
      
         
            
            
            COVNTREY Contentments, OR The English Husvvife.
            CONTAINING The inward and outward Vertues which ought to be in a compleate Woman.
            As her skill in Physicke, Surgerie, Extraction of Oyles, Banqueting-stuffe, Ordering of great Feasts, Preseruing of all sorts of Wines, Conceited Secrets, Distillations, Perfumes, ordering of Wooll, Hempe, Flax, making Cloth, Dying, the knowledge of Dayries, office of Malting, Oats, their excellent vses in a Family, Brewing, Baking, and all other things belonging to an Houshold.
            A Worke generally approued, and now much augmented, purged and made most profitable and necessarie for all men, and Dedicated to the Honour of the Noble House of Exceter, and the generall good of this Kingdome.
            By G. M.
            
            Printed at London by I. B. for R. Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop neere Fleet-streete Conduit. 1623.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND MOST EXCELLENTEST of all Ladies, FRANCES, Countesse Dowager of Exceter.
            
               HOwsoeuer (Right Honourable and most vertuous Ladie) this Booke may come to your Noble Goodnesse clothed in an old Name or Garment, yet doubtlesse (excellent Madam) it is full of many new vertues which will euer admire and serue you; and though it can adde nothing to your owne rare and vnparalleld knowledge, yet may it to those Noble good ones (which will endeauour any small sparke of your imitation) bring such a light, as may make them shine with a great deale of charitie. I doe not assume to my selfe (though I am not altogether ignorant in abilitie to iudge of these things) the full inuention and scope of this whole worke: for it is true (great Lady) that much of it was a Manuscript which many yeeres agon belonged to an Honourable Contesse, one of the greatest Glories of our Kingdome, and were the opinions of the greatest Physitions which then liued; which being now approued

by one not inferiour to any of that Profession, I was the rather imboldned to send it to your blessed hand, knowing you to be a Mistresse so full of Honourable pietie and goodnesse, that although this imperfit offer may come vnto you weake and disable, yet your Noble vertue will support it, and make it so strong in the world, that I doubt not but it shall doe seruice to all those which will serue you, whilest my selfe and my poore prayers shall to my last gaspe labour to attend you.
            
               The true admirer of your Noble Vertues,GERVASE MARKHAM.
            
         
         
            
            THE TABLE.
            
               
                  Chap. 1.
                  THe inward vertues of the Huswife.
                  
                     2
                  
                  Her garments.
                  
                     3
                  
                  Her diet and generall vertues, as first in Physicke.
                  
                     4
                  
                  Feuors and their kinds.
                  
                     5.51
                  
                  To make one sweate.
                  
                     8
                  
                  A preseruatiue against the Plague.
                  
                     9
                  
                  To draw a Plague botch to any place.
                  
                     10
                  
                  A Cordiall against infection.
                  
                     10
                  
                  Against sweating.
                  
                     10
                  
                  For the Headach.
                  
                     10.16
                  
                  For the frenzie.
                  
                     11
                  
                  For the Lethargie.
                  
                     11
                  
                  To prouoke sleepe.
                  
                     11.37
                  
                  For swimming of the head.
                  
                     11
                  
                  For the Palsey.
                  
                     12
                  
                  For all Colds or Coughes.
                  
                     12.20
                  
                  For the falling sicknesse.
                  
                     13
                  
                  To helpe hearing.
                  
                     13.17
                  
                  For the Rhume.
                  
                     13.20
                  
                  For a stinking breath.
                  
                     13.18
                  
                  For the Toothach.
                  
                     14.17
                  
                  For all sore eyes.
                  
                     15.18
                  
                  For a Canker.
                  
                     15.18.19
                  
                  For swelling in the mouth.
                  
                     15
                  
                  For the Quinsey or Squinacie.
                  
                     15.17
                  
                  For Drunkennesse.
                  
                     16
                  
                  To quicken wit.
                  
                     16
                  
                  For the Kings Euill.
                  
                     16
                  
                  To stanch bleeding.
                  
                     16.24.25.48
                  
                  To draw out Bones.
                  
                     16
                  
                  For falling of the mold of the head.
                  
                     16
                  
                  For stinking nostrels, and of the nose.
                  
                     18
                  
                  To make haire grow.
                  
                     20.38
                  
                  For a pimpled saucie face.
                  
                     20, 40
                  
                  For horsenesse in the throte.
                  
                     20
                  
                  For griefe in the stomake.
                  
                     21.22
                  
                  For spitting blood.
                  
                     21
                  
                  To stay vomiting.
                  
                     21
                  
                  To cause vomiting.
                  
                     22
                  
                  For the Ilica-passio.
                  
                     22
                  
                  For paine in the brest.
                  
                     22
                  
                  For the Mother.
                  
                     22
                  
                  For obstructions in the Liuer.
                  
                     23.25
                  
                  Against heate in the Liuer.
                  
                     23
                  
                  For the Plurasie.
                  
                     23
                  
                  For any Stich.
                  
                     23.26
                  
                  For a Consumption.
                  
                     24
                  
                  For the yellow Iandise.
                  
                     24
                  
                  For the black Iandise.
                  
                     25
                  
                  For a Ring-worme.
                  
                     25.45
                  
                  For the Dropsie.
                  
                     26
                  
                  For paine in the Spleene.
                  
                     26.27
                  
                  For paine in the side.
                  
                     26
                  
                  For fatnesse or short breath.
                  
                     26.27
                  
                  For diseases in the Heart.
                  
                     27
                  
                  For the Wind-cholick.
                  
                     27
                  
                  For a Laske or loosenes.
                  
                     28.29.30.52
                  
                  
                     For the bloody Flux.
                  
                     28.29
                  
                  For Cosi
                        •
                     enesse.
                  
                     29.30
                  
                  For all sorts of Wormes.
                  
                     29
                  
                  For hardnesse of the belly.
                  
                     30
                  
                  For the Rupture.
                  
                     30.34
                  
                  For the Stone.
                  
                     31.32.33
                  
                  For the Cholick and Stone.
                  
                     31
                  
                  To helpe the Vrine.
                  
                     33.34
                  
                  For the Strang
                        •
                     llion.
                  
                     33
                  
                  For the Gonorea.
                  
                     34
                  
                  For the Emorods.
                  
                     35
                  
                  For diseases in the fundament.
                  
                     35
                  
                  For the greene s
                        •
                     icknesse.
                  
                     35
                  
                  To increase milke.
                  
                     36.37
                  
                  To drie vp milke.
                  
                     36
                  
                  For sore brests.
                  
                     36.38
                  
                  For ease in child-bearing.
                  
                     36
                  
                  Child dead in the wombe.
                  
                     36.37
                  
                  For aptnesse to conceiue.
                  
                     37
                  
                  To cease the Termes.
                  
                     37
                  
                  Helpe for the Matrix.
                  
                     37
                  
                  Helpe in the childbed
                  
                     37
                  
                  For Morphew of both kinds.
                  
                     38
                  
                  For the Gout.
                  
                     38
                  
                  For the Siatica.
                  
                     38.49
                  
                  For the stinging of venemus beasts.
                  
                     39.45
                  
                  For swellings in the leggs.
                  
                     39.49
                  
                  For old or new sores.
                  
                     39.40.41.42.43 44.45.47.48
                  
                  For Scabs or Itch.
                  
                     40.45.46
                  
                  For the Leprosie.
                  
                     40
                  
                  Priuie parts burnt.
                  
                     41
                  
                  For any burning.
                  
                     41.42.43
                  
                  For Scaldings.
                  
                     41
                  
                  To eate away dead flesh.
                  
                     41.44
                  
                  For Sinews out or shrunke.
                  
                     42.48
                  
                  To helpe Impostumes.
                  
                     42
                  
                  To helpe tht skarres of the small Pox.
                  
                     46
                  
                  For the French Pox.
                  
                     46.47
                  
                  For pricking with a thorne.
                  
                     28
                  
                  For any Ache or swelling.
                  
                     49
                  
                  For bruses.
                  
                     49
                  
                  For bones broke or out of ioynt.
                  
                     50.51
                  
                  A Bath to comfort the body.
                  
                     50
                  
                  To make oyle of Swallowes.
                  
                     52
                  
                  The oyle of Camomile or Lauender.
                  
                     53
                  
                  To make oyle of Roses or Violet.
                  
                     55
                  
                  Oyle of Nutmegs.
                  
                     55
                  
                  Oyle of Spike or Mastick.
                  
                     56
                  
                  Oyle to make smooth hands.
                  
                     53
                  
                  Of Doctor Steuens water.
                  
                     53
                  
                  A Restoratiue of Rosa-solis.
                  
                     54
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 2.
                  The outward and actiue knowledge of the Hous-wife.
                  
                     57
                  
                  The knowledge of Hearbs and Gardening.
                  
                     57.58.59
                  
                  Of Cookerie and the seuerall parts.
                  
                     59
                  
                  Of Sall
                        •
                     ts simple and compound.
                  
                     60.61 62.63
                  
                  Of Fricases simple and compound.
                  
                     63.64
                  
                  Of Collops and Eggs.
                  
                     63
                  
                  The best Tansey.
                  
                     64
                  
                  Fritters of all sorts.
                  
                     65.68
                  
                  To make Pancakes.
                  
                     66
                  
                  Veale toasts.
                  
                     66
                  
                  To make any Quelquechose.
                  
                     67
                  
                  To make all sorts of Puddings.
                  
                     68.69.70
                  
                  To make Linkes
                  
                     72
                  
                  To make all sorts of boyld meates or pottage.
                  from 71 to 79
                  
                  To make Oleopotrigo.
                  
                     74
                  
                  
                     To make Broth for fresh-fish.
                  
                     77
                  
                  To make all sorts of Roast-meats.
                  
                     80 81.82.83.84.85.86
                  
                  The obseruations in Rost-meates.
                  
                     80.85
                  
                  Spitting of Rost meates.
                  
                     80
                  
                  The temperature of the fire.
                  
                     81
                  
                  The complexion of meates.
                  
                     81
                  
                  The best basting and dredging.
                  
                     81
                  
                  To know whem meate is enough.
                  
                     82
                  
                  All sorts of Sauces.
                  
                     86.87.88.89.90
                  
                  To make Gallantines or Chauders.
                  
                     90
                  
                  To make all sorts of Carbonad
                        •
                     s.
                  
                     90 91.92
                  
                  Tosting of Mutton.
                  
                     91
                  
                  Rashers of Mutton or Lambe.
                  
                     92
                  
                  The dressing of all kind of Fish.
                  
                     92.93.94
                  
                  Sauce for any Fish.
                  
                     92
                  
                  To make Pastery and all sorts of Bak't-meates.
                  from 94 to 110
                  
                  The mixture of Pasts.
                  
                     95
                  
                  To make a Norffolke Foole.
                  
                     101
                  
                  To make a Trifle.
                  
                     101
                  
                  To recouer Venison that is tainted.
                  
                     103
                  
                  To preserue Quinces to bake all the yeere.
                  
                     105.123.121
                  
                  Tarts of als sorts.
                  from 105 to 110
                  
                  To make a Florentine.
                  
                     107
                  
                  To make a Whitepot.
                  
                     111
                  
                  To make all sorts of Banqueting stuffe and conceited dishes.
                  from 111 to 124
                  
                  To make all sorts of Conserues.
                  
                     119 120.122
                  
                  To make Waffers.
                  
                     120
                  
                  To make a fine bread.
                  
                     121
                  
                  To make Ipocras.
                  
                     112.121
                  
                  To make all sorts of Preserues.
                  
                     121
                  
                  The ordering of great Feasts.
                  
                     124
                  
                  A proportion for expence in Feasts.
                  
                     125
                  
                  Of all sorts of Distillations,
                  
                     116 117.129.130.131.132 133.137.141
                  
                  The natures of Waters.
                  
                     129
                  
                  
                     Hipocrates sixe famous Waters.
                  
                     133
                  
                  Waters for Perfumes.
                  
                     137
                  
                  To perfume Gloues, Ierkins, &c.
                  
                     137 138.142
                  
                  To make washing Balls.
                  
                     138
                  
                  To make Muske Balls.
                  
                     138
                  
                  To make perfume to burne.
                  
                     139
                  
                  To make all sorts of Vinegar.
                  
                     139.141
                  
                  To make veriuyce.
                  
                     140
                  
                  To make all sorts of sweete Baggs.
                  
                     140
                  
                  To make Powder for Baggs.
                  
                     140
                  
                  The ordering, choyce, helping and curing of all sorts of Wines.
                  from 143 to 153
                  
                  The notes and markes for gadging of all Wines, oyles or liquors.
                  
                     149
                  
                  The contents of Wines.
                  
                     151
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 3.
                  Of Wooll and woolling cloth.
                  
                     154
                  
                  Dying of Wooll.
                  
                     155.156.157
                  
                  The mixing of colours.
                  
                     157
                  
                  The oyling of Wooll.
                  
                     158
                  
                  The tumming and spinning Wooll.
                  
                     159 160
                  
                  Of winding, Waping and weauing.
                  
                     160 161
                  
                  The ordering of Flaxe, Hempe, and making of all kind of Linnen cloth,
                  from page 162 to page 173.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 4.
                  Of Daries, Butter, Cheese, and all things belonging to that office,
                  from page 174 to page 189
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 5.
                  The office of the Malster, and all the secrets belonging to that knowledge,
                  from page 190 to pag 216
                  
                  Of oate-meale and the vse.
                  
                     212
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 6.
                  The excellencie of Oates, and the seuerall profits arising from it,
                  from page 217 to page 224
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 7.
                  The office of the Brew-house, Back-house, and all things depending vpon the vse of bread or drinke,
                  from page 225 to page 133
                  
                  The making of Perry or Cider.
                  
                     229
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Country Contentments, OR The approued Booke called the English Hous-wife.
            Containing all the vertuous knowledges and actions both of minde and body, which ought to bee in any compleat Hous-wife, of what degree or calling soeuer.
            
               CHAP. I. Of the inward vertues of the minde which ought to be in euery Hous-wife. And first of her generall knowledges both in Phisicke and Surgerie, with plaine approued medicynes for health of the House-hold, also the extraction of excellent Oyles fit for those purposes.
               
                  HAuing already in a summary briefenesse passed through those outward parts of husbandrie which belong vnto the perfit Husbandman, who is the father and master of the family, and whose office and imployments are euer for the most part abroad, or remoued from the house, as in the field or yarde: It is now meete that we descend in as orderly a method as wee can, to the office of our english

Hous-wife, who is the mother and Mistris of the family, and hath her most generall imployments within the house; where from the generall example of her vertues, and the most approued skill of her knowledges, those of her family may both learne to serue God, and sustaine man in that godly & profitable sort which is required of euery true Christian.
               
                  
                     A Hous-wife must be religious
                  First then to speake of the inward vertues of her minde; shee ought, aboue all things, to be of an vpright and sincere religion, and in the same both zealous and constant; giuing by her example, an incitement and spurre vnto all her family to pursue the same steppes, and to vtter forth by the instruction of her life, those vertuous fruits of good-liuing, which shall be pleasing both to God and his creatures; I do not meane that herein she should vtterforth that violēce of spirit which many of our (vainely accounted pure) women do, drawing a contempt vpon the ordinary Ministery, and thinking nothing lawful but the fantazies of their own inuentions, vsurping to themselues a power of preaching and interpreting the holy word, to which only they ought to be but hearers and beleeuers, or at the most but modest perswaders, this is not the office either of good Hous-wife or good woman. But let our english Hus-wife be a godly, constant, and religious woman, learning from the worthy Preacher & her husband, those good examples which shee shall with all carefull diligence see exercised amongst her seruants.
               In which practise of hers, what particular rules are to be obserued, I leaue her to learne of them who are professed Diuines, and haue purposely written of this argument; onely thus much will I say, which each ones experience will teach him to be true, that the more carefull the master and mistris are to bring vp their seruants in the dayly exercises

of Religion toward God, the more faithfull they shall find them in all their businesses towards men, and procure Gods fauour the more plentifully on all the household: & therefore a small time morning and euening bestowed in prayers, and other exercises or religion, will proue no 
                     •
                  ost time at the weekes end.
               Next vnto this sanctity & holinesse of life,
                     Shee must bee temperate.
                   it is meete that our English Hous-wife be a woman of great modesty and temperance as well inwardly as outwardly; inwardly, as in 
                     •
                  er behauiour and cariage towards her husband, wherein she shall shunne all violence of rage, passion and humour, coueting lesse to direct then to bee directed, appearing euer vnto him pleasant, amiable and delightfull; and though occasion, mishaps, or the misgouernement of his will may 
                     •
                  nduce her to contrarie thoughts, yet vertuously to suppresse them, and with a milde sufferance rather to call him 
                     •
                  ome from his error, then with the strength of anger to a
                  
                     •
                  ate the least sparke of his euill, calling in her minde that euill and vncomely language is deformed though vttered euen to seruants, but most monstrous and vgly when it appeares before the presence of a husband: outwardly, as in 
                     •
                  er apparrell and dyet, both which she shall proportion according to the competency of her husbands estate & cal
                  
                     •
                  ing, making her circle raither straight then large, for it is a rule if we extend to the vttermost we take away increase, if we goe a hayre breadth beyond we enter into consumption: but if we preserue any part, we build strong sorts against the aduersaries of fortune, prouided that such preseruation be honest and conscionable: for as lauish prodigality is brutish, so miserable couetousnesse is hellish. Let therefore the Hus-wifes garments becomely and strong,
                     Of her garments.
                   made as well to preserue the health, as adorne the person, altogether without toyish garnishes, or the glosse of light

colours, and as farre from the vanity of new and fantastiq
                     •
                  e fashions, as neere to the comely imitations of modest Matrons; let her dyet be wholesome and cleanly, prepared at due howers, and Cookt with care and diligence, let it be rather to satisfie nature then our affections,
                     Of her diet.
                   and apter to kill hunger then reuiue new appetites, let it proceed more from the prouision of her owne yarde, then the furniture of the markets; and let it be rather esteemed for the familiar acquaintance she hath with it, then for the strangenesse and raritie it bringeth from other Countries.
               
                  
                     Her generall vertues.
                  To conclude, our English Hus-wife must bee of chast thought, stout courage, patient, vntyred, watchfull, diligent, witty, pleasant, constant in friendship, full of good neghbour-hood, wise in discourse, but not frequent therein, sharpe and quicke of speech, but not bitter or talkatiue, secret in her affaires, comfortable in her counsels, and generally skilfull in the worthy knowledges which doe belong to her vocation, of all, or most part whereof I now intend to speake more largely.
               
                  
                     OF Her vertues in phisicke.
                  To begin then with one of the most principall vertues which doth belong to our English hous-wife; you shall vnderstand, that sith the preseruation and care of the family touching their health and soundnesse of body, consisteth most in the diligence: it is meet that shee haue a phisicall kinde of knowledge, how to administer many wholsome receits or medicines for the good of their healthes, as well to preuent the first occasion of sicknesse, as to take away the effects and euill of the same when it hath made seazure on the body. Indeede we must confesse that the depth and secrets of this most excellent art of phisicke, is farre beyond the capacity of the most skilfull woman, as lodging onely in the brest of the larned Professors, yet that our hous-wife may from them receiue some ordinary rules, and medicines

which may auaile for the benefit of her family, is (in 
                     •
                  ur common experience) no derogation at all to that wor
                  
                     •
                  hy Science: Neither do I intend heere to lead her minde with all the Symptomes, accidents, and effects which goe 
                     •
                  efore or after euery sicknesse, as though I would haue her 
                     〈◊〉
                   assume the name of a Practitioner, but onely relate vnto 
                     •
                  er some approued medicines, and old doctrines which 
                     •
                  aue been gathered together, and deliuered by common 
                     •
                  xperien
                     •
                  e, for the curing of those ordinary sicknesses 
                     •
                  hich daily perturbe the health of Men and Women.
               First then to speake of Feuers or Agues,
                     Of feuers in generall.
                   the Hus-wife 
                     •
                  hall know those kinds thereof, which are most familiar & 
                     •
                  rdinary, as the quotidian or dayly ague, the Tertian or euery other day ague, the quartan or euery third dayes a
                  
                     ••
                  e, the Pestilent
                     •
                   which keepeth no order in his fits, but 
                     〈◊〉
                   more dangerous and mortall: And lastly the accidentall 
                     ••
                  uer which proceedeth from the receit of some wound 
                     〈◊〉
                   other, painefull perturbation of the spirits. There bee 
                     ••
                  ndry other feuers which comming from consumptions, a
                     •
                  d other long continued sicknesses, doe altogether sur
                  
                     ••
                  sse our Hus-wiues capacity.
               First then for the quotidian feuer,
                     Of the quotidian.
                   (whose fits alwaies last 
                     ••
                  o
                     •
                  e twelue howers) you shall take a new laid egge, and 
                     •
                  pening the crowne you shall put out the white, then fill 
                     •
                  o the shell with very good Aquauitae, and stirre it and the yoke very well together, & then as soone as you feele your 
                     •
                  old fit begin to come vpon you, suppe vp the egge, and 
                     •
                  ither labour till you sweate, or else laying great store of 
                     •
                  oathes vpon you, put your selfe in a sweat in your bed; 
                     •
                  nd thus doe whilst your fits continue, and for your drinke 
                     ••
                  t it be onely coole posset ale.
               For a single Tertian feuer,
                     Of the single Tertian.
                   or each other dayes ague; take 
                     〈◊〉
                   quart of posset ale, the curde being well drained from the

same, and put thereinto a good handfull of Dandilion, and then setting it vpon the fire, boyle it till a fourth part bee consumed, then as soone as your cold fit beginneth, drinke a good draught thereof, & then either labour till you sweat, or else force your selfe to sweate in your bed, but labour is much the better, prouided that you take not cold after it, and thus doe whilst your fits continue, and in all your sicknesse let your drinke bee posset ale thus boyled with the same herbe.
               
                  
                     Of the accidentall Feuer.
                  For the accidentall Feuer which commeth by meanes of some dangerous wound receiued, although for the most part it is an ill signe, if it be strong and continuing, yet many times it abateth, & the party recouereth when the wound is wel tended and comforted with such souereigne balmes & hot oyles as are most fit to bee applyed to the member so grieued or iniured: therefore in this feuer you must respect the wound from whēce the accident doth proceed, and it recouereth, so you shall see the feuer wast and diminish.
               
                  
                     Of the Feuer hettick
                  For the Hettique feuer, which is also a very dangerous sicknesse, you shall take the oyle of Violets, & mixe it with a good quantity of the pouder of white Poppy seed finely searst, and therewith annoynt the small & raines of the parties backe, euening and morning, and it will not onely giue ease to the feuer, but also purge and cleanse away the dry scalings which is ingendred either by this or any other feuer whatsoeuer.
               
                  
                     For any Feuer.
                  For any Feuer whasoeuer, whose fit beginneth with a cold. Take a spoonefull and a halfe of Dragon water, a spoonefull of Rosewater, a spoonefull of running water, a spoonefull of Aquavite, and a spoonefull of Vinegar, halfe a spoonefull of Methridate or lesse, and beate all these well together, & let the partie drinke it before his fit beginne.
               
                  It is to bee vnderstood that al feuers of what kind soeuer they bee,
                     Of thirst in Feuers.
                   and these infectious diseases, as the Pestilence, plague and such like, are thought the inflamation of the blood, insiuely much subiect to drought; so that, should the party drinke as much as he desired, neither could his body containe it, nor could the great abundance of drinke do other then weaken his stomacke, and bring his body to a certaine destruction: Wherefore, when any man is so ouer pressed with desire of drinke, you shall giue him at conuenient times, either posset ale made with cold hearbs; as sorrell purslen, violet leaues, lettice, spinage, and such like, or else a Iulip made as before said in the pestilent feuer, or some almond milke: and betwixt those times, because the 
                     •
                  se of these drinkes will grow wearisome and lothsome to 
                     •
                  he patient, you shal suffer him to gargil in his mouth good wholesome beare or ale, which the patient best liketh, and hauing gargled it in his mouth, to spit it out againe, & then to take more, and thus to doe as oft as he pleaseth; till his mouth be cooled: prouided that by no meanes he suffer any of the drinke to goe downe, and this will much better asswage the heate of his thirst then if he drinke; and when appetite desireth drinke to goe downe, then let him take either his Iulip, or his almond milke.
               To make a pultis to cure any sore,
                     For any ague sore.
                   take elder leaues and seeth them in milke, till they bee soft, then take them vp and straine them; and then boyle it againe til it be thicke, & so vse it to the sore as occasion shall serue.
               For the Quartain Feuer or third day ague,
                     For the quartaine Feuer.
                   which is of all feuers the lougest lasting, & many times dangerous, because many times consumptions, blacke iaundys, and such like mortall sicknesses follow it: you shall take Methridate and spread it vpon a lymon slice, cut of a reasonable thicknes, a
                     •
                  d so as the lymon bee couered with the Methridate;

then bind it to the pulse of the sicke mans wrist of his arme about an houre before his fit doth beginne, & then let him goe to his bed made warme, and with hot cloathes laid to the soales of his feete, and store of clothes laid vpon him, let him trie if he can force himselfe to sweat which if he do, then halfe an houre after he hath sweate, hee shall take hot posset ale brewed with a little Methridate, and drinke a good draught thereof, and rest till his fit bee passed ouer: but if he be hard to sweate, then with the said posset ale also you shall mix a few bruised any-seeds,
                     To make one sweat.
                   and that will bring sweate vpon him: and thus you shall doe euery fit till they begin to cease, or that sweate come naturally of it owne accord, which is a true signe that the sicknesse decreaseth.
               
                  
                     Of the pestilent Feuer.
                  For the pestilent Feuer, which is a continuall sicknesse full of infection, and mortality, you shall cause the party first to bee let blood, if his strength will beare it: then you shall giue him coole Iulyps made of endife or succorie water, the sirrop of Violets, conserue of Barberries, and the iuice of Lymons, well mixed & simboliz'd together: Also you shall giue him to drink Almond milke made with the dewition coole hearbs, as violet leaues, strawberrie leaues; french mallowes, pursline, and such like; and if the parties mouth shall through the heate of his stomacke, or liuer inflame or grow sore, you shall wash it with the syrop of mulberries; and that will not onely heale it, but also strengthen his stomacke. If (as it is most common in this sicknesse) the party shall grow costiue, you shall giue him a suppositary made of honie, boild to the height of hardnesse, which you shall know by cooling a drop thereof, and so if you find it hard, you shall then know that the hony is boiled sufficiently; then put salt to it, and so pouder it in water, and worke it into a roule in the manner of a suppositary, & so administer it, and it most assuredly bringeth

no hurt, but ease to the party, of what age or strength soeuer he be: during his sicknesse, you shall keepe him from all manner of strong drinkes, or hot spices, and then there is no doubt of his recouery.
               To preser
                     •
                  e your body from the infection of the plague,
                     A preseruatiue against the plague.
                   you shall take a quart of old ale, and after it hath risen vpon 
                     •
                  he fire and hath been scummed, you shall put there into of Aristolochia longa, of Angelica and of Cellandine of each halfe 
                     •
                  n handfull, and boyle them well therein; then straine the drinke through a cleane cloath, and dissolue therein a dram of the best Methridate, as much Iuory finely powdred and 
                     •
                  earst, and sixe spoonefull of Dragon water, then put it vp in a close glasse; and euery morning fasting take fiue spoonefull 
                     •
                  hereof, and after bite and chaw in your mouth the dryed 
                     •
                  oot of Angelica, or smell on a nose-gay to the 
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  eld end of 
                     •
                   ship rope, and they will surely preserue you from infection.
               But if you be infected with the plague,
                     Fer infection of the plague.
                   and feele the as
                  
                     •
                  ured signes thereof, as paine in the head, drought, burning, weakenesse of stomack and such like: Then you shall take 
                     •
                   dramme of the best Methridate, and dissolue it in three or foure spoonefull of Dragon water, and immediately drinke 
                     •
                  t off; and then with hot cloathes or brickes made extreame hot, and laid to the foales of your feet, after you haue been wrapt in woollen cloathes, cōpell the sicke person to sweat, which if he do, keepe him moderately therein till the sore begin to rise; then to the same apply a little Pigeon cut in two parts, or else a plaister made of the yolke of an egge, hony, herbe of grace chopt exceeding small, and wheate flower, which in very short space will not onely ripen, but also breake the same without any other incision; then after it hath runne a day or two, you shall apply a plaister of Melilot vnto it vntill it be whole.
                     For the Pestilence.
                  
               
               Take Fetherfew, Maleselon, Scabyous, and Mugwort, of each

alike, bruise them and mixe them with old ale, and let the sicke drinke thereof sixe spoonefull at once, and it will expell the corruption.
               
                  
                     Another.
                  Take Yarlow, Tansey, Fetherfue, of each a handfull, and bruise them well together, then let the sicke party make water into the hearbs, then straine them, and giue it the sicke to drinke.
               
                  
                     A preseruation against the Pestilence.
                  Take of Sage, of Rue, Bryer leaues, of Elder leaues, of each an handfull, stampe them & straine them with a quart of white wine, and put thereto a little Ginger, and a good spoonefull of the best Treakle, & drinke thereof morning and euening.
               
                  
                     To draw a plague botch to any place you will.
                  Take Smalledge, Mallowes, Wormewood, and Rue, stampe them well together, and fry them in Oyle Olyue till they bee thicke, plaisterwise them, apply it to the place where you would haue it rise, and let it lie till it breake, then to heale it vpp, take the iuyce of Smallage, Wheate flower, and Milke, and boyle them to a pultis, and apply it morning and euening till it be whole.
               
                  
                     A cordyall for any infection at the heart.
                  Take of Burrage, Langdebease, and Callamynt, of each a good handfull, of Harts tonge, Red mynt, Violetts, and Marygolds, of each halfe a handfull, boyle them in white wine, or faire running water, then add a penyworth of the best Saffrone, and as much Sugar, & boyle them ouer againe well, then straine it into an earthen pott, and drinke thereof morning and euening, to the quantitie of seauen spoonefuls.
               
                  
                     Against too violent sweating.
                  Take Lyntseed, and Lettune, and bruise it well, then apply it to the stomacke, and remoue it once in foure howers.
               
                  
                     For the head-ach.
                  For the Head-ach, you shall take of Rosewater, of the iuice of Cammomil, of worme milke, of strong wine vinegar, of each two spoonefull, mixe them together well vpon a chafing-dish of coales: then take a peece of drie rose cake and steepe it therein, and as soone as it hath drunke vp the liquor and is throughly hot, take a couple of sound Nutmegs grated to

powder, and strew them vpon the rose cake; then breaking it into two parts, binde it on each side vpon the temples of the head, so let the party lye downe to rest, and the paine will in a short space be taken from him.
               For Frenzie or inflamation of the calles of the braine,
                     For the Frenzie.
                   you 
                     •
                  hall cause the iuice of Beets to be with a surridge squirted vp 
                     •
                  nto the patients nostrils, which will purge and cleanse his head exceedingly; and then giue him to drinke posset ale, in which Violet leaue and Lettice hath been boyled, & it will 
                     •
                  uddainly bring him to a very temperate mildnesse, and make the passion of Frenzie forsake him.
               For the Lethargie or extreame drowsinesse,
                     For the lethargy.
                   you shall by all violent meanes either by noyse or other disturbances, force 
                     •
                  erforce keepe the party from sleeping; and whensoeuer he 
                     •
                  alleth for drinke, you shall giue him white wine and Isop water of each a little quantitie mixt together, and not suffer him to sleepe aboue foure houres in foure and twenty, till he come to his owne former wakefulnesse, which as soone as hee hath recouered, you shall then forthwith purge his head with the iuice of Beetes squirted vp into his nostrils as is before shewed.
               But if any of the family bee troubled with too much watchfulnesse,
                     To prouoke sleepe.
                   so that they cannot by any meanes take rest, 
                     •
                  hen to prouoke the party to sleepe, you shall take of Saffron a dramme dried, and beaten to pouder, and as much Lettice seed also dryed, and beaten to pouder, and twice as much white Poppy seed beaten also to pouder, and mixe these with womans milke til it be a thicke salue, and then binde it to the temples of the head & it will soone cause the party to sleepe; and let it lie on not aboue foure howers.
               For the swimming or dizzing in the head,
                     For the 
                           •
                        wimming of the head.
                   you shall take of Agnus castu
                        •
                     , of Broome wort, and of Camomile dried, of each two drammes mixt with the iuice of Iuie, oyle of Roses, and

white wine, of each like quantitie, till it come to a thicke salue: and then binde it to the temples of the head, and it will in short space take away the griefe.
               
                  
                     For the palsie.
                  For the Apoplexie or palsie, the strong sent or smell of a Foxe is exceeding soueraigne, or to drinke euery morning halfe a pint of the dewition of lauendar, and to rub the head euery morning & euening exceding hard with a very cleane course cloath, whereby the humours may be dissolued and disperst into the outward parts of the body: by all meanes for this infirmity keepe your feete safe from cold or wet, and also the nape of your necke, for from those parts it first getteth the strength of euill and vnauoydable paines.
               
                  
                     For a new cough.
                  For a cough or cold but lately taken, you shal take a spoonfull of Sugar finely beaten and scarst, and drop into it of the best Aquauitae, vntill all the sugar be wette through, and can receiue no more moysture: Then being ready to lye down to rest, take & swallow the spoonefull of sugar downe; and so couer you warme in your bed, & it will soone breake and dissolue the cold.
               
                  
                     For an old cough.
                  But if the cough bee more old and inueterate, and more inwardly fixt to the lungs, take of the pouder of Bettonie, of the pouder of Carraway seeds, of the pouder of Sheruit dryed, of the pouder of Hou
                        •
                     ds tongue, and of Pepper, finely beaten, of each two drames, & mingling thē well with clarified hony, make an electuary therof & drink it morning & euening for nine dayes together: Then take of Sugar candie coursly beaten, an ounce of Licoras finely pared and trimmed, and cut into very little small slices, as much of Aniseeds and Coriander seeds halfe an ounce; mixe all these together, and keepe them in a paper in your pocket, and euer in the day time when the cough offendeth you, take some of this dredge, as much as you can hold betweene your thumbe & fiingers and eate it, and it will giue ease to your griefe: And in the

night whē the cough or rhume offendeth you, take as much of the iuice of Licoras as two good barly cornes, and let it melt in your mouth, and it will giue you ease.
               Although the falling-sicknes bee seldome or neuer to bee cured,
                     For the falling sicknes.
                   yet if the party which is troubled with the same, will 
                     •
                  ut morning and euening, during the wane of the moone, or when shee is in the signe Virgo, eate the berries of the hearbe Asterion, or beare the hearbs about him next to his bare skinne, it is likely hee shall find much ease and fall very 
                     •
                  eldome, though this medicine be somewhat doubtfull.
               For the falling euill take,
                     For the falling euill.
                   if it bee a man, a femall Mole, if a woman a male Mole, and take them in March, or else Aprill, when they goe to the bucke: Then drie it in an ouen, and make pouder of it whole as you take it out of the earth: then giue the sicke person of this pouder to drinke euening and morning for nine or ten dayes together.
               To take away deafenes,OF An oyle to helpe hearing.
                   take a gray Eele with a white bel
                  
                     •
                  y and put her into a sweete earthen pot quicke, and stop the pot very close with an earthen couer, or some such hard substance: Then dig a deepe hole in a horse dung hill, and 
                     •
                  et it therein, and couer it with the dunge, and so let it remaine a fortnight, and then take it out and cleare out the oile which will come of it, and drop it into the imperfect eare, or both if both be imperfect.
               To stay the flux of the Ruhme,
                  
                     For the ruhme.
                   take Sage and drie it before the fire, and rub it to pouder: Then take bay salt and drie it and beate it to pouder; and take a Nutmeg and grate it, and mixe them all together, and put them in a long linnen bag, then heate it vpon a tile stone, and lay it to the nape of the necke.
               For a stinking breath,
                     For a stinking breath.
                   take oake buds when they are new budded out, and distill them; then let the party grieued nine mornings and nine euenings drinke of it, then forbeare a

while, and after take it againe.
               
                  
                     A vomit for an ill breath
                  To make a vomit for a strong stinking breath, you must take of Antimonium the waight of three barly cornes, and beate it very small, and mixe it with conserue of Roses and giue the Patient to eate in the morning; then let him take nine dayes together the iuice of Mints and Sage, then giue him a gentle purgation, and let him vse the iuice of Mint & Sage longer. This medicine must be giuen in the spring of the yeare, but if the infirmity come for want of digestion in the stomacke, then take Mints, course Marierom, & Wormewood, and choppe them small and boyle them in Malmesie till it bee thicke, and make a plaister of it, and lay it to the stomacke.
               
                  
                     For the tooth
                           •
                        ach.
                  For the Tooth-ach, take a handfull of dasie roots, and wash them very cleane and drye them with a cloath, & then stamp them: and when you haue stamped them a good while, take the quantitie of halfe a nutshell full of bay salt, & strew it amongst the roos, & then when they are very well beaten, straigne them through a cleane eloth: then grate some Cattham Aromaticus, and mixe it good and stiffe with the iuice of the roots, and when you haue done so, put it into a quill & snuffe it vp into your nose, and you shall find ease.
               
                  
                     Another.
                  Another for the Tooth-ach, take small Sage, Rue, Smallage, Fether-fewe, Wormewood, and Mints, of each of them halfe a handfull, then stampe them well all together putting thereto fower drammes of Vinegar, & one dramme of Bay-salt, with a pennyworth of good Aquavitae: stirre them well together, then put it betweene two linnen clouts of the bignesse of your cheeke, temples, & iawe, & quilt it ni māner of a course imbroderie; then set it vpon a chafing-dish of coales, and as hot as you may abide it, lay it ouer that side where the paine is, and lay you downe vpon that side, and as it cooles warme it againe, or else haue another ready warme to lay on.
               
                  To make a drinke to destroy any pearle or filme in the eye:
                     A drinke for a perle in the eye.
                   
                  
                     •
                  ake a good handfull of Marigold plants, & a handfull of Fennell, as much of May-weed, beate them together, then straine 
                     •
                  hem with a pint of beere, then put it into a pot and stop it 
                     •
                  lose that the strength may not goe out; then let the offended party drinke thereof when he is in bed, and lie of that side on which the pearle is, and drinke of it likewise in the morning next his heart when he is risen.
               For paine in the eyes,
                     For paine in the eyes.
                   take Milke when it comes new from 
                     •
                  he Cowe, and hauing fill'd it into a cleane vessell, couer it with a pewter dish, and the next morning take off the dish and you shall see a dew vpon the same, and with that dew wash the pained eyes, and it will ease them.
               For dimme eyes:
                     For dimme eyes.
                   take Wormewood, beaten with the gall of 
                     •
                   Bull, and then straine it and annoynt the eyes therewith, 
                     •
                  nd it will cleare them exceedingly.
               For sore eyes,
                     For sore eyes
                   or blood-shotten eyes: take the white of an 
                     
                        •
                     gge beaten to oyle, as much Rose-water, and as much of the 
                     ••
                  ice of House-leeke, mixe them well together, then dippe 
                     •
                  at pleageants of flaxe therein, & lay them vpō the sore eyes, 
                     •
                  nd as they drye, so renew them againe, and wet them, and 
                     •
                  hus doe till the eyes be well.
               For watery eyes,
                     For waterie eyes.
                   take the iuice of Affodill, Mirrhe, and Saffron, of each a little, & mixe it with twice so much white wine, then boyle it ouer the fire, then straine it and wash the eyes therewith, and it is a present helpe.
               For a Canker or any sore mouth:
                     For a canker
                   take Cheruile and beate it 
                     •
                  o a salue with old ale and Allum water, & annoint the sore 
                     •
                  herewith, and it will cure it.
               For any swelling in the mouth:
                     A swelled mouth.
                   Take the iuice of Wormewood, Cammomill, and Shirwitt, and mixe them with hony, 
                     •
                  nd bath the swelling therewith, and it will cure it.
               For the Quinsie,
                  
                     For the Quinsie.
                   or Quinarie, giue the party to drinke the

hearbe Mouseare steept in ale or beere, & looke where you see a Swine rubbe himselfe, and there vpon the same place rubbe a slate stone, and then with it slate all the swelling, and it will cure it.
               
                  
                     Against drunkennes.
                  If you would not be drunke, take the pouder of Betany & Coleworts mixt together; and eate it euery morning fasting as much as will lie vpon a sixpence, and it will preserue a man from drunkennes.
               
                  
                     To quicken the wit.
                  To quicken a mans wits, spirit and memory; let him take Langdebeefe, which is gathered in Iune or Iuly, and beating it in a cleane morter; Let him drinke the iuyce thereof with warme water, and he shall finde the benefit.
               
                  
                     For the Kings euill.
                  If a man be troubled with the Kings euill, let him take the red docke & seeth it in wine till it be very tender, then straine it, and so drinke a good draught thereof, and he shall finde great ease from the same: especially if he doe continue the vse thereof.
               
                  
                     Additions to the particular sicknesses & first of the head and the parts 
                           •
                        hereof & the lungs
                  Take Frankinsence, Doues dung, and Wheate flower, of each an ounce, and mixe them well with the white of an egge, then plasterwise apply it where the paine is.
               The oyle of Lyllyes if the head bee annoynted therewith, is good for any payne therein.
               Take Rewe, and steepe it in Vynegar a day and a night, the Rewe being first well bruised,
                     Another. For the head ake a
                           •
                        d to stay bleeding at the nose.
                   then with the same annoynt the head twice or thrice a day.
               Take the white of an egge and beate it to oyle, then put to it Rosewater, and the pouder of Alablaster, then take flaxe and dippe it therein and lay it to the temples, and renewe it two or three times a day.
                     To dnaw out bones broken in the head.
                  
               
               Take Agrymonie and bruise it, and plasterwise apply it to the wound,
                     For the falling of the mould of the head.
                   and let the party drinke the iuyce of Bettanie, and it will expell the bones, and heale the wound.
               Take the leaues of Agrymonie, & boyle thē in hony, till it be

                  
                     •
                  hicke like a plaister, and then apply it to the wound of the 
                     •
                  ead warme.
               Take a table napkin or any lynnen cloath, and wet it in 
                     •
                  old water,
                     For the Squynancie.
                   and when you goe to bed apply it to the swel
                  
                     ••
                  ng and lie vpright; thus doe three or foure times in a night 
                     •
                  nd the swelling wasts.
               Take two or three docke roots,
                     For the tooth
                           •
                        ake.
                   and as many daysie roots, 
                     •
                  nd boyle them in water till they be soft, then take them out of the water, and boyle them well ouer againe in oyle Olyue, 
                  
                     ••
                  en strayne them through a cleane cloath, and anoynt the 
                     •
                  ayned tooth therewith, and keepe your mouth close, and 
                     •
                  t will not onely take away the payne, but also ease any me
                  
                     •
                  rem or griefe in in the head.
               Take a sawcer of strong vinegar,
                     To make teeth white.
                   and two spoonefulls of 
                     •
                  he pouder of Roch allem, a spoonefull of white salt, and a 
                     •
                  poonefull of hony, seeth all these till it be as thinne as water, 
                     •
                  hen put it into a close viall and keepe it, and when occasion 
                     •
                  erues wash your teeth therewith, with a rough cloath, and 
                     •
                  ub them soundly, but not to bleed.
               Take summe of the elder tree,
                     To draw teeth without yron.
                   or the aples of oake trees, 
                     •
                  nd with either of these rub the teeth & gummes and it will 
                     •
                  oosen them so as you may take them out.
               Take Sage and salt,
                     For teeth that are yellow.
                   of each alike, and stampe them well 
                     •
                  ogether, then take it till it be hard, and make a fine pouder 
                     ••
                  ereof, then therewith rub the teeth euening and morning 
                     •
                  nd it will take away all yellownes.
               First let them blood,
                     For teeth that are loose.
                   then take Harts horne or Iuorie and 
                     •
                  ed Pympernell, and bruise them well together, then put it in
                  
                     •
                  o a linnen cloath and lay it to the teeth, & it wil fasten them.
               Take the iuyce of Louage and drop it in
                     •
                  o the eare, and it cure any venome,
                     For any venome in the eare.
                   and kill any worme, earewigge or other vermine.
               Take two ounces of comine and beate it a morter to fine

pouder,
                     For a stinking breath which commeth from the stomacke
                   then boyle it in wine from a pottell to a quart, then drinke thereof morning and euening as hot as you ca
                     •
                   suffer it, or otherwise take an ounce of wild time, and being cleane washed cut it small and then pouder it, then put to it halfe an ounce of peper in fine pouder, and as much comyne; myxe them all well together, and boyle them in a pottell of white wine, till halfe be consumed, and after meate (but not before) vse to drinke thereof hot, also once in the afternoone and at your going to bed, and it will purge the breath.
               
                  
                     For stinking nostrills.
                  Take red nettles and burne them to pouder, then add as much of the pouder of pepper, and myxe them well together, and snuffe thereof vp into the nose, and thus do diuers times a day.
               
                  
                     For a canker in the nose.
                  Take old ale, and hauing boyld it on the fire, and clensd it ad thereto a pretie quantitie of lyfe hony and as much allom, then with a serryndge of such like wash the sores therewith very warme.
               
                  
                     A red water for any cauker.
                  Take a gallond of running water, and boyle it to a pottell, then put to it a handfull of red sage, a handfull of Cellodyne, a handfull of honysuckles, a handfull of woodbine leaues and flowers, then take a peniworth of graynes made into fine pouder, and boyle all very well together, then put to a quart of the best life hony of a yeare old, and a pound of roch allom, let all boyle together till it come to a pottell, then straine it and put it into a close vessell, and therewith dresse and anoynt the sores as occasion serues, it will heale any canker or vlcer, and cleanse any wound; It is best to be made at Midsomer.
               
                  
                     To cleare the eyes.
                  Take the flowers and roots of primrose cleane washt in running water, then boyle them in faire running water the space of an houre, then put thereto a pretty quantitie of white copperas, and then straine all through a linnin cloath & so let it stand a while, & there will an Oyle appeare vpon the

water, wirh that oyle anoynt the lids & the browes of your eyes, and the temples of your head, and with the water wash 
                     •
                  our eyes, and it is most soueraigne.
               Take Fifteene seedes of Gyneper,
                  
                     Another for the sight.
                   & as many Gromell seeds, 
                     ••
                  ue bra
                     •
                  ches of Fenell, beate them all together, then boyle 
                     ••
                  em in a pint of old ale til three parts be wasted, then straine 
                     •
                  t into a glasse, and drop thereof three drops into each eye 
                     •
                  t night, and wash your eyes euery morning for the space of 
                     •
                  ifteene dayes with your owne water, and it will cleare any 
                     •
                  ecayed sight whatsoeuer.
               Take red Snayles,
                  
                     For sore eyes
                   and seeth them in faire water, and then gather the oyle that aryseth thereof, & therwith anoynt your eyes morning and euening.
               Take a gallond or two of the dregges of strong ale,
                     For sicke eyes.
                   & put thereto a handfull or two of Comyne, and as much salt, and 
                     ••
                  en distill in a Lymbeck, and the water is most pretious to 
                     •
                  ash eyes with.
               Take Cellondine,
                  
                     For bleared eyes.
                   
                  Rue, Chervyle, Plantine, and anyse, of each 
                     •
                  ike, and as much fenell, as of all the rest, stampe them al well together, then let it stand two dayes & two nights, thē straine 
                     ••
                  and annoynt your eyes morning and euening therewith.
               Take an egge,
                  
                     For the pin and webb in the eye.
                   and rost it extreame hard, then take the whit 
                     ••
                  eing very hot lapp in it as much white copperas as a pease & then violently straine it through a fine cloath, then put a good drop thereof into the eye, and it is most soueraigne.
               Take two drams of pr
                     •
                  pard Tulia,
                  
                     A pouder for the pin and webb in the eye.
                   of Sandragon one dram, of Sugar a dram, bray them all very well together till they be 
                     •
                  xceeding small, then take of the pouder and blow a littell 
                     •
                  hereof into the eye, and it is soueraigne.
               Take of Red rose leaues,
                  
                     A pretious water for the eyes.
                   of Smalladge, of Mayden hayre, 
                        ••
                     saace, endyue, succory, red fenell, hill-wort, and cellendyne, of each halfe a quarter of a pound, wash them cleane & lay thē 
                  
                     •
                  n steepe in white wine a whole day, then still them in an ordinary

still, & the first water will be like gold, the second like siluer, & the third like balme, any of these is most pretious for sore eyes, and hath recouered sight lost fer the space ef Ten yeares, hauing been vsed but foure dayes.
               
                  
                     To make hayre to grow.
                  Take the leaues of wyllowe & boyle them well in oyle & therewith annoynt the place where you would haue any hayre to grow, whether vpon head or beard.
               
                  
                     An other
                  Take Treakle water and hony, boyle them together, and wet a cloth therein, and lay it where you would haue hayre to grow, and it will come speedily.
               
                  
                     For a pympled or redsancy face.
                  Take nine or ten egges and rost them very hard, then put away the yolkes, and bray the whites very small with three or foure ounces of white Copporas till it bee come to perfect oyntment, then with it anoynt the face morning and euening for the space of a weeke and more.
               
                  
                     For the rhume.
                  Take the rynde of Issop, and boyle it or burne it and let the fume or smoke go into the mouth and it will stay any rhume falling from the head.
               
                  
                     For hearcemesse in the throate.
                  Take a pint of running water, and three spoonefulls of hony, and boyle them together and slyme off the filth, then put thereto an ounce of small Raysons, and straine it well through a cloath, and so drinke it morning and euneing.
               
                  
                     For a dangerous cough.
                  Take Aquauiae and salt, and mixe it with strong old ale and then heate it on the fire, and therewith wash the soales of the feete when you goe to bed.
               
                  
                     For the dry cough.
                  Take of cleane Wheate and of cleane Barly of each a like quantitie, and put them into a gallond and a halfe of faire water, and boyle them till they burst, then straine it into a cleane vessell, and ad thereto a quarterne of fine Lycoras pouder, and two penyworth of gumme, arabicke, then boyle it ouer againe and straine it, and keepe it in a sweete vessell, and drinke thereof morning and euening.
               
                  
                     For the tis
                        
                           •
                        ike.
                  Take the best wort and let it stand till it bee yellow, then

boye it & after let it coole, then put to it a quantitie of barme, saffron, and so drinke of it morning and e
                     •
                  ening while it lasteth, otherwise take hore-hound, violet leaues, and Isop, of each a handfull, seeth them in water, and put thereto a littell Saffron, Lychoras, and Sugar-candy, after they haue boyled a good while, then straine it into an earthen vessel, & let the sick drink 
                     •
                  hereof Sixe spoonefull at a time morning and euening; or 
                     •
                  astly, take the lungs of a Foxe, and lay it in rosewater, or boyle it in rosewater, then take it out and dry it in some hot place without the sunne, then beate it to pouder with Sugar-candy, 
                  
                     •
                  nd eate of this pouder morning and euening.
               To ease paine in the stomacke take Endiue,
                  
                     For griefes in the stomacke.
                   
                  Mints, of each 
                     •
                   like quantitie, and steepe them in white Wine a dayes space, then strayning it and adding thereto a little Cinamo and Pep
                     
                        •
                     er, giue it the sicke person to drinke, and if you add thereto 
                     •
                   litle of the pouder of Horse-mint and Calamint, it will com
                  
                     •
                  ort the stomacke exceedingly, and occasion swift and good 
                     •
                  igestion.
               For spitting of blood,
                     For spitting of blood.
                   whether it proceede of inward 
                     •
                  ruises, ouerstrayning or suck like, you shall take some pitch, 
                     •
                  nd a little Sperma Caeti, and mixe it with old ale and drinke 
                     •
                  t, and it will stay the flux of blood: but if by meanes of the 
                     •
                  ruise any outward griefe remaine, then you shall take the herbe Br
                        •
                     ckell hempe, and frying it with sheepes tallow lay it hot to the grieued place, and it will take away the anguish.
               To stay the fluxe of vomiting take Worme-wood, and sowre bread toasted of each like quantitie,
                     For vomitting.
                   & beate them well in a morter, then adde to them as much of the iuice of mints, and the iuice of Plan
                        •
                     ane as well bring it to a thicke salue: then fry them all together in a frying pan, & when it is hot lay it plaister wise to the mouth of the stomacke, then let the party drinke a little white wine and cheruile water mixt together, and then steepe sower toasted bread in very strong Vinegar,

wrapt it in a fine cloath and let the sicke party smell thereto, and it will stay the excesse of vomiting, and both comfort & strengthen the stomacke.
               
                  
                     To force one to vomit.
                  If you would compell one to vomit, take halfe a spoonefull of Stonecrop, and mixe it with three spoonefull of white wine and giue it to the party to drinke, and it will make him vomite presently, but doe this seldome and to strong bodies, for otherwise it is dangerous.
               
                  
                     For the Ilica passio.
                  For the Iliaca passio, take of Polipody an ounce, & stampe it, then boyle it with prunes and violets in fennell water or Anniseeds water,Additions, to the diseases of the stomacke. For the stomacke.
                   take thereof a good quantatitie, then straine it and let the party euery morning and euening drinke a good draught thereof.
               If the stomacke bee troubled with wind or other paine, take Comyne and beate it to pouder, and mixe with it red wine, and drinke it at night when you goe to bed, dyuers nights together.
               Take Brokelyme roots and leaues and was them cleane & drye them in the sunne,
                     For the Illica passio.
                   so dry till you may make pouder thereof, then take of the pouder a good quantatitie, and the like of Treakle, and put them in a cup with a pretty quantatie of strong old ale & stirre them well together, & drink therof first and last morning and euening for the space of three or foure dayes, and if need doe require, vse the same in thy brothes you do eate, for it is very soueraine.
               
                  
                     For paine in the brest.
                  Take Harts-horne or Iuorye beaten to fine pouder, and as much Cynamon in pouder, mixe them with vinegar, & drink thereof to the quantitie of seauen or eight spoonefulls.
               
                  
                     For the Mother.
                  Take the water of Mouseare, and drinke thereof the quantitie of an ounce and a halfe or two ounces, twice or thrice a day, or otherwise 
                     •
                  ake a little Nutmegge, a little Cynamond, a little Cloues, a little Mace, & a very little Ginger, & the flowers of Lauendar, beate all to a fine pouder, and when the passion

of the mother cometh, take a chaffingdish of good quicke coales, and bend the patyent forward and cast of the pouder into the chaffingdish so as she may receiue the smoake both in at her nose and mouth, and it it is a present cure.
               Against obstructions in the liuer,
                     Obstructions of the liuer.
                   take Anyseeds, Amees, Burnet, Camomile, and the greater Centuarie, and boyle them in white wine with a little hony, and drinke it euere morning & it will cure the obstructions, and cleanse the liuer from all imperfection.
               Against the heate and inflamation of the liuer,
                     Against the heate of the liuer.
                   take Endiue dried to pouder, and the meale of Lupin-seeds, and mixe it with hony and the iuice of Wormewood, make a cake thereof and eate it, and it will asswage the great heate & inflamation of the liuer, and take away the pimples and rednesse of the 
                     ••
                  ce which proceedeth from the same.
               To preuent a plurisie a good while before it come,
                     For the plurisie.
                   there 
                     •
                  s no better way then to vse much the exercise of ringing, or 
                     •
                  o stretch your armes vpward, so as they may beare the waight of your body, & so to swing your body vp & downe 
                     •
                   good space: but hauing caught a plurisie and feeling the gripes, stitches, and pangs thereof, you shall presently cause 
                     •
                  he party to be let bloud, & then take the herb Althea or Hol
                     
                        •
                     yhocke, and boyle it with vinegar and linseed till it be thicke plaisterwise, and then spread it vpon a peece of Allom leather, and lay it to the side that is grieued, and it will helpe it.
               To helpe a stitch in the side or else where, take Doues dung,
                     A plaister for a stitch.
                   red rose leaues and put them into a bagge, & quilt it: then throughly heate it vpon a chaffingdish of coales with vinegar in a platter: Then lay it to the pained place as hot as may bee suffered, & when it cooleth heate it againe.
               For any extraordinary heate or inflamation in the liuer,
                     Heate in the liuer.
                   take Barbaries & boyle them in clarified whay and drinke them and they will cure it.
               
                  
                  
                     For the consumption.
                  If you will make a cordiall for a Consumption or any other weakenesse: take a quart of running water, a peece of Mutton, and a peece of Veale, and put them with the water into a pot, then take of Sorrell, Violet leaues, Spynage, Endiu
                        •
                     , Succory Sage, Isop, of each a good quantitie; then take Prunes & Raysons, and put them all to the broth, and seeth them from a quart to a pinte, then straine the yolke of an egge and a little Saffron thereinto, putting in Sugar, whole Mace, and a little white wine, so seeth them a while together, and let the party drinke it as warme as may be.
               
                  
                     To stanch blood.
                  To stanch blood, take the hearbe Shepheards-purse (if it may be gotten) distilled at the Apoticaries, and drinke an ounce thereof at a time Morning and Euening, and it will stay any fluxe of blood naturall or vnnaturall, but if you cannot get the distilled water, then boyle a handfull of the hearbe with Cinamon, and a little Sugar, in Claret wine, and boyle it from a quart to a pint, & drinke it as oft as you please: also if you but rubbe the hearbe betweene your hands, you shall see it will soone make the blood returne.
               
                  
                     For the yellow Iaundisse.
                  For the yellow Iaundisse, take two peniwoth of the best English Saffron, drie it and grind it to an exceeding fine pouder, then mixe it with the pap of a rosted apple, and giue it the diseased party to swallow downe in the manner of a pill, and doe thus diuers mornings together, and without doubt it is the most present cure that can be for the same, as hath beene often times proued
                     For the yellow Iaundisse.
                  
               
               For the yellow Iaundisse take pimpernell, and chickweede, stampe them and straine them into posset ale, and let the party drinke thereof morning and euening.
                     For a desperate yellow Iaundisse.
                  
               
               For the yellow Iaundisse which is desperat and almost past cure: Take sheepes dung new made & put it into a cup of Beare or Ale, and close the cuppe fast and let it stand so all night, and in the morning take a draught of the clearest of the

drinke, and giue it to the sicke party.
               For the blacke Iaundisse take the hearbe called Pemyry
                     
                        •
                     all,
                  
                     For the blacke iaundisse.
                   & either boyle it in white wine, or drinke the iuice thereof simply by it selfe to the quantitie of three or foure spoonefull at a time, and it will cure the blacke Iaundisse.Additions, to the diseases of the liuer. For wasting of the Liuer.
                  
               
               Take of Isop, Parseley, & Harts tongue, of each a like quantitie, and seeth them in worte till they be soft, then let it stand till it be cold, and then drinke thereof first and last, morning and euening.
               Take Fenell roots, and Parseley roots, of each a like, wash 
                     •
                  hem cleane, and peele off the ouer barke and cast away the pyth within,
                     A restoratiue for the liuer.
                   then mynce them small, then put them to three pynts of water, and set them ouer the fire, then take figges, 
                  
                     •
                  nd shred them small, Lycoras and breake it small, and put 
                     •
                  hēm to the hearbs, and let all boyle vere well, then take sor
                     
                        •
                     ell & stampe it and put it to the rest, and let it boyle till some 
                     •
                  art be wasted, then take a good quantitie of hony and put to 
                     〈◊〉
                   and boyle a while, then take it from the fire and clarifie it 
                     •
                  hrough a strayner into a glasse vessell and stop it very close, 
                     •
                  hen giue the sicke to drinke thereof morning and euening.
               Take the stalke of of Saint Mary Garbycke,
                  
                     To heale a ringworme commiog of heate from the liuer.
                   and burne it or 
                     ••
                  y it vpon a hot tyle stone vntill it bee very drye, and then 
                     •
                  eate it into pouder, and rub the sore therewith till a bee 
                     •
                  hole.
               Take wooll in the walkmyll that commeth from the cloth and flyeth about like downe and beate it into pouder,
                     To stanch blood.
                   then 
                     •
                  ake thereof, the white of an egge and wheate flower, and 
                     •
                  tampe them together, then lay it on a linen cloath or lynt & 
                     •
                  pply it to the bleeding place, and it will stanch it.
               If a man bleed and haue no present helpe, if the wound be 
                     •
                  n the foote,
                     For great danger in bleeding.
                   bind him about the ankle, if in the legges bind 
                     •
                  im about the knee, if it be on the hand bind him about the wrist if it be on the arme bind him about the brawne of the

arme, with a good lyst, two or three, and the blood will presently stanch.
               
                  
                     For a stitch.
                  Take good store of Cynamon grated and put it into posset ale very hot and drinke it, and it is a present cure.
               
                  
                     A bath for the dropsie.
                  Take a gallond of running water, and put to it as much salt as will make the water salt as the sea water, then boyle it a good while, and bath the legges therein as hot as may bee suffered.
               
                  
                     For the dropsie.
                  For the dropsie, take Agnus castus, Fenell, Affodill, dark
                        •
                      wall woort, Lupins, and worme wood, of each a handfull, and boyle them in a gallon of white wine till a fourth part bee cosumed: then straine it and drinke it morning and euening halfe a pinte thereof, and it will cure the dropsie; but you must be carefull that you take not Daffodill, for Affodill.
               
               
                  
                     Paine in the spleene.
                  For paine in the spleene, take Agnus Castus, Agrymony, Anyseeds, Centuary the great, and Worme-wood, of each a handfull, and boyle them in a gallon of white wine, then straine it and let the patient drinke diuers mornings together halfe a pint thereof: and at his vsuall meales let him neither drinke Ale, Beere, nor wine, but such as hath had the hearbe Tamoriske steeped in the same, or for want of the hearbe, let him drinke out of a cup made of Tamoriske wood, & he shall surely finde remedie.
               
                  
                     For paine in the side.
                  For any paine in the side, take Mugwort and red Sage, and drie them betweene two tile stones, & then put it in a bagge, and lay it to your side as hot as can be indured.
                     For fatnesse and short breath.
                  
               
               To helpe him that is exceeding fat, pursie, and short breathed: take hony clarified, & bread vnleauened and make toasts of it,Additions, to the diseases of the 
                           •
                        pleene, For 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   and dippe the toasts into the clarified hony, and eate this diuers times with your meate.
               Take a lumpe of yron or steele, and heate it red hot, and quench it in Wine, then giue the Wine to the sicke party to drinke.
               
                  Take Fenell seeds and the roots,
                     For the stepping of the spleene.
                   boyle them in water, and after it is cleansed put to it hony & giue it the party to drinke, then seeth the hearbe in oyle and wine together, and plaister wise apply it to the side.
               Make a plaister of worme-wood boyled in oyle, or make an oyntment of the Iuice of Worme-word,
                  
                     For the hardnesse of the spleene. Diseases of the heart.
                   of Vinegar, armonyake, waxe, and oyle, myxt and melted together, and annoynt the side therewith, either in the sun, or before the fire.
               Take the pouder of Galingall, and mixe it with the iuice of Borage,
                  
                     For the passion of the Heart.
                   and let the offended party drinke therein sweete wine.
               Take Rosemary and Sage, of each an handfull, and seeth them in white wine or strong ale,
                     For heart sicknesse.
                   and then let the patient drinke it luke warme.
               Take the iuice of Fenell myxt with hony,
                     For fatnesse about the heart.
                   and seeth them both together till it be hard, and then eate it Euening and Morning, and it will consume away the fatnesse.
               For the wind Collicke,
                  
                     For the wind collicke
                   which is a disease both generall and 
                     •
                  ruell, there be a world of remidies, yet none more appro
                  
                     •
                  ed then this which I will repeate: you shall take Nutmegs sound and large, and diuide them equally into foure quarters: the first morning as soone as you rise eate a quar
                  
                     •
                  er thereof; the second morning eate two quarters, and the third eate three quarters, and the fourth morning eate a whole Nutmegge, and so hauing made your stomacke and 
                     •
                  ast familiar therewith, eate euery morning whilst the Col
                  
                     •
                  icke offendeth you a whole Nutmegge drie without any composition, and fast euer an howre at least after it, and you shall find a most vnspeakeable profit which will arise from the same.
               For the wind Collicke,
                     The wind collicke.
                   take a handfull of cleane wheate meale as it commeth from the mill, and two egges, and a little wine-vinegar, and a little Aquauitae, and mingle them all

together colde and make a cake of it and bake it on a gridyron with a soft fire, and turne it often and tend it with basting of aquauitae with a feather; then lay it somewhat higher then the paine is, rather then lower.
               
                  
                     For the lask
                  For the Lask or extreame scowring of the belly, take the seeds of the wood-rose, or bryar-rose, beate it to pouder and mixe a dramme thereof with an ounce of the conserue of sloes and eate it, and it will in short space bind and make the belly hard.
               For the bloody-flux, take a quart of Red wine and boyle therein a handfull of Shepheards-purse till the hearb bee very soft:
                     For the blodie fluxe.
                   then straine it, and ad thereto a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, and as much of dryed Tanners barke taken from the ouze, and both beaten to fine pouder, then giue the party halfe a pinte thereof to drinke morning and euening, it being made very warme, and tt will cure him.
               
                  
                     To stay a laske.
                  To stay a sore laske, take Plantane water and cinamon finely beaten, and the flowers of Pomgranats, and boyle them well together, then take Sugar, and the yolke of an egge, & make a caudle of it, and giue it the grieued party.
               
                  
                     For the flex.
                  For the flixe take a Stags pizzell dried and grated, and giue it in any drinke, either in beere, ale, or wine, and it is most soueraigne for any flixe whatsoeuer.
               
                  
                     For the worst fluxe.
                  To rule the worst bloody Flix that may be, take a quart of red-wine, and a spoonefull of Commin-seede, boyle them together vntill halfe bee consumed, then take knot-grasse and Sepheards purse, and plantane, and stampe them seuerall, and then straine them & take of the iuice of each of them a good spooneful, and put thē to the wine, and so seeth thē againe a little: Then drinke it luke-warme, halfe ouer-night, and halfe the next morning, and if it fall out to be in winter, so that you cannot get the hearbes: then take the water of thē distilled, of each three spoonefuls, and vse it as before.
               
                  For extreame costiuenesse, or binding in the body, so as a man cannot auoid his excrements,
                     For costiuenesse.
                   take Anniseeds. Fen
                     
                        ••
                      cr
                        •
                     ete, Linseed, and the powder of Pyonie: of each halfe an ounce, and boyle them in a quart of white wine, and drinke 
                     •
                   good draught thereof, and it will make a man goe to the stoole orderly and at great ease.
               For wormes in the belly,
                     For wormes
                   either of child or man, take Aloes 
                        •
                     ickatrine, as much as halfe a hazell Nut, and wrappe it in the pappe of a roasted apple, and so let the offended party swal
                  
                     •
                  ow it in manner of a pill fas
                     •
                  ing in the morning, or else mixe 
                     ••
                   with three or foure spoonefull of Muskadine, and so let the party drinke, it is a present cure: but if the child be either 
                     ••
                   young, or the man so weake with sicknesse that you dare not administer any thing inwardly, then you shall dissolue your Aloes in the oyle of Sauine, making it salue-like thicke, then plaister-wise spread it vpon sheepes leather, and lay it 
                     •
                  pon the nauill or mouth of the stomacke of the grieued 
                     ••
                  rty, and it will giue him ease, so will also vnset leekes chopt 
                     ••
                  all and fryde with sweete butter,Additions, to the diseases of the belly & guts For the greatest lax
                           •
                        
                     
                   & then in a linnen bagge 
                     ••
                  ply hot to the nauill of the grieued party.
               Take a quart of red wine & put to it three yolkes of egges, and a penyworth of long pepper and graynes, and boyle it wel 
                     ••
                  d drinke it as hot as can bee suffered, or otherwise take an 
                     ••
                  ince of the inner bark of an oake, and a penyworth of long 
                     
                        ••
                     pper, and boyle them in a pint and better of new milke, and drinke it hot first and last morning and euening.
               Take an egge and make a little hole in the top,
                     For the bloody flixe.
                   and put 
                     〈◊〉
                   it the white, then fill it vp agai
                     •
                  e with Aquauitae, stirring 
                     •
                  he egge and Aquauitae till it be hard, then let the party eate 
                     ••
                  e egge and it will cure him, or otherwise take pint of red 
                     •
                  ine & nine yolkes of egges, and Twentie pepper cornes 
                     ••
                  all beatē let them seeth til they be thick, then take it off & 
                     •
                  iue the sicke to eate nine spooneful morning & euening.
               
                  
                  
                     For an easie laske.
                  Take of Rue and Beets a like quantitie, bruise them & take the iuice, mixe it with clarified hony, and boyle it in redde wine, and drinke it warme first and last morning and euening.
               
                  
                     To haue two stooles a day and no more.
                  Take Mercury, Sinkefoyle, and Mallowes, and when you make pottage or broth with other hearbs, let these hearbs before named haue most strength in the pottage, and eateing thereon it will giue you two stooles and no more.
               
                  
                     For hardnes of the belly or wombe. Against costiuenesse.
                  Take two spoonefull of the Iuyce of Iuye leaues, and drinke it three times a day, and it will dissolue the hardnes.
               Take the barkes of the roots of the elder tree and stampe it, and mixe it with old ale, and drinke thereof a good harty draught.
               
                  
                     For the stopping of the wombe.
                  Take the crummes of white bread, and steepe it in allom milke and ad sugar vnto it and eate it, and it will open the belly.
               
                  
                     For the wind collick.
                  Take the kyrnelles of three Peatch stones, & bruise them, seauen cornes of 
                     •
                  ase pepper, and of slyced ginger a greater quantitie then of the pepper, pound all together grosly & put it into a spoonefull of Sacke (which is the best) or else white wine or strong ale, and drinke it off in a great spoone, then fast two houres after and walke vp & downe if you can, if otheswise, keepe your selfe warme, and be ware of melancholly. It may be taken at all times.
               
                  
                     For the Rupture.
                  Take of Dasies, comfrey, Polpodi, of the oake and auence of each halfe a handfull, two roots of Osmund, boyle them in strong Ale & hony, and drinke thereof morning, noone, & night, & it wil breake any reasonable rupture. Or otherwise take of Smallage, Comfrey setwell, polypody that growes on the grownd like fearne, dasie
                        •
                     , and mores, of each a like, stampe them very small, and boyle them well in Barme, vntill it bee thicke like a pultis, and so keepe it in a closse vessell, and when you haue occasion to vse it, make it as hot as the party can suffer it, and lay it to the place grieued, then with a trusse,

trusse him vp close, and let him be carefull for strayning of himselfe, and in a few dayes it will knyt, during which euer giue him to drinke a draught of red wine, and put therein a good quantitie of the flower of fetches finely boulted styrring it well together, and then fast an houre after.
               For the violent paine of the stone, make a posset of milke and sacke,
                     For the stone.
                   then take off the curd, and put a handfull of Camomill flowers into the drinke, then put it into a pewter pot and let it stand vpon hot imbers, so that it may dissolue: and then drinke it as occasion shall serue:
                     Another.
                   Other for this griefe 
                     •
                  ake the stone of an Oxe gall, & drie it in an ouen, then beate 
                     •
                  t to pouder, and take of it the quantitie of a hasill nut with a draught of good old ale or white wine.
               For the Collicke and stone,
                     The collicke and stone.
                   take hawthorne berries, the berries of sweet briars, and ashen keyes, and dry them euery 
                     •
                  ne seuerally vntill you make them into pouder, then put a 
                     ••
                  ttle quantity of euery one of them together, then if you 
                     ••
                  inke good put to it the pouder of Licoras and aniseeds, to 
                     •
                  he intent that the party may the better take it, then put in a quantity of this pouder in a draught of white wine, & drinke 
                     •
                   fasting.
                     Another.
                   Otherwise you may take Smallage seede, Parsley, 
                        ••
                     uage, Saxifrage, & broome-seede, of each one of them a little quantitie, beate them into a pouder, and when you feele a 
                     ••
                  t of either of the diseases, eate of this pouder a spoonefull at a time either in pottage, or else in the broth of a chicken, and so fast two or three howers after.
               To make a pouder for the collicke and stone, take fenell, 
                        •
                     arsley seede,
                  
                     A pouder for the collicke and stone.
                   
                  any seed, and earraway seed, of each the waight of sixe pence, of gromel seede, saxifrage seede, the roots of Fili
                     
                        •
                     endula, and licoras, of each the waight of twelfe-pence, of 
                     
                        •
                     allingall, spikenard, and Cinamon, of each the waight of eight 
                     •
                  ence, of Seena the waight of xvii. shillings, good waight, 
                     •
                  eate them all to pouder and searce it, which will waigh in

all 25. shillings and 6. pence: This pouder is to bee giuen in white wine and sugar in the morning fasting, and so to continue fasting two howers after; and to take of it at one time the waite of ten pence or twelue pence. Other Physitians for the stone take a quart of renish or white wine,
                     Another.
                   and two lymons, and pare the vpper rinde thinne, & slice them into the wine, and as much white soape as the waight of a groate, and boyle them to a pint, and put thereto sugar according to your discretion; and so drinke it keeping your selfe warme in your bed, and lying vpon your backe.
               
                  
                     For the stone in the reynes.
                  For the stone in the reynes, take Ameos, Camomill, Maiden-haire, Sparrow-tounge, and Filapendula, of each a like quantity, drie it in an ouen, and then beate it to pouder, and euery Morning drinke halfe a sponefull thereof with a good draught of white wine, and it will helpe.
               
                  
                     For the stone in the bladder.
                  For the stone in the bladder, take a Radish roote and slit it crosse twice, then put it into a pint of white wine, and stoppe the vessell exceeding close: then let it stand all one night, and the next morning drinke it off fasting, & thus do diuers mornings together, and it will helpe.
               
                  
                     A pouder for the stone in the bladder.
                  For the stone in the bladder take the kernels of sloes & drie them on a tile stone, then beate them to pouder, then take the roots of Alexanders, parsly, pellitorie, & holihocke, of euery of their roots a like quantitie, & seeth them all in white wine, or else in the broth of a yong chicken: then straine them into a cleane vessell, & when you drinke of it, put into it halfe a spoonefull of the pouder of slow kernels. Also if you take the oyle of Scorpion, it is very good to annoynt the members, & the tender part of the belly against the bladder.
               
                  
                     A bath for the stone.
                  To make a bath for the stone, take mallowes, holihocke, and lilly roots, & linseed, pellitory of the wall, and seeth them in the broth of a sheepes head, and bath the reines of the backe therewith oftentimes, for it will open the straitnes of

the water conduits, that the stone may haue issue, and asswage the paine, and bring out the grauell with the vrine: but yet in more effect, when a plaister is made and laid vnto the reines and belly immediately after the bathing.
               To make a water for the stone,
                     A water for the stone.
                   take a gallon of new milke of a red Cow, and put therein a handfull of Pellitory of the wall, and a handfull of wild time, and a handfull of Saxifrage and a handfull of parsly, and two or three radish roots sliced and a quantitie of Philipendula roots, let them lie in the milke a night, and in the morning put the milke with the hearbs into a still, & distill them with a moderate fire of charrcole or such like: then when you are to vse the water, take a draught of renish wine or whit wine, and put into it fiue spoonfull of the distilled water, and a little sugar and nutmeg sliced, & then drinke of it, the next day meddle not with it, but the third day do as you did the first day, and so euery other day for a weekes space.
               For the difficulty of vrine,
                     Difficultie of Vrine.
                   or hardnesse to make water, take Smallage, Dill, Any-seedes and Burnet, of each a like quantitie, and drie them and beate them to fine pouder, and drink halfe a spoonefull thereof with a good draught of white wine.
               If the Vrine be hot and burning,
                     For hot vrine.
                   the party shall vse euery morning to drinke a good draught of new milke and sugar well mixt together, and by all meanes to abstaine from beere that is old, hard, and tart, and from all meates and sawces which are sower or sharpe.
               For the strangullion,
                     For the strangullion.
                   take Saxifrage, Polipody, of the Oake, the roots of beanes, and a quantitie or Raysins, of euery one three handfull or more, and then two gallonds of good wine, or else wine lees, and put it into a slerpentary and make therof a good quantitie, and giue the sicke therof to drinke morning and euening a spoonefull at once.
               For them that cannot hold their water in the night time,

take Kiddes hoofe and drie it and beete it into powder,
                     For pissing in bed.
                   and giue it to the patient to drinke, either in beare or ale foure or fiue times.
               
                  
                     For the rupture.
                  For the rupture or bursnesse in men, take Comphrie and Ferneosmund, and beate them together with yellow waxe and Deares suet till it come to a salue, & then apply it to the broken place and it will knit it; also it shall be good for the party to take Comphry roots, and rost them in hot imbers at you rost wardens, and let the diseased party eate them, for they are very soueraine for the rupture, especially being eaten fasting,Additions, to the diseases of the Reynes and Bladder.
                   and by all meanes let him weare a strong trufle till he be whole.
               Take Goates clawes & burne them in a new earthen pot to powder, then put of the pouder into broth or pottage & eate therein, or otherwise take Rew, Gromell, and Parsly, and stampe them together & mixe it with wine and drinke it.
               
                  
                     For he that cannot hold his water.
                  Taka Agnus castus, and Castoreum and seeth them together in wine and drinke thereof, also seeth them in Vineger and hot lappe it about the priuie parts and it will helpe.
                     For the Gonorea or shedding of 
                           •
                        eede.
                  
               
               Take Malmesey and Butter, and warme it and wash the reynes of the backe, whereupon you find paine, then take oyle of mace and annoynt the backe therewith.
               
                  
                     For weakenes in the backe.
                  First wash the reynes of the backe with warme white wine, then annoynt all the backe with the oyntment called Perstuaneto.
                  
                     For heate in the reines.
                  
               
               Take a legge of beefe, a handfull of Fenell roots, a handfull of parsly roots,
                     For comforting and strengthing of the backe.
                   two roots of comfrey, one pound of raysons of the sun, a pound of damaske prumes, and a quarter o
                     •
                   a pound of dates, put all these together and boyle them very lost with sixe leaues of nip, sixe leaues of clary, twelue leaues of bittany of the wood, and a little haras-tongue, when they are sod very soft, take them and stampe them very small and and straine them into the same broth againe with a quart of

sacke and a penyworth of large mace, and of this drink at your pleasure.
               For the Hemeroides,
                     For the Hemeroides.
                   which is a troublesome and a sore griefe, take of Dill, Dogge-fennell, and Pellitory of Spaine, of each hafe a handfull, and beate it in a morter with sheepes suet and blacke sope til it co
                     •
                  e to a salue, & then lay it plasterwise to the sore, and it will giue the griefe ease.
               For the piles or Hemerods,
                     For the piles or hemeroids.
                   take halfe a pint of ale, and a good quantity of pepper, and as much allom as a walenut: boyle all this together till it be as thicke as b
                     ••
                  dlime or thicker, this done take the iuice of white violets, & the iuice of housleeke, and when it is almost cold, put in the iuice and straine them all together, and with this oyntment annoynt the sore place twice a day. Otherwise for this griefe take lead and grate it small, & lay it vpon the sores: or else take muskles dried and beate to pouder, and lay it on the sores.
               If a mans fundament fall downe through som cold taken or other cause,
                     For the fa
                           •
                        
                        ling of the fundament.
                   let it be forthwith put vp againe: then take the powder or Towne cresses dried, and strew it gently vpon the fundament, and annoynt the reines of the backe with hony,Additions, to the diseases of the priuate parts. For the hemroids
                   and then about it strew the powder of Cummin and calafine mixt together, and ease will come thereby.
               Take a great handfull of orpyns, & bruise them betweene your hands till they be like a salue, and then lay them vpon a cloth and bind them fast to the fundament.
               To helpe the greene sicknesse, take a pottle of white wine & a handfull of Rosemary, a handfull of worme-wood, an ounce of cardus benedictus seed,
                     For the greene sicknesse.
                   and a dramme of Cloue: all these must be put into the white-wine in a iugge, and couered very close, and in steepe a day & a night before the party drinke of it, then let her drinke of it euery morning and two houres before supper: & so take for a fortnight, and let her stirre as much as she can, the more the better, & as earely as she can:

Otherwise for this sicknesse take Isop, Fennell, and Peny-royall, of these three one good handfull, take two ounces of Currants, seeth these in a pint of faire water to the halfe, then straine the hearbs from the liquor, & put therto two ounces of fine sugar, and two spoonefuls of white wine vinegar, and let the party drinke euery morning foure spoonefuls thereof and walke vpon it.
               
                  
                     To increase a womans milke.
                  To increase a womans milke, you shall boyle in strong posset ale good store of Colworts, & cause her to drinke euery meale of the same, also if shee vse to eate boyled Colworts with her meate, it will wonderfully increase her milke also.
               
                  
                     To drie vp milke.
                  To drie vp womans milke, take red sage, & hauing stampt it and strayned the iuice from the same, adde thereunto as much wine vinegar, and stirre them well together, then warming it on a flat dish ouer a few coales, steepe therein a sheete of browne paper, then making a hole in the midst therof for the nipple of the brest to goe through, couer all the brest ouer with the paper, and remoue it as occasion shall serue, but be very carefull it be laid very hot to. Some are of opinion, that for a woman to milke her brests vpon the earth will cause the milke to dry, but I referre it to triall.
               
                  
                     Apultus for sore breasts in women.
                  To helpe womens sore breasts, when they are swelled or else inflamed: Take violet leaues and cut them small, and seeth them in milke or running water with wheate bran, or wheate bread crummes: then lay it to the sore as hot as the party can indure it.
               
                  
                     For ease in child bearing.
                  If a woman haue a strong and hard labour: Take foure spoonefull of another womans milke, & giue it the woman to drinke in her labour, and shee shall be deliuered presently.
               
                  
                     Childe dead in the womb.
                  If a woman by mischance haue her child dead within her shee shall take Vitander, Felwort, and Penyroyall, and stampe them, and take of each a spoonefull of the iuice, and mixe it with old wine and giue it her to drinke, and shee shall soone

be deliuered without danger.
               To make a woman apt to conceiue,
                     Aptnesse to conceiue.
                   let her either drinke Mugwort steeped in her wine, or else the pouder thereof mixed with her wine,Additions, to womens infirmities.
                   as shall best please her tast.
               Take the pouder of Corrall finely ground and eate it in a reare egge, and it will stay the flux.
               Against the flowers with-holden in women, make a pessary of the iuyce of Mugwort or the water that it is sodden in and apply it,
                     To cesse womens flowers.
                   but if it be for the fluxe of the flowers, take the iuice of plantane and drinke it in red wine.
               Take a Fomentation made of the water wherein the leaues and flowers of Tutson is sodden,
                     Against the flowers.
                   drinke the superfluities of the matryx,
                  
                     For the matrix.
                   it clenseth the entrance, but this hearb would be gathered in haruest; if a woman haue paine in the matrix, set on the fire water that Amomum hath been sodden in and the dewition make a pessarye and it will giue ease.
               Take two or three egges and they must bee neither rost nor raw,
                     A generall purge for a woman in childe bed.
                   but betweene both, and then take butter that salt neuer came in, and put it into the egges and supp them off, & eate a peece of browne bread to them & drinke a draught of small ale.
               Take the root of Aristolo
                        •
                     hia rotunda and boyle it in wine and oyle,
                     To deliuer the dead birth.
                   and make a fomentation thereof and it helpe.
               Take the budds and tender crops of Bryonye, and boyle them in broth or pottage,
                     To increase milke.
                   and let the woman eate thereof, it is soueraine.
               Take Mugwort,
                  
                     For a woman that is new brought in bed, and soundeth much.
                   
                  motherwort, and mynts, the quantitie of a handfull in all, seeth them together in a pint of Malmsey and giue her to drinke thereof two or three spoonefull at a time, and it will appease her swounding.
               Take henbane stamped and mixt with vinegar and apply it plaister wise ouer all the forehead,
                     To prouoke sleepe.
                   and it will cause sleepe.
               Take Sage, Smallage, Mallowes and plantane, of each an

handfull beate them all well in a morter, then put to them oatemeale and milke,
                     For 
                           •
                        ore brests.
                   and spread it on a fine linnen cloth an inch thicke, and lay it to the brest or brests, or otherwise take white bread leauen and straine it with creame, & put thereto two or three yolkes of egges, salt, oyle, or oyle of Roses, and put it vpon a soft fire till it bee luke warme, and so apply it to the brest.
               
                  
                     For morphew of both kinds.
                  For morphew, whether it be white or blacke, take of the Lethargie of gold a dram, of vnwrought brimston two drams beate them into fine powder, then take of the oyle of Roses, and swines grease, of each a like quantitie, and grind them all together with halfe a dramme of camphyre and a little vinegar, and annoynt the same therewith morning and euening.
               
                  
                     To breede haire.
                  To breede hayre, take Southerne-wood and burne it to ashes, and mixe it well with common oyle, then annoynt the balde place therwith morning aud euening, & it will breede hayre exceedingly.
               
                  
                     For the gout
                  For the gout, take Aristolochia rotunda, Althea, Bett
                        •
                     nie, and the roots of wild Neepe, and the roots of the wild Docke cut in peeces after the vpper rind is taken away, of each a like quantitie, boyle then all in running water till they be soft and thicke: then stampe them in a morter as small as may be, and put thereto a little quantitie of chymney soot, and a pint or better of new milke of a Cow which is all of one entire colour, & as much of the vrine of a man that is fasting, and hauing stirred them all well together, boyle them once againe on the fire, then as hot as the party can suffer it, apply it to the grieued place, and it will giue him ease.
               
                  
                     For the Syatica.
                  For the Syatica, take of mustard seede a good handfull, and as much in waight of hony, and as much in waight of figges, and crummes of white bread halfe so much, then with strong vinegar beate in a morter till it come to a salue, then apply it to the grieued place and it will giue the grieued

party ease, so will also a plaister of Oxicrotium, if it be continually warme vpon the same.
               To helpe all manner of swellings or aches,
                     For any pain or swelling, or the stinging of venomous beasts.
                   in what part of the body soeuer it be, or the stinging of any venomous beas
                     •
                  , as Adder, Snake, or such like, take horehound, smallage, porrets, small mallowes, and wild tansey, of each a like quantitie, and bruise them or cut them small: Then seeth them altogether in a pan with milke, oatemeale, and as much Sheepes suet, or Deares suet as an hens egge, and let it boyle till it bee a thicke plaister, then lay it vpon a blew woolen cloath, and lay it to the griefe as hot as one can suffer it.
               For any swelling in the legges or feete,
                     For swelings in the legges or feete.
                   take a good handfull of water cresses and shread them small, and put them in an earthen pot, and put thereto thicke wine lees, and wheate branne, and sheepes suet, of each of them a like quantitie, and let them boyle together vntill they bee thicke, then take a linnen cloath bind it all about the sore and swelling as hot as the party grieued can indure it, & let it remaine on a whole night, and a day without any remouing, and when you take it away lay to it a fresh plaister, hot, as before, & it will take away bothe the paine & the swelling. Other Surgions for this griefe take hony and beere and heate them together, & therewith bath the swelling both morning and euening.
               To wash any sore or vlcer,
                     A water to wash a sorewith.
                   take running water & Bole Armoniake and camphire, and boyle them together, and dip in a cloth, and lay it to the sore as hot as it may be indured, also plantane water is good to kill the heate of any sore: or if you take woodbine
                     •
                   leaues and bruise them small, it will heale a sore; or if you wash a sore with veriuice, that hath beene burnt or scalded, it is a present remedy.
               Others for this griefe, take the greene of goose dunge & boyle it in fresh butter,
                     A pultis for a sore.
                   then straine it and vse it. Also sallet oyle and snow water beaten together, will cure any scald or

burning.
               
                  
                     For any old sore.
                  To cure any old sore how grieuous soeuer it bee, take of new milke three quarts, a good handful of plantane, and let it boyle till a pint be consumed: Then ad three ounces of allom made in powder, and one ounce and a halfe of white Sugar candy powdered. Also then let it boyle a little till it haue a hard curd, then straine it with this warme the vlcer, and all the member about it: then drie it, and lay vpon the vlcer, vnguentum Basilicon spread on lint, and your diminium plaister diminio ouer it: for this strengtheneth and killeth the itch: but if you find this is not sharpe enough, then take of milke a quart, allom in pouder two ounces, vinegar a spooneful, whē the milke doth seeth, put in the allom & vinegar: then take off the curd, and vse the rest as was before said, and it will cure it.
               
                  
                     For scabs or itch.
                  For scabs or itch take vnguentum populion, and therewith annoynt the party and it will helpe, but if it be more strong & ranke, take an ounce of Nerue oile and three penyworth of quicksiluer, and beate and worke them together, till you see that assuredly the quicksiluer is kild, then let the party annoynt therewith the palmes of his hands, the boughs at his elbowes, his arme pits, & hammes, and it will cure all his body.
               
                  
                     For the Leprosie.
                  To cure the Leprosie, take the iuice of colworts, and mixe it with Allom and strong Ale, and annoynt the leaper therewith morning and euening, and it will cleanse him wonderfully, especially if he bee purged first, and haue some part of his corrupt blood taken away.
               
                  
                     To take away pimples.
                  To take away either pimples from the face, or any other part of the body, take Virgin waxe, and Spermacaeti, of each a like quantitie, and boyle them together, and dip in a fine linnen cloth, and as it cooles dippe it well of both sides, then lay it vpon another faire cloth vpon a Table, & then fold vp a cloth in your hands, and all to slight it with the cloth, then

take as much as wil couer the grieued place.
               If any man haue his priuy parts burnt,
                     Priuie parts burnt.
                   take the ashes of a fine linnen cloth in good quantity, and put it into the former oyle of egges, and annoynt the sore member therewith, and it will cure it.
               For any burning,
                     For any burning.
                   take sixe new laid egges and roast them very hard, and take out the yolkes thereof, and put them into an earthen pot, and set it ouer the fire on hot imbers, and then whilst the egges looke blacke, stirre them with a slice till they come to an oyle, which oyle take and clarifie & put into a glasse by it selfe, and therewith annoynt any burning, and it will cure it.
               For any scalding with hot water,
                     For any scalding.
                   oyle or otherwise; take thicke creame; & set it on the fire, and put into it the greene which growes on a stone wall, take also yarrow, the greene of elder barke and fire grasse, and chop them small, then put them into the creame, and stirre it well till it come to an oyle salue, then straine it and annoynt the sore with it.
               To drie vp any sore,
                     A pultis to drie a sore.
                   take Smallage, Ground
                        •
                     ill, wilde Mallowes, and violet leaues: chop them small and boyle them in milke with bruised Oatemeale and sheepes suet, and so apply it to the sore.
               To eate away dead flesh,
                     To eate away dead flesh.
                   take Stubble wort, and folde it vp in a red docke leafe, or red wort leafe, and so roast it in the hot imbers and lay it hot to any sore, and it will fret away all the dead flesh; or otherwise, if you strew vpon the sore a litle precipitate it will eate away the dead flesh.
               To make a water to heale all manner of wounds,
                     A water to heale woūds.
                   you shall take Iuph-wort flowers, leaues and roots, & in March or Aprill when the flowers are at the best, distill it, then with that water bath the wound, and lay a linnen cloth well there with in the wound, and it will heale it.
               To heale any wound or cut in any flesh or part of the body:

First if it bee fit to bee stitch
                     •
                  st, itch it vp, and then take Vnguentum aurum,
                  
                     To heale any wound.
                   and lay it vpon a pleagant of lint as bigge as the wound, and then ouer it lay a diminio plaister made of Sallet oyle and white leade, and so dresse it at least once in fowre and twenty houres, but if it be a hollow wound, as some thrust in the body or other members, then you shall take Balsamum cephalicum, and warming it on a Chafing dish and coales, dip the tent therein, and so put it into the wound, then lay your plaister diminio ouer it, & do thus at least once a day till it be whole.
               
                  
                     For sinewes cut or shrunke.
                  If a mans sinewes be cut or shrunke, hee shall goe to the root of the wild neepe which is like woodbine, and make a hole in the midst of the root, then couer it well againe that no ayre goe out nor in, nor raine nor other moysture: Thus let it abide a day and a night, then goe and open it, and you shall find therein a certaine liquor: then take out the liquor and put it into a cleane glasse, and doe thus euery day whilst you find any moysture in the hole; And this must onely bee done in the moneths of Aprill and May: Then annoynt the sore therewith against the fire, then wet a linnen cloth in the same liquor, and lap it about the sore, and the vertue will soone be perceiued.
               
                  
                     To breake any impostume.
                  To breake any Impostume, and to ripe it onely, take the greene Melilot plaister, and lay it thereunto, and it is sufficient.
               
                  
                     Additions, to generall infirmities of Surgery and first of burnings & scaldings.
                     
                     
                        For burning or scalding with either liquor or gunpowder.
                     
                  Take Plantane water, or Sallet oyle and running water beaten together, and therewith annoynt the sore with a feather till the fire be taken out, then take the white of eggs and beate them to oyle, which done take a hare skynne and & clyppe the hayre into the oyle & make it as thicke as you may spread it vpon a fine linnen cloth, and so lay it vpon the soret and remoue it no, vntill it be whole, and if any rise vp of it selfe, clippe it away with your sheares, and if it be not perfectly

whole, then take a little of the oyntment and lay it to the same place againe, ortherwise take halfe a bushell of glouers shreads of all sorts, & so much of running water as shall be thought conuenient to seeth them, and put thereto a quarter of a pound of Barrowes grease, and then take halfe a bushell of the downe of catts tayles and boyle them all together, continually stirring them, till they bee sodden that they may be strayned into an earthen pot or glasse, and with it annoynt the sore. Or else take of Caprefollij, Mouseare ground, Iuye and hens dung of the reddest or of the yellowest, and fry them with may butter al together vntill it be browne, then strayne it through a cleane cloth, and annoynt the sore therewith.
               Take the middle rind of the Elme tree,
                     For burnings or scaldings on the face.
                   and lay it two or three houres in faire running water till it waxe ropye like glew, and then annoynt the sore therewith: Or otherwise, take sheeps tallow and sheeps dung and mixe them together till they come to a salue, and then apply it to the sore.
               Take Plantane leaues,
                     Anoyntment for burning.
                   
                  Dasie leaues, the greene barke of elders, and greene Germaunders dyrte, stampe them all together with fresh butter or with oyle, then strayne it through a linnen cloth, and with a feather annoynt the sore till it be whole.
               Take of Oyle olyue a pint,
                     
                        Vlcers and Sores.
                     
                     
                        A salue for any old sore.
                     
                   
                  Terpentyne a pound, vnwrought waxe halfe a pound, Rosen a quarter of a pound, sheepes suet two pound, then take of orpens, Smallage, Ragwort, Plantane, and sicke-wort, of each a good handfull, chop all the hearbs very small, and boyle them in a pan altogether vpon a soakeing fire, and stirry them exceeding much till they bee well incorporate together, then take it from the fire and strayne al through a strong canuasse cloth into cleane potts or glasses and vse it as occasion shall serue, eyther to annoynt, tent, or plaister. Otherwise take popler budds, and elder budds,

stampe and straine them, then put thereto a little venyce turpentime, waxe and rosin, and so boyle them together and therwith dresse the sore, or else take two handfull of plantane leaues, bray them small, and s
                     •
                  rayne out the iuyce, then put to it as much womans milke, a spoonefull of hony, a yolke of an egge, and as much wheate flower as you thinke will bring it to a salue, then make a plaister thereof and lay it vnto the sore, renewing it once in foure and twenty houres.
               
                  
                     To take away dead flesh.
                  Take an oune of Vnguentum apostolorum, and an ounce of Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, and put them together in a port being first well wrought together in a bladder, and if the flesh be weake, put to it a little fine white sugar, and therewith dresse the sore, or otherwise take onely Precypitate in fine pouder, and strew it on the sore.
               
                  
                     A water for a sore.
                  Take a gallon of Smithes sleacke water, two handfuls of sage, a pint of hony, a quart of ale, two ounces of Allom, and a littell white copporas, seeth them all together till halfe be consumed, then strayne it, and put it into a cleane vessell, and therewith wash the sore. Or otherwise take cleane running water and put therein roch allom and madder, and let them boyle till the allom and the madder be consumed, then take the clearest of the water and therewith wash the sore. Or else take Sage, Fenell, & sinquefoyle, of each a good handfull, boyle them in a gallond of running water till they bee tender, then strayne the liquor from the hearbs, and put to it a quarter of a pound of roch allom, and let it seeth againe a little till the allom be melted, then take it from the fire and vse it, thus, dip lint in it warme and lay it to the sore, and if it be hollow apply more lynt,
                     A blacke plaister to heale old sores and kill inflamation.
                   then make a little bolster of linnen cloth, and wett it well in the water, then wring out the water, and so bind on the bolster close.
               Take a pint of 
                     •
                  allet oyle and put into it sixe ounces of red lead, and a little ceruse or white lead, then set it ouer a gentle

fire, and let it boyle a long season stirring it well till it bee stiffe, which you shall trie in this order; let it drop from your sticke or slice vpon the bottome of a saucer, and so stand vntill it be cold, and then if it be well boyled, it will be stiffe & very blacke, then take it off and let it stand a little, and after straine i
                     •
                   through a cloth into a bason, but first annoynt the bason with sallet oyle, and also your fingars, and so make it vp into roules plaisterwise, and spread it and apply it as occasion shall serue.
               Take Mallowes and B
                        •
                     ets,
                  
                     An oyntment to ripen sores.
                   and seeth them in water, then drie away the water from them, and beate the hearbs well with old Boares grease, and so apply it to the appostume hott.
                     For the stinging of any adder or venomous thing.
                  
               
               Take a handfull of Rue and stampe it with rustie Bacon till it come to a perfect salue, and therewith dresse the sore till it be whole.
               If the party be outwardly venomed,
                     For any venoming.
                   take Sage and bruise it well & apply it to the sore, renewing it at least twice a day, but if it be inwardly, then let the party drink the iuice of Sage either in wine or ale morning and euening.
               Take Sellodyne early in the morning,
                     For a ringworme.
                   and bruise it well, & then apply it to the sore, and renewing it twice or thrice a day.
               Take of Campheare one dramme,
                     For the itch.
                   of quicksiluer, four penyworth killed well with vinegar, then mixe it with two penyworth of oylede bay, and therewith annoynt the body. Or otherwise take red Onyons and seeth them in running water a good while, then bruise the Onyons small, and with the water they were sodden in, strayne them in, then wash the infected place with the same.
               Take a greate quantitie of the hearbe Bennet,
                  
                     For thy dryed Scabbe.
                   and as much of red nett
                        •
                     es, pound them well & strayne them, and with the iuyce wash the patyent naked before the fire, and so let it

drinke in and wash him againe, and doe so diuers dayes till he be whole.
               
                  
                     To kill the Itch or tetter serpego.
                  Take a penyworth of white copperas, and as much greene copporas, a quarter of an ounce of white Mercury, a halpenyworth of Allom & burne it, and set al ouer the fire with a pint of fayre water, and a quarter of a pint of wine vinegar, boyle all these together till they come to halfe a pint, and then annoynt the sore therewith.
               
                  
                     To take away the arrs of the small Poxe.
                  Take Barrowes grease a prettie quantitie, and take an apple and pare it and take the chore cleane out, then chop your apple and your Barrowes grease together, and set it ouer the fire that it may melt but not boyle, then take it from the fire, and put thereto a pretty quantitie of rose water and stirr all together till it be cold, and keepe it in a cleane vessell, and then annoynt the face therewith.
               
                  
                     For the French or Spanish pox.
                  Take quicksiluer and kill it with fasting spittle, then take Verdigrease, Arabi
                        •
                     ke, Turpentime, Oyle olyue, and Populion, & mixe them together to one entyre oyntment, and annoynt the Sores therewith, and keepe the party exceeding warme. Or otherwise, take of Allom burned, of Rossin, Frankensence, Populion, oyle of Roses, Oyle de bay, Oyle olyue, greene Copporas, Verdigrease, White lead, Mercury sublymde: of each a prettie quantitie but of Allom most, then beate to powder the symples that are hard, and melt your oyles, and cast in your powders and stirre all well together, then straine them through a cloth, and apply it warme to the sores; or else take of Capons greafe that hath toucht no water, the iuyce of Rue and the fine powder of Pepper, and mixe them together to an oyntment, and apply it round about the sores, but let it not come into the sores, and it will drie them vp.
               
                  
                     To put out the French or Spanish Poxe.
                  Take of Treakle halfe a pennyworth, of long Pepper as much, and of graynes as much, a littell ginger, and a little quantitie of Licoras, warme them with strong ale, and let

the party drinke it off, and lie downe in his bed and take a good sweat: and then when the sores arise, vse some of the oyntment before rehearsed.
               Take the iuice of red Fennell,
                  
                     To make the scabs of the French poxe to fall away.
                   and the iuyce of Sen greene and stone hony, and mixe them very well together till it bee thicke, and with it annoynt the party, but before you doe annoyt him you shall make this water. Take Sage and seeth it in very faire water from a gallond to a pottell, & put therein a quantitie of hony and some allom, and let them boyle a little together; when you haue strayned the hearbs from the water,Additions, to greene wounds.
                   then put in your hony and your allom, and therewith wash the poxe first, and let it drie in well, and then lay on the aforesaid oyntment.
               Take the oyle of the white of an egge, wheate flower, a littell hony and venice Turpentine,
                  
                     A deffensitiue for a greene wound.
                   take and stirre all these together, and so vse it about the wound but not within, and if the wound do bleed, then adde to this salue a little quantity of Bolarmonyake.
               
               Take Apponaxe and Galbanum,
                  
                     A salue for a greene wound.
                   of each an ounce, Ammonianum, and Bedlynd of each two ounces, of Lethargie of gold one pound and a halfe, new waxe halfe a pound, Lapis Calamniaris one ounce, Turpentine foure ounces, Myrhe two ounces, Oyle de bay one ounce, Thusse one ounce, Arystolochia roots two ounces, oyle of Roses two ounces, sallet oyle two pound, all the hard symples must bee beaten to fine powder and searssed, take also three pynts of right wine vinegar, & put your foure gummes into the vinegar a whole day before till the gummes be dissolued, then set it ouer the fire and let it boyle very softly till your vinegar be as good as boyled away, then take an earthen pot with a wide mouth and put your oyle in and your waxe, but your waxe must be escraped before you put it in, then by a littell at once put in your Lethargie and stirre it exceedingly, then put in all your

gummes and all the rest, but let your Turpentine be last, and so let it boyle till you see it grow to be thicke, then poure it into a bason of water and worke it with oyle of Roses for sticking to your hands, and make it vp in roules plaisterwise, and here is to be noted, that your oyle of Roses must not be boyled with the rest, but after it is taken from the fire a littell before the Turpentine.
               
               
                  
                     A water to heale any greene wound, cut, or sore.
                  Take three good handfull of Sage, and as much of Honysuckell leaues and the flowers cleane picked, then take one pound of roch Allom, & a quarter of a pound of right english hony clarified cleane, halfe a penyworth of graynes, and two gallonds of running water, then put all the said things into the water, and let them seeth till halfe be consumed, then take it from the fire till it be almost cold & strayne it through a cleane cloth, & put it vp in a glasse, and then either on tent or pleagant vse as you haue occasion.
               Take a quart of rye flower and temper it with running water,
                     To stanch blood and draw sinewes together.
                   and make dough thereof, then according to the bignesse of the wound lay it in with the deffensytiue plaister before rehearsed ouer it, and euery dressing make it lesse and lesse till the wound be closed.
               
                  
                     A mayden oyle for shrinking of sinewes.
                  Take a quart of neates foot oyle, a quart of oxe galles, a quart of Aquauitae, and a quart of rose water, a handfull of rosemary strypt, and boyle all these together till halfe be consumed, then presse and strayne it, and vse it according as you find occasion.
               
                  
                     For a wound in the gutts.
                  Take hony, pitch and butter, and seeth them together, & annoynt the hurt against the fire, and tent the sore with the same.
                     For prieking with a thorne.
                  
               
               Take groundsell and stampe it, and seeth it with sweete mylke till it be thicke,
                     To gather flesh in wounds.
                   then temper it with blacke sope and lay it to the sore.
               Take Rosin a quarter of a pound, of waxe three ounces,

of oyle of Roses one ounce and a halfe, seeth all them together in a pint of white wine till it come to skymming, then take it from the fire & put thereto two ounces of venice 
                     
                        •
                     urpentine, and apply it to the wound or sore.
               Take mustard made with strong vinegar,Additions, for ach or swellings.
                   the crūmes of browne bread, with a quantitie of hony and sixe figgs minxt, temper all together well and lay it vpon a cloath plaisterwise, put a thinne cloath betweene the plaister and the flesh & lay it to the place greued as oftae need requires.
                     For the Cyatyca.
                  
               
               Take a pound of fine Rozin, of oyle de bay two ounces, of Populion as much,
                     A yellow searcloth for any payne or swelling.
                   of Frankensence halfe a pound, of oyle of Spyke two ounces, of oyle of Camomile two ounces, of oyle of Roses two ounces, of Waxe half a pound, of Turpentine a quarter of a pound, melt them and stirre them well together and then dip linnen clothes therein, and apply the searecloath as you shall haue occasion, and note the more oyle you vse, the more supler the searecloth is, and the lesse oyle the stiffer it wi
                     •
                  l be.
               Take a little blacke sope,
                     For bruise
                           •
                         swelled.
                   sault and hony, and beate them well together, and spread it on a browne paper and apply it to the bruise.
               Take Mallowes and seeth them in the dregges of good Ale or milke,
                     For swelled legges.
                   and make a plaister thereof, and apply it to the place swelled.
               Take in the moneth of May,
                  
                     For any ache
                   
                  henbane and bruise it well and put it into an earthen pot and put thereto a pint of sallet oyle and set it in the sunne till it be all one substance, the annoynt the ach therewith.
               Take halfe a pound of vnwrought wax,
                     A plaister for any paine or ache in the ioynts.
                   as much Rozin, one ounce of galbanum, a quarter of a pound of Lethargie of gold, 3. quarters of white Leade, beaten to pouded and cearst, then take a pint of neates foote oyle and set it on the fire in a small vessell which may containe the rest, and when it is all moulten,

then put in the pouders and stirre it fast with a slice, and trie it vpon the bottome of a saucer, when it beginneth to be somewhat hard, then take it from the fire, & annoynt a fayre boord with neates foot oyle, & as you may handle it for heate, worke it vp in roules, and it will keepe fiue or sixe yeares, being wraped vp close in papers, & when you will vse it, spread of it thin vpon new lockram or leather somewhat bigger then the griefe,Additions, to griefe in the Bones. For bones out of Ioynt or sinnewes sprung or strained.
                   and so if the griefe remoue follow it, renewing it morning and euening, and let it bee somewhat warme when it is layd on, and beware of taking cold, & drinking hot wines.
               Take foure or fiue yolkes of egges, hard sodden or rosted, & take the branches of great Morrell, and the berryes in Somer, and in winter the roots, and bray all well together in a morter with sheeps milke, and then fry it till it be very thicke and so make a plaister thereof, and lay it about the sore and it will take away both paine and swelling.
               
                  
                     A bath for broken bones
                  Take a gallond of standing lye, put to it of Plantane and knot-grasse, of each two handfull, of worme-wood & Comfry, of each a handfull, & boyle all these together in the lye a good while, and when it is luke warme bath the broken member therewith, & take the budds of elder gathered in March, and strypped downeward and a little boyle them in water, then eate them in oyle and very little vinegar, a good quantitie at a time in the morning euer before meate or an houre before the patient goe to dinner, and it much auayles to the knytting of bones.
               
                  
                     A generall bath for clearing the skin and camforting the body.
                  Take Rosemary, Featherfewe, Organye, Pelitory of the wall, Fennill, Mallowes, Violet leaues, and Nettells, boyle all these together, and when it is well sodden put to it two or three gallonds of milke, then let the party stand or sit in it an houre or two, the bath reaching vp to the stomacke, and when they come out they must goe to bed and sweate, beware taking of cold.
               
                  Make a plaister of wheate flower and the whits of egges, & spead it on a double linnen cloth,
                     A soueraine helpe for broken bones
                   then lay the plaister on an euen board, and lay the broken lymbe thereon, and set it euen according to nature, and lap the plaister about it and splynt it, and giue him to drinke Knyt-wort the iuice thereof twice and no more, for the third time it will vnknit, but giue him to drinke nine dayes each day twice the iuy
                     •
                  e of Comfery, Daysies and Osmund in stale ale and it shall knit it, and let the foresaid plaister lye to ten dayes at the least, and when you take it away doe thus, take hore-hound, Red fenell, Houns, tongue, w
                        •
                     ll-wort, and Pelitory, and seeth them, then vnroule the member and take away the splynts, and then bath the linnen & the plaister about the member in this bath till it haue soakt so long that it come gently away of it selfe, then take the aforesaid plaister and lay thereto fiue or sixe dayes very hot, and let each plaister lie a day and a night & alwaies splynt it well, and after cherish it with the oyntments before rehearsed for broken bones, and keepe the party from vnholsome meates and drinkes till hee bee whole, and if the hurt be on his arme let him beare a ball of greene hearbs in his hand to preuent the shrinking of the hand and sinewes.
               Take Sage,
                  
                     For any Feuer.
                   
                  Rag-wort, Yarrow, vnset leekes of each a like quantitie, stampe them with bay salt and apply them to the wrests of the hands.
               Blanch Almonds in the cold water,
                     To expell heate in a Feuer.
                   and make milke of them (but it must not seeth) then put to it sugar, and in the extremitie of heate, see you drinke thereof.
               Take three spoonefull of Ale and a little Saffron, and bruise and straine it thereto,
                     The royall medicine for Feuers.
                   then adde a quarter of a spoonefull of fine Treakle and mixt together, and drinke it when the fitt comes.
               Take two roots of crowe foot that growes in a marsh grownd,
                     Another.
                   which haue no little roots about them, to the number

of twentie or more, and a little of the earth that is about them, and doe not wash them, and adde a little quantitie of salt, and mixe all well together and lay in one linnen clothes and bind it about your thumbes betwixt the first and the neather ioynt, and let it lye nine dayes vnremoued, and it will expell the feuer.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           An approued medicine for the greatest Laske or Flixe.
                           Take a right Pomwater the greatest you can get, or els two little ones, roast them very tender to pap, then take away the skinne and the core and vse onely the pap, and the like quantitie of Chalke finely scraped, mixe them both together vpon a trencher before the fire, and worke them well to a plaister, then spread it vpon a linnen cloth warmed very hot as may be suffred, and so bind it to the nauill for 24. houres, vse this medicine twice or thrice or more till the laske be stayed.
                        
                     
                  
               
               To make the oyle of Swallowes,OF Oyle of Swallowes.
                   take Lauendar cotton, Spike, Knot-grasse, Ribwort, Balme, Valerian, Rosemarie tops, Woodbine tops, Vine strings, French Mallowes, the tops of Alecost, Strawberry strings, Tutsan, Plantane, Wale-nut tree leaues, the tops of young Baies, Isop, Violet leaues, Sage of vertue, fine roman Worme-wood, of each of them a handfull, Camomile and Redroses, of each two handfull, twentie quicke Swallowes, & beate them al together in a great morter, & put to thē a quart of Neat
                     •
                  -foote oyle, or may butter, and grind them all well together with two ounces of cloues well beaten, then put them all together in an earthen pot, and stop it very close that no ayer come into it, and set it nine dayes in a seller or cold place, then open your pot and put into it halfe a pound of white or yellow waxe cut very small, and a pint of oyle or butter, then set your pot close stopped into a panne of water, & let it boyl
                     •
                  
                  
sixe or eight houres, and then straine it: This oyle is exceeding soueraine for any broken bones, bones out of ioynt, or any paine or griefe either in the bones or sinnewes.
               To make oyle of Camomile,
                  
                     To make oile of cammomile.
                   take a quart of Sallet oyle and put it into a glasse, then take a handfull of Camomile and bruise it, and put it into the oyle, and let them stand in the same 12. dayes, onely you must shift it euery three dayes, that is to strayne it from the old Cammomile, and put in as much of new, and that oyle is very souereine for any griefe proceeding from cold causes.
               To make oyle of Lauender,
                  
                     To make oyle of La
                        
                           •
                        endar.
                   take a pint of Sallet oyle and put it into a glasse, then put to it a handfull of Lauender, and let it stand in the same twelue dayes, and vse it in all respects as you did your oyle of Cammomile.
               
               To make an oyle which shall make the skinne of the hands very smooth,
                     To make smooth 
                           •
                        āds
                   take Almonds and beate them to oyle, then take whole Cloues and put them both together into a glasse, and set it in the sunne fiue or sixe dayes, then strayne it, and with the same annoynt your hands euerie night when you goe to bed, and otherwise as you haue conuenient leasure.
               To make that soueraine water which was first inuented by Doctor Steuens,
                  
                     To make Doctor Steuens water.
                   in the same forme as he deliuered the Receite to the Arch-bishop of Canturbury, a little before the death of the said Doctor. Take a gallon of good Gascoyne wine, then take Ginger, Galingale, Synamon, Nutmegges, Graines, Cloues brused, Fennell seeds, Carrawaie seeds, Origanum; of euery of them a like quantitie, that is to say a dramme: Then take Sage, wild Margerom, Peny-royaell, Mints, Red-roses, Time, Pellitory, Rosemary, wild-time, Cammomill, Lauender, of each of them a handfull, then bray the spices small, and bruise the hearbs and put al into the wine; & let it stand so twelue houres, only stirre it diuers times, then distill it by a Lymbecke, and keepe the first water by it selfe for that is the best, then keepe the second

water for that is good, and for the last neglect it not, for it is very wholesome though the worst of the three. Now for the vertue of this water it is this, it comforteth the spirits and vitall parts, and helpeth all inward diseases that commeth of cold, it is good against the shaking of the palsie, & cureth the contraction of sinnewes, and helpeth the conception of women that be barraine, it killeth the wormes in the body, it cureth the cold cough, it helpeth the tooth-ache, it comforteth the stomacke, and cureth the old dropsie, it helpeth the stone in bladder and in the reines, it helpeth a stinking breath: And whosoeuer vseth this water moderately and not too often, preserueth him in good liking, & will make him seeme young in old age. With this water Docter Steuens preserued his owne life vntill such extreame age, that he could neither goe nor ride, and he continued his life being bed-rid fiue yeares, when other Physicions did iudge he could not liue one yeare, which he did coufesse a little before his death; saying: that if he were sicke at any time, he neuer vsed any thing but this water only; And also the Archbishop of Canterbury vsed it, and found such goodnesse in it that hee liued till he was not able to drinke of a cup, but sucked his drinke throug a hollow pipe of siluer. This water will be much the better if it be set in the Sunne all Summer.
               To make a cordiall Rosasolis, take Rosasolis, and in any wise touch not the leaues thereof in the gathering,
                     Arestoratiue of Rosasol
                           ••
                        
                     
                   nor wash it; take thereof foure good handfuls, then take two good pints of Aqua
                        •
                     itae, and put them both in a glasse or pewter pot of three or foure pints, and then stop the same hard and iust, and so let it hand three dayes and three nights, and the third day straine it through a cleane cloth into another glasse or pewter pot, and put thereto halfe a pound of Sugar beaten small, fowre ounces of fine Licoras beaten into powder, halfe a

pound of sonud Dates the stones being taken out, & cut them and make them cleane, and then mince them small, and mixe all these together and stop the glasse or pot close and iust, and drinke of it at night to bedward halfe a spoonefull with Ale or Beere, but Ale is the better, as much in the morning fasting for there is not the weakest body in the world that wanteth nature or strength, or that is in a consumption, but it will restore him againe, and cause him to be strong and lustie, and to haue a maruailous hungrie stomacke, prouided alwaies that this Rosasolis be gathered (as neare as you possibly can) at the full of the moone when the sunne shineth before noone, and let the roots of them be cut away.
               Take the flowers of roses or violets & breake them small and put them into sallet oyle,Additions, to the Oyles. To make oyle of Roses or Violetts.
                   and let them stand in the same ten or twelue dayes, and then presse it. Or otherwise take a quart of oyle Olyue, and put thereto Sixe spoonefuls of cleane water, and stirre it well with a slice, till it waxe as white as milke, then take two pound of red rose leaues and cut the white of the ends of the leaues away, and put the roses into the oyle, & then put it into a double glasse and set it in the sun all the summer time, and it is soueraine for any scalding or burning with water or oyle. Or else take red roses new plucked a pound or two, and cut the white ends of the leaues away, then take may Butter and melt it ouer the fire w
                     •
                  th 2. pound of oyle olyue, & when it is clarified put in your roses and put it all in a vessell of glasse or of earthen, and stop it well about that no ayre enter in nor out, and set it in another vessell with water and let it boyle halfe a day or more, and then take if forth and straine or presse it through a cloth, and put it into glasse bottells
                     •
                   this is good for al manner of vnkind heates.
               Take two or three pound of Nutmegges & cut them small and bruse them well,
                     To make oyle of Nutmeggs.
                   then put them into a pan and beate them and stir
                     •
                  e them about, which done, put them into a canuasse

or strong linnen bagge, and close them in a presse and presse them, & get out all the liquor of them which will be like manna, then scrape it from the canuasse bagge as much as you can with a knife, then put it into some vessell of glasse and stoppe it well, but set it not in the sun for it will waxe cleane of it selfe within 10. or 15. dayes, and it is worth thrice so much as the Nutmeggs themselues, and the oyle hath very great vertue in comforting the stomacke and inward parts, and asswaging the paine of the Mother and Cyatica.
               
                  
                     To make perfect oyle of Spyke.
                  Take the flowers of Spyke, and wash them only in Oyle olyue and then stampe them well, then put them in a canuasse bagge & presse them in a presse as hard as you can, & take that which commeth out carefully, and put it into a strong vessell of glasse, and set it not in the sun for it will cleare of it selfe & waxe fayre and bright, and will haue a very sharpe odor of the Spike; and thus you may make oyle of other hearbs of like nature, as Lauender, Camomile, and such like.
               
                  
                     To m
                           •
                        ke oyle of Masticke.
                  Take an ounce of Masticke, and an ounce of Olibanum pounded as small as is possible, & boyle them in oyle Olyue (a quart) to a third part, then presse it and put it into a glasse, & after 10. or 12. dayes it will be perfect: it is exceeding good for any cold griefe.
               Thus hauing in a summary manner passed ouer all the most Phisicall & chirurgicall notes which burtheneth the mind of our English House-wife, beeing as much as needfull for the preseruation of the health of her Family: and hauing in this chapte
                     •
                   shewed all the inward vertues wherewith shee should bee adorned. I will now returne to her more outward and actiue knowledges, wherein albeit the mind bee as much occupied as before; yet is the body a great deale more in vse: neither can the worke be well effected by rule or direction.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II. Of the outward and actiue knowledge of the Hous-wife; and of her skill in Cookerie; As Sallets of all sorts, with Flesh, Fish, Sauces, Pastrie, Banqueting-stuffe, and ordering of great feasts: Also Distillations, Perfumes, conceited Secrets, and preseruing Wine of all sorts.
               
                  TO speake then of the outward and actiue knowledges which belong to our English House-wife, I hold the first and most principall to be a perfect skill and knowledge in Cookery, together with all the secrets belonging to the same, because it is a dutie rarely belonging to the woman; and she that is vtterly ignorant therein, may not by the lawes of strict Iustice challenge the freedome of Marriage, because indeed she can then but performe halfe her vow; for she may loue and obey, but shee cannot serue and keepe him with that true dutie which is euer expected.
               To proceede then to this knowledge of Cookery,
                     She must know all Hearbs:
                   yoù shall vnderstand, that the first steppe thereunto is, to haue knowledge of all sorts of hearbs belonging to the Kitchin, whether they be for the Pot, for Sallets, for Sauces, for Seruings, or for any other Seasoning, or adorning; which skill of knowledge of the Hearbs she must get by her owne labour and experience, and not by my relation, which would be much too tedious, and for the vse of them, she shall see it in the composition of dishes and meates here-after following. She shall also know the time of the yeere, Month and Moone, in which all Hearbs are to bee sowne; and when they are in their best flourishing, that gathering all Hearbs in their height of goodnesse, she may haue the prime vse of the same. And because I will inable, and not burthen her

memorie, I will here giue her a short Epitomie of all that knowledge.
               
                  
                     Her skill in the Garden.
                  First then, let our English Hous-wife know, that she may at all times of the Moneth and Moone, generally sow Asparagus, Colworts, Spinage, Lettice, Parsnips, Radish, and Chyues.
               
               In February, in the new of the Moone, she may sow Spyke, Garlick, Borage, Buglose, Cheruyle, Coriander, Gourds, Cresses, Marioram, Palma Christi, Flower-gentle, white Poppie, Purslan, Radish, Rocket, Rosemarie, Sorrell, Double Marigolds and Time. The Moone full she may sow Anisseedes musked, Violets, Bleets, Skyrrits, White Succory, Fennell, and Parslie. The Moone old, sow Holy Thystell, Cole Cabadge, white Cole greene Cole, Cucumbers, Harts-Horne, Diers Graine, Cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Onions, Parsnips, Larkes Heele, Burnet and Leekes.
               
               In March the Moone new, sow Garlick, Borrage, Buglosse, Cheruile, Coriander, Gourds, Marioram, White Poppie, Purslan, Radish, Sorrell, Double Marigolds, Time, Violets. At the full Moone; Aniseeds, bleets, Skirrets, Succorie, Fennell, Apples of Loue, and Marueilous Apples. At the wane; Artichokes, Bassill, Blessed Thistle, Cole Cabadge, White Cole, Greene Cole, Citrons, Cucumbers, Harts-Horne, Samphire, Spinage, Gilliflowers, Issop, Cabadge, Lettice, Mellons, Mugrets, Onions, Flower Gentil, Burnet, Leekes and Sauorie. In May, the Moone old, sow Blessed Thistle. In Iune, the Moone new, sow Gourds and Radishes. The Moone old, sow Cucumbers, Mellons, Parsnips. In Iuly, the Moone at full, sow White Succorie: and the Moone old, sow Cabadge, Lettice. Lastly, in August, the Moone at the full, sow White Succorie.
               
               
                  
                     Transplanting of Hearbs.
                  Also she must know, that Hearbs growing of Seeds, may be transplanted at all times, except Cheruyle, Arage, Spynage, and Pselye, which are not good being once transplanted, obseruing euer to transplant in moist and rainie weather.
               
                  Also she must know,
                     Choice of seedes.
                   that the choice of seedes are two-fold, of which some grow best, being new, as Cucumbers and Leekes, and some being old as Coriander, Par
                        ••
                     y, Sauorie, Beets, Origan, Cresses, Spinage and Poppy, you must keepe cold Lettice, Artichokes, Basil, Holy Thistle, Cabadge, Cole, Diers Graine, and Mellons, fifteene dayes after they put forth of the earth.
               Also seedes prosper better being sowne in temperate weather,
                     Prosperity of seedes.
                   then in hot, cold, or drie daies. In the Moneth of Aprill, the Moone being new, sow Marioram, Flower-gentle, Time, Violets: in the full of the Moone, Aples of loue, and marueilous Apples: and in the wane, Artichokes, Thistles, Cabadge, Cole, Cierons, Harts-horne, Samphire, Gilliflowers, and Parsenips.
               
               Seedes must be gathered in faire weather;
                     Gathering of seeds.
                   at the wane of the Moone, and kept some in boxes of wood, some in bagges of leather, and some in vessels of earth, and after to be well cleansed and dried in the Sunne or shadow; othersome, as Onions, Chibols and Leekes, must be kept in their husks. Lastly, she must know, that it is best to plant in the last of the Moone; to gather grafts in the last but one, and to graft two daies after the change; and thus much for her knowledge briefly of Hearbs, and how she shal haue them continually for her vse in the Kitchin.
               It resteth now that I proceede vnto Cookerie it selfe,OF Cookery and the parts thereof.
                   which is the dressing and ordering of meate, in good and wholsome manner; to which, when our Hous-wife shall addresse her selfe, she shall well vnderstand, that these qualities must euer accompanie it: First, she must be cleanly both in body and garments, she must haue a quick eye, a curious nose, a perfect taste, and a ready eare (she must not be butter-fingred, sweete-toothed, nor faint-hearted;) for, the first will let euery thing fall, the second will consume what

it should increase, and the last will loose time with too much nicenesse. Now for the substance of the Art it selfe, I will diuide it into fiue parts; the first, Sallats and Fricases; the second, boyled Meates and Broaths; the third, Roast meates, and Carbonados; the fourth, Bak't meates and Pies; and the fifth, Banqueting and made dishes, with other conceits and secrets.
               
                  
                     Of Sallats.
                  First then to speake of Sallats, there be some simple, and some compounded;
                     Simple Sallats.
                   some only to furnish out the table, and some both for vse and adornation: your simple Sallats are Chibols pilled, washt cleane, and halfe of the greene tops cut cleane away, so serued on a Fruit dish, or Chines, Scallions, Radish-rootes, boyled Carrets, Skirrets, and Turneps, with such like serued vp simply: also, all young Lettice, Cabage lettice, Porslan, and diuers other herbs which may be serued simply without any thing, but a little Vinegar, Sallet-Oyle, and Sugar: Onions boiled, and stript from their rind, and serued vp with Vinegar, oyle and Pepper is a good simple Sallat; so is Samphire, Beane-cods, Sparagus, and Cucumbers, serued in likewise with Oyle, Vinegar and Pepper, with a world of others, too tedious to nominate.
               
                  
                     Of compound Sallats.
                  Your compound Sallats, are first the young Buds and Knots of all manner of wholsome hearbes at their first springing; as Red-sage, Mints, Lettice, Violets, Marigolds, Spinage, and many other mixed together, and then serued vp to the table with Vinegar, Sallet Oyle and Sugar.
               
                  
                     Another compound Sallat.
                  To compound an excellent Sallat, and which indeed is vsuall at great feasts, and vpon Princes tables: Take a good quantitie of blancht Almonds, and with your shredding Knife cut them grossely; then take as many Raisins of the Sunne cleane washt, and the stones pickt out, as many Figs shred like the Almonds, as many Capers, twice so many

Oliues, and as many Currants as of all the rest cleane washt: a good handfull of the small tender leaues of red Sage and Spinage: mixe all these well together with good store of Sugar, and lay them in the bottome of a great dish; then put vnto them Vinegar and Oyle, and scrape more Suger ouer all: then take Orenges and Lemons, and paring away the outward pills, cut them into thinne slices, then with those slices couer the Sallet al ouer; which done, take the the fine thinne leafe of the red Coleflower, and with them couer the Orenges and Lemons all ouer; then ouer those red leaues lay another course of old Oliues, and the slices of well pickled Cucumbers, together with the very inward heart of your Cabbage lettice cut into slices; then adorne the sides of the dish, and the top of the Sallet with mo slices of Lemons and Orenges, and so serue it vp.
               To make an excellent compound boild Sallat:
                     An excellent boiled Sallet.
                   take of Spinage well washt, two or three handfulls, and put it into faire water, and boile it till it be exceeding soft, and tender as pap; then put it into a Culland
                     •
                  r and draine the water from it, which done, with the backside of your Chopping-knife chop it, and bruise it as small as may be: then put it into a Pipkin with a good lump of sweete butter, and boile it ouer againe; then take a good handfull of Currants cleane washt, and put to it, and stirre them well together; then put to as much Vinegar as will make it reasonable tart, and then with Suger season it according to the taste of the Master of the house, and so serue it vpon sippets.
               Your preserued Sallats are of two kinds,
                     Of preseruing of Sallets.
                   either pickled, as are Cucumbers, Samphire, Purslan, Broome, and such like, or preserued with Vinegar; as Violets, Prim-rose, Cowslops, Gillyflowers of all kinds, Broome-flowers, and for the most part any wholsome flower whatsoeuer.
               
                  Now for the picking of Sallats, they are onely boyled, and then drained from the water, spread vpon a table, and good store of Salt throwne ouer them, then when they are thorow cold, make a Pickle with Water, Salt, and a little Vinegar, and with the same pot them vp in close earthen pots, and serue them forth as occasion shall serue.
               Now for preseruing Sallats, you shall take any of the Flowers before-said after they haue been pickt cleane from their stalkes, and the white ends (of them which haue any) cleane cut away, and washt and dried, and taking a glasse-pot like a Gally-pot, or for want thereof a Gally-pot it selfe; and first strew a little Sugar in the bottom, then lay a layer of the Flowers, then couer that layer ouer with Sugar, then lay another layer of the Flowers, and another of Sugar; and thus doe one aboue another till the pot be filled, euer and anon pressing them hard downe with your hand: this done, you shal take of the best and sharpest Vinegar you can get (and if the vinegar be distilled vinegar, the Flowers wil keepe their colours the better) and with it fill vp your pot till the Vinegar swim aloft, and no more can be receiued; then stop vp the pot close, and set them in a drie temperate place, & vse them at pleasure, for they wil last all the yeere.
               
                  
                     The making of strange Sallats
                  Now for compounding of Sallats of these pickled and preserued things, though they may be serued vp simply of themselues, and are both good and daintie; yet for better curiositie, and the finer adorning of the table, you shall thus vse them: First, if you would set forth any red Flower that you know or haue seene, you shall take your pots of preserued Gilliflowers, and suting the colours answerable to the Flower you shall proportion forth, lay the shape of the Flower in a Fruit dish; then with your Purslan leaues make the greene Coffin of the Flower, and with the Purslan stalkes, make the stalke of the Flower, and the diuisions

of the leaues and branches; then with the thin slices of Cucumbers make their leaues in true proportions, iagged or otherwise: and thus you may set forth some ful blowne, some halfe blowne, and some in the bud, which will bee pretty and curious. And if you will set forth yellow flowers, take the pots of Primroses and Cowslops, if blew flowers, then the pots of Violets, or Buglosse Flowers; and these Sallats are both for shew and vse; for they are more excellent for taste then to looke on.
               Now for Sallats for shew onely,
                     Sallats for shew only.
                   and the adorning and setting out of a table with numbers of dishes, they be those which are made of Carret rootes of sundrie colours well boiled, and cut out into many shapes and proportions, as some into knots, some in the manner of Scutchions and Armes, some like Birds, and some like wild Beasts, according to the Art and cunning of the Workman; & these for the most part are seasoned with Vinegar, Oyle, and a little Pepper. A world of other Sallats there are, which time and experience may bring to our Hous-wifes eye, but the composition of them, and the seruing of them differeth nothing from these already rehearsed.
               Now to proceed to your Fricases,Of Friscases and Quelque choses.
                   or Quelque choses, which are dishes of many compositions, and ingredients; as Flesh, Fish, Egges, Hearbs, and many other things, all being prepared and made ready in a frying pan, they are likewise of two sorts, simple, and compound.
               Your simple Fricases are Egges and Collops fried,
                     Of simple Fricases.
                   whether the Collops be of Bacon, Ling, Beefe, or young Porke, the frying whereof is so ordinarie, that it needeth not any relation, or the frying of any Flesh or Fish simple of it selfe with Butter or sweete Oyle.
               To haue the best Collops and Egges,
                     Best Collops and Egges.
                   you shall take the whitest and youngest Bacon; and cutting away the sward,

cut the Collops into thin slices, lay them in a dish, and put hot water vnto them, and so let them stand an hower or two, for that will take away the extreame saltnesse: then draine away the water cleane, and put them into a drie pewter dish, and lay them one by one, and set them before the heate of the fire, so as they may toast, and turne them so, as they may toast sufficiently thorow and thorow: which done, take your Egges and breake them into a dish, and put a spoonefull of Vinegar vnto them: then set on a cleane Skillet with faire water on the fire, and as soone as the water boileth put in the Eggs, and let 
                     •
                  hem take a boile or two, then with a spoone trie if they be hard enough, and then take them vp, and trim them, and drie them; and then dishing vp the Collops, lay the Egges vpon them, and so serue them vp: and in this sort you may potch Eggs when you please, for it is the best and most wholsome.
               
                  
                     Of the compound friecases.
                  Now the compound Fricases are those which consist of many things, as Tansies, Fritters, Pancakes; & any Q
                     •
                  elque chose whatsoeuer, being things of great request and estimation in France, Spaine, and Italy, and the most curious Nations.
               
                  
                     To make the best Tansey.
                  First then for making the best Tansey, you shall take a certaine number of Egges, according to the bignesse of your frying-pan, and breake them into a dish, abating euer the white of euery third Egge; then with a Spoone you shall cleanse away the little white Chickin-knots which sticke to the yelkes; then with a little Creame beate them exceedingly together: then 
                     •
                  ake of greene Wheat blades, Violet leaues, Straw-bery leaues, Spinage and Succorie, of each a like quantitie, and a few Wall-nut buds; chop and beate all these very well, and then straine out the iuyce, and mixing it with a little more Creame, put it to the Eggs, and stirre all well together; then put in a few crummes of

Bread, fine grated Bread, Cinamon, Nutmegge and Salt, then put some sweete Butter into the Frying-pan, and so soone as it is melted, put in the Tansey, and frie it browne without burning, and with a dish turne it in the Pan as occasion shall serue; then serue it vp, hauing strewed good store of Suger vpon it, for to put in Suger before will make it heauie: some vse to put of the hearbe Tansey into it, but the Wall-nut tree buds doe giue the better taste; therefore when you please to vse the one, doe not vse the other.
               To make the best Fritters,
                     The best Fritters.
                   take a pint of Creame and warme it: then take eight Eggs, onely abate fowre of the Whites, and beate them well in a dish, and so mixe them with the Creame, then put in a little Cloues, Mace, Nutmeg and Saffron, and stirre them well together: then put in two spoonefull of the best Ale-barme, and a little Salt, and stirre it againe: then make it thicke according to your pleasure with Wheate-flower; which done, set it within the aire of the fire, that it may rise and swell; which when it doth, you shall beate it in once or twice, then put into it a penny pot of Sack: all this being done, you shall take a pound or two of sweete seame, and put it into a pan, and set it ouer the fire, and when it is moulten and begins to bubble, you shall take the Fritter-batter, and setting it by you, put thick slices of well-pared Apples into the batter: and then taking the Apples and batter out together with a spoone put it into the boyling seame, and boyle your Fritters crispe and browne: and when you find the strength of your seame decay, you shall renew it with more seame, and of all sorts of seame, that which is made of the beefesuet is the best and strongest: when your Fritters are made strow good store of Suger and Cinamon vpon them, being faire disht, and so serue them vp.
               
                  
                  
                     The best Pancake.
                  To make the best Pancake, take two or three Egges, and breake them into a dish, and beate them well: then adde vnto them a pretty quantitie of faire running water, and beate all well together: then put in Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, and a Nutmeg, and season it with Salt: which done, make it thick as you thinke good with fine Wheat flower: then frie the cakes as thin as may be with sweete Butter, or sweete Seame, and make them browne, and so serue them vp with Sugar strowed vpon them. There be some which mixe Pancakes with new Milke or Creame, but that makes them tough, cloying, and not so crispe, pleasant and sauorie as running water.
               
                  
                     Veale toasts.
                  To make the best Veale tosts; take the kidney fat, and all of a loyne of veale rosted, and shred it as small as is possible; then take a couple of Egges and beat them very wel; which done, take Spinage, Succory, Violet leaues, and Marigold leaues, and beate them, and straine out the iuice, and mix it with the Egges: then put it to your Veale, and stirre it exceedingly well in a dish; then put to good store of Currance cleane washt and pickt, Cloues, Mace, Sinamon, Nutmeg, Sugar and Salt, and mix them al perfectly wel together: then take a Manchet and cut it into tosts, and toste them well before the fire; then with a spoone lay vpon the toste in a good thicknesse the Veale, prepared as beforesaid: which done, put into your frying pan good store of sweete Butter, and when it is well melted and very hot, put your tosts in to the same with the bread side vpward, and the flesh side downeward: and assoone as you see they are fried browne, lay vpon the vpperside of the tostes which are bare more of the flesh meate, and then turne them, and frie that side browne also: then take them out of the pan and dish them vp, and strow Suger vpon them, and so serue them forth. There be some Cookes which will do this but

vpon one side of the tostes, but to do it on both is much better; if you adde Creame it is not amisse.
               To make the best Panperdy,
                     To make the best panperdie.
                   take a dozen Egges, and breake them, and beat them very well, then put vnto them Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, Nutmeg, and good store of Suger, with as much Salt as shall season it: then take a Manchet, and cut it into thick slices like tostes; which done, take your frying pan, and put into it good store of sweete Butter, and being melted lay in your slices of bread, then powre vpon them one halfe of your Egges; then when that is fried, with a dish turne your slices of bread vpward, and then powre on them the other halfe of your Eggs, and so turne them till both sides bee browne; then dish it vp, and serue it with Sugar strowed vpon it.
               To make a Quelquechose,
                     To make any quelquechose.
                   which is a mixture of many things together; take the Eggs and breake them, and do away the one halfe of the Whites, and after they are beaten put to them a good quantitie of sweete Creame, Currants, Cinamon, Cloues, Mace, Salt, and a little Ginger, Spinage, Endiue, and Marigold flowers grossely chopt, and beate them all very well together; then take Piggs Pettitoes slic't, and grossely chopt, and mixe them with the eggs, and with your hand stirre them exceeding well together; then put sweet butter in your frying pan, and being melted, put in all the rest, and frie it browne without burning, euer and anon turning it till it be fried enough; then dish it vp vpon a flat Plate, and couer it with Sugar, and so serue it forth. Only herein is to be obserued, that your Pettitoes must be very well boyled before you put them into the frycase.
               And in this manner as you make this Quelquechose, so you may make any other, whether it be of flesh, smal birds, sweet roots, oisters, muskles, cockles, giblets, lemons, orenges, or any fruit, pulse; or other sallet herbe whatsoeuer; of

which to speake seuerally were a labour infinite, because they vary with mens opinions. Only the composition and worke is no other then this before prescribed; and who can doe these, neede no instruction for the rest. And thus much for Sallets and Frycases.
               
                  
                     Additions to the houswifes Cookerie.
                     
                     
                        To make Fritters.
                     
                  To make Fritters another way, take Flower, Milke, Barme, grated Bread, small Raysings, Cinamon, Suger, Cloues, Mace, Pepper, Saffron and Salt; stirre all these together very well with a strong spoone, or small ladle; then let it stand more then a quarter of an hower that it may rise, then beate it in againe, and thus let it rise and bebeat in twice or thrice at least; then take it and bake them in sweete and strong Seame, as hath been before shewed; and when they are serued vp to the Table, see you strow vpon them good store of Sugar, Cynomon and Ginger.
               
                  
                     To make the best white Puddings.
                  Take a pint of the best, thickest and sweetest Creame, and boile it, then whilest it is hot, put thereunto a good quantitie of faire great Oat-meale Grotes cleane pickt, and formerly steept in Milke twelue houres at least, and let it soake in this Creame another night; then put thereto at least eight yelks of Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Saffron, Currants, Dates, Sugar, Salt, and great store of Swines suet, or for want thereof, great store of Beefe suet, and then fill it vp in the Farmes according to the order of good houswiferie, & then boyle them on a soft and gentle fire, and as they swell, prick them with a great pin, or small awle, to keepe them that they burst not: and when you serue them to the Table (which must be not till they be a day old,) first, boyle them a little, then take them out and toast them browne before the fire, and so serue them, trimming the edge of the dish either with Salt or Sugar.
               
                  
                     Puddings of a Hogs Liuer.
                  Take the Liuer of a fat Hog, and parboyle it, then shred it small, and after beate it in a Morter very fine; then mixe

it with the thickest and sweetest Creame, and straine it very well through an ordinary strainer
                     •
                   then put thereto six yelkes of Egges, and two whites, and the grated crums of neere-hand a penny white loafe, with good store of Currants, Dates, Cloues, Mace, Sugar, Saffron, Salt, and the best Swine suet, or Beefe suet, but Beefe suet is the more wholsome, and lesse loosening; then after it hath stood a while, fill it into the farmes, and boyle them, as before shewed: and when you serue them to the Table, first, boyle them a little, then lay them on a Gridyron ouer the coales, and broyle them gently, but scorch them not, nor in any wise breake their skinnes, which is to bee preuented by oft turning and tossing them on the Grid-yron, and keeping a slow fire.
               Take the Yelkes and Whites often or twelue Eggs,
                     To make bread Puddings.
                   and hauing beate them well, put to them the fine pouder of Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs, Sugar, Cynamon, Saffron and Salt; then take the quantity of two loaues of grated bread, Dates (small shred) and great store of Currants, with good store either of Sheepes, Hoggs, or Beeffe-suet beaten and cut small; then when all is mixt well together, and hath stood a while to settle, then fill it into the farmes as hath been before shewed, and in like manner boile them, cooke them, and serue them to the Table.
               Take halfe a pound of Rice,
                     Rice Puddings.
                   and steepe it in new milke a whole night, and in the morning draine it, and let the Milke drop away; then take a quart of the best, sweetest, and thickest Creame, and put the Rice into it, and boyle it a little; then set it to coole an hower or two, & after put in the Yelkes of halfe a dozzen Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Currants, Dates, Sugar and Salt; and hauing mixt them well together, put in great store of Beefe Suet well beaten, and small shred, and so put it into the farmes, and

boyle them as before shewed, and serue them after a day old.
               
                  
                     Another of Liuer.
                  Take the best Hoggs Liuer you can get, and boyle it extreamely till it bee as hard as a stone; then lay it to coole, and being cold, vpon a great bread-grater grate it all to powder; then si
                     •
                  t it through a fine meale-siue, and put to it the crummes of (at least two peny loaues of) white bread, and boyle al in the thickest and sweetest Creame you haue till it be very thick; then let it coole, and put to it the yelks of halfe a dozzen Egges, a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Corants, Dates small shred, Cinamon, Ginger, a little Nutmeg, good store of Sugar, a little Saffron, Salt, and of Beefe and Swines suet great plenty, then fill it into the Farmes, and boyle them as before shewed,
               
                  
                     Puddings of a Calues Mugget.
                  Take a Calues Mugget, cleane and sweete drest, and boyle it well; then shred it as small as is possible, then take of Strawberry leaues, of Endyue, Spynage, Succorie, and Sollell, of each a pretty quantitie, and chop them as small as is possible, and then mixe them with the Mugget; then take the Yelkes of halfe a dozzen Egges, and three Whites, and beate them into it also; & if you find it is to stiffe, then make it thinner with a little Creame warmed on the fier; then put in a little Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger, Sugar, Currants, Dates and Salt, and worke all together, with casting in little peyres of sweet Butter one after another, till it haue receiued good store of Butter; then put it vp into the Calues bagge, Sheeps bagge, or Hogs bagge, and then boyle it well, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     A Blood Pudding.
                  Take the Blood of an Hogge whilest it is warme, and steepe in it a quarte, or more, of great Oate-meale grotes, and at the end of three dayes with your hands take the Grots out of the blood, and draine them cleane; then put put to those Grotes more then a quarte of the best creame

warmd on the fire; then take Mother-of-Time, Parsely, Spinnage, Succory, Endiue, Sorrel and Strawberry leaues, of each a few chopt exceeding small, and mixe them with the Grots, and also a little Fenell seede finely beaten; then adde a little Pepper, Cloues and Mace, Salt, and great store of Suet finely shred, and well beaten; then therewith fill your Farmes, and boyle them, as hath been before described.
               Take the largest of your Chines of Porke,
                     Linkes.
                   and that which is called a Liste, and first with your knife cut the the leane thereof into thin slices, and then shred small those slices, and then spread it ouer the bottom of a dish or woodden platter; then take the fat of the Chine and the Liste, and cut it in the same manner, and spread it vpon the leane, and then cut more leane, and spread it on the fat, and thus doe one leane vpon another till all the Porke bee shred, obseruing to begin and end with the leane; then with your knife scortch it through and through diuers wayes, and mixe it all well together: then take good store of Sage, and shred it exceeding small, and mixe it with the flesh, then giue it a good season of Pepper and Salt; then take the farmes made as long as is possible, and not cut in pieces as for Puddings, and first blow them well to make the meat slip, and then fill them: which done, with threads deuide them into seuerall linkes as you please, then hang them vp in the corner of some Chimney cleane kept, where they may take ayre of the fire, and let them drie there at least foure dayes before any be eaten; and when they are serued vp, let them be either fried or boyld on the Gridyron, or else roasted about a Capon.
               It resteth now that we speak of boild meats and broths,OF Boild meates ordinarie.
                   which forasmuch as our Hous-wife is intended to be generall, one that can as well feed the poore as the rich, we will

first begin with those ordinarie wholsome boyld-meates, which are of vse in euery good mans house: therefore to make the best ordinarie Pottage, you shall take a racke of Mutton cut into pieces, or a leg of Mutton cut into pieces; for this meate and these ioynts are the best, although any other ioynt, or any fresh Beefe will likewise make good Pottage: and hauing washt your meate well, put it into a cleane pot with faire water, and set it on the fire; then take Violet leaues, Succory, Strawbery leaues, Spinage, Langdebeefe, Marigold flowers, Scallions, & a little Parsly, & chop thē very small together; then take halfe so much Oat-meale well beaten as there is Hearbs, and mixe it with the Hearbs, and chop all very well together: then when the pot is ready to boyle, skum it very wel, and then put in your hearbs, and so let it boyle with a quick fire, stirring the meate oft in the pot, till the meate bee boyld enough, and that the hearbs and water are mixt together without any separation, which will bee after the consumption of more then a third part: Then season them with Salt, and serue them vp with the meate either with Sippets or without.
               
                  
                     Pottage without sight of hearbs.
                  Some desire to haue their Pottage greene, yet no herbs to be seene in this case: you must take your hearbs and Oat-meale, and after it is chopt, put it into a stone Morter, or Bowle, and with a woodden pestell beate it exceedingly; then with some of the warme liquor in the pot straine it as hard as may be, and so put it in and boyle it.
               
                  
                     Pottage without hearbs.
                  Others desire to haue Pottage without any hearbs at all, And then you must only take Oat-meale beaten, and good store of Onions, and put them in, and boile them together; and thus doing you must take a greater quantitie of Oate-meale then before.
               
                  
                     Pottage with whole hearbs.
                  If you wil make pottage of the best & daintiest kind, you shal take Mutton, Veale, or Kid, & hauing broke the bones,

but not cut the flesh in peeces, and wash it, put it into a pot with faire water, after it is ready to boile, and is throughly skumd, you shal put in a good handful or two of smale oat-meale: & then take whole lettice of the best & most inward leaues, whole spinage, endiue, succory, and whole leaues of colast 
                     •
                  orry, or the inward parts of white cabage, with two or three sli
                     •
                  't onions; and put all into the pot and boile them well together till the meat be enough, and the herbes so soft as may be, and stirre them oft well together; and then season it with salt and as much veriuice as will onely turne the tast of the pottage; and so serue them vp, couering the meat with the whole hearbes, and adorning the dish with sippets.
               To make ordinary stewd broth,
                     To make ordinary stewd broth.
                   you shall take a necke of veale, or a leg, or mary bones of beefe, or a pullet, or mutton, and after the meat is washt, put it into a pot with faire water, and being ready to boile, skumme it well; then you shall take a couple of manchets, and paring away the crust, cut it into thicke slices, and lay them in a dish, and couer them with hot broth out of the pot; when they are steept, put them and some of the broth into a strainer, and straine it, and then put it into the pot; then take halfe a pound of Prunes, half a pound of Rai
                     •
                  ins, and a quarter of a pound of Currants clean pickt & washt, with a litle whole Mace and two or three brused Cloues, and put them into the pot, and stirre all well together, and so let them boile till the meate be enough; then if you will alter the colour of the broth, put in a little Turnesole, or red Saunders, and so serue it vpon Sippets, and the fruit vppermost. To make an excellent boiled meate:
                     A fine boild meate.
                   take fowre peeces of a racke of Mutton, and wash them cleane and put them into a pot well scowred with faire water; then take a good quantity of wine and veriuice and put into it; then slice a

handfull of Onions and put them in also, and so let it boile a good while; then take a peece of sweet butter with gi
                     •
                  
                  ger and salt and put it 
                     •
                  o also, and then make the broth thicke with grated bread, and so serue it vp with sippets.
               
                  
                     To boile a Mallard.
                  To boile a Mallard curiously, take the Mallard when it is faire dressed, washed and trust, and put it one a spit and rost it till you can get the gra
                     •
                  y out of it; then take it from the spit and boile it, then take the best of the broth in a pipkin, and the grauy which you saued, with a peece of sweete butter and Currants, Vineger, Sugar, P
                     •
                  pper and grated bread: Thus boile all these together, and when the Mallard is boiled sufficiently, lay it on a dish with sippets, and the broth vpon it, and so serue it foorth.
               
                  
                     To make an excellent Olepotrige.
                  To make an excellent Olepotrige, which is the onely principall dish of boild meate which is esteemed in all Spaine, you shall take a very large vessell, pot or kettell, and filling it with water, you shall set it on the fire, and first put in good thicke gobbets of well fed Beefe, and being ready to boile, skumme your pot; when the Beefe is halfe boiled, you shall put in Potato roots, Turneps, and Skirrets: also like gobbets of the best Mutton, and the best Porke; after they haue boyled a while, you shall put in the like gobbets of Venison red, and Fallow, if you haue them; then the like gobbets, of Veale, Kidde, and Lamb; a little space after these, the foreparts of a fat Pigge, and a crambd Pullet; then put in Spinage, Endiue, Succory, Marigold leaues & flowers, Lettice, Violet leaues, Strawberry leaues, Buglosse and Scallions, all whole and vnchoot; then when they haue boiled a while, put in a Partridge and a Chicken chopt in peeces, with Quailes, Rails, Blackbirds, Larkes, Sparrowes and other small birds, all being well and tenderly boiled, season vp the broth with good store of Sugar, Cloues, Mace, Cinamon, Ginger

and Nutmegge mixt together in a good quantity of Veriuice and salt, and so stirre vp the pot well from the bottome, then dish it vp vpon great Chargers, or long Spanish dishes made in the fashion of our English woodden trayes, with good store of sippets in the bottome; then couer the meate all ouer with Prunes, Raisins, Currants, and blaunch't Almonds, boiled in a thing by themselues; then couer the fruite and the whole boiled hearbes, and the hearbes with slices of Orenges and Lemmons, and lay the roots round about the sides of the dish, and strew good store of Sugar ouer all, and so serue it foorth.
               To make the best white broth
                     •
                  
                  
                     To make the best white broath.
                   whether it be with Veale, Capon, Chickins, or any other Fowle or Fish: First boile the flesh or fish by it selfe, then take the valew of a quart of strong mutton broth, or fat Kidde broth, and put it into a pipkin by it selfe, and put into it a bunch of Time, Marierome, Spinage and Endiue bound together; then when it seethes put in a pretty quantity of Beefe-marrow, and the marrowe of Mutton, with some whole Mace and a few bruised Cloues; then put in a pinte of White-wine with a few whole slices of Ginger; after these haue boiled a
                     •
                   wile together, take blanch't Almonds, and hauing beaten them together in a morter with some of the broth, st
                     •
                  aine them and put it in also; then in another pipkin boile Currants, Prunes, Raisins, and whole Cinamon in veriuice and sugar, with a few sliced Dates; and boile them til the veriuice be most part consumed, or at least come to a syrrup; then draine the fruit from the sirrup, and if you see it be high coloured; make it white with sweete creame warmed, and so mixe it with your wine broth; then take out the Capon or the other Flesh or fish, and dish it vp dry in a clean dish; then powre the broth vpon it, and lay the fruite on the top of

the meate, and adorne the side of the dish with sippets; first Orenges, Lemmons and Sugar, and so serue it forth.
               To boile any wild Fowle, as Mallard, Teale, Widgeon, or such like: First boile the Fowle by it selfe, then take a quart of strong Mutton broth,
                     To boile any wild Fowle.
                   and put it into a pipkin, and boile it; then put into it good store of sliced Onions, a bunch of sweete pot-hearbes, and a lump of sweete butter; after it hath boiled well, season it with veriuice, salt and sugar, and a little whole Pepper; which done, take vp your Fowle and breake it vp according to the fashion of caruing, and sticke a few Cloues about it; then put it into the broth with Onions, and there let it take a walme or two, & so serue it and the broth foorth vppon Sippets, some vse to thicken it with toasts of bread steept and strained, but that is as please the Cooke.
               To boile a legge of Mutton, or any other ioint of meate whatsoeuer; first after you haue washt it cleane, parboile it a little,
                     To boile a legge of Mutton.
                   then spit it and giue it halfe a dozen turnes before the fire, then draw it when it beginnes to drop, and presse it betweene two dishes, and saue the grauy; then slash it with your knife, and giue it halfe a dozen turnes more, and then presse it againe, and thus doe as often as you can force any moisture to come from it; then mixing Mutton broth, White-wine, and Veriuice together, boile the Mutton therein till it be tender, and that most part of the liquor is cleane consumed; then hauing all that while kept the grauy you tooke from the Mutton, stewing gently vpon a Chaffing-dish and coales, you shall adde vnto it good store of salt; sugar, cinamon & ginger, with some lemmon slices, and a little of an Oringe pill, with a few fine whitebread crums: then taking vp the Mutton, put the remainder of the broth in which it lay to the grauy, and then serue it vp with sippets,

laying the Lemmon slices vppermost, and trimming the dish about with Sugar.
               
               If you will boile Chickens,
                  
                     An excellent way to boile Chickens.
                   young Turkies, Pea-hens, or any house-Fowle daintily, you shall after you haue trimmed them, drawne them, trust them, and washt them, fill their bellies as full of Parsly as they can hold; then boile them with salt and water onely till they be enough: then take a dish and put into it veriuice, and butter, and salt, and when the butter is melted, take the Parsly out of the Chickens bellies, and mince it very small, and put it to the veriuice and butter, and stirre it well together; then lay in the Chickens, and trimme the dish with sippets, and so serue it foorth.
               If you will make broth of any fresh fish whatsoeuer, whether it be Pike,
                     A broth for any fresh Fish.
                   Breame, Carpe, Eele, Barbell or such like: you shall boile water, veriuice & salt together with a handfull of sliced Onions; then you shall thicken it with two or three spoonefull of Ale-barme; then put in a good quantity of whole barberies, both branches and other, as also pretty store of Currants: then when it is boild enough, dish vp your fish, and powre your broth vnto it, laying the fruit and Onions vppermost. Some to this broth will put Prunes and Dates slic't, but it is according to the fancy of the Cooke, or the will of the House-holder. Thus I haue from these few presidents shewed you the true Art and making of all sorts of boild-meates, and broths; and though men may coine strange names, and faine strange Art, yet be assured she that can doe these, may make any other whatsoeuer; altering the tast by the alteration of the compounds as shee shall see occasion: And when a broth is to sweet, to sharpen it with veriuice, when to tart; to sweet it with sugar; when flat & wallowish, to quicken it with Oringes & Lemmons; & when to bitter, to make it pleasant with

hearbes & spices: and thus much for broths & boild meats.
               
                  
                     Additions To boyle meates.
                     
                     
                        A Mallard smoard, or a Hare, or old Conie.
                     
                  Take a Mallard when it is cleane dressed, washed and trust, and parboyle it in water till it be skumd and purified; then take it vp, and put it into a Pipkin with the neck downward, and the tayle vpward, standing as it were vpright; then fill the Pipkin halfe full with that water, in which the Mallard parboyld, and fill vp the other halfe with White Wine; then pill and slice thin a good quantitie of Onyons, and put them in with whole fine Hearbs, according to the time of the yeare, as Lettice, Strawberry leaues, Violet leaues, Vines leaues, Spinage, Endiue, Succorie, and such like, which haue no bitter or hard taste, and a pretty quantitie of Currants and Dates sliced; then couer it close, and set it on a gentle fire, and let it stew, and smoare till the Hearbs and Onyons be soft, and the Mallard enough; then take out the Mallard, and carue it as it were to goe to the Table; then to the Broath put a good lumpe of Butter, Sugar, Cinamon; and if it be in some, so many Goose-berries as will giue it a sharpe taste, but in the Winter as much Wine Vinegar; then heate it on the fire, and stirre all well together; then lay the Mallard in a dish with Sippets, and powre all this broth vpon it; then trim the Egges of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp. And in this manner you may also smoare the hinder parts of a Hare, or a whole old Conie, being trust vp close together.
               
                  
                     To stew a Pike.
                  After your Pike is drest and opened in the back, and laid flat, as if it were to frie, then lay it in a large dish for the purpose, able to receiue it; then put as much White Wine to it as will couer it all ouer; then set it on a Chaffing-dish and Coales to boyle very gently, and if any skum arise, take it away; then put to it Currants, Sugar, Cynamon, Barber-berries, and as many Prunes as wil serue to garnish the dish; then couer it close with another dish, and let it stew till the

fruit be soft, and the Pike enough; then put in a good lumpe of sweet Butter; then with a fine skummer take vp the fish and lay it in a cleane dish with Sippets; then take a copple of Yelkes of Egges, the filme taken away, and beate them well together with a spoonefull or two of Creame, and assoone as the Pike is taken out, put it into the broth, and stir it exceedingly to keepe it from curding; then power the broth vpon the Pike, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, and Barberies, Slices of Orenges or Lemmons, and so serue it vp. And thus may you also stew Rochets, Gurnets, or almost any sea-fish, or fresh-fish.
               Take a Lambs-head and Purtenance cleane washt & pickt and put it into a Pipkin with faire water,
                     To stew a Lambs head and Purtenance.
                   and let it boile, and skum it cleane; then put in Currants and a few sliced Dates, and a bunch of the best fercing Hearbs tyed vp together, and so let it boyle well till the meate be enough: then take vp the Lambes head and purtenance, and put it into a cleane dish with Sippets; then put in a good lumpe of Butter, and beate the Yelkes of two Egges with a little Creame, and put it to the Broth with Sugar, Synamon, and a spoonefull or two of Verdiuyce, and whole Mace, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish, which should bee put in when it is but halfe boyld, and so power it vpon the Lambs-head and Purtnance, and adorne the sides of the dish with Sugar, Prunes, Barberries, Orenges and Lemons, and in no case forget neuer to season well with Salt, and so serue it vp.
               Take a very good brest of Mutton chopt into sundry large pieces,
                     A Brest of Mutton stewed.
                   and when it is cleane washt, put it into a Pipkin with faire water, and set it on the fire to boyle; then skum it very well, then put in of the finest Parsneps cut into large pieces as long as ones hand, and cleane washt and scrapt; then good store of the best onions, and all manner of

sweet pleasant Pot-herbs and lettice, all grossely chopt, and good store of pepper & salt, and then couer it, & let it stew till the Mutton be enough; then take vp the Mutton, and lay it in a cleane dish with Sippets, and to the broath put a little Wine-vinegar, and so power it on the Mutton with the Parseneps whole, and adorne the sides of the dish with Sugar, and so serue it vp: and as you doe with the Brest, so you may doe with any other Ioynt of Mutton.
               
                  
                     To stew a Neats foote.
                  Take a Neates foot that is very well boyld (for the tenderer it is, the better it is) and cleaue it in two, and with a cleane cloth drie it well from the Souse-drinke; then lay it in a deepe earthen platter, and couer it ouer with Verdiuyce; then set it on a Chaffing-dish and Coales, and put to it a few Currants, and as many Prunes as will garnish the dish; then couer it, and let it boyle well, many times stirring it vp with your knife, for feare it sticke to the bottome of the dish; then when it is sufficiently stewed, which will appeare by the tendernesse of the meate and softnes of the fruit; then put in a good lumpe of Butter, great store of Sugar and Sinamon, and let boyle a little after; then put it altogether into a cleane dish with Sippets, and adorne the sides of the dish with Sugar and Prunes, and so serue it vp.
               
                  Of Roast-meats.
                  To proceed then to roast meats, it is to bee vnderstood, that in the generall knowledge thereof are to be obserued these few rules. First, the cleanely keeping and scowring of of the spits and cobirons; next, the neat picking and washing of meate before it bee spitted,
                     Obseruations in roast meates.
                   then the spitting and broaching of meate which must bee done so strongly and firmely, that the meat may by no meanes either shrink from the spit, or else turne about the spit: and yet euer to obserue,
                     Spitting of rost meates.
                   that the spit doe not goe through any principall part of the meate, but such as is of least account and estimation: and if it be birds or fowle which you spit, then to

let the spit goe through the hollow of the body of the Fowle, and to fasten it with pricks or skewers vnder the wings about the thighes of the Fowle, and at the feete or rump,
                     Temperature of fire.
                   according to your manner of trussing and dressing them. Then to know the temperatures of fiers for euery meate, and which must haue a slow fire, yet a good one, taking leasure in roasting, as Chines of Beefe, Swannes, Turkies, Peacockes, Bustards, and generally any great large Fowle, or any other ioints of Mutton, Veale, Porke, Kid, Lambe, or such like: whether it be Venison red, or Fallow, which indeed would lie long at the fire, and soke well in the roasting, and which would haue a quicke and sharpe fire without schorching; as Pigges, Pullets, Feasants, Partridge, Quaile, and all sorts of middle sized or lesser fowle, and all small birds, or compound roste-meates, as Oliues of Veale, Haslets; a pound of butter roasted; or puddings simple of themselues; and many other such like, which indeed would be suddenly & quickly dispatcht, because it is intended in Cookery, that on of these dishes must be made ready whilst the other is in eating. Then to know the complexions of meates,
                     The complexions of meats.
                   as which must be pale and white rosted, (yet thorowly rosted) as Mutton Veale, Lambe, Kid, Capon, Pullet, Pheasant, Partridge, Quaile, and all sorts of middle and small land, or water-fowle, and all small birds, and which must be browne rosted, as Beefe, venison, Porke Swannne, Geese, Pigges, Crane, Bustards, and any large fowle, or other thing whose flesh is blacke.
               Then to know the best bastings for meat,
                     The best bastings of meates.
                   which is sweet butter, sweet oyle, barreld butter, or fine rendred vp seame with sinamon, cloues, and mace. There be some that will bast onely with water, and salt, and nothing else; yet it is but opinion, and that must be the worlds Master alwaies.
               Then the best dredging,
                     The best dredging.
                   which is either fine white-bread

crummes well grated, or els a little very fine white meale, and the crummes very well mixt together.
               Lastly to know when meate is rosted enough; for as too much rarenes is vnholsome,
                     To know when meat is enough.
                   so too much drinesse is not nourishing. Therefore to know when it is in the perfit height, and is neither too moist nor too dry, you shall obserue these signes first in your large ioints of meate, when the stemme or stroke of the meate offendeth, either vpright or els goeth from the fire, when it beginneth a little to shrinke from the spit, or when the grauy which droppeth from it is cleare without bloodinesse. If it be a Pigge when the eies are fallen out, and the body leaueth piping; for the first is when it is halfe rosted, and would bee singed to make the coat rise and be crackle, and the latter when it is fully enough and would be drawne: or if it be any kind of fowle you rost, when the thighs are tender, or the hinder parts of the pinions at the setting on of the wings, are without blood; then be sure that your meat is fully enough roasted: yet for a better and more certain assurednesse, you may thrust your knife into the thickest parts of the meate, and draw it out againe, and if it bring out white grauy without any bloodishnesse, then assuredly it is enough, and may be drawne with all speed conuenient, after it hath beene well basted with butter not formerly melted, then dredged as aforesaid, then basted ouer the dredging, and so suffered to take two or three turnes, to make crispe the dredging: Then disht in a faire dish with salt sprinckled ouer it, and so seru'd forth. Thus you see the generall forme of roasting all kind of meat: therefore now I will returne to some particular dishes, together with their seuerall sawces.
               
                  
                     Roasting mutton with oisters.
                  If you will roast mutton with oisters; take a shoulder a lone
                     •
                   or a legge, and after it is washt parboile it a little;

then take the greatest oisters, and hauing opened them into a dish, draine the grauy cleane from them twice or thrice, then parboile them a little: Also then take spinage endiue, succory, strawberry leaues, violet leaues, and a little parsley, with some scallions; chop these very small together: Then take your oisters very dry, draind, and mixe them with an halfe part of these herbes: Then take your meate and with these oisters and hearbes farce or stop it, leauing no place empty, then spit it and roast it, and whilst it is in roasting take good store of veriuice and butter, and a little salt, and set in a dish on a chaffing-dish and coales: and when it begins to boile, put in the remainder of your herbes without oisters, and a good quantity of currants, with Cinamon, and the yelke of a couple of egges: And after they are well boyled and stir'd together, season it vp according to tast with sugar: then put in a few lemmon, slices, and the meate, being enough, draw it and lay it vpon this sawce remooued into a clean dish, the egges, thereof being trimmed about with sugar, and so serue it foorth.
               To toast a legge of Mutton after an out-landish fashion,
                     To roast a legge of mutton otherwise.
                   you shall take it after it is washt, and cut out all the flesh from the bone, leauing onely the outmost skinne entirely whole and fast to the bone; then take thicke creame and the yelke of egges and beate them exceedingly well together; then put to Cinamon, Mace, and a little Nutmegge, with Salt, then take bread crumms finely grated and searst with good store of Currants, and as you mixe them with the creame, put in sugar, and so make it into a good stiffnesse: Now if you would haue it looke greene, put in the iuice of sweet hearbes, as Spinage, Violet leaues, Endiue &c. If you would haue it yellow, then put in a little Safforn strained, and with this fill vp the skin of your legge of Mutton in the same shape and forme that it was before,

and sticke the out-side of the skinne thick with Cloues, and so roast it thorowly and baste it very well, then after it is dredg'd serue it vp as a legge of Mutton with this pudding, for indeed it is no other: you may stop any other ioint of meate, as breast or loine, or the belly of any Fowle boiled or roast, or rabbet, or any meat else which hath skinne or emptinesse. If into this pudding also you beate the inward pith of an Oxes backe, it is booth good in tast, and excellent soueraigne for any disease, ache or fluxe in the 
                     •
                  aynes wha
                     •
                  soeuer.
               
                  
                     To rost a Gigget of Mutton.
                  To roast a Gigget of Mutton, which is the legge splatted, and halfe part of the loine together; you shall after it is washt, stop it with cloues, so spit it, and lay it to the fire, and tend it well with b
                     •
                  sting: Then you shall take vinegar butter and currants, and set them on the fire in a dish or pipkin; then when it boiles you shall put in sweete herbes finely chopt, with the yelke of a couple of egges, and so let them boile together; then the meat being halfe roastest you shall pare of some part of the leanest and brownest, then shed it very small and put it into the Pipkin also; then season it vp with sugar, cinamon, ginger, and salt, and so put it into a cleane dish: Then draw the Gigget of Mutton and lay it on the sauce, aud throw salt on the top, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To rost Oliues of Veale.
                  You shall take a legge of veale and cut the flesh from the bones, and cut it out into thin long slices; then take sweet hearbes and the white parts of scallions, and chop them well together with the yelkes of egges, then rowle it vp within the slices of Veale, and so spit them and roast them; then boile veriuice, butter, sugar, cynamon, currants and sweet herbes together, and being seasoned with a little salt, serue the Oliues vp vpon that sauce with salt, cast ouer them.
               
                  To roast a Pigge curiously,
                     To roast a Pigge.
                   you shall not scald it, but draw it with the haire on, then hauing washt it, spit it and lay it to the fire so as it may not scorch, then being a quarter roasted, and the skinne blistered from the flesh, with your hand pull away the haire and skinne, and leaue all the fat and flesh perfectly bare: then with your knife scotch all the flesh downe to the bones, then bast it exceedingly with sweet butter and creame, being no more but warme; then dredge it with fine bread-crummes, currants, sugar and salt mixt together, and thus apply dredging, vpon basting, and basting vpon dredging, till you haue couered all the flesh a full inch deepe: Then the meat being fully rosted, draw it and serue it vp whole,
               To roast a pound of Butter curiously and well,
                     To roast a pound of butter well.
                   you shall take a pound of sweet Butter and beate it stiffe with sugar, and the yolkes of egges; then clap it round-wise about a spit, and lay it before a soft fire, and presently dredge it with the dredging before appointed for the Pigge; then as it warmeth or melteth, so apply it with dredging till the butter be ouercomed and no more wil melt to fall from it, then roast it browne, and so draw it, and serue it out, the dish being as neatly trim'd with sugar as may be,
               To roast a pudding on a spit,
                     To roast a pudding on a spit.
                   you shall mixe the pudding before spoken of in the leg of Mutton, neither omitting hearbes, nor saffron, and put to a little sweet butter and mix it very stiffe: then fold it about the spit, and haue ready in another dish some of the same mixture well seasoned, but a great deale thinner and no butter at all in it, and when the Pudding doth beginne to roast, and that the butter appeares, then with a spoone couer it all ouer with the thinner mixture, and so let it roast; then if you see no more butter appeare, then bast it as you did the Pigge and lay more of the mixture on, and so continue till all bee

spent:
                     To roast a chine of Beefe, loyne of Mutton, Larke and Capon at one fire, and one instant.
                   And then roast it browne, and so serue it vp.
               If you will roast a Chine of Beefe, a loyne of Mutton, a Capon, and a Larke, all at one instant and at one fire, and haue all ready together and none burnt: you shall first take your Chine of Beefe and perboile if more then halfe through: Then first take your Capon being large and fat, and spit it next the hand of the turner, with the legges, from the fire, then spit the Chine of Beefe, then the Larke, and lastly the loine of Mutton, and place the Larke so as it may be couered ouer with the Beefe, and the fat part of the loine of Mutton, without any part disclosed: Then bast your Capon, and your loine of Mutton, with cold water, and Salt, the Chine of Beefe with boyling larde: Then when you see the beefe is almost enough, which you shall hasten by schorching and opening of it: then with a cleane cloth you shall wipe the Mutton and Capon all ouer, and then bast it with sweet butter till all bee enough roasted; Then with your knife lay the Larke open which by this time will be stewed betweene the Beefe and Mutton, and basting it also dredge all together; draw them and serue them vp.
               If you wil roast any Venison after you haue washt it, & clensed al blood from it,
                     To roast Venison.
                   you shal sticke it with cloues all ouer on the out side; and if it be leane you shall larde it either with Mutton larde, or Porke larde, but mutton is the best: then spit it and roast it by a good soking fire, then take Vinegar, bread crummes, and some of the grauy, which comes from the Venison, and boile them well in a dish: then season it with sugar, cinamon, ginger, and salt, And serue the Venison foorth vpon the sauce when it is roasted enough,
               
                  
                     To rost fresh Sturgeon.
                  If you will roast a peece of fresh Sturgeon which is a dainty dishe, you shall first stop it all ouer with cloues,

then spit it, and let it roast at great leasure, plying it continually with basting, which will take away the hardnesse: then when it is enough, you shall draw it, and serue it vpon Venison sauce with salt onely throwne ouer it.
               The roasting of all sorts of meates differeth nothing but in the fires,
                     Ordering of meates to be roasted.
                   speed and leasure as is before said, except these compound dishes, of which I haue giuen you sufficient presidents, and by them you may performe any worke whatsoeuer: but for the ordering, preparing and trussing your meates for the spit or table, in that there is much difference: for in all ioynts of meate except a shoulder of Mutton, you shall crush and breake the bones well, from Pigges and Rabbets you shall cut off the frete before you spit them, and the heads when you serue them to table, and the Pigge you shall chine, and diuide into two parts; Capons, Pheasants, Chickens and Turkies you shall roast with the Pinions foulded vp, and the leggs extended; Hens, Stock-doues, and Hous-doues, you shall roast with the pinions foulded vp, and the legges cut off by the knees, and thrust into the bodies: Quailes, Partridge, and all sorts of small birds shall haue their pinions cut away, and the legges extended: all sorts of Waterfowle shall haue their pinions cut away, and their legges turned backward: Wood-cocks, Snipes and Stints shall be rosted with their heads and necks on, and their legges thrust into their bodies, and Shouelers and Bitterns shall haue no necks but their heads onely.
               Take a Cowes Vdder,
                     To roast a Calues Vdder.
                   and first boile it wel: then sticke it thick all ouer with Cloues: then when it is cold, spit it, and lay it to the fier, and apply it very well with basting of sweete butter, and when it is sufficiently roasted, and browne, then dredge it, and draw it from the fire, take vinegar and Butter, and put it on a Chaffing-dish and coales

and boile it with white-bread crums, till it be thick: then put to it good store of suger and cinamon, and putting it in a cleane dish, lay the Cowes Vdder therein, and trim the sides of the dish with suger, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To roast a Fillet of Veale.
                  Take an excellent good legge of Veale, and cut the thick part thereof a handfull and more from the Knuckle: then take the thick part (which is the fillet) and fierce it in euery part all ouer with strawberry-leaues, vplet-leaues sorrell, spinage, endiue and succorie grossely chopt together, and good store of onyons: then lay it to the fire and roast it very sufficiently and browne, casting good store of salt vpon it, and basting it well with sweete butter: then take of the former hearbs much finer chopt then they were for fiercing, and put them into a Pipkin with vinegar, and cleane washt currants, and boyle them wel together: then when the hearbs are sufficiently boyld and soft, take the yelkes of foure very hard boyld egges, and shred them very small, and put them into the Pipkin also with suger and cinamon, and some of the grauie which drops from the Veale, and boyle it ouer againe, and then put it into a cleane dish, & the fillet being dredgd and drawne, lay vpō it, and trim the side of the dish with suger, & so serue it vp.
               
                  OF Sauces, and first for a rost Capon or Turkie.
                  To make an excellent sauce for a rost Capon, you shall take onions, and hauing sliced and pilled them, boile them in faire water with pepper, salt, and a few bread-crummes: then put vnto it a spoonefull or two of Claret-wine, the iuyce of an orenge, and three or foure slices of a lemmon pill; all these shred together, and so powre it vpon the Capon being broake vp.
               
                  
                     Sauce for a Hen or Pullet.
                  To make sauce for an old Hen or Pullet, take a good quantitie of beere and salt, and mixe them well together with a few fine bread-crummes, and boile them on a chafing-dish and coales, then take the yelks of three or fowre

hard Eggs, and being shred small, put it to the Beere, and boile it also: then the Hen being almost enough, take three or fowre spoonefull of the grauie which comes from her and put it to also, and boile altogether to an indifferent thicknesse: which done, suffer it to boile no more, but only keepe it warme on the fire, and put into it the iuyce of two or three Orenges, & the slices of Lemmon pills shred small, and the slices of Orenges also hauing the vpper rine taken away: then the Henne beeing broken vp, take the brawnes thereof, and shredding them small, put it into the sauce also; and stirring all well together, put it hot into a cleane warme dish, and lay the Henne (broke vp) in the same.
               The sauce for Chickins is diuers,
                     Sauce for Chickins.
                   according to mens taste: for some will onely haue Butter, Veriuyce, and a little Parsely rolled in their bellies mixt together: others will haue Butter, Veriuyce and Sugar boyld together with toasts of bread: and others will haue thicke Syppets with the iuyce of Sorrell and Sugar mixt together.
               The best sauce for a Phesant,
                     Sauce for a Phesant or Patridge.
                   is Water, Onions slic't, Pepper and a little Salt mixt together, and but stewed vpon the Coales, and then powred vpon the Pheasant or Patridge being broken vp, and some will put thereto the iuyce or slices of an Orenge or Lemmon, or both: but it is according to taste, and indeed more proper for a Pheasant then Partridge.
               Sauce for a Quaile,
                     Sauce for a Quaile, Raile, or big bird.
                   Raile, or any fat big bird, is Claret Wine and Salt mixt together with the grauie of the Bird; and a few fine bread-crumnes well boild together, and either a Sage-leafe, or Bay-leafe crusht among it according to mens tasts.
               The best sauce for Pigeons,
                     Sauce for Pigeons.
                   Stockdoues, or such like, is Vinegar and Butter melted together, and Parsely rosted in

their bellies, or vine-leaues rosted and mixed well together.
               
                  
                     A generall sauce for wild Fowle.
                  The most generall sauce for ordinarie wild fowle rosted, as Duckes, Mallard, Widgen, Tele, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plouers, Pulers, Guls, and such like, is onely mustard and vinegar, or mustard and veriuyce mixt together, or else an onion, water and Pepper, and some (especially in the Court) vse onely butter melted, and not any thing else.
               
                  
                     Sauce for greene geese.
                  The best sauce for greene Geese is the iuyce of sorrel and suger, mixt together with a few scalded feberries, and serued vpon sippets; or els the belly of greene Goose fild with Feberries, and so rosted, and then the same mixt with veriuyce, butter, suger and cinamon, and so serued vpon sippets.
               
                  
                     Sauce for a stubble goose.
                  The same for a stubble Goose is diuers, according to mens minds; for some will take the pap of rosted apples, and mixing it with vinegar, boyle them together on the fire with some of the grauie of the Goose, and a few barberries and bread-crummes, and when it is boyld to a good thicknesse, season it with suger and a little cinamon, and so serue it vp; some will adde a little mustard and onions vnto it, and some will not rost the apples, but pare them and slice them; and that is the neerer way, but not the better. Others will fill the belly of the Goose full of onions shred, and oate-meale Groats, and beeing rosted enough, mixe it with the grauie of the Goose, and sweete hearbs well boild together, and seasoned with a little veriuyce.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        uce for a 
                           •
                        wan, Bitter, Shoueler, or large Fowle.
                  To make a sauce for a Swan, Bitter, Shoueler, Herne, Crane, or any large foule, take the blood of the same foule, & being stird wel, boile it on the fire, then when it comes to be thick, put vnto it vinegar a good quantitie, with a few fine bread-crummes, and so boile it ouer againe: then

being come to good thicknesse, season it with Sugar and Cinamon, so as it may taste prettie and sharpe vpon the Cinamon, and then serue it vp in Saucers as you doe Mustard: for this is called a Chauder or Gallantine, and is a sauce almost for any Fowle whatsoeuer.
               To make sauce for a Pigge,
                     Sauce for a Pig.
                   some take Sage and roast it in the belly of the Pig, then boyling Veriuyce, Butter and Currants together, take and chop the Sage small, and mixing the braines of the Pig with it, put all together, and so serue it vp.
               To make a sauce for a Ioynt of Veale,
                     Sauce for Veale.
                   take all kind of sweet Pot-hearbs, and chopping them very small with the Yelkes of two or three Egges, boyle them in Vinegar and Butter, with a few bread-crummes, and good store of Currants; then season it with Sugar and Cinamon, and a Cloue or two crusht, and so powre it vpon the Veale, with the slices of Orenges and Lemons about the dish.
               Take Orenges and slice them thin, and vnto them White Wine and Rose-water,
                  Additions vnto Sauces, Sops for Chickens.
                   the powder of Mace, Ginger and Sugar, and set the same vpon a Chaffing-dish and coales, and when it is halfe boyled, put to it a good lumpe of Butter, and then lay good store of sippets of fine white bread therein, and so serue your Chickens vpon them, and trim the sides of the dish with Sugar.
               
               Take faire water and set it ouer the fire,
                     Sauce for a Turkie.
                   then slice good store of Onions and put into it, and also Pepper and Salt, and good store of the grauy that comes from the Turkie, and boyle them very well together: then put to it a few fine crummes of grated bread to thicken it; a very little Sugar and some Vinegar, and so serue it vp with the Turkey: or otherwise; take grated white bread and boile it in White-wine till it bee thicke as a Gallantine, and in the boyling

put in good store of Sugar and Cinamon, and then with a little Turnesole make it of a high Murrey colour, and so serue it in Saucers with the Turkey in manner of a Gallantine.
               
               
                  
                     The best Gallantine.
                  Take the blood of a Swan, or any other great Fowle, and put it into a dish; then take stewed Prunes and put them into a strainer, and straine them into the blood; then set it on a Chaffing-dish and Coales, and let it boyle, euer s
                     •
                  irring it till it come to be thicke, and season it very well with Sugar and Cinamon, and so serue it in Saucers with the Fowle: but this Sauce must be serued cold.
               
                  
                     Sauce for a Mallard.
                  Take good store of Onions, pill them, and slice them, and put them into Vinegar, and boyle them very well till they be tender; then put into it a good lumpe of sweete Butter, and season it well with Sugar and Cinamon, and so serue it vp with the Fowle.
               
                  OF Carbonados.
                  Charbonados, or Carbonados, which is meate broiled vpon the Coales (and the inuention thereof first brought out of France, as appeares by the name) are of diuers kinds according to mens pleasures: for there is no meate either boiled or roasted whatsoeuer, but may afterwards bee broiled, if the Master thereof be disposed; yet the generall dishes for the most part which are vsed to be Carbonadoed, are a Breast of Mutton halfe boyled, a Shoulder of Mutton halfe roasted,
                     What is to be carbonadoed.
                   the Leggs, Wings, and Carkases of Capon, Turkie, Goose, or any other Fowle whatsoeuer, especially Land-Fowle. And lastly, the vppermost thick skinne which couereth 
                     •
                  he ribbes of Beefe, and is called (being broyled) the skin of Court Goose, and is indeed a dish vsed most for wantonnesse, sometimes to please appetite: to which may also be added the broyling of Pigs heads, or the braines of any Fowle whatsoeuer after it is roasted and drest.
               
                  Now for the manner of Carbonadoing,
                     The maner of carbonadoing.
                   it is in this sort; you shall first take the meate you must Carbonadoe, and scorch it both aboue and below, then sprinkle good store of Salt vpon it, and baste it all ouer with sweet Butter melted, which done, take your broiling-yron, I doe not meane a Grid-yron (though it be much vsed for this purpose) because the smoake of the coales, occasioned by the dropping of the meate, will ascend about it, and make it stinke; but a plate Iron made with hookes and pricks, on which you may hang the meate, and set it close before the fire, and so the Plate heating the meate behind, as the fire doth before, it will both the sooner, and with more neatnesse bee readie: then hauing turned it, and basted it till it be very browne, dredge it, and serue it vp with Vinegar and Butter.
               
               Touching the toasting of Mutton,
                     Of the toasting of Mutton.
                   Venison, or any other Ioynt of meate, which is the most excellentest of all Carbonadoes, you shal take the fattest and largest that can possibly be got (for leane meate is losse of labour, and little meate not worth your time,) and hauing scorcht it, and cast salt vpon it, you shall set it on a strong forke, with a dripping pan vnderneath it, before the face of a quick fire, yet so farre off, that it may by no meanes scorch, but toast at leasure; then with that which falles from it, and with no other basting, see that you baste it continually, turning it euer and anon many times, and so oft, that it may soake and browne at great leasure, and as oft as you baste it, so oft sprinkle Salt vpon it, and as you see it toast so scorch it deeper and deeper, especially in the thickest and most fleshy parts where the blood most resteth: and when you see that no more blood droppeth from it, but the grauy is cleere and white; then shal you serue it vp either with Venion sauce, or with Vinegar, Pepper and Sugar,

Cinamon, and the iuyce of an Orenge mixt together, and warmed with some of the grauie.
               
                  
                     Additions vnto Carbonados.
                     
                     
                        A rasher of Mutton or Lambe.
                     
                  Take Mutton or Lambe that hath been either rosted, or but parboild, and with your knife scotch it many waies; then lay it in a deepe dish, and put to it a pint of White Wine, and a little whole Mace, a little slic't Nutmeg and some Sugar, with a lump of sweet Butter, and stew it so till it be very tender: then take it forth, and browne it on the Grid-yron, and then laying Sippets in the former broth serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To carbonado Tongues.
                  Take any tongue, whether of Beefe, Mutton, Calues, red Deare, or Fallow, and being well boyld, pill them, cleaue them, and scotch them many waies; then take three or foure Egs broken, some Sugar, Cinamon and Nutmeg, and hauing beaten it well together, put to it a Lemon cut in thin slices, and another cleane pild, and cut into little foure-square bits, and then take the tongue and lay in it; and then hauing melted good store of Butter in a Frying-pan, put the Tongue and the rest therein, and so frie it browne, and then dish it, and scrape Sugar vpon it, and serue it vp.
               
                  
                     Additions for dressing of Fish.
                     
                     
                        To souce any fresh fish.
                     
                  Take any fresh-fish whatsoeuer (as Pike, Breame, Carp, Barbel, Cheain, and such like, and draw it, but scale it not; then take the Liuer and the refuse, and hauing opened it, wash it; then take a pottle of faire water, a pretty quantitie of white wine, good store of Salt, and some Vinegar, with a little bunch of sweet Hearbs, and set it on the fier, and as soone as it begins to boyle, put in your fish, and hauing boild a little, take it vp into a faire vessell, then put into the liquor some grosse Pepper, & slit Ginger; and when it is boyled well together with more Salt, set it by to coole, and then put your fish into it, and when you serue it vp, lay Fenell there vpon.
               
                  To boyle small Fish,
                     To boyle small fish.
                   as Roches, Daces, Gudgeon or Flounders, boyle White-wine and water together with a bunch of choise Hearbs, and a little whole Mace: when all is boyled wel together, put in your fish, and skum it well: then put in the soale of a Manchet, a good quantitie of sweet Butter, and season it with Pepper and Veriuyce, and so serue it in vpon Sippets, and adorne the sides of the dish wish Sugar.
               First,
                     To boyle a Gurnet or Rochet.
                   draw your fish, and either split it open in the back, or ioynt it in the back, and trusse it round, then wash it cleane, and boyle it in water and salt, with a bunch of sweete Hearbs: then take it vp into a large dish, and powre vnto it Veriuyce, Nutmeg, Butter and Pepper, and letting it stew a little, thicken it with the yelkes of Egges: then hot remoue it into another dish, and garnish it with slices of Orenges and Lemons, Barberies, prunes and Suger, and so serue it vp.
               After you haue drawne,
                     To bake a Carpe.
                   washt and scalded a faire large Carpe, season it with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, and then put it into a coffin with good store of sweet Butter, and then cast on Raysins of the Sunne, the iuyce of Lemons, and some slices of Orenge pills; and then sprinkling on a little Vinegar, close it vp and bake it.
               First,
                     To bake a Tench.
                   let your Tench blood in the tayle, then scower it, wash it and scald it: then hauing dried it, take the fine crummes of bread, sweete Creame, the yelkes of Egges, Currants cleane washt, a few sweete Hearbs chopt small, season it with Nutmegs and Pepper, and make it into a stiffe paste, and put it into the belly of the Tench: then season the fish on the outside with Pepper, Salt and Nutmeg, and so put it into a deepe coffin with sweete Butter, and so close vp the pie and bake it: then when it is enough, draw it, and open it, and put into it a good piece of a preserued

                  Orenge minst: then take Vinegar, Nutmeg, Butter, Suger, and the yelke of a new-laid Egge, and boyle it on a Chaffing-dish and coales, alwaies stirring it to keepe it from curding; then powre it into the pie, shake it well, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To stew a Trout.
                  Take a large Trout, faire trimd, and wash it, and put it into a deepe pewter dish, then take halfe a pint of sweet Wine, with a lumpe of Butter, a little whole Mace, Parsely, Sauorie and Time, mince them all small, and put them into the Trouts belly, & so let it stew a quarter of an houre: then minse the yelke of an hard Egge, and strow it on the Trout, and laying the Hearbs about it, and scraping on Suger, serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To bake Eeles.
                  After you haue drawne your Eeles, chop them into small pieces of three or foure inches, and season them with Pepper, Salt and Ginger, and so put them into a coffin with a good lumpe of Butter, great Raysins, Onions small chopt, and so close it, bake it, and serue it vp.
               
                  Of The pasterie and baked meates.
                  Next to these already rehearsed, our English Hous-wife must be skilfull in Pasterie, and know how and in what manner to bake all sorts of meate, and what Paste is fit for euerie meate, and how to handle and compound such Pastes: As for example, red Deere Venison, wilde Boare, Gammons of Bacon, Swannes, Elkes, Porpas, and such like standing dishes, which must bee kept long, would be bak't in a moist, thicke, tough, course, and long lasting crust, and therefore of all other your Rie paste is best for that purpose: your Turkie, Capon, Pheasant, Partridge, Veale, Peacocks, Lambe, and all sorts of water-fowle which are to come to the table more then once (yet not many dayes) would be bak't in a good white crust, somewhat thick; therefore your Wheate is fit for them: your Chickens, Calues-feet, Oliues, Potatoes, Quinces, Fallow

deere and such like, which are most commonly eaten hot, would be in the finest, shortest & thinnest crust, therefore your fine wheat flower which is a li
                     •
                  te baked in the ouen before it be kneaded is the best for that purpose.
               To speake then of the mixture and kneading of pastes,
                     Of the mixture of pasts
                   you shall vnderstand that your Rie paste would be kneaded only with hot water and a little butter, or sweet seame and Rie flower very finely sifted, and it would bee made tough and stiffe that it may stand well in the raising, for the coffin thereof must euer be very deepe: your course wheat crust would be kneaded with hot water, or Mutton broth and good store of butter, and the paste made stiffe and tough because that coffin must bee deepe also; your fine wheat crust must be kneaded with as much butter as water, and the paste made reasonable lythe and gentle, into which you must put three o
                     •
                   fowre eggs or more according to the quantity you blend together, for they will giue it a sufficient stiffening.
               Now for the making of puffe-past of the best kind,
                     Of puff past
                   you shall take the finest wheat flowre after it hath been a little bak't in a pot in the ouen, and blend it well with egges whites and yelkes altogether, then after the past is well kneaded, roule out a part thereof as thin as you please, and then spread cold sweet butter ouer the same, then vpon the same butter role another leafe of the paste as before; and spread it with butter also; and thus role leafe vpon leafe with butter betweene till it be as thick as you thinke good: and with it either couer any bak't meate, or make pastie for Venison, Florentine, Tart or what dish else you please and so bake it: there be some that to this past vse sugar, but it is certaine it will hinder the rising thereof; and therefore when your puft past is bak't, you shall dissolue sugar into Rose-water, and drop it into the paste as

much as it will by any meanes receiue, and then set it a little while in the ouen after and it will be sweet enough.
               When you bake red Deere, you shall first parboile it and take out the bones,
                     Of baking Red. deere, or Fallow, or any thing to keepe cold.
                   then you shall if it be leane larde it, if fat saue the charge, then put it into a presse to squeese out the blood; then for a night lay it in a meare sauce made of Vinegar, small drinke and salt, and then taking it forth, season it well with Pepper finely beaten, and salt well mixt together, and see that you lay good store thereof, both vpon and in euery open and hollow place of the Venison; but by no meanes cut any slashes to put in the pepper, for it will of it selfe sinke fast enough into the flesh, and be more pleasant in the eating: then hauing raised the coffin, lay in the bottome a thicke course of butter, then lay the flesh thereon and couer it all ouer with butter, and so bake it as much as if you did bake great browne bread; then when you draw it, melt more butter with three or fowre spoonefull of Vinegar, and twice so much Claret wine, and at a vent hole on the toppe of the lidde powre in the same till it can receiue no more, and so let it stand and coole; and in this sort you may bake Fallow-deere, or Swanne, or whatsoeuer else you please to keepe colde, the meare sauce only being left out which is only proper to red Deere:
                     To bake beefe, or mutton for Venison.
                   And if to your meare sauce you adde a little Turnesole, and therein steepe beefe, or Ramme mutton; you may also in the same manner take the first for Red-deere Venison, and the latter for Fallow, and a very good iudgement shall not be able to say otherwise, then that it is of it selfe perfect Venison, both in taste, colour, and the manner of cutting.
               
                  
                     To bake a Custarde or Dowset.
                  To bake an excellent Custard or Dowset; you shall take good store of 
                     •
                  gges, and putting away one quarter of the whites, beate them exceeding well in a bason, and

then mixe with them the sweetest and thickest creame you can get, for if it be any thing thinne, the Custard will be wheyish; then season it with salt, sugar, cinamon, cloues, mace, and a little Nutmegge; which done raise your coffins of good tough wheate paste, being the second sort before spoke of, and if you please raise it in pretty workes, or angular formes, which you may doe by fixing the vpper part of the crust to the nether with the yelks of egges: then when the coffins are ready, strow the bottomes a good thicknesse ouer with Currants and Sugar; then 
                     •
                  et them into the Ouen, and fill them vp with the confection before blended, and so drawing them, adorne all the toppes with Carraway Cumfets, and the slices of Dates prickt right vp, and so serue them vp to the table.
               To make an excellent Oliue pie;
                     To bake an Oliue pye.
                   take sweet hearbs as Violet leaues, Strawberry leaues, Spinage, Succorie, Endiue, Time and Sorrell, and chop them as small as may be, and if there be a Scallion or two amongst them it will giue the better taste, then take the yelks of hard egs with Curran
                     •
                  s, Cinamon, Cloues and Mace, and chop them amongst the hearbes also; then hauing cut out long oliues of a legge of Veale, roule vp more then three parts of the hearbs so mixed within the Oliues, together with a good deale of sweet butter; then hauing raised your crust of the finest and best paste, strowe in the bottome the remainder of the hearbes, with a few great Raysins hauing the stones pickt out; then put in the Oliues and couer them with great Raysins and a few Pruens; then ouer all lay good store of butter and so bake them; then being sufficiently bak't, take Claret wine, Sugar, Cinamon, and two or three spoonefull of wine Vinegar and boile them together, and then drawing the pie, at a vent in the top of the lid put in the same, and then set it into the Ouen

againe a little space, and so serue it forth.
               
                  
                     To make a Marrow-bone Pie.
                  To bake the best Marrow-bone pie, after you haue mixt the crusts of the best sort of pastes, and raised the coffin in such manner as you please; you shall first in the bottome thereof lay a course of marrow of Beefe mixt with currants; then vpon it a lay of the soales of Artichokes, after they haue been boiled, and are diuided from the thistle; then couer them ouer with marrow, currants, and great raysons, the stones pickt out; then lay a course of Potatos cut in thick slices, after they haue been boyled soft, and are cleane pild; then couer them with marrow, currants, great raysons, suger and cinamon: they lay a layer of candied Eringo roots mixt very thicke with the slices of Dates: then couer it with marrow, currants, great raysins, suger, cinamon and dates, with a few dammaske prunes, and so bake it: and after it is bakt power into it as long as it will receiue it white-wine, rosewater, suger, cinamon, and vinegar, mixt together, and candie all the couer with rosewater and suger only; and so set it into the ouen a little, and after serue it forth.
               
                  
                     To bake a Chicken pie.
                  To bake a chickin pie, after you haue trust your chickins, broken their legges and breast bones, and raysed your crust of the best paste, you shall lay them in the coffin close together with their bodies full of butter: Then lay vpon them, and vnderneath them, currants, great raysins, pruens, cinamon, sager, whole mace and salt: then couer all with great store of butter, and so bake it; after powre into it the same liquor you did in your marrow bone Pie with the yelkes of two or three egges beaten amongst it,Additions to the Pasterie.
                   and so serue it forth.
               To make good Red-Deere Venison of Hares, take a Hare or two, or three, as you can or please, and picke all the flesh from the bones; then put it into a morter either of

wood or stone,
                     Venison of Hares.
                   and with a woodden pestle let a strong person beate it exceedingly, and euer as it is beating, let one sprinckle in vinegar and some salt; then when it is sufficiently beaten, take it out of the morter, and put it into boyling water and parboyle it: when it is parboyld, take it and lay it on a table in a round lumpe, and lay a board ouer it, and with weights presse it as hard as may be: then the water being prest out of it, season it well with pepper and salt: then lard it with the fat of bacon so thicke as may be: then bake it as you bake other Red Deare, which is formerly declared.
               Take a Hare and picke of all the flesh from the bones,
                     To bake a Hare pie.
                   and onely reserue the head, then parboyle it well: which done, take it out and let it coole, assoone as it is cold, take at least a pound and a halfe of raysins of the Sunne, and take out the stones: then mixe them with a good quantitie of Mutton suet, and with a sharpe shredding knife shred it as small as you would doe for a Chewet: then put to it currants and whole raysins, cloues and mace, cinamon and salt: then hauing raysed the coffin long-wise to the proportion of a Hare, first, lay in the head, and then the aforesaid meate, and lay the meate in the true portion of a Hare, with necke, shoulders and leggs, and then couer the coffin and bake it as other bak't meates of that nature.
               Take a Gammon of Bacon and onely wash it cleane,
                     A Gammon of Bacon pie.
                   and then boyle it on a soft gentle fire, till it be boyled as tender as is possible, euer and anon fleeting it cleane, that by all meanes it may boyle white: then take off the swerd, and serse it very well with all manner of sweet and pleasant serssing hearbs: then strow store of pepper ouer it, and pricke it thick with cloues: then lay it into a coffin made of the same proportion, and lay good store of butter
                  
round about it, and vpon it, and strow pepper vpon the butter, that as it melts, the pepper may fall vpon the Bacon: then couer it, and make the proportion of a Piggs head in paste vpon it, and then bake it as you bake Red Deere, or things of the like nature, onely the Paste would bee of Wheate meale.
               
                  
                     A Herring pie.
                  Take white pickled Herrings of one nights watering, and boyle them a little: then pill of the skin, and take only the backs of them, and picke the fish cleane from the bones, then take good store off raysins of the Sunne, and stone them, and put them to the fish: then take a warden or two, and pare it, and slice it in small slices from the chore, and put it likewise to the fish: then with a very sharpe shredding knife shred all as small and fine as may be: then put to it good store of currants, suger, cinamon, flic't dates, and so put it into the coffin with good store of very sweete butter, and so couer it, and leaue only a round vent-hole on the top of the lid, and so bake it like pies of that nature: When it is sufficiently bak't, draw it our, and take Clarret-wine and a little veriuyce, suger, cinamon, and sweete butter, and boyle them together; then put it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie a little, and put it againe into the Ouen for a little space, and so serue it vp, the lid being candied ouer with suger, and the sides of the dish trimmed with Suger.
               
               
                  
                     A Ling pie.
                  Take a Tole of the best Ling that is not much watred, and is well sodden and cold, but whilest it is hot take off the skin, & pare it cleane vnderneath, and picke out the bones cleane from the fish: then cut it into grosse bits and let it lie: then take the yelks of a dozen eggs boyld exceeding hard, and put them to the fish, and shred all together as small as is possible: then take all manner of the best and finest pot-hearbs, and chop them wonderfull small,

and mixe them also with the fish; then season it with pepper, cloues and mace, and so lay it into a coffin with great store of sweet butter, so as it may swim therein, and then couer it, and leaue a vent-hole open in the top (when it is bak't, draw it, and take veriuyce, suger, cinamon and butter, and boyle them together, and first with a feather annoynt all the lid ouer with that liquor, and then scrape good store of suger vpon it; then powre the rest of the liquor in at the vent-hole, and then set it into the Ouen againe for a very little space, and then serue it vp as pies of the same nature; and both these pies of fish before rehearsed, are especiall Lenten dishes.
               Take a pint of the sweetest and thickest Creame that can be gotten,
                     A Foolé.
                   and set it on the fire in a very cleane scowred skillet, and put into it suger, cinamon, and a nutmeg cut into foure quarters, and so boyle it well: then take the the yelkes of foure eggs, and take off the filmes, and beate them well with a little sweete creame: then take the foure quarters of the nutmeg out of the creame, then put in the egges, and stirre it exceedingly, till it be thicke: then take a fine Manchet, and cut it into thin shiues, as much as will couer a dish-bottome, and holding it in your hand, powre halfe the creame into the dish: then lay your bread ouer it, then couer the bread with the rest of the creame, and so let it stand till it be cold: then strow it ouer with caraway Comfets, and prick vp some cinamon Comfets, and some slic't dates; or for want thereof, scrape all ouer it some suger, and trim the sides of the dish with suger, and so serue it vp.
               Take a pint of the best and thickest creame,
                  
                     A Trifle.
                   and set it on the fire in a cleane skillet, and put into it suger, cinamon, and a nutmeg cut into foure quarters, and so boyle it well:

then put it into the dish you intend to serue it in, and let it stand to coole till it be no more then luke-warme: then put in a spoonefull of the best earning, and stirre it well about, and so let it stand till it be cold, and then strow suger vpon it, and so serue it vp, and this you may serue either in dish, glasse, or other plate.
               
                  
                     A Calues foote pie.
                  Take Calues feete well boyld, and picke all the meate from the bones: then being cold shred it as small as you can, then season it with cloues and mace, and put in good store of currants, raysins and prunes: then put it into the coffin with good store of sweete butter, then breake in whole sticks of cinamon, and a nutmeg slic't into foure quarters, and season it before with salt: then close vp the coffin, and onely leaue a vent-hole. When it is bak't, draw it, and at the vent-hole put in the same liquor you did in the Ling-pie, and trim the lid after the same manner, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     Oyster pie.
                  Take of the greatest oysters drawne from the shells, and parboyle them in veriuyce: then put them into a cullander, and let all the moysture run from them, till they bee as drie as is possible: then raise vp the coffin of the pie, and lay them in: then put to them good store of currants and fine powdred suger, with whole mace, whole cloues, whole cinamon, and a nutmeg slic't, dates cut, and good store of sweete butter: then couer it, and onely leaue a vent-hole: when it is bak't, then draw it, and take White-wine, and White-wine vinegar, suger, cinamon, and sweete butter, and melt it together; then first trim the lid therewith, and candie it with suger; then powre the rest in at the vent-hole, and shake it well, and so set it into the ouen againe for a little space, and so serue it vp, the dish-edges trimd with suger. Now some vse to put to this pie onions
                  
sliced and shred, but that is referred to discretion, and to the pleasure of the taste.
               Take strong ale,
                  
                     To recouer Venison that is tainted.
                   and put to it of wine-vinegar as much as will make it sharpe: then set it on the fier, and boyle it well, and skum it, and make of it a strong brine with bay-salt, or other salt: then take it off, and let it stand till it be cold, then put your Venison into it, and let it lie in it full twelue howers: then take it out from that mearsauce, and presse it well; then parboyle it, and season it with pepper and salt, and bake it, as hath been before shewed in this Chapter.
               Take the brawnes and wings of Capons and Chickens after they haue been rosted,
                     A Chewet pie.
                   and pull away the skin; then shred them with fine Mutten suet very small; then season it with cloues, mace, cinamon, suger and salt
                  
                     •
                   then put to raysins of the Sunne and currants, and slic't dates, and orange pills, and being well mixt together, put it into small coffins made for the purpose, and strow on the top of them good store of caraway Comfets: then couer them, and bake them with a gentle heate, and these Chewets you may also make of rosted Veale, seasoned as before shewed, and of all parts the loyne is the best.
               Take a Leg of Mutton,
                     A minc`t pie.
                   and cut the best of the best flesh from the bone, and parboyle it well: then put to it three pound of the best Mutton suet, and shred it very small: then spred it abroad, and season it with pepper and salt, cloues and mace: then put in good store of currants, great raysons and prunes cleane, washt and pickt, a few dates slic't, and some orange pills slic't: then being all well mixt together, put it into a coffin, or into diuers coffins, and so bake them: and when they are serued vp open the liddes, and strow store of suger on the top of the meate, and vpon the lid. And in this sort you may

also bake Beefe or Veale; onely the Beefe would not be parboyld, and the Veale will aske a double quantitie of suet.
               
                  
                     A Pippen pie.
                  Take of the fairest and best Pippins, and pare them, and make a hole in the top of them; then prick in each hole a cloue or two, then put them into the coffin, then breake in whole sticks of cinamon, and slices of orange pills and dates, and on the top of euery pippen a little piece of sweete butter: then fill the coffin, and couer the Pippins ouer with suger; then close vp the pie, and bake it, as you bake pies of the like nature, and when it is bak't, annoint the lid ouer with store of sweete butter, and then strow suger vpon it a good thicknesse, and set it into the ouen againe for a little space, as whilest the meate is in dishing vp, and then serue it.
               
                  
                     A Warden pie, or quince pie.
                  Take of the fairest and best Wardens, and pare them, and take out the hard chores on the top, and cut the sharp ends at the bottome flat; then boyle them in White-wine and suger, vntill the sirrup grow thick: then take the wardens from the sirrup into a cleane dish, & let them coole; then set them into the coffin, and prick cloues in the tops, with whole sticks of cinamon, and great store of suger, as for Pippins; then couer it, and onely reserue a vent-hole, so set it in the ouen and bake it: when it is bak't, draw it forth, and take the first sirrup in which the Wardens were boyld, and taste it, and if it be not sweet enough, then put in more suger and some rosewater, & boile it again a little, then powre it in at the vent-hole, and shake the pie wel; then take sweet butter and rose-water melted, and with it anoynt and the pie-lid all ouer, and then strow vpon it store of suger, and so set it into the ouen againe a little space, and then serue it vp. And in this manner you may also bake Quinces.
               
               
                  Take the best and sweetest wo
                     •
                  te,
                     To preserue quinces to bake all the yeere.
                   and put to it good store of suger; then pare and chore the Quinces cleane, and put them therein, and boile them till they grow tender: then take out the quinces and let them coole, and let the pickle in which they were boyld, stand to coole also; then straine it through a raunger fiue, then put the quinces into a sweete earthen pot, then powre the pickle or sirrup vnto them, so as all the quinces may be quite couered all ouer; then stop vp the pot close, and set it in a dry place, and once in six or seuen weekes looke vnto it; and if you see it shrinke, or doe begin to hoare or mould, then poure out the pickle or sirrup, and renewing it, boile it ouer againe, and as before put it to the quinces being cold, and thus you may preserue them for the vse of baking, or otherwise all the yeere.
               Take Pippins of the fairest,
                     A Pipin Tart.
                   and pare them, and then diuide them iust in the halfes, and take out the chores cleane: then hauing rold out the coffin flat, and raysde vp a small verdge of an inch, or more high, lay in the Pippins with the hollow side downeward, as close one to another as may be: then lay here and there a cloue, and here and there a whole stick of cinamon, and a little bit of butter: then couer all cleane ouer with suger, and so couer the coffin, and bake it according to the manner of Tarts; and when it is bak't, then draw it out, and hauing boyld butter and rose-water together, anoynt all the lid ouer therewith, and then scrape or strow on it good store of suger, and so set it in the ouen againe, & after serue it vp.
               Take greene Apples from the tree,
                     A codlin Tart.
                   and coddle them in scalding water without breaking; then pill the thin skin from them, and so diuide them in halfes
                     •
                   and cut out the chores, and so lay them into the coffin, and doe in euery thing as you did in the Pippin-tart; and before you couer

it when the suger is cast in, see you sprinkle vpon it good store of rose-water, then close it, and doe as before shewed.
               
                  
                     A Codling pie.
                  Take Codlins as before-said, and pill them, and deuide them in halfes, and chore them, and lay a leare thereof in the bottome of the pie: then scatter here and there a cloue, and here and there a peece of whole cinamon; then couer them all ouer with suger, then lay another leare of Codlins, and doe as beforesaid, and so another, till the coffin be all filled; then couer all well with Suger, and here and there a Cloue and a Cinamon-stick, and if you will a slic't Orange pill and a Date; then couer it, and bake it as the pies of that nature: when it is bak't, draw it out of the ouen, and take of the thickest and best Creame with good store of Suger, and giue it one boyle or two on the fire: then open the pie, and put the Creame therein, and mash the Codlins all about; then couer it, and hauing trimd the lid (as was before shewed in the like pies and tarts) set it into the ouen againe for halfe an hower, and so serue it forth.
               
                  
                     A Cheerrie Tart.
                  Take the fairest Cherries you can get, and picke them cleane from leaues and stalkes; then spread out you coffin as for your Pippin-tart, and couer the bottome with Suger; then couer the Suger all ouer with Cherries, then couer those Cherries with Sugar, some sticks of Cinamon, and here and there a Cloue; then lay in more cherries, and so more Suger, Cinamon and cloues, till the coffin be filled vp; then couer it, and bake it in all points as the codling and pipping tart, and so serue it; and in the same manner you may make Tarts of Gooseberries, Strawberries, Rasberries, Bilberries, or any other Berrie whatsoeuer.
               
                  
                     A Rice Tart.
                  Take Rice that is cleane picked, and boyle it in sweete

                  Creame, till it bee very soft; then let it stand and coole, and put into it good store of Cinamon and suger, and the yelkes of a coople of egges, currants, stirre and beate all well together: then hauing made the coffin in the manner before-said for other tarts, put the Rice therein, and spread it all ouer the coffin; then breake many little bits of sweete butter vpon it all ouer, and scrape some suger ouer it also; then couer the tart, and bake it, and trim it in all points, as hath been before shewed, and so serue it vp.
               Take the Kineys of Veale after it hath been well rosted,
                     A Florentine.
                   and is cold; then shred it as fine as is possible: then take all sorts of sweet Pothearbs or fersing hearbs, which haue no bitter or strong taste, and chop them as small as may be, and putting the Veale into a large dish, put the hearbs vnto it, and good store of cleane washt currants, suger, cinamon, the yelkes of foure eggs, a little sweete creame warmd, and the fine grated crummes of a halfe-penny loafe and salt, and mixe all exceeding well together; then take a deep pewter dish, and in it lay your paste very thin rowld out, which paste you must mingle thus: Take of the finest Wheate-flower, and a quarter so much suger, and a little cinamon; then breake into it a couple of eggs, then take sweete creame and butter melted on the fire, and with it knead the paste, and as was before-said, hauing spread butter all about the dishes sides, and rowld out the paste thin, lay it into the dish; then put in the Veale, and breake peeces of sweete butter vpon it, and scrape suger ouer it; then rowle out another paste reasonable thick, and with it couer the dish all ouer, closing the two pasts with the beaten Whites of eggs very fast togethes: then with your knife cut the lid into diuers prettie works according to your fancy: then set it in the Ouen and bake it with pies and tarts of like nature: when it is

bak't, draw it, & trim the lid with suger, as hath bin shewed in tarts, and so serue it vp in your second courses.
               
                  
                     A Pruen Tart.
                  Take of the fairest damaske pruens you can get, and put them in a cleane pipkin with faire water, suger, vnbruised cinamon, and a branch or two of Rosemarie; and if you haue bread to bake, stew them in the ouen with your bread; if otherwise, stew them on the fire: when they are stewed, then bruise them all to mash in their sirrop, and straine them into a cleane dish; then boyle it ouer againe with suger, sinamon, and rosewater till it bee as thicke as Marmalad; then set it to coole, then make a reasonable tuffe paste with fine flower, water, and a little butter, and rowle it out very thin; then hauing patterns of paper cut in diuers proportions, as Beasts, Birds, Armes, Knots, Flowers, and such like; lay the patterns on the paste, and so cut them accordingly; then with your fingers pinch vp the edges of the paste, and set the worke in good proportion: then prick it well all ouer for rising, and set it on a cleane sheete of large paper, and so set it into the Ouen, and bake it hard: then draw it, and set it by to coole: and thus you may doe by a whole Ouen full at once, as your occasion of expence is: then against the time of seruice comes, take off the cōfection of pruens before rehearsed, and with your knife, or a spoone fill the coffin according to the thicknes of the verge: then strow it ouer all with caraway comfets, and pricke long comfets vpright in it, and so taking the paper from the bottome, serue it on a plate in a dish or charger, according to the bignesse of the tarte, and at the second course, and this tart carrieth the colour blacke.
               
                  
                     Apple Tart.
                  Take Apples and pare them, and slice them thin from the chore into a pipkin with White-wine, good store of suger, cinamon, a few saunders and rosewater, and boile it

till it be thicke; then coole it, and straine it, and beate it very well together with a spoone; then put it into the coffin as you did the pruen Tart, and adorne it also in the same manner; and this tart you may fill thicker or thinner, as you please to raise the edge of the coffin; and it carrieth the colour red.
               Take good store of Spinage,
                  
                     A Spinage Tart.
                   and boyle it in a Pipkin with White-wine till it be very soft as pap; then take it, and straine it well into a pewter dish, not leauing any part vnstrained: then put to it Rosewater, great store of suger, cinamon, and boyle it til it be as thick as Marmalad; then let it coole, and after fill your coffin, and adorne it, and serue it in all points as you did your pruen-tart, and this carrieth the colour Greene.
               Take the yelkes of egs,
                     A yellow Tart.
                   and breake away the filmes, and beate them well with a little creame; then take of the sweetest and thickest creame can be got, and set it on the fire in a cleane skillet, and put into it suger, cinamon and rosewater, and then boyle it well: when it is boild, and still boyling, stirre it well, and as you stirre it, put in the egs, and so boyle it till it curdle; then take it from the fire and put it into a strainer, and first let the thin whay runne away into a by-dish, then straine the rest very well, and beate it well with a spoone, and so put it into the Tart-coffin, and adorne it as you did your Pruen-tart, and so serue it: this carrieth the colour yellow.
               Take the whites of egs and beate thē with rose-water,
                     A white Tart.
                   and a little sweet creame: then set on the fier good thick sweete Creame, and put into it suger, cinamon, rosewater, and boyle it well, and as it boyles stir it exceedingly, and in the stirring put in the whites of egs; then boile it till it curdle, and after do in all things as you did to the yellow Tart; and this carrieth the colour white, and it is a very pure white, and therfore would be adorned with red carraway

Comfets. Now you may (if you please) put all these seuerall colours, and seuerall stuffes into one tart, as thus; If the tart be in the proportion of a beast, the bodie may be of one colour, the eyes of another, the teeth of an other, and the tallents of another; and so of birds, the bodie of one colour, the eyes another, the leggs of another, and euery feather in the wings of a seuerall colour according to fancie; and so likewise in Armes, the field of one colour, the charge of another, according to the forme of the Coat-armour: as for the mantles, trailes and deuices about Armes, they may be set out with seuerall colours of Preserues, Conserues, Marmalads and Goodinyaks, as you shall find occasion or inuention, and so likewise of Knots, one traile of one colour, and another of another, and so of as many as you please.
               
                  
                     An hearbe Tart.
                  Take sorrell, spinage, parsely, and boile them in water till they be very soft as pop; then take them vp, and presse the water cleane from them, then take good store of yelks of egs boild very hard, and chopping them with the hearbs exceeding small, then put in good store of currants, suger and cynamon, and stirre all well together; then put them into a deep tart-coffin with good store of sweet butter, & couer it, & bake it like a pipin-tart, & adorne the lid after the baking in that maner also, and so serue it vp.
               
                  
                     To bake a pudding pie.
                  Take a quart of the best creame, and set on the fier, and slice a loa
                     •
                  e of the lightest white bread into thin slices, and put into it, and let it stand on the fier till the milke begin to rise: then take it off, and put it into a bason, and let it stand till it be cold: then put in the yelkes of foure eggs, and two whites, good store of currants, suger, cinamon, cloues, mace, and plenty of Sheepes suet finely shred, and a good season of salt; then trim your pot very well round about with butter, and so put in your pudding, and bake it sufficiently, then when you serue it, strow suger vpon it.

Take the best and sweetest creame,
                     A Whitepot.
                   and boile it with good store of Sugar, and Cinamon, and a little rose-water, then take it from the fire and put into it cleane pickt ryce, but not so much as to make it thicke, & let it steepe therein till it be cold; then put in the yelkes of sixe egges, and two whites, Currants, Sugar, Cinamon, and Rose water, and Salt, then put it into a pan, or pot, as thinne as if it were a custard; and so bake it and serue it in the pot it is baked in, trimming the top with sugar or comfets.
               There are a world of other Bak't meates and Pies,Of banquetting stuffe and conceited dishes.
                   but for as much as whosoeuer can doe these, may doe all the rest, because herein is contained all the Art of seasonings, I will trouble you with no further repetitions; but proceede to the manner of making of Banquetting stuffe and conceited dishes, with other pretty and curious secrets, necessary for the vnderstanding of our English Houswife: for albeit they are not of general vse, yet their true times they are so needfull for adornation, that whosoeuer is ignorant therein, is lame, and but the half part of a compleat Hous-wife.
               To make past of Quinces:
                     To make past of Quinces.
                   first boile your quinces whole and when they are soft, pare them and cut the Quince from the core; Then take the finest sugar you can get finely beaten a
                     •
                  d searsed, and put in a little Ro
                     •
                  e-wa
                     •
                  er & boile it together till it be thicke; then put in the cut quinces and so boile them together till it bee stiffe enough to mold, and when it is cold, then role it & print it; A pound of Quinces will take a pound of sugar, or neere thereabouts.
               To make thinne Quince cakes,
                     To make thin quince cakes.
                   take your Quince when it is boiled soft as before said, and drie it vpon a Pewter plate with a soft heate, and be euer stirring of it with a slice till it be hard; then take fearced sugar quantity for quantity

and strow it into the quince, as you beate it in a woodden or stone morter; And so roule them thinne & print them.
               
                  
                     To preserue Quinces.
                  To perserue Quinces; first pare your quinces and take out the cores and boile the cores and parings altogether in faire water, and when they beginne to be soft, take them out and straine your liquor, and put the waight of your quinces in sugar, and boile the quinces in the sirrop till they be tender; Then take them vp and boile your sirrop till it be thicke: If you will haue your quinces red, couer them in the boiling, and if you will haue them white doe not couer them.
               
                  
                     To make Ipocras.
                  To make Ipocras, take a pottell of wine, two ounces of good Cinamon, halfe an ounce of ginger, nine cloues, and sixe pepper cornes, and a nutmeg, and bruise them and put them into the wine with some rosemary flowers, and so let them steepe all night, and then put in sugar a pound at least; and when it is well setled, let it runne through a woollen bag made for that purpose: thus if your wine be clarret, the Ipocras will be red; if white, then of that color also.
               
                  
                     To make iellie.
                  To make the best Ielly, take calues feet and wash them and scald of the haire as cleane as you can get it; then split them and take out the fat and lay them in water, and shift them: Then boile them in faire water vntill it will ielly, which you shall know by now and then cooling a spoonefull of the broth; when it will ielly then straine it, and when it is cold then put in a pint of sacke and whole cinamon and Ginger slic't, and sugar and a little rose water, and boile all well together againe: Then beate the white of an egge and put it into it, and let it haue one boile more: then put in a branch of rosemary into the bottome of your ielly bag, and let it runne through once or

twice, and if you will haue it coloured, then put in a little Townesall. Also if you want calues feete you may make as good Ielly if you take the like quantity of Isingglasse, & so vse no Calues feet at all.
               To make the best Leache,
                     To make Leache.
                   take Isingglasse and lay it two houres in water
                     •
                   and shift it and boile it in faire water and let it coole: Then take Almonds and lay them in cold water till they will blaunch: And then stampe them and put to new milke, and straine them and put in whole mace and ginger slic't, and boile them till it taste well of the spice; then put in your Isingglasse and sugar, and a little rose-water: And then let them all runne through a strainer.
               Take Clarret wine and colour it with Townesall,
                     To make ginger bread
                   and put in sugar and set it to the fire; Then take wheat bread finely grated and sifted, and licoras, Aniseeds, Ginger and Cinamon beaten very small and searsed; and put your bread and your spice altogether, and put them into the wine and boile it and stirre it till it be thicke; then mould it and print it at your pleasure, and let it stand neither two moist nor two warme.
               To make red Marmelade of Quinces;
                     Marmalad of quinces red.
                   take a pound of Quinces and cut them in halfes, and take out the cores and pare them; then take a pound of sugar and a quart of faire water and put them all into a pan, and let them boile with a soft fire, and sometimes turne them and keep them couered with a Pewter dish, so that the teane or aire may come a little out; the longer they are in boiling the better colour they will haue; and when they be soft take a knife and cut them crosse vpon the top, it will make the sirrop goe through that they may be all of a like colour: then set a little of your sirrop to coole, and when it beginneth to bee thicke then breake your quinces with a slice

or a spoone so small as you can in the pan, and then strow a little fine sugar in your boxes bottome, and so put it vp.
               To make white Marmalade you must in all points vse your quinces as is before said;
                     Marmalad white.
                   onely you must take but a pint of water to a pound of Quinces, and a pound of suger, and boile them as fast as you can, and couer them not at all.
               
                  
                     To make Iumbals.
                  To make the best Iumbals, take the whites of three egges and beate them well, and take of the viell; then take a little milke and a pound of fine wheat flower and sugar together finely sifted, and a few Aniseeds well rubd and dried; and then worke altogether as stiffe as you can worke it, and so make them in what formes you plea
                     •
                  e, & bake them in a soft ouen vpon white Papers.
               
                  
                     To make Bisket bread.
                  To make Bisket bread, take a pound of fine flower, and a pound of sugar finely beaten and s
                     •
                  arsed, and mix them together; Then take eight egges and put foure yelkes & beate them very well together; then strow in your flower and sagar as you are beating of it, by a little at once, it will take very neere an houres beating; then take halfe an ounce of Anisseedes and let them be dried and rubbed very cleane, and put them in; then rub your Bisket pans with cold sweet butter as thinne as you can, and so put it in and bake it in an ouen: But if you would haue thinne Cakes, then take fruit dishes and rub them in like sort with butter, and so bake your Cakes on them, and when they are almost bak't, turne them and thrust them downe close with your hand. Some to this Bisket bread will adde a little Creame and a few Coriander seedes cleane rubd,
                     To make finer iumbals.
                   and it is not amisse, but excellent good also.
               To make Iumbals more fine and curious then the former, and neerer to the taste of the Macaroone; take a

pound of sugar beate it fine; then take as much fine wheat flower and mixe them together, then take two whites and one yelke of an egge, halfe a quarter of a pound of blaunched Almonds; then beat them very fine altogether with halfe a dish of sweet butter, and a spoonefull of rosewater, and so worke it with a little Creame till it come to a very stiffe past, then roule them forth as you please: And hereto you shall also if you please adde a few dried Aniseedes finely rubbed and strewed into the past.
               To make drie sugar Leache, blaunch your Almonds and beate them with a little rose-water and the white of one egge,
                     To make dry sugar leach.
                   and you must beate it with a great deale of suger, and worke it as you would worke a peece of past then roule it and print it as you did other things, onely be sure to strew sugar in the print for feare of cleauing too.
               To make Leache Lumbard,
                     To make Leach Lumbarde.
                   take halfe a pound of blaunched Almonds, two ounces of Cinomon beaten and fearsed, halfe a pound of sugar, then beat your Almonds, and strew in your sugar and Cinamon till it come to a Paste, then roule it and print it as aforesaid.
               To make an excellent fresh Cheese,
                     To make a fresh Cheese.
                   take a pottle of Milke as it comes from the Cow and a pint of Creame: then take a spoonefull of runnet or earning and put it vnto it, and let it stand two houres; then stirre it vp and put it into a fine cloth, and let the whay draine from it: then put it into a bowle and take the yelke of an egge, a spoonefull of rosewater, and bray them altogether with a very little salt, with Sugar and Nutmegs; and when all these are braied together and searst, mix it with the curd, and then put it into a Cheese-fatt with a very fine cloth.
               To make course Ginger bread, take a quart of hony

and set it on the coales and refine it:
                     To make course ginger bread.
                   then take a penny worth of Ginger, as much pepper, as much Licoras, and a quarter of a pound of Aniseeds, and a penny worth of Saunders: All these must be beaten and s
                     •
                  arsed, and so put into the hony: then put in a quarter of a pint of Clarret wine or old Ale: then take three penny Manchets finely grated and strow it amongst the rest, and stirre it till it come to a stiffe Past, and then make it into Cakes and drie them gently,
               
                  
                     To make quince Cakes ordinary.
                  To make ordinary Quince Cakes, take a good peece of a preserued Quince, and beate it in a morter, and worke it vp into a very stiffe past with fine searst Sugar: then print it and drie them gently.
               
                  
                     To make Cinamon sticks.
                  To make most Artificiall Cinamon stickes, take an ounce of Cinamon & pound it, and half a pound of suger: then take some gumme Dragon and put it in steepe in Rosewater, then take thereof to the quantity of a hasell nut, and worke it out and print it, and roule it in forme of a Cinamon sticke.
               
                  
                     To make Cinamon water.
                  To make Cinamon water take a pottle of the best Ale and a pottle of sacke lees; a pound of Cinamon sliced fine, and put them together, and let them stand two daies; Then distill them in a limbecke or glasse Still.
               
                  
                     To make wormewood water.
                  To make Wormewood water take two gallons of good Ale, a pound of Aniseeds, halfe a pound of Licoras, and beate them very fine; And then take two good handfuls of the crops of worme wood, and put them into the Ale and let them stand all night, and then distill them in a limbeck with a moderate fire.
               
                  
                     To make sweete water.
                  To make sweet water of the best kind, take a thousand damaske roses, two good handfuls of Lauendar knops, a three peny waight of mace, two ounces of cloues btuised, a quart of running water: put a little water into the

bottome of an earthen pot, and then put in your Roses and Lauender with the spices by little and little, and in the putting in alwaies knead them downe with your fist, and so continue it vntill yon haue wrought vp all your Roses and Lauender, and in the working betweene put in alwaies a little of your water; then stop your pot close, and let it stand foure daies, in which time euery morning and euening put in your hand, and pull from the bottome of your pot the said Roses, working it for a time: and then distill it, and hang in the glasse of water a graine or two of Muske wrapt in a peece of Sarcenet or fine cloth.
               Others to make sweet water,
                     Another way.
                   take of Ireos two ounces, of Calamus halfe an ounce, of Cipresse rootes halfe an ounce, of yellow Saunders nine drams, of Cloues bruised one ounce, of Beniamin one ounce, of Storax Calamint one ounce, and of Muske twelue graines, and infusing all these in Rose-water distill it.
               To make an excellent Date-Leach,
                     To make date Leache
                   take Dates, and take out the stones and the white rinde, and beate them with Suger, Cinamon and Ginger very finely: then work it as you would worke a peece of Paste, and then print them as you please.
               To make a kind of Suger plate,
                     To make sugar Plate.
                   take Gumme Dragon, and lay it in Rose-water two daies: then take the powder of faire Heapps and Suger, and the iuyce of an Orange; beate all these together in a Morter, then take it out and worke it with your hand; and print it at your pleasure.
               To make excellent spice Cakes,
                     To make spice Cakes.
                   take halfe a pecke of very fine Wheat-flower, take almost one pound of sweet butter, and some good milke and creame mixt together, set it on the fire, and put in your butter, and a good deale

of sugar, and let it melt together: then straine Saffron into your milke a good quantity; then take seuen or eight spoonefull of good Ale barme, and eight egges with two yelkes and mix them together, then put your milke to it when it is somewhat cold, and into your flower put salt, Aniseedes bruised, Cloues and Mace, and a good deale of Cinamon: then worke all together good and stiffe, that you need not worke in any flower after; then put in a little rosewater cold, then rub it well in the thing you knead it in, and worke it throughly: if it be not sweet enough, scrape in a little more suger, and pull it all in peeces, and hurle in a good quantity of Currants, and so worke all together againe, and bake your Cake as you see cause in a gentle warme ouen.
               
                  
                     To make a Banbury Cake.
                  To make a very good Banbury Cake, take 4. pounds of Currants, and wash and picke them very cleane, and drie them in a cloth: then take three egges and put away one yelke, and beate them, and straine them with good barme, putting thereto Cloues, Mace, Cinamon and Nutmegges; then take a pint of creame, and as much mornings milke and set it one the fire till the cold bee taken away; then take flower and put in good store of cold butter and suger, then put in your egges, barme and meale and worke them all together an houre or more; then saue a part of the Past, and the rest breake in peeces and worke in your Currants; which done, mould your Cake of what quantity you please; And then with that past which hath not any Currants couer it very thinne both vnderneath and a loft. And so bake it according to the bignesse.
               
                  
                     To make the best March Pane.
                  To make the best March-pane, take the best Iordan almonds & blaunch them in warm water, then put them into a stone morter, and with a wooden pestell beate them to pappe, then take of the finest refined sugar well searst, and

to pappe; then take of the finest refined suger well searst, and with it Damaske rosewater, beate it to a good stiffe paste, allowing almost to euery Iordan almond three spoonful of suger; then when it is brought thus to a paste, lay it vpon a faire table, & strowing searst suger vnder it, mould it like leauen, then with a roling-pin role it forth, and lay it vpon wafers washt with rosewater; then pinch it about the sides, and put it into what forme you please; then strow searst suger all ouer it; which done, wash it ouer with rosewater and suger mixt together, for that will make the Ice; then adorne it with Cumfets, guilding, or whatsoeuer deuices you please, and so set it into a hot stoue, and there bake it crispie, and so serue it forth. Some vse to mixe with the paste cinamon and ginger finely searst, but I referre that to your particular taste.
               To make paste of Genoa,
                  
                     To make paste of Genoa, or any other paste.
                   you shall take Quinces after they haue been boiled soft, and beate them in a morter with refined suger, cinamon and ginger finely searst, a
                     •
                  d Damaske rosewater till it come to a stiffe paste; and role it forth and print it, and so bake it in a stoue; and in this sort you may make paste of Peares, Apples, Wardens, Plummes of all kinds, Cherries, Barberies, or what other fruit you please.
               To make conserue of any fruit you please,
                     To make any Conserue.
                   you shall take the fruit you intend to make conserue of; and if it be stone fruit you shal take out the stones; if other fruit, take away the paring and core, and then boile them in faire running water to a reasonable height; then draine them from thence, and put them into a fresh vessell with Claret wine, or White wine, according to the colour of the fruit: and so boyle them to a thicke pap all to mashing, breaking, and stirring them together; then to euery pound of pappe put to a pound of Suger, and so stirre them all

well together, and being very hot straine them through faire strainers, and so p
                     •
                  t it vp.
               
                  
                     To make Conserue of Flowers.
                  To make conserue of Flowers, as Roses, Violets, Gillyflowers, and such like; you shall take the flowers from the stalkes, and with a paire of sheeres cut away the white ends at the roots thereof, and then put them into a stone morter or woodden brake, and there crush or beate them till they bee come to a soft substance; and then to euerie pound therof, take a pound of fine refined suger wel 
                     •
                  earst and beate it all together, till it come to one intire bodie, and then pot it vp, and vse it as occasion shall serue.
               
                  
                     To make Wafers.
                  To make the best Wafers, take the finest wheat-flower you can get, and mixe it with creame, the yelkes of eggs, rosewater, suger and cinamon til it be a little thicker then Pan-cake batter; and then warming your wafer-yrons on a Char-coale fire, annoint them first with sweete butter, and then lay on your batter and presse it, and bake it white or browne at your pleasure.
               
                  
                     To make Marmalade of Oranges.
                  To make an excellent Marmalade of Oranges, take the Oranges, and with a knife pare off as thinne as is possible the vppermost rinde of the Orange; yet in such sort, as by no meanes you alter the colo
                     •
                  r of the Orange; then steepe them in faire water, changing the water twice a day, till you find no bitternesse of taste therein; then take them forth, and first boyle them in faire running water, and when they are soft, remoue them into ro
                     •
                  ewater, and boile them therein till they breake: then to euery pound of the pulpe put a pound of 
                     •
                  eined sugar, and so hauing masht and stirred them all wel together, straine it through very faire strainers into boxes,Additions to Banqueting stuffe.
                   and so vse it as you shal see occasion.
               Take a pottle of fine flower, and a pound of butter, a pound of Suger, one ounce of Mace, and so much Rosewater

as will mingle the flower into a stiffe paste,
                     To make fine Cakes.
                   and a good season of Salt, and so linead it, and role out the cakethin and bake them on papers.
               Take a quarter of a pound of fine suger well beaten,
                     Fine bread.
                   and as much flower finely boulted, with a quantitie of Aniseedes a little bruised, and mingle all together; then take two egges and beate them very well, whites and all; then put in the mingled stuffe aforesaid, and beate all together a good while, then put it into a mould, wiping the bottome euer first with butter to make it come out easily, and in the baking turne it once or twice as you shall haue occasion, and so serue it whole, or in slices at your pleasure.
               Take sweete Apples and stampe them as you doe see Cider,
                     To preseru
                           •
                         Quinces for kitchin seruice.
                   then presse them through a bagge as you do veriuce; then put it into a ferkin wherein you will keep your Quinces, and then gather your Quinces, and wipe them cleane, and neither chore them nor pare them, but onely take the blacks from the tops, and so put them into the ferkin of Cider, and therein you may keepe them all the yeare very faire, and take them not out of the liquor, but as you are ready to vse them, whether it be for pies, or any other purpose, and then pare them, and chore them as you thinke good.
               Take a gallon of Clarret or White-wine,
                     To make Epocras.
                   and put therin foure ounces of Ginger, an ounce and a halfe of Nutmegs, of Cloues one quarter, of Suger foure pound; let all this stand together in a pot at least twelue houres, then take it, and put it into a cleane bagge made for the purpose, so that the wine may come with good leasure from the spices.
               Take Quinces and wipe them very cleane,
                     To preserue quinces.
                   and then chore them, & as you chore them, put the chores straight

into faire water, and let the chores and the water boyle; when the water boyleth, put in the Quinces vnpared, and let them buyle till they be tender, and then take them out and pare them, and euer as you pare them, put them straight into suger finely beaten: then take the water they were sodden in, and straine it through a faire cloth, and take as much of the same water as you thinke will make Sirrop enough for the Quinces, and put in some of your suger and let it boyle a while, and then put in your Quinces, and let them boyle a while, and turne them, and cast on a good deale of suger vpon them; they must seeth apace, and euer as you turne them, couer them still with suger, til you haue bestowed all your suger; & when you thinke that your Quinces are tender enough, take them fourth, and if your sirrop be not stiffe enough, you may seeth it againe after the Quinces are forth. To euerrie pound of Quinces you must take more then a pound of suger: for the more suger you take, the fairer your Quinces will bee, and the better and longer they will keepe.
               
                  
                     Conserue of quinces.
                  Take two gallons of faire water, and set it on the fier, and when it is luke-warme, beate the whites of fiue or six egs, and put them into the water, and stir it well, and then let the water seeth, and when it riseth vp all on a curd, then scumme it off: Take Quinces and pare them, and quarter them, and cut out the chores: then take as many pound of your Quinces as of your suger, and put them into your liquor, and let it boyle till your liquor bee as ill coloured as French Wine, and when they be very tender, then take a faire new canuase cloth faire washt, and straine your Quinces through it with some of your liquor; if they will not go thorow easily, then if you will make it very pleasant, take a little Muske, and lay it in

Rosewater, and put it thereto; then take and seeth it, vntill it be of such substance, that when it is cold, it will cut with a knife; and then put it into a faire boxe, and if you please, lay leafe-gold thereon.
               Take all the parings of your Quinces that you make your Conserue withall,
                     To keepe quinces all the yeere.
                   and three or foure other Quinces, and cut them in peeces, and boyle the same parings, and the other peeces in two or three gallons of water, and so let them boyle till all the strength bee sodden out of the said Quinces and parings, and if any skumme arise whilest it boyles, take it away: then let the said water run thorow a strainer into a faire vessell, and set it on the fire againe, and take your Quinces that you will keepe, and wipe them cleane, and cut off the vttermost part of the said Quinces, and picke out the kernels and chores as cleane as you can, and put them into the said liquor, and so let them boyle till they bee a little soft, and then take them from the fire, and let them stand till they bee cold: then take a little barrell, and put into the said barrell, the water that your Quinces be sodden in; then take vp your Quinces with a ladle, and put them into your barrell, and stop your barrell close that no ayre come into them, till you haue fit occasion to vse them; and bee sure to take such Quinces as are neither brused not rotten.
               Take of the best suger,
                     Fine Ginger Cakes.
                   and when it is beaten searse it very fine, and of the best Ginger and Cinamon; then take a little Gum-dragon and lay it in rosewater al night, then powre the water from it, and put the same with a little White of an Egge well beaten into a brasse morter, the Suger, Ginger, Cinamon and all together, and beate them together till you may worke it like paste; then take it and driue it forth into Cakes, and print them, and

lay them before the fire, or in a very warme. Sto
                     •
                  e to bake. Or otherwise, take Suger and Ginger (as is before said) Cinamon and Gum-dragon excepted, in stead whereof, take onely the Whites of Egges, and so doe as was before shewed you.
               
                  
                     To make Sucket.
                  Take Curds, the parings of Lemons, of Oranges or Pouncithrons, or indeed any halfe-ripe greene fruit, and boyle them till they bee tender in sweete Worte; then make a Sirrop in this sort: take three pound of Suger, and the Whites of foure Egges, and a gallon of water
                     •
                   then swinge and beate the water and the Eggs together, and then put in your Suger, and set it on the fier, and let it haue an easie fier, and so let it boyle sixe or seuen walmes, and then straine it thorow a cloth, and let it seeth againe till it fall from the spoone, and then put it into the rindes or fruits.
               
                  
                     Course Ginger-bread.
                  Take a quart of Honie clarified, and seeth it till it bee browne, and if it be thicke, put to it a dish of water: then take fine crummes of white bread grated, and put to it, and stirre it well, and when it is almost cold, put to it the powder of Ginger, Cloues and Cinamon, and a little Licoras and Aniseedes; then knead it, and put it into moulds and print it: some vse to put to it also a little Pepper, but that is according vnto taste and pleasure.
               
                  
                     Ordering of Banquets.
                  Thus hauing shewed you how to Preserue, Conserue, Candie, and make Pastes of all kinds, in which foure heads consists the whole Art of banqueting dishes, I will now proceede to the ordering or setting forth of a Banquet, wherein you shall obserue, that March-panes haue the first place, the middle place, and last place; your preserued fruits shall be disht vp first, your Pastes next, your wet Suckets after them, then your dried Suckets, then

your Marmelades and Goodiniakes, then your Cumfets of all kinds; next, your Peares, Apples, Wardens bak't, raw or roasted, and your Oranges and Lemons sliced; and lastly your Wafer cakes. Thus you shall order them in the Closet; but when they goe to the table, you shall first send forth a dish made for shew onely, as Beast, bird, Fish, or Fowle, according to inuention: then your Marchpane, then Preserued Fruite, then a Paste, then a wet Sucket, then a drie Sucket, Marmelade, Cumfets, Apples, Peares, Wardens, Oranges and Lemmons sliced; and then Wafers, and another dish of preserued Fruites, and so consequently all the rest before: no two dishes of one kind going or standing together, and this will not onely appeare delicate to the eye, but inuite the appetite with the much varietie thereof.
               Now we haue drawne our Hous-wife into these seuerall knowledges of Cookerie,
                     Ordering of great Feasts and proportion of expence.
                   in as much as in her is contained all the inward offices of houshold, wee-will proceede to declare the manner of seruing and setting forth of Meate for a great Feast, and from it deriue meaner, making a due proportion of all things: for what auailes it our good Houswife to be neuer so skilful in the parts of Cookerie, if she want skill to marshall the dishes, and set euery one in his due place, giuing precedency according to fashion and custome; it is like a Fencer leading a band of men in rout, who knowes the vse of the weapon, but not how to put men into order. It is then to bee vnderstood, that it is the office of the Clerke of the Kitchin (whose place our Hous-wife must many times supply) to order the meate at the Dresser, and deliuer it vnto the Sewer, who is to deliuer it to the Gentlemen and Yeomen-wayters to beare to the Table. Now because wee

alow no Officer but our Houswife, to whom wee onely speake in this booke, she shall first marshall her sallets, deliuering the grand Sallet first, which is euer more compound; then greene Sallets, then boyld Sallets, then some smaller compound Sallets. Next vnto Sallets she shall deliuer forth all her Fricases, the simple first, as Collops, Rashers, and such like; then compound Fricases, after them all her boyld-meates in their degrees, as simple-broths, stewd-broth, and the boylings of sundrie Fowles. Next them all sorts of Rost-meates, of which the greatest first, as Chine of beeffe or Surloine, the Gigget or Legges of Mutton, Goosse, Swan, Veale, Pig, Capon, and such like. Then bak't-meates, the hot first, as Fallow-deare in Pastie, Chicken, or Calues-foote pie and Douset. Then cold bak't-meates, Pheasant, Partridges Turky, Goose, Woodcock, and such like. Then lastly, Carbonados both simple and compound. And being thus marshald from the Dresser, the Sewer vpon the placing them on the table, shall not set them downe as hee receiued them, but setting the Sallets extrauagantly about the table, mixe the Fricases about them; then the boild-meates amongst the Fricases, Rost-meates amongst the boyld, Bak't-meats amongst the Rost, and Carbonados amongst the bak't; so that before euery trencher may stand a Sallet, a fricase, a Boyld-meate, a Rost-meate, a Bak't-meate, and a Carbonado, which will both giue a a most comely beautie to the Table, and very great contentment to the Guesse. So likewise in the second course she shall first preferre the lesser wild-fowle, as Mallard, Tayle, Snipe, Plouer, Wood-cock, and such like: then the lesser land-fowle; as Chicken, Pigeons, Partridge, Raile, Turkie, Chickens, young Pea-hens, and such like.

Then the greater wild-fowle; as Bitter, Hearne, Shoueler, Crane, Bustard, and such like. Then the greater land-fowles; as Peacocks, Pheasant, Puets, Gulles, and such like. Then hot Bak't-meates; as Marrybone-pie, Quince pie, Florentine, and Tarts. Then cold bak't-meates, as Red-deere, Hare-pie, Gammon of Bacon-pie, wild Bore, Roe-pie, and such like, and these also shall be marshald at the Table, as the first course not one kind altogether, but each seuerall sort mixt together, as a lesser wild-fowle and a lesser land-fowle; a great wild-fowle, and a great land-fowle; a hot bak't meate, and a cold: and for made dishes and Quelquechoses, which relie on the inuention of the Cooke, they are to bee thrust in into euery place that is emptie, and so sprinckled ouer all the table: and this is the best method for the extraordinarie great feasts of Princes. But in case it bee for much more humble meanes, then lesse care and fewer dishes may discharge it; yee, before I proceed to that lower rate, you shall vnderstand, that in these great Feasts of Princes, though I haue mentioned nothing but Flesh, yet is not fish to be exempted; for it is a beautie and an honour vnto euery Feast, and is to be placed amongst all the seuerall seruices, as thus; as amongst your Sallets all sorts of 
                     •
                  ouse-fish that liues in the fresh water; amongst your Fricases all manner of fride-fish; amongst your boyld-meates, all fish in broaths; amongst your rost-meates, all fish serued hot, but drie; amongst the bak't-meates, all fish bak't, and sea-fish that is soust, as sturgion and the like; and amongst your Carbonados, fish that is broild. As for your second course, to it belongeth all manner of shell-fish, either in the shell, or without the hot, to goe vp with the hot meate, and the cold with the cold. And thus shall the Feast be royall, and the seruice worthie.
               
                  Now for a more humble Feast, or an ordinary proportion which any good man may keepe in his family for the entertainment of his true and worthie friends, it must hold limitation with his prouision, and the season of the yeere; for summer affords what winter wants, and winter is master of that which summer can but with difficultie haue: it is good then for him that intends to feast, to set downe the full number of his full dishes, that is, dishes of meate that are of substance, and not emptie or for shew; and of these sixteene is a good proportion for one course vnto one messe, as thus for example; first, a sheild of Brawne with Mustard; secondly, a boyld Capon; thirdlie, a boyld peece of Beefe; fourthlie, a Chine of Beefe rosted; fifthlie, a Neates Tongue rosted; sixthlie, a Pigge rosted; seuenthlie, Chewets bak't; eighthlie, a Goose rosted; ninthlie, a Swan rosted; tenthly, a Turkey rosted; the eleuenth, a Haunch of Venyson rosted; the twelfth, a Pastie of Venyson; the thirteenth, a Kid with a pudding in the belly; the fourteenth, an Oliue pie; the fifteenth, a couple of Capons; the sixteenth, a Custard of Dousets. Now to these full dishes may bee added in Sallets, Fricases, quelquechoses, and deuised paste, as many dishes more, which make the full seruice no lesse then two and thirtie dishes, which is as much as can conueniently stand on one table, and in one messe; and after this manner you may proportion both your second and third course, holding fulnesse in one halfe of the dishes, and shew the other, which will be both frugall in the spender, contentment to the guest, and much pleasure and delight to the beholders. And thus much touching the ordering of great Feasts and ordinarie entertainements.
               When our English Hous-wife is exact in these rules before

rehearsed, and that she is able to adorne and bea
                     •
                  tifie her table, with all the vertuous illustrations meet for her knowledge; shee shall then sort her mind to the vnderstanding of other House-wifely secrets, right profitable and meet for her vse, such as the want thereof may trouble her when need, or the time requires them.
               Therefore first I would haue her furnish her self of very good Stils,OF Distillations.
                   for the distillation of all kindes of Waters, which Stils would either bee of Tinne, or sweet Earth, & in them shee shall distill all sorts of waters meete for the health of her Houshold, as Sagewater, which is good for all Rhumes and Collickes;
                     The nature of waters.
                   Radish water, which is good for the stone, Angelcia water good for infection, Celadine water for sore eyes, Vine water for itchings, rose water, and Eye-bright water for dimme sights, Rosemary water for Fistuloes, Treacle water for mouth cankers, water of Gloues for paine in the stomacke, Sax
                     ••
                  age water for grauell and hard Vrine, Allum water for old Vlcers, and a world of others, any of which will last a 
                     •
                  ull yeere at the least: Then shee shall know that the best waters for the smoothing of the skinne, and keeping the face delicate and ami
                     •
                  ble, are those which are distilled from Beane flowers from Strawberies, from Vine 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     •
                  rom Goats milke,Additions to distillations.
                   from Asses milke, from the whites of Eggs, from the Flowers of Lillies, from Dragons, from Calues feete, from branne, or from yelkes of egges, any of which will last a yeere or better.
               First distill your water in a 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
                     To distill water of the collour of the hearbe o
                           •
                         flower you desire.
                   then put it in a glasse of great strength, and fill it with those flowers again (whose colour you desire) as full as you can, & stop it and set it in the styllatorie againe, and let it distill, & you shall haue the collour you distill.
               Take of Rosemary flowers two handfuls,
                     To make aquauita.
                   of mariarome,

winter-sauory, rosemary, rewe, vnset Time, Germander, Rybworte, Harts tong, Mouseare, White wormwood, Buglosse, Red sage, Liuer-worte; Hoare-hound, fine Lauender, Issop-cropps, Penny-royall, Red-fenell
                     •
                   of each of these one handfull; of Elycompane roots, cleane pared and sliced, two handfulls; Then take all these afore-said and shred them, but not wash them; then take foure gallons and more of stronge Ale, & one gallon of Sack-lees, and put all these aforesaid hearbe
                     •
                   shred into it, and then put into it one pound of Licoras bruised, halfe a pound of any seedes cleane sifted and bruised, and of Mace & Nutmeggs bruised of each one ounce; then put altogether into your stillyng - pot close couered with Rye paste, and make a soft fire vnder your pot, and as the head of the Limbecke heateth, draw out your hot water and put in cold, keeping the head of your Limbeck still with cold water, but see your fire be not two rash at the first, but let your water come at leasure, and take heed vnto your stilling that your water change not white, for it is not so strong as the first draught is; and when the water is distilled, take a gallon glasse with a wide mouth, and put therein a pottell of the best water and cleerest, and put to it a pottell of Rosa-
                     •
                  olis, halfe a pound of Dates bruised, and one once of graynes, halfe a pound of Sugar, halfe an ounce of seed-pearle beaten, three leaues of fine gold; stirre all these together well, then stop your glasse and set it in the sunne the space of one or two moneths, and then clarifie it and vse it at your discretion; for a spoonefull or two at a time is sufficient, and the vertues are infinite.
               
                  
                     Another excelent aquauitoe.
                  Fill a pot with red wine cleane and strong, and put therein the pouders of camomyle, gylly flowers, ginger, pellytory, Nutmegg, Gallengall, Spicknard, quenebits,

graines of pure long pepper, blacke pepper, commin, fenell seede, smalledge, parsley, Sage, Rew, mint, calamint and horshow, of each of them a like quantity, and beware they differ not the waight of a dram vnder or aboue; then put all the pouders abouesaid into the wine, and after put them into the distilling pot, and distill it with a soft fyre, & looke that it bee well luted about with rye paste, so that no fume or breath goe forth, and looke that the fire be temperate, also receiue the water out of the Lymbecke into a glassevyall. This water is called the water of life, & it may be likned to Balme, for it hath all the vertues and properties which Balme hath; this water is cleere and lighter then rosewater, for it will fleete aboue all liquors, for if oyle be put aboue this water, it sinketh to the bottome. This water keepeth flesh & fish both raw & sodden in his own kinde & state, it is good against aches in the bones, the poxe, and such like, neither can any thing kept in this water rot or putrifie, it doth draw out the sweetnesse, fauor, and vertues of all manner of spices, rootes and hearbes that are wet or layd therein, it giues sweetnes to all manner of water that is myxt with it; it is good for all manner of cold sicknesses, and namely for the palsy or trembling Ioynts, & stretching of the sinews; it is good against the cold gout; and it maketh an old man seeme young, vsing to drinke it fasting; and lastly it fretteth away dead flesh in wounds, and killeth the canker.
               Take rosemary,
                     To make aqua composita.
                   Time, Issop, sage, fenell, nip, roots of elicompane, of ech an handfull, of marierum, and penyroyall of ech halfe a handfull; eight slippes of red mynt, halfe a pound of Licoras, halfe a pound of ani
                     •
                  eeds and two gallands of the best Ale that can be brewed, wash all these hearbes cleane, & put into the Ale, licoras, aniseeds, and hearbes into a cleane brasse pot, and set your limbecke

thereon, and paste it round about that no ayre come out, then distill the water with a gentle fire, and keepe the lymbecke coole aboue, not suffering it to runne too fast; and take heede when your water changeth collour, to put another glasse vnder, and keepe the first water, for it is most precious, and the latter water keepe by it selfe, and put it into your next pot, and that shall make it much better.
               
                  
                     A very principall aqua-composita.
                  Take of balme, of rosemary Flowers tops and all, of dried red rose leaues, of penny-royall, of each of these a handfull, of Issop halfe a handfull, one roote of elycompane the whitest that can be got, three quarters of a pound of Licoras, two ounces of Cinamond, two drams of great mace, two drams of gallendgall, three drams of coliander seed, three drammes of carraway seeds, two or three Nutmegs cut in foure quarters, an ounce of aniseeds, a handfull of Borage; you must chuse a faire sunny day to gather the hearbes in; you must not wash them, but cut them in sunder, and not too small; then lay all your hearbes in souse all night and a day, with the spices grosly beaten or bruised, & then distill it in order aforesaid; this was made for a learned Phisitians owne drinking.
               
                  
                     To make the emperiall water.
                  Take a galland of Gascoin wine ginger, gallengall, nutmegs; grains, Cloues, aniseeds, fenell seedes, carraway seeds, of ech one dram, thē take sage, mints, red-roses, time pellitory, Rose-mary; wild time, camomile, and Lauender, of ech a handfull, then bray the spices small
                     •
                   and the hearbs also, & put al together into the wine, and let it stand so twelue houres, stirring it diuers times, then distill it with a limbecke, and keepe the first water, for it is best: of a gallon of wine you must not take aboue a quart of water; this water comforteth the vitall spirits, and helpeth inward diseases that commeth of cold, as the palsey,

the contraction of sinewes, also it killeth wormes, and comforts the stomacke; it cureth the cold dropsy, helps the stone, the stinking breath, and maketh one seem yong.
               Take a pottell of the best Sacke,
                     To make Cinamon-water.
                  & halfe a pint of Rosewater, a quarter & half of a pound of good Cinamon well bruised, but not small beaten; distill all these together in a glasse-still, but you must carefully looke to it, that it boyle not ouer hastily, & attend it with cold wet cloathes 
                     •
                  o coole the top of the still if the water should offer to boyle too hastily. This water is very soueraigne for the stomacke, the head, and all the inward parts; it helps digestion, & comforteth the vitall spirits.
               1 Take Fennell,
                     Sixe most pretious waters, which Hypocrates made, and sent to a Queene sometimes liuing in England.
                   Rew, Veruine, Endiue, Betony, Germander, Redrose, Capillus veneris, of each an ounce; stampe them and steepe them in white wine a day and a night, and distill water of them, which water will diuide in three parts, the first water you shall put in a glasse by it selfe, for it is more pretious then gold, the second as siluer, and the third as Balme, and keepe these three parts in Glasses: this water you shall giue the rich for gold, to meaner for siluer, to poore men for Balme: this water keepeth the sight in cleernes, and purgeth all grosse humors.
               2 Take Salgemma a pound, and lay it in a green docke leafe, and lay it in the fier till it bee well rosted, and waxe white, and put it in a glasse against the aire a night, and on the morrow it shalbe turned to a white water like vnto Christall: keepe this water well in a glasse, and put a drop into the eie, and it shall clense and sharpe the sight: it is good for any euill at the heart, for the morphew, and the canker in the mouth, and for diuers other euils in the body.
               3 Take the roots of Fenell, Parseley, Endiue, Betony,

of each an ounce, and first wash them well in luke-warme water, and bray them well with white wine a day and a night, and then distill them into water: this water is more worthy then Balme; it preserueth the sight much, and clenseth it of all filth, it restraineth teares, and comforteth the head, and auoideth the water that commeth through the payne in the head.
               4 Take the seed of Parseley, Achannes, Veruine, Carawaies, and centuary, of each ten drams; beat all these together, and put it in warme water a day and a night, and put it in a vessell to distill: this water is a pretious water for all sore eies, and very good for the health of man or womans bodie.
               5 Take limmel of gold, siluer, lattin, copper, iron, steele, & leade; & take lethurgy of gold & siluer, take callamint & columbine, & steep al together, the first day in the vrine of a man-childe, that is between a day & a night, the second day in white wine, the third day in the iuyce of fennel, the fourth day in the whites of egges, the fift day in the womans milke that nourisheth a man-child, the sixt day in red wine, the seuenth day in the whites of egges, and vpon the eight day bind all these together, and distill the water of them, and keepe this water in a vessell of gold or siluer: the vertues of this water are these, first it expelleth all rhumes, and doth away all manner of sicknes from the eies, and weares away the pearle, pin and webbe; it draweth againe into his owne kinde the eie-lids that haue been bleared, it easeth the ache of the head, and if a man drinke it, maketh him looke young euen in old age, besides a world of ohter most excellent vertues.
               6 Take the Gold-smiths stone, and put it into the fier, till it bee red-hot, and quench it in a pint of white wine, and doe so nine times, and after grind it, and beat it

small, and clense it as cleane as you may, and after set it in the sunne with the water of Fennell distilled, and Ve
                     •
                  
                  uine, Roses, Celladine and Rew, and a little Aquauite, and when you haue sprinkled it in the water nine times, put it then in a vessell of glasse, and yet vpon a reuersion of the water distill it, till it passe ouer the touch foure or fiue inches; and when you will vse it then stirre it all together, and then take vp a drop with a feather, and put it on your naile, & if it abyde, it is fine and good: then put it in the eie that runneth, or annoynt the head with it if it ake, and the temples, and beleeue it, that of all waters this is the most pretious, and helpeth the sight or any paine in the head.
               The water of Cheruyle is good for a sore mouth.
               The water of Callamynt is good for the stomacke.
                     The vertues of seuerall waters.
                  
               
               The water of Planten is good for the fluxe, and the hot dropsy.
               Water of Fennell is good to make a fat body small, and also for the eies.
               Water of Violets is good for a man that is sore within his body, and for the raynes, and for the liuer.
               Water of endiue is good for the dropsy, and for the iaundyse, and the stomacke.
               Water of Borage is good for the stomacke, and for the illica passio, and many other sicknesses in the body.
               Water of both Sages is good for the palsey.
               Water of Bettony, is good for the heary ago, and all inward sicknesses.
               Water of Radish drunke twice a day, at each time an ounce, or an ounce and a halfe, doth multiply and prouoke lust, and also it prouoketh the tearmes in women.
               Rosemary water (the face washed therein both morning and night) causeth a faire and cleere countenance:

also the head washed therewith, and let dry of it selfe, preserueth the falling of the hai
                     •
                  e, and causeth more to growe; also two ounces of the same drunke, driueth venome out of the body in the same sort as Methridate doth; the same twice or thrice drunke at each time halfe an ounce, rectifieth the mother
                     •
                   and it causeth womē to be fruitful: when one maketh a Bath of this decoction, it is called the Bathe of life; the same drunke comforteth the heart, the brayne, and the whole body, and clenseth away the spots of the face; it maketh a man looke young, and causeth women to conceiue quickly, and hath all the vertues of Balme.
               Water of Rew drunke in a morning foure or fiue daies together, at each time an ounce, purifieth the flowers in women; the same water drunke in the morning fasting, is good against the gryping of the bowels, and drunke at morning and at night, at each time an ounce, it prouoketh the termes in women.
               The water of Sorrell drunke is good for al burning & pestilent feuers, and all other hot sicknesses; being mixt with beere, ale or wine, it 
                     •
                  laketh thirst; it is also good for the yellow Iaundise, being taken sixe or eight daies together; it also expelleth heate from the liuer if it be drunke, and a clothe wet in the same and a little wrong out, and so applied to the right side ouer against the liuer, and when it is drie then wet another, and apply it; and thus doe three or foure times together.
               Lastly the water of Angelica is good for the head, for inward infection, either of the plague or pestilence, it is very soueraigne for sore breasts; also the same water being drunke of twelue or thirteene daies together, is good to vnlade the stomacke of grosse humors and superfluities, and it strengthneth and comforteth all the

vniuersall parts of the body: and lastly, it is a most soueraine medicine for the gout, by bathing the diseased member much therein.
               Now to conclude and knit vp this chapter, it is meete that our huswife know that from the eight of the kallends of the moneth of aprill vnto the eight of the Callends of Iuly, all manner of hearbes & leaues are in that time most in strength and of the greatest vertue to be vsed and put in all manner of medicines, also from the eight of the Callends of Iuly vnto the eight of the Callends of October the stalks, stems and hard braunches of euery hearbe and plant is most in strength to be vsed in medicines; and from the eight of the callends of October, vnto the eight of the Callends of Aprill, all manner of roots of hearbs and plants are the most of strength and vertue to be vsed in all manner of medicines.
               To make an excellent sweet water for perfume,
                     An excellent water for perfume.
                   you shall take of Basill, mints, Mariorum, Corne flagge roots, Isop, Sauory, Sage, Balme, Lauender and Rosemary, of each one a handfull, of Cloues, Cinamon and Nutmegges of each halfe an ounce, then three or foure Pome-citrous cut into slices, infuse all these into Damaske-rose water the space of three daies, & then distill it with a gentle fire of Charcole, then when you haue put it into a very clean glasse, take of fat Muske, Ciuet, and Ambergreece of each the quantity of a scruple, and put into a ragge of fine Lawne, and then hang it within the water: This being either burnt vpon a hot pan, or else boiled in perfuming pannes with Cloues, B
                     •
                  y leaues and Lemmon pils, will make the most delicatest perfume that may be without any offence, and will last the longest of all o
                     •
                  her sweet perfumes, as hath been found by experience.
               To perfume gloues excellently,
                     To perfume Gloues.
                   take the oyle of sweet

Almonds, oyle of Almonds, oyle of Nutmegs, oyle of Beniamin, of each a dramme, of Ambergreece one graine, fat Muske two graines: mixe them altogether and grind them vpon a painters stone, and then annoint the gloues therewith: yet before you annoint them let them be dampishly moistned with Damaske Rose water.
               
                  
                     To perfume a Ierkin.
                  To perfume a Ierkin well, take the oyle of Beniamin a penny-worth, oyle of Spike, and oyle of Oliues half peny-worths of each, and take two spunges and warme one of them against the fire and rubbe your Ierkin therewith; and when the oyle is dryed, take the other spunge and dippe it in the oyle and rub your Ierkin therewith til it bee dry, then lay on the perfume before prescribed for gloues.
               
                  
                     To make Washing Bals.
                  To make very good washing balls take Storax of both kindes, Beniamin, Calamus Aromaticus, Labdanum of each a like; and bray them two powder with Cloues and Arras; then beate them all with a sufficient quantity of Sope till it bee stiffe, then with your hand you shall worke it like paste, and make round balls thereof.
               
                  
                     To make a muske Ball.
                  To make Muske balls, take Nutmegs, Mace, Cloues, Saffron and Cinamon, of each the waight of jj d, and beat to fine powder, of Masticke the weight of two-pence halfe peny, of Storax the weight of six-pence; of Labdanum the weight ten-pence; of Ambergreece the weight of sixe-pence; and of Muske foure graines, dissolue and worke all these in hard sweet sope till it come to a stiffe paste, and then make balls thereof.
               
                  
                     A perfume to burne.
                  To make a good perfume to burne, take Beniamin one ounce, Storax Calamint two ounces, of Masticke, white Ambergreece, of each one ounce, Ireos, Calamus aromaticus, Cypesse wood, of each halfe an ounce,

of Camphire one scruple, Labdanum one ounce: beate all these to powder, then take of Sallow Charcole 
                     •
                  ixe ounces, of liquid Storax two ounces, beate them all with Aquauita, and then shall you role them into long round roules.
               To make Pomanders,
                     To make Pomanders.
                   take two peniworth of Labdanum two peniworth of Storax liquid, one peniworth of Calamus aromaticus, as much Balme, halfe a quarter of a pound of fine waxe, of Cloues & Mace two peny-worth, of liquid Aloes three peniworth, of Nutmegges eight peniworth, and of Muske foure graines; beat all these exceedingly together till they come to a perfect substance, then mould it in any fashion you please and drie it.
               To make excellent strong Vinegar,
                     To mke Vinegar.
                   you shall brew the strongest Ale that may be, and hauing tunned it in a very strong vessell, you shal set it either in your garden or some other safe place abroad, where it may haue the whole summer daies sunne to shine vpon it, and there let it lie till it be extreame sowre, then into a Hogshead of this Vinegar put the leaues of foure or fiue hundred Damaske Roses, and after they haue layen for the space of a moneth therein, house the Vinegar and draw it as you neede it.
               To make drie Vinegar which you may carry in your pocket,
                     To make dry vinegar.
                   you 
                     •
                  hall take the blades of greene corne either Wheat or Rie, and beat it in a morter with the strongest Vinegar you can get till it come to a paste; then role it into little balls, and dry it in the sunne till it be very hard, then when you haue any occasion to vse it, cut a little peece thereof and dissolue it in wine, and it will make a strong Vinegar.
               To make Veriuice, you shall gather your Crabbs as

soone as the kernels turne blacke,
                     To make veriuyce.
                   and hauing laid them a while in a heape to sweat together, take them and picke them from stalkes, blacks and rottennesse: then in long troughs with beetles for the purpose, crush and breake them all to mash: then make a bagge of course hairecloth as square as the presse, and fill it with the crusht Crabs; then put it into the presse, and presse it while any moysture will drop forth, hauing a cleane vessell vnderneath to receiue the liquor: this done, tun it vp into sweet Hogsheads, and to euery Hogshead put halfe a dozen handfuls of Damaske Rose leaues, and then b
                     ••
                  ng it vp, and spend it as you shall haue occasion.
               Many other pretty secrets there are belonging vnto curious Hous-wiues, but none more necessary then these already rehearsed, except such as shall hereafter follow in their proper places.
               
                  
                     Additions to concei
                              •
                           ed secrets.
                     
                     
                        To make sweete powder for baggs.
                     
                  Take of Arras sixe ounces, of Damaske rose-leaues as much, of Margerom and sweete Basill, of each an ounce, of Cloues two ounces, yellow Saunders two ounces, of Citron pills seuen drams, of Lign
                     •
                  m-aloes one ounce, of Beniamine one ounce, of Storaxe one ounce, of Muske one dram: bruise all these, and put them into a bagge of silke or linnen, but silke is the best.
               Take of Arras foure ounces, of Gallaminis one ounce, of Ciris halfe an ounce,
                     To make sweete bags.
                   of Rose leaues dried two handfuls, of dried Marierom one handfull, of spike one handfull, Cloues one ounce, of Beniamine & Storaxe of each two ounces, of white Saunders and yellow of each one ounce: beate all these into a grosse powder, then put to it Muske a dram, of Ciuet halfe a dram, and of Ambergreece halfe a dram; then put then into a Taffata bag and vse it.
               
                  Take of Bay leaues one handfull,
                     To make sweet water.
                   of red Roses two handfuls of Damaske Roses three handfull, of Lauender foure handfuls, of Basill one handfuls, Mariorum two handfulls, of Camomile one handfull, the young tops of sweete B
                     •
                  ia
                     •
                   two handfulls, of Mandelion
                     •
                  tansey two handfuls, of Orange pils sixe or seuen ounces, of Cloues and Mace a groats worth: put all these together in a pottle of new Ale in comes for the space of three daies, shaking it euery day three or foure times; then distill it the fourth day in a still with a continuall soft fire, and after it is distilled, put into it a graine or to of Muske.
               Take a quart of Malmsey lees,
                     A very rare and pleasant Damaske water.
                   or a quart of Malmsey simply, one handfull of Margerome, of Bassill as much, of Lauender foure handfulls, Bay leaues one good handfull, Damask-Rose leaues foure handfuls, and as many of red, the pils of sixe Oranges, or for want of them one handfull of the tender leaues of Walnut-trees, of Beniamine halfe an ounce, of Callamus Aramaticus as much, of Camphyr foure 
                     〈◊〉
                  , of Cloues one ounce, of Baldamum halfe an ounce
                     •
                   then take a pottle of running water, and put in all these spices bruised into your Water and Malmsey together in a close stopped pot, with a good handfull of Rosemarie, and let them stand for the space of sixe dayes; then distill it with a soft fire; then set it in the Sunne sixteene dayes with foure graines of Muske bruised. This quantitie will make three quarts of water, Probatum.
               
               Take and brew very strong Ale,
                     To make the best vinegar.
                   then take halfe a dozen gallons of the first running, & set it abroad to coole, and when it is cold, put Yest vnto it, and head it very strongly: then put it vp in a Firkin, and distill it in the Sunne; then take foure or fiue handfull of Beanes, and parch them in a pan till they burst
                     •
                   then put them in as

hot as you can into the firkin, and stop it with a little clay about the bung-hole: then take a handfull of cleane Ri
                     •
                   leauen and put in the firkin; then take a quantitie of Barberries, and bruise and straine them into the firkin, and a good handfull of salt, and let them lie and worke in the Sun from May till August: then hauing the full strength, take Rose-leaues and clip the white ends off, and let them drie in the Sunne; then take Elder-flowers and picke them, and dry them in the Sunne, and when they are dry, put them in bags, and keepe them all the Winter: then take a pottle-pot, and draw forth a pottle out of the firkin into the bottle, and put a handfull of the red rose-leaues, and another of the Elder-flowers, and put into the bottle, and hang it in the Sunne, where you may occupie the same, and when it is emptie, take out all the leaues, and fill againe as you did before.
               
                  
                     To perfume Gloues.
                  Take Angelica-water and Rose-water, and put into them the powder of Cloues, Amber-greece, Muske and Lignum Aloes, Beniamine and Callamus Aramattecus; boyle these till halfe bee consumed; then straine it, and put your Gloues therein; then hang them in the Sunne to drie, and turne them often; and thus three times wet them, and drie them againe: or otherwise, take Rosewater and wet your Gloues therein, then hang them vp till they be almost drie; then take halfe an ounce of Beniamine, and grind it with Oyle of Almons, and rub it on the Gloues till it be almost dried in: then take twentie graines of Amber-greece, and twentie graines of Muske, and grind them together with Oyle of Almons, and so rub it on the Gloues, and then hang them vp to drie, or else let them drie in your bosome, and so after vse them at your pleasure.
               It is necessarie that our English Hous-wife be skilfull in

the election, preseruation and curing of all sorts of wines,OF The ordring
                           •
                         preseruing and helping of all sorts of Wines, and first of the choice of sweet Wines.
                   because they be vsuall charges vnder her hands, and by the least neglect must turne the husband to much losse: therefore to speake first of the election of sweete wines, she must bee carefull that her Malmseys bee full Wines, pleasant, well hewed and fine: that Bastard be fat, and if it be tawny it skils no
                     •
                  , for the tawny Bastards be alwaies the sweetest. Muskadine must bee great, pleasant and strong, with a sweete sent, and with Amber colour. Sacke if it bee Seres (as it should be) you shall know it by the marke of a corke burned on one side of the bung, and they be euer full gadge, and so are no other Sacks, and the longer they lie, the better they be.
               Take a pleasant Butt of Malmsey,
                     To make Muskadine, and giue it a Fla
                           ••
                        r.
                   and draw it out a quarter and more; then fill it vp with fat Bastard within eight gallants, or there-abouts, and parill it with six eggs, yel
                     •
                  s and all, one handfull of Bay-salt, and a pint of cundui
                     •
                   water to euery parill, and if the wine be hie of colour, put in three gallants of new milke, but skim of the Creame first, and beate it well, or otherwise if you haue a good Butt of Malmsey, and a good pipe of Bastard, you must take some emptie Butt or pipe, and draw thirtie gallans of Malmsey, and as many of Bastard, and beate them together; and when you haue so done, take a quarter of a pound of Ginger and bruise it, and put it into your vessell; then fill it vp with Malmsey and Bastard: or otherwise thus; if you haue a pleasant Butt of Malmsey, which is called Ra
                     •
                  t-mow, you may draw out of it fortie gallans, and if your Bastard be very faint, then thirtie gallans of it will serue to make it pleasant; then take foure gallans of new milke and beate it, and put into it when it lacketh twelue gallans of full, and then make your Flauer.
               
                  
                  
                     How to 
                           ••
                        auer Muskadine.
                  Take one ounce of Collianders of Bay salt, of Cloues, of each as much, one handfull of Sauorie; let all these be blended and bruised together, and sow them close in a bag, and take halfe a pint of Damaske-water and lay your Flauer into it, and then put it into your Butt, and if it fine, giue it a parill and fill it vp, and let it lie till it fine 
                     〈◊〉
                   else thus; Take Colliander rootes a peniworth, one pound of Anyseedes, one peniworth in Ginger; bruise them together and put it into a bag as before, and make your bagge long and small that it may goe in and out at the bung
                     •
                   hole, and when you doe put it in, fasten it with a thread at the Bung; then take a pint of the strongest Damaske water, and warme it luke-warme, then put it into the Butt, and then stop it close for two or three dayes at least, and then if you please you may set it abroach.
               
                  
                     To aparill Muskadine when it comes new in to be fined in 24 houres.
                  Take seuen Whites of new laid egges, two handfuls of Bay-salt, and beate them well together, and put therein a pint of Sacke or more, and beate them till they bee as short as Snow; then ouer-draw the Butt seuen or eight gallans, and beate the Wine, and stirre his Lees, and then put in the parill and beate it, and so fill it vp, and stoppe it close, and draw it on the morrow.
               
                  
                     To make white Bastard.
                  Draw out of a pipe of Bastard ten gallans, and put to it fiue gallans of new milke, and skim it as before
                     •
                   and all to beate it with a parill of eight Whites of Egs, and a handfull of Bay-salt, and a pint of conduit water, and it will be white and fine in the morning. But if you will make verie fine Bastard, take a White-wine hogshead, and put out the Lees, and wash it cleane, and fill it halfe full and halfe a quarter, and put to it foure gallans of new Milke and beate it well with the Whites of sixe Egges, and fill it vp with White-wine and Sack, and it will be white 
                     •
                  nd fine.
               
                  Take two gallons of the best stoned honey,
                     To helpe Bastard being eager.
                   and two gallons of White-wine, and boyle them in a faire pan, skim it cleane, and straine it thorow a faire cloth that there be no moats in it: then put to it one ounce of Collianders, and one ounce of Aniseedes, foure or fiue Orange-pils drie and beaten two powder, let them lie three dayes; then draw your Bastard into a cleane pipe, then put in your Honey with the rest, and beate it well; then let it lie a weeke and touch it not, after draw it at pleasure.
               If your Bastard be fat and good,
                     To make Bastard white, and to rid
                           •
                        way Laggs.
                   draw out fortie gallons, then may you fill it vp with the laggs of any kind of White-wines or Sacks; then take fiue gallons of new milke, and first take away the Creame, then straine it through a cleane cloth, and when your pipe is three quarters full, put in your milke; then beate it very well, and fill it so, that it may lacke fifteene gallons, then aparill it thus: take the Whites onely of ten eggs, and beate them in a faire Tray with Bay-salt and conduit water; then put it into the pipe and beate it well, and so fill it vp, and let it stand open all night; and if you will keepe it any while, you must on the morrow stop it close, and to make the same drinke like Ossey, giue it this flauer: Take a pound of Aniseeds, two pence in Colianders, two pence in Ginger, two pence in Cloues, two pence in graines, two pence in long Pepper, and two pence in Licoras: bruise all these together; then make two baggs of linnen cloth, long and small, and put your Spices into them, and put them into the pipe at the bung, making them fast there with a thread that it may sinke into the Wine, then stop it close, and in two dayes you may broch it.
               Take and draw him from his Lees if he haue any,
                     A remedie for Bastard if it pricke.
                   and put the Wine into a Malmsey Butt to the Le
                     •
                  s of Malmsey;

then put to the Bastard that is in the Malmsey Butt, nigh three gallons of the best Worre of a fresh tap, and then fill him vp with Bastard or Malmsey of Cute if you will: then aparell it thus; first, parell him, and beate him with a staffe, and then take the Whites of foure new-laid Egges, and beate them with a handfull of Salt till it bee short as mosse, and then put a pint of running water therein, and so fill the pipe vp full, and lay a tile-stone on the bung, and set it abroach within foure and twentie houres if you will.
               
                  
                     To make Malmsey.
                  If you haue a good Butt of Malmsey, and a Butt or two of Sacke that will not be drunke: for the Sacke prepare some emptie Butt or Pipe, and draw it more then halfe full of Sacke, then fill it vp with Malmsey, and when your Butt is full within a little, put into it three gallons of Spanish Cute, the best that you can get, then beate it wel, then take your taster and see that it bee deepe coloured; then fill it vp with Sacke, and giue it a parell, and beate it well, the aparell is thus; Take the Yelkes of ten Egges and beate them in a cleane bason with a handfull of Bay-Salt, and a quart of conduit water, and beate them together with a little peece of Birch, and beate it till it bee as short as mosse; then draw fiue or sixe gallons out of your Butte, then beate it againe, and then fill it vp, and the next day it will bee readie to bee drawne. This aparall will serue both for Muskadine, Bastard and for Sacke.
               
                  
                     To shift Malmsey, and to rid away ill W
                           ••
                        es.
                  If you haue two principall Butts of Malmsey, you may make three good Butts with your laggs of Clare
                     •
                   and of Sacke, if you put two gallons of Red-wine in a Butt, it will saue the more Cute: then put two or three gallons of Cute as you see cause; and if it be Spanish Cute, two gallons will go further then fiue gallons of Candy Cute, but the Candy Cute is more natur
                     •
                  ll for the Malmsey:

also one But of good Malmsey, and a Butt of Sacke that hath lost his colour, will make two good Butts of Malmsey with the more Cute; and when you haue fild your Butts within twelue gallons, then put in your Cute, and beate it halfe an houre and more; then put in your parell and let it lie.
               First,
                     If Sack want his colour.
                   parell him as you did the Bastard, and order him as shall be shewed you for the White-wine of Gascoyne with Milke, and so set him abroach.
               If your Sacke haue a strong ley or taste,
                     For Sack that is tawnie.
                   take a good sweete Butt faire washed, and draw your Sack into it, and make vnto it a parell as you doe to the Bastard, and beate it very well, and so stop vp your Butt: and if it be tawny, take three gallons of new Milke and straine it cleane, and put it into your Sacke, then beate it very well, and stop it close.
               Take a faire emptie Butt with the Lees in it,
                     For Sack that doth rape and is browne.
                   and draw your Sacke into the same from his Lees fine; then take a pound of Rice-flower as fine as you can get, and foure graines of Camphire, and put it into the Sacke; and if it will not fine, giue it a good parell, and beate it well; then stop it and let it lie.
               If any of your Sacks or White-wines haue lost their colour,
                     To colour Sacke, or any White-wine.
                   take three gallons of new Milke, and take away the Creame; then ouer-draw your wine fiue or sixe gallons, then put in your Milke and beate it; then lay it a foretarke all night, and in the morning lay it vp, and the next day if you will you may set it abroach.
               Draw him out into fresh lees,
                     If Allegant be growne hard.
                   and take three or foure gallons of stone-hony clarified, and being coole, put it in and parell it with the Yelkes of foure Egges, Whites and all, and beate it well, and fill it vp, and stop it closse, and it will be pleasant and quick as long as it is in drawing.
               
                  
                  
                     For Allegant that is sower.
                  Take three gallons of white Honey, and two gallons of Red-wine, boyle them together in a faire pan, and skim it cleane, and let it stand till it be fine and cold, then put it into your Pipe; yet nothing but the finest; then beate it well, and fill it vp, and stop it close, and if your Alligant be pleasant and great, it will doe much good, for one Pipe will rid away diuers.
               
                  
                     How to order Renish wine.
                  There are two sorts of Renish-wines, that is to say, Elstertune and Brabant: the Estertune are best, you shall know it by the Fatt, for it is double bard and double pinned, the Brabant is nothing so good, and there is not so much good to bee done with them as with the other. If the Wines be good and pleasant, a man may rid away a Hogshead or two of White-wine, and this is the most vantage a man can haue by them: and if it be slender and hard, then take three or foure gallons of stone-honey and clarifie it cleane; then put into the Honey foure or fiue gallons of the same Wine, and then let it seeth a great while, and put into it two pence in Cloues bruised, let them seeth together, for it will take away the sent of Honie, and when it is sodden take it off, and set it by till it be thorow cold; then take foure gallons of Milke and order it as before, and then put all into your Wine and all to beate it; and (if you can) role it, for that is the best way; then stop it close & let it lie, and that wil make it pleasant.
               
                  
                     Of what countries VVines are by their names.
                  The Wines that be made in Burdeaux are called Gascoine Wines, and you shall know them by their Hazell hoopes, and the most be full gadge and sound Wines.
               The Wines of the hie countries, and which is called Hie-country wine, are made some thirtie or fortie miles beyond Burdeaux, and they come not downe so soone as the other; for if they doe, they are all forfeited, and you shall know them euer by their hazell

hoopes, and the leghth gage lackes.
               Then haue you Wines that be called Gallaway both in Pipes and Hogsheads, and be long
                     •
                   and lacks 
                     〈◊〉
                   Cesternes in gadge and a halfe, and the Wines themselues are hie-coloured. Then there are other Wines which is called White-wine of Angulle, very good Wine, and lacks little of gadge, and that is also in Pipes for the most part, and is quarter bound. Then there are Rochell wines, which are also in Pipes long and slender; they are very small Hedge-wines, sharpe in taste, and of a pallad complexions. Your best Sacke are of Seres in Spaine, your smaller of Galicia and Portugall; your strong Sacks are of the Hands of the Canaries, and of Malligo; and your Muskadines and Malmseys are of many parts of Italy, Greece, and some especiall Ilands.
               Euerie Terse is in depth the middle of the knot in the midst.
                     Notes of gadging of Wines, Oyles and Liquors.
                  
               
               The depth of euery Hogshead is the fourth pricke aboue the knot.
               The depth of euery Puncheon is the fourth prick next to the punchener.
               The depth of euery Sack-Butt is the foure pricks next to the puncheon.
               The depth of the Halfe Hogshead is at the lowest notch, and accounted one.
               The depth of the halfe Terse is at the second notch, and is accounted two.
               The depth of the halfe Hogshead and halfe pipe, is at the third notch, and accounted three.
               The depth of the halfe Butt is at the forth notch
                     •
                   and accounted foure.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        The markes of gadging.
                     1. The full gage is marked thus.

                  
                  2. The halfe Sesterne lacking, thus.

                  
                  3. The whole Sesterne lacking, thus.

                  
                  4. The Sesterne and halfe lag.

                  
                  5. The two Sesternes thus.

                  
                  6. The two and a halfe Sesterns, thus.

                  
               
               
                  A But of Malmsey if he be ful gadge,
                     The Contēts of all manner of Gascoyne wine, and others.
                   is one hundred & twenty six gallons.
               And so the tun is two hundred and fifty two gallons.
               Euery Sesterne is three gallons.
               If you sell for twelue pence a gallon, the tun is twelue pound, twelue shillings.
               And Malmsey and Rhenish wine at tenne pence the gallon, is the tunne, ten pound.
               Eight pence the gallon, is the tunne eight pounds.
               Sixe pence the gallon, is the tunne six pounds.
               Fiue pence the gallon, is the tunne fiue pound.
               Foure pence the gallon, is the tunne foure pound.
               Now for Gaswine wine there goeth foure hogsheads to a tun, & euery hogshead is sixty three gallons, the two hogsheads are one hundred twenty six gallons, and foure hogsheads are two hundred fifty two gallons; and if you sell for eight pence the gallon, you shall make of the tun eight pounds, and so foorth looke how many pence the gallons are, and so many pounds the tunne is.
               Now for Bastard it is at the same rate, but it laketh of gadge two Sesternes and a halfe, or three at a pipe, and then you must abate six gallons of the price, and so in all other wines.
               See that in your choyce of Gascoine wines you obserue,
                     To chuse Gascoyne wines.
                   that your Clarret wines be faire coloured, and bright as a Rubie, not deepe as an Ametist; for though it may shew strength, yet it wants neatnesse: also let it bee sweete as a Rose or a Violet, and in any case let it bee short; for if it bee long, then in no wise meddle with it.
               For your white wines, see they bee sweete and pleasant at the nose, very short, cleere and bright and quick in the taste.
               Lastly for your Red wine, prouide that they bee deepe

coloured and pleasant, long, and sweete, and if in them, or Clarret wines be any default of colour, there are remedies enow to amend and repaire them.
               
                  
                     To remedy Clarret wine that hath lost the Colour.
                  If your Clarret wine be faint, and haue lost his colour; then take a fresh hogs-head with his fresh lees which was very good wine, and draw your wine into the same; then stop it close & tight, and lay it a foretake for two or three daies that the lees may run through it, then lay it vp till it be fine, and if the colour bee not per
                     •
                  it, draw it into a red wine hogshead, that is new drawne with the lees, & that will colour of himselfe, and make him strong; or take a pound of Tournsoll or two, & beat it with a gallon or two of wine, and let it lie a day or two, then put it into your hogshead, draw your wine againe, and wash your clothes, then lay it aforetake all night, and rowle it on the morrow; then lay it vp, and it will haue a perfit colour.
               
                  
                     A remedy for Gascoine wine, that hath lost his colour.
                  And if your Clarret wine haue lost his colour, take a peny worth of Damsens, or els black Bullesses, as you see cause, and stew them with some red wine of the deepest colour, & make thereof a pound or more of sirrop, and put it into a cleane glasse, and after into the hogshead of Clarret wine; and the same may likewise doe vnto red wine if you please.
               And if your white wine be faint, & haue lost his colour, if the wine haue any strength in it;
                     A remedy for white wine, that hath lost his colour.
                   take to a hogshead so much as you intend to put in, out of the said milke, and a handfull of Rice beaten very well, and a little salt, and lay him a foretake all night, and on the morning lay him vp againe, and set it abroch in any wise the next wine you spend, for it will not last long.
               
                  
                     For white wine that hath lost his colour.
                  Take three gallons of new milke, and take away the Creame off it; then draw fiue or six gallons of wine, & put your milke into the hogshead, & beate it exceeding well;

then fill it vp, but before you fill it vp, if you can, roule it, and if it bee long and small, take halfe a pound of Roche Allum finelie beaten into pouder, and put into the vessell, and let it lie.
               Take and draw it into new lees of the one nature,
                     A remedy for Clarret, or white wine that drinks foule.
                   and then take a dozen of new pippins, and pare them, and take away the choares, and then put them in, and if that will not serue, take a handfull of the Oake of Ierusalem, and stampe it, then put it into your wine, and beate it exceeding well, and it will not onely take away the foulnesse, but also make it haue a good sent at the nose.
               If your Red wine drinke fainte,
                     For red wine that drinke faint.
                   then take a hogshead that Allegant hath been in with the lees also, and draw your wine into it, and that will refresh it well, and make the wine wel coloured; or otherwise draw it close to fresh lees, and that will recouer it againe, and put to it three or foure gallons of Allegant, and turne it on his lees.
               If your Red wine lacke colour,
                     For red wine that wants colour.
                   then take out foure gallons, and put in foure gallons of Allegant, and turne him on his lees, and the Bung vp, and his colour will returne, and be faire.
               Take a good But of Malmsey,
                     To make Tyre.
                   and ouerdraw it a quarter or more, and fill him vp with fat Bastard, and with Cute a gallon and more, then parrell him as you did your Malmsey.
               Yow shall in all points dresse him,
                     If Ossey cō
                        pleate, or Caprock haue lost their colour.
                   as you did dresse your Sacke, or white wine in the like case, and parrell him, and then set him abroach: And thus much touching wines of all sorts, and the true vse and ordering of them, so farre foorth as belongeth to the knowledge, and profit of our English Hous-wife.
            
            
               
               CHAP III. Of Wooll, Hempe, Flaxe and Cloth, and Dying of colours, of each seuerall substance, with all the knowledges belonging thereto.
               
                  OVr English Hous-wife after her knowledge of preseruing, and feeding her family, must learne also how out of her owne indeauours, shee ought to cloath them outwardly & inwardly; outwardly for defence from the cold and comelinesse to the person; and inwardly, for cleanlinesse and neatnesse of the skinne, whereby it may be kept from the filth of sweat, or vermine; the first consisting of woollen cloth, the latter of linnen.
               
                  
                     Of mak
                           •
                        ng woollē cloth.
                  To speake then first of the making of woollen cloth, it is the office of the Husbandman at the sheering of his sheepe, to bestow vpon the Hous-wife such a competent proportion of wooll, as shall bee conuenient for the clothing of his family; which wooll as soone as shee hath receiued it, shee shall open, and with a paire of sheeres (the fleece lying as it were whole before her) shee shall cut away all the course lockes, pitch, brands, tarr'd lockes, and other feltrings, and lay them by themselues for course Couerlids, or the like: then the rest so cleansed shee shall breake into peeces,
                     Of toasing wooll.
                   and tose it euery locke by locke, that is, with her hands open, and so diuide the wooll so, as not any part thereof may be feltred or close together, but all open and loose; then so much of the wooll as shee intends to spinne white, shee shall put by it selfe, and the rest which she intends to put into colours

she shall waigh vp, and diuide into seuerall quantities, according to the proportion of the webbe which shee intends to make, and put euery one of them into particular bagges made of netting, with talies or little peeces of wood fixed vnto them, with priuy markes thereon both for the waight, the colour, and the knowledge of the same wooll when the first colour is altred:
                     The dying of wooll.
                   this done, she shall if she please send them vnto the Dyers, to bee dyed after her own fancy; yet for as much as I would not haue our English Hous-wife ignorant in any thing meete for her knowledge, I will shew her heere before I proceede any further, how shee shall dye her wooll her selfe into any colour meete for her vse.
               First then to dye wooll blacke,
                     To die wooll blacke.
                   you shall take two pound of galles, and bruise them, then take halfe so much of the best greene coperas, and boile them both together in two gallons of running water; then shall you put your wool therein and boile it, so done, take it foorth and drie it.
               If you will dye your wooll of a bright haire colour:
                     To die wooll of haire colour.
                   first boile your wooll in Allum and water; then take it foorth, and when it is cold, take Chamber-lie and Chimnie soote, and mixing them together well, boile your wooll againe therein, and stirre it exceeding well about, then take it foorth, and lay it where it may conueniently drie.
               If you would dye your wooll into a perfect redde colour,
                     To die wooll redde.
                   set on a panne full of water, when it is hot put in a pecke of wheate branne, and let it boile a little; then put it into a tubbe, and put twice as much cold water vnto it, and let it stand vntill it bee a weeke old: hauing done so; then shall you put to tenne pounds of wooll, a pound of Allum, then heate your liquor againe, and

put in your Allum, and so soone as it is melted, put in your wooll, and let it boile the space of an houre: Then take it out againe, and then set on more bran and water: Then take a pound of Madder, and put in your Madder when the liquor is hot: when the Madder is broken, put in the Wooll and open it, and when it commeth to be very hot, then stirre it with a staffe, and then take it out and wash it with faire water; then set on the pan againe with faire water, and then take a pound of Saradine bucke, and put it therein, and let it boile the space of an egge seething: then put in the wooll, and stirre it three or foure times about, and open it well.
               
                  
                     To die wooll blew.
                  To die wooll blew; take good stoore of old Chamber lie, and set it on the fire; then take halfe a pound of blew Neale, and beate it small in a Morter; and then put it into the Lie; and when it seethes put in your wooll.
               
                  
                     To die a Puke.
                  To die wooll of a puke colour, take Galles, and beate them very small in a Morter, put them into faire seething water, and boile your wooll or your cloth therein, and boile them the space of halfe an houre: then take them vp, and put in your Copperas into the same liquor: then put in your wooll againe, and doing thus once or twice, it will be sufficient.
               
                  
                     To die a Sinder colour.
                  If you will die your wooll of a finder colour, you shall put your red wooll into your puke liquour; and then it will failelesse be of a sinder colour.
               
                  
                     To die green or yellow.
                  If you will die your wooll either green or yellow, then boile your Woodward in faire water, then put in your wooll or cloth, and that wooll which you put in white, will be yellow: and that wooll which you put in blew will be green, and all this with one liquor; prouided that each be first boiled in Allom.
               
                  
                     Handling of wooll after dying.
                  When you haue thus dyed your worke into those

seuerall colours meet for your purpose, and haue also dried it well: then you shall take it foorth, and toase it ouer againe as you did before: for the first toasing was to make it receiue the colour or die: this second is to receiue the oile, and make it fit for spinning; which assoone as you haue done,
                     The mixing of colours.
                   you shall mixe your colours together, wherein you are to note that the best medley, is that which is compounded of two colours only; as a light colour, and a darke: for to haue more is but confusion, and breeds no pleasure, but distraction to the fight therefore for the proportion of your mixtures, you shall euer take two parts of the darker colour, and but a third part of the light. As for example, your web containes twelue pound, and the colours are red and greene to you shall then toke eight pound of the greene wooll, and but foure pound of the red; and so of any other colours where there is difference of brightnes.
               But if it be so that you will needs haue your cloth of three colours,
                     Mixing of three colours
                   as of two darke and one light, or two light and one darke: As thus, you will haue Crimson, yellow, and puke; you shall take of the Crimson and yellow of each two pound, and of the puke eight pound: for this is two light colours to one darke; but if you will take a puke; a greene and an orenge tawny wich is too darke, and one light; then you shall take of the puke and greene, and the orenge tawny of each a like quantity; that is to say, of either foure pounds, when you haue equally diuided your proportions; then you shall spread vpon the ground a sheete, and vpon the same first lay a thinne layre or bed of your darker colour, all of one euen thicknesse: then vpon the same layre, lay another much thinner of the brighter quantity, being so neere as you can guesse it, hardly half so much as the darker: then couer it ouer with

another layre of the sad colour or colours againe, then vppon it another of the bright againe: And thus lay layre vpon layre till all your wooll be spread; then beginning at one end role vp round and hard together the whole bed of wooll; and then causing one to kneele hard vpon the roule, that it may not stirre nor open, with your hands toase, and pull out all the wooll in small pieces: And then taking a paire of stocke Cards sharpe and large, and bound fast to a forme, or such like thing, and on the same Combe, and Carde ouer all the wooll, till you see it perfectly, and vndistinctly mixed together, and that indeed it is become one intire colour of diuers without spots, or vndeuided locks or knots; in which doing you shall bee very carefull, and heedfull with your eye: And if you finde any hard knot, or other felter in the Wooll, which will not open, though it be neuer so small, yet you shall picke it out and open it, or else being any other fault cast it away: for it is the greatest Art in House-wifery to mixe these wools right, and to make the Cloth without blemish.
               
                  
                     Of the oiling of wooll.
                  Your wooll being thus mixed perfectly together, you shall then oile it, or as the plaine House-wife termes it, grease it: In this manner being laid in a round flat bed, you shall take of the best rape oile, or for want thereof either wel raynd red Goose grease, or Swines grease, & hauing melted it with your hand sprinkle it all ouer your wooll, and worke it very well into the same: then turne your wooll about, and doe as much on the other side, till you haue oiled all the wooll ouer, and that there is not a locke which is not moistened with the same.
               
                  
                     The quantity of Oile.
                  Now for as much as if you shall put too much oile vpon the wooll, you may thereby doe great hurt to the web, and make that the thread will not draw, but fal into

many pieces; you shall therefore be sure at the first to giue it little enough: and taking some thereof, proue it vpon the wheele: And if you see it drawes drie, and breaketh, then you may put more oile vnto it; but if it draw well, then to keepe it there without any alteration: but because you shall be a little more certaine in the truth of your proportions, you shall know, that three pound of grease or oile, will sufficiently annoint or grease ten pounds of wooll: And so according to that proportion you may oile what quantity you will.
               After your wooll is oild and annointed thus,
                     Of the tumming of wooll.
                   you shall then tumme it; which is, you shall pull it foorth as you did before, when you mixe it, and card it ouer againe vpon your Stocke cards: and then those cardings which you strike off, are called tummings, which you shal lay by, till it come to spinning. There be some Hous-wiues which oile it as they mix it, and sprinkle euery layre as they lay it, and worke the oile well into it: and then rouling it vp as before said, pull it out, and tumme it; so that then it goeth but once ouer the stocke-Cards, which is not amisse: yet the other is more certaine, though somewhat more painefull.
               After your wooll is thus mixed oiled and tummed,
                     Of spinning wooll.
                   you shall then Spinne it vpon great Wooll wheeles, according to the order of good House-wifery; the action whereof must be got by practise, and not relation; onely this you shall be carefull, to draw your thread according to the nature, & goodnes of your wooll, not according to your particular desire: for if you draw a fine thread from a wooll which is of a course staple, it will want substance when it comes to the Walke Mill, and either there beat in pieces, or not being able to bed, and couer the threads well, be a cloth of a very short lasting. So likewise if you

draw a course thread from a wooll of a fine staple, it will then so much ouer thicke, that you must either take away a great part of the substance of your wooll in flockes; or els let the cloth weare course, and high, to the disgrace of good House-wifery, and losse of much cloth, which els might haue been saued.
               
                  
                     The diuersities in spinning.
                  Now for the diuersities of spinning, although our ordinary English House-wiues make none at all, but spin euery thread alike, yet the better experienst make two manner of spinnings, and two sorts of thread; the one they call warpe, the other weft, or els wooffe; the warpe is spunne close, round and hard twisted, being strong and well smoothed, because it runs thorough the sleies, and also indureth the fretting and beating of the beame, the weft is spunne open, loose, hollow, and but halfe twisted; neither smoothed with the hand, nor made of any great strength, because it but only crosseth the warpe, without any violent straining, and by reason of the softnesse thereof beddeth closer, and couereth the warpe so well, that a very little beating in the Mill bringeth it to perfect cloth: and though some hold it lesse substantiall then the web, which is all of twisted yarn, yet experience finds they are deceiued, and that this open weft keepes the Cloth longer from fretting and wearing.
               
                  
                     Winding of woolle
                           •
                         yarn
                           •
                        .
                  After the spinning of your wooll, some Hous-wifes vse to wind it from the broche into round clewes for more ease in the warping, but it is a labour may very well be saued, and you may as well warpe it from the broch as from the clew, as long as you know the certaine waight, for by that onely you are to bee directed in all manner of cloth making.
               
                  
                     Of warping Cloth.
                  Now as touching the warping of cloth, which is both the skill and action of the Weauer, yet must not our Engglish

House-wife be ignorant therein, but though the doing of the thing be not proper vnto her, yet what is done must not be beyond her knowledge, both to bridle the falshood of vnconscionable workemen, and for her owne satisfaction, when shee is rid of the doubt of anothers euill doings. It is necessary then that shee first cast by the waight of her wooll, to how many yards of cloth the web will arise: for if the wooll bee of a reasonable good staple, and well spunne, it will runne yard and pound, but if it be course, it will not runne so much.
               Now in your warping also, you must looke how manie pounds you lay in your warpe, and so many you must necessarilie preserue for your weft; for Hus-wifes say the best cloth is made of euen and euen; for to dr
                     •
                  ue it to greater aduantage is hurtfull to the cloth: there be other obseruations in the warping of cloth; as to number your portusses, and know how many goes to a yard: to looke to the closenes, and fulling of the sleie, and such like, which sometimes hold, and sometimes faile, according to the art of the Workeman; and therefore I will not stand much vpon them; but referre the Hus-wife to the instruction of her owne experience.
               Now after your cloth is thus warped,
                     Of weauing cloth, walking & dressing it.
                   and deliuered vp into the hands of the Weauer; the Hus-wife hath finisht her labour: for in the weauing, walking, and dressing thereof shee can challenge no property more, then to intreate them seuerally to discharge their duties with a good conscience; that is to say, that the Weauer weaue it close, strong, and true, that the Walker or Fuller, mill it carefully, and looke well to his scowring-earth, for feare of beating holes into the cloth; and that the Clothworker, or Shereman burle, and dresse it sufficiently, neither cutting the wooll too vnreasonable high, whereby the

cloth may weare rough, nor too low, lest it appeare thread bare ere it come out of the hands of the Tailor. These things forewarnd and performed, the cloth is then to bee vsed at your pleasure.
               
                  
                     Of linnen cloath.
                  The next thing to this, which our English Hous-wife must be skilfull in the making of all sorts of linnen cloth, whether it bee of hemp or flaxe, for from those two only is the most principall cloth deriued, and made both in this, and in other nations.
               
                  
                     The ground best to sow hemp on.
                  And first touching the soile fittest to sow hempe vpon, it must be a rich mingle earth of clay and sand, or clay and grauell well tempered: and of these the best serueth best for the purpose, for the simple clay, or the simple sand are nothing so good; for the first is too tough, too rich, & too heauy, bringeth foorth al bun, & no rinde, the other is too barren, too hot, & too light, & bringeth forth such slender withered increase, that it is nothing neere worth the labor: briefly then the best earth is the best mixt ground which Husband-men cal the red hazel ground, being wel ordered & manured: and of this earth a principall place to sow hempe on, is in old stackeyards, or other places kept in the winter time for the laire of sheep or cattell, when your ground is either scarse, or formerly not imploid to that purpose; but if it be where the ground is plenty, and only vsed thereunto, as in Holland, in Lincolneshire, the Ile of Apham, and such like places, then the custome of the country will make you expert enough therein: there bee some that will preserue the ends of their corne lands, which but vpon grasse for to sow hempe or flax thereon, and for that purpose will manure it well with sheepe; for whereas corne which butteth on grasse hads, where cattel are teathered is commonly destroied, and no profit issuing from a good part thereof; by this meanes, that wich is

sowen will bee more lafe and plentifull, and that which was destroied, will beare a commodity of better valew.
               Now for the tillage or ordering of the ground where you sow hempe or flaxe,
                     The tillage of the groūd.
                   it would in al points be like vnto that where you sow barlie, or at the least as often broke vp, as you doe when you sow fallow wheat, which is thrice at least, except it bee some very mellow, and ripe mould, as stackyards, and vsuall hempelands be, and then twice breaking vp is sufficient; that is to say, about the latter end of February, and the latter end of Aprill; at which time you shall sow it:
                     Of sowing of hempe or flaxe,
                   and herein is to bee noted, that you must sow it reasonable thicke with good sound and perfect seed, of which the smoothest, roundest, and brightest with least dust in is the best
                     •
                   you must not lay it too deepe in the Earth, but you must couer it close, light, and with so fine a mould as you can possible breake with your Harrowes, clotting-beetles, or sleighting: then till you see it appeare aboue the earth, you must haue it exceedingly carefully tended, especially an houre or two before Sun rise, and as much before it set, from birds and other vermine, which wil otherwise picke the seed out of the earth, and so deceiue you of your profit.
               Now for the weeding of hempe,
                     Of weeding hempe and flaxe.
                   you may saue the labour, because it is naturally of it selfe swift of growth, rough, and venemous to any thing that growes vnder it, and will sooner of its own accord destroy those vnwholsome weeds then by your labour: But for your Flaxe or line which is a great deale more tender, and of harder encrease, you shall as occasion serueth weed it, and trimme it, especially if the weeds ouer grow it, but not otherwise: for if it once get aboue the weeds, then it will saue it selfe.
               Touching the pulling of Hempe or Flaxe,
                     The pulling of hempe or flaxe.
                   which is

the manner of gathering of the same: you shall vnderstand that it must bee pulled vp by the rootes, and not cut as Corne is, either with sithe or hooke: and the best time for the pulling of the same is, when you see the leaues fall downeward, or turne yellow at the tops, for then it is full ripe, and this for the most part will be in Iuly, and about Mary Maudlins day. I speake now touching the pulling of hemp for cloth: but if you intend to saue any for seed, then you shall haue the principall bunnes, and let them stand till it be the latter end of August, or sometimes till mid September following: and then seeing the seed turned browne and hard, you may gather it, for if it stand longer, it will shed suddenly: as for flax, which ripeneth a little after the hempe, you shall pull it as soone as you see the seed turne browne, and bend the head to the earthward, for it will afterward ripen of it selfe as the bunne drieth.
               
                  
                     The ripening of hemp and flaxe.
                  Now for the ripening, and seasoning of Hempe or Flaxe, you shall so soone as you haue pulled it, lay it all along flat, and thinne vpon the ground, for a night and a day at the most, and no more; and then as Hous-wifes call it, tie it vp in baites, and reare them vpright till you can conueniently carry it to the water, which would be done as speedily as may bee. Now there be some which ripen their Hempe and Flaxe vpon the ground where it grew, by letting it lie thereon to receiue dewes and raine, and the moistnesse of the earth, till it bee ripe; but this is a vile and naughty way of ripening, it making the Hempe or Flaxe blacke, rough, and often rotten: therefore I would wish none to vse it, but such as necessity compelleth therunto, and then to be carefull to the often turning thereof, for it is the ground onely which rots it.
               
                  
                     The watering of hemp or flaxe.
                  Now for the watring of the Hempe or Faxe, the best

water is the running streame, and the worst the standing pit; yet because Hempe is a poisonous thing, and infecteth the water; and destroyeth all kinde of Fish, it is more fit to employ such pits and ditches as are least subiect to annoiance, except you liue neere some great broad and swift streame, and then in the shallow parts thereof, you may water without danger: touching the manner of the watering thereof, you shall according to the quantity, knocke fowre or six strong stakes into the bottome of the water, and set them square-wise, then lay your round baits or bundles of Hempe downe vnder the water, the thick end of one bundle one way, and the thick ends of another bundle another way; and so lay baite vpon baite till you haue laid in all, and that the water couereth them all ouer; then you shall take ouer-lyers of wood, and binding them ouerthwart to the stakes, keepe the Hempe downe close, and especially at the foure corners; then take great stones, grauell, and other heauy rubbish, and lay it betweene,
                     The time it shall lie in the water.
                   and ouer the ouer-lyers, and so couer the Hempe close that it may by no meanes stirre, and so let it continue in the water foure daies and nights, if it be in a running water, but if it be in a standing water, then longer, and then take out one of the vppermost baits and wash it; and if in the washing you see the leafe come of, then you may be assured the hemp is watred enough: as for flax, les time will serue it, and it will shed the leafe in three nights.
               When your Hemp or Flaxe is thus watred enough,
                     Of washing out of Hempe or Flaxe.
                   you shall take off the grauell, stones, ouer-lyers of wood, and vnloosing it from the stakes, take and wash out euery baite or bundle seuerall by it selfe, and rub it exceeding cleane, leauing not a leafe vpon it, nor any filth within it; then set it vpon the drie earth vpright that the water may drop from it, which done, load it vp, & carry it home, and in some open Close or peece of ground reare it vpright

either against hedges, pales, walls, backsides of houses, or such like, where it may haue the full strength, or reflection of the sun, and being thoroughly dried, then house it; yet there be some Hous-wiues which as soon as their Hempe comes from the water, will not reare it vpright, but lay it vpon the ground flat & thin for the space of a fortnight, turning it at the end of euery two daies; first on the one side, then on the other, & then after reare it vpright, drie it, & so house it, and this hous-wifery is good & orderly.
               
                  
                     Speciall ordering of Flaxe.
                  Now although I haue hitherto ioyned Hempe and Flaxe together, yet you shal vnderstād that there are some particular differences betweene them; for whereas your Hemp may within a night or two after the pulling be caried to the water, your flaxe may not, but must be reared vp, and dried and withered a week or more to ripen the seed, which done, you must take ripple combs, and ripple your flaxe ouer, which is the beating, or breaking off from the stalks the round bels or bobs, which containe the seed which you must preserue in some drie vessell or place, till the spring of the yeere, and then beate it, or thresh it for your vse, and when your Flaxe or line is ripled, then you must send it to the water as aforesaid.
               
                  
                     The braking for Hempe Flaxe.
                  After your Hempe or Flaxe hath been watered, dried, & housed, you may then at your pleasure breake it, which is in a brake of wood (whose proportiō is so ordinary, that euery one almost knowes them) breake and beate out the drie bun, or kexe of the Hempe and Flaxe from the rinde which couers it, and when you brake either, you shall do it, as neer as you can, on a faire drie sun-shine day, obseruing to set foorth your hemp and Flaxe, and spread it thin before the sun, that it may be as drie as tinder before it come to the brake; for if either in the lying close together it shall giue againe or sweat, or through the moistnesse of

the ayre or place where it lies receiues any dampishnesse, you must necessarily see it dried sufficiently againe, or else it will neuer brake well, nor the bun breake and part from the rinde in order as it should: therfore if the weather be not seasonable,
                     The drying of hēp or flaxe.
                   and your need much to vse your hempe or flaxe, you shall then spread it vpon your kilne, and making a soft fire vnder it, drie it vpon the same, and then brake it: yet for as much as this is oft-times dangerous, & much hurt hath bin receiued thereby through casualty of fire, I would wish you to stick foure stakes in the earth at least fiue foote aboue ground, and laying ouer them small our-layers of wood, and open fleaks or hurdles vpon the same, spread your Hempe, and also reare some round about it all, but at one open side; then with straw, small shauing, or other light drie wood make a soft fire vnder the same, and so drie it, and brake it, and this is without all danger or mistrust of euill; and as you brake it, you shall open and looke into it, euer beginning to brake the roote ends first;
                     When it is brak't enough,
                   and when you see the bun is sufficiently crusht, falne away, or at the most hangeth but in very small shiuers within the Hempe or Flaxe, then you shall say it is brak't enough, and then tearming that which you called a baite or bundle before, now a strike, you shall lay them together and so house them, keeping in your memorie either by score or writing, how many strikes of Hempe, and how many strikes of flaxe you brake vp euery day.
               Now that your Hempe or Flaxe may brake so much the better,
                     Diuersity of brakes.
                   you must haue for each seuerall sort two seuerall brakes, which is an open and wide toothed, or nicktbrake, and a close and straight toothed brake: the first being to crush the bun, and the latter to beate it forth. Now for Flax you must take first that which is the straitest for the Hempe, and then after one of purpose, much

straighter and sharper for the bunne of it being more small, tough and thinne, must necessarily be broken into much lesse peeces.
               
                  
                     Of swingling hempe and flaxe.
                  After your Hempe and Flaxe is brak't, you shall then swingle it, which is vpon a swingle tree block made of an halfe inch boord about fowre foote aboue ground, and set vpon a strong foot or stocke, that will not easily moue and stirre, as you may see in any Hous-wiues house whatsoeuer better then my words can expresse; and with a peece of wood called the swingle tree dagger, and made in the shape and proportion of an old dagger with a reasonable blunt edge; you shall beate out all the loose buns and shiuers that hang in the Hempe or Flaxe, opening and turning it from one end to the other, till you haue left no bunne or shiuer to be perceiued therein, and then strike a twist, and fould in the midst, which is euer the thickest part of the strike, lay them by till you haue swingled all; the generall profit whereof, is not onely the beating out of the hard bunne, but also an opening, and softning of the teare, whereby it is prepared and made ready for the maker.
               
                  
                     Vse of swingle tree first 
                           •
                        urds.
                  Now after you haue swingled your Hempe and Flaxe ouer once, you shall take and shake vp the refuse stuffe, which you beate from the same seuerally, and not only it, but the tops and knots, and halfe brak't buns which fall from the brake also, and drying them againe cause them to bee very well thresht with flayles, and then mixing them with the refuse which fell from the swingle tree, dresse them all well with threshing and shaking, till the buns be cleane driuen out of them; and then lay them in some safe drie place till occasion of vse: these are called swingle tree hurds, and that which comes from the hemp will make window-cloth, and such like course stuffe, and

that which comes from the flax being a little towed again in a paire af wooll cards will make a course hardingl
               But to proceed forward in the making of cloth;
                     The second swingling.
                   after your hemp or flax hath bin swingled once ouer, which is sufficient for the market, or for ordinary sale, you shal then for cloth swingle it ouer the second time, and as the first did beat away the bun, and soften the rinde, so this shall break and diuide, and prepare it fit for the heckle; & hurds which are this second time beaten off, you shall also saue; for that of the hemp (being toased in wool cards) wil make a good hempen hurden) & that comming from the flaxe (vsed in that manner) a flax hurden better then the former.
               After the second swingling of your Hempe,
                     Of beating hempe.
                   and that the hurds thereof haue been laid by, you shall take the strikes, and diuiding them into dozens, or halfe dozens, make them vp to great thicke roles, and then as it were broaching them, or spitting them vpon long stickes, set them in the corner of some chimney, where they may receiue the heate of the fire, and there let them abide, till they bee dried exceedingly, then take them, and laying them in a round trough made for the purpose, so many as may conueniently lie therein, and there with beetles beat them exceedingly, till they handle both without & within as soft and pliant as may be, without any hardnesse or roughnesse to be felt or perceiued; then take them from the trough, and open the roler, and diuide the strikes seuerally as at the first, and if any be insufficiently beaten, role them vp, and beat them ouer as before.
               When your Hempe hath been twice swingled,
                     Of heckling hempe.
                   dried, and beaten, you shal then bring it to the heckle, which instrument needeth no demonstration, because it is hardly vnknown to any woman whatsoeuer; and the first Heckle shall be course, open and wide toothed, because it is the

first breaker or diuider of the same, and the layer of the strikes euen & straight: and the hurds which come of this heckling you shall mixe with those of the latter swingling, & it will make the cloth much better; then you shall heckle it the second time through a good straight heckle made purposely for hemp, & be sure to break it very wel and sufficiently therupon, & saue both the hurds by themselues, and the strikes by themselues in seuerall places.
               Now here bee some very principall good Hus-wiues, which vse only but to heckle their hemp once ouer, affirming, that if it be sufficiently dried and beaten, that once going ouer through a straight heckle will serue without more losse of labour, hauing been twice swingled before.
               
                  
                     Dressing of hempe more fine.
                  Now if you intend to haue an excellent peece of hempen cloth, which shall equall a peece of very pure linnen, then after you haue beaten it, as before said, and heckled once ouer, you shall then role it vp againe, drie it as before, and beat it againe as much as at the first; then heckle it through a fine flaxen heckle, and the towe which falles from the heckle, will make a principall hemping, but the Teare it selfe a cloth as pure, as fine Hus-wifes linnen, the indurance and lasting whereof, is rare & wonderfull; thus you see the vttermost art in dressing of hemp for each seueral purpose in cloth making till it come to the spinning.
               
                  
                     Of heckling flaxe.
                  Flax after it hath been twice swingeld needeth neither more drying nor beating as hempe doth, but may bee brought to the heckle in the same manner as you did hempe; onely the heckle must be much finer and straiter; and as you did before the first heckle being much courser then the latter, holding the strike stiffe in your hand, breake it very well vpon that heckell: then the hurdes which come thereof, you shall saue to make fine hurden cloth of, and the strike it selfe you shall passe through a finer

heckle; and the hurds which come from thence, you shall saue to make fine midlen cloth of, and then teare it selfe for the best linnen.
               To dresse Flaxe for the finest vse that may mee,
                     The dressing of flaxe to the finest vse
                   as to to make faire Holland cloth of great price, or thread for the most curious purpose, a secret hitherto almost concealed from the best Hus-wifes; you shall take your flaxe after it hath been handled, as is before shewed, and laying three strikes together, plat them in a plat of three so hard and close together as it is possible, ioining one to the end of another, till you haue platted so much as you thinke conuenient, and then begin another plat
                     •
                   and thus plat as many seueral plats as you thinke will make a role, like vnto one of your Hempe roules before spoke off, and then wreathing them hard together, make vp the roule
                     •
                   and so many roules more or lesse, according to the purpose you dresse them for: This done, put the roules into a hempe trough, and beat them soundly, rather more then lesse the hempe: and then open and vnplat it, and diuide euery strike from other very carefully; then heckle it through a finer heckle then any formerly vsed; for of heckles there be euer three sorts, and this must be the finest: and in this heckling you must bee exceeding carefull to doe it gently, lightly, and with good deliberation, least what you heckle from it should runne to knots, or other hardnes, as it is apt to doe: but being done artificially as it ought, you shall see it looke, & feele it handle like fine soft cotton, or Iersey wooll; and this which thus looketh and feeleth, and falleth from the heckle, will notwithstanding make a pure fine linnen, and runne at least two yards and a halfe in the pound; but the teare it selfe will make a perfect strong, and most fine holland, running at least fiue yards in the pound.
               
                  
                  
                     Of the spinning of hempe.
                  After your teare is thus drest, you shall spinne it either vpon wheele or rocke, but the wheele is the swifter way, & the rocke maketh the finer thread; you shall draw your thread according to the nature of the teare, and as long as it is euen, it can not be to small, but if it be vneuen it will ne
                     •
                  er make a durable cloth. Now for as much as euery Hus-wife is not able to spinne her owne teare in her owne house, you shall make choice of the best Spinners you can heare of, and to them put foorth your teare to spinne, waighing it before it goe, and waighing it after it is spun and drie, allowing waight for waight, or an ounce and a halfe for wast at the most: as for the prises for spinning, they are according to the natures of the country, the finenesse of the teare, and the dearenesse of prouisions: some spinning by the pound, some by the lay, and some by day, as the bargaine shall be made.
               
                  
                     Of reeling yarne.
                  After your yarne is spunne vpon spindles, spooles, or such like; you shall then reele it vpon reeles, of which the reeles which are hardly two foot in length, and haue but onely two contrary crosse barres are the best, the most easie and least to be troubled with rauelling; and in the weauing of your fine yarne to keepe it the better from rauelling, you shal as you reele it, with a Ley band of a big twist, diuide the slipping or skeane into diuers Leyes, allowing to euery Ley 80. threads, and 20. Laies to euery slipping, the yarne being very fine, otherwise lesse of both kinds: but if you spinne by the Ley, as at a ob. a Ley or so, then the ancient custome hath been to allow to a reele which was 8. yards, all aboue 160. threads to euery Ley, and 25 Leyes, and sometimes 30 Leyes to a slipping, which will ordinarily amount to a pound or there abouts; and so by that you may proportion foorth the price for any manner of spinning whatsoeuer: for if the best thus,

then the 2. so much bated; and so accordingly the worst.
               After thus your yarne is spunne and reeld,
                     Of the scowring of yarne
                   being in the slipping you shall scowre it
                     •
                   Therefore first to fetch out the spottes, you shall lay it in luke wa
                     •
                  me water, and let it lie so three or foure daies, each day shifting it once, and wringing it out, and laying it in another water of the same nature; then carry it to a well or brooke, and there rinse it, till you see that nothing commeth from it, but pure cleane water; for whilst there is any filth within it, there will neuer be white cloth
                     •
                   which done take a bucking tub, & couer the bottome thereof with very fine Ashen ashes: then opening your slippings,
                     Bucking of yarne.
                   and spreading them, lay them on those ashes; then couer those slippings with ashes againe, then lay in more slippings, and couer them with ashes as before, and thus lay one vpon another, till all your yarne be laid in; then couer the vppermost yarne with a bucking cloth, and lay therein a pecke or two (according to the bignes of the tub) of ashes more: then poure into all through the vppermost cloth so much warme water, till the tub can receiue no more; and so let it stand al night: the next morning you shall set a kettle of cleane water on the fire; and when it is warme, you shall pull out the spigget of the bucking tubbe, and let the water therein runne into another cleane vessell, and as the bucking tubbe wasteth, so you shall fill it vp againe with the warme water on the fire; and as the water on the fire wasteth, so you shal fill it vp againe with the lie which commeth from the bucking tubbe, euer obseruing to make the lie hotter and hotter till it seeth; and then when it so seetheth, you shall as before apply it with boiling lie, at least foure houres together; which is called, the driuing of a Buck of yarne: All which being done you shall take off the Bucking-cloth, and then putting the yarne with the lie ashes into

large tubbes or boales, with your hands as hot as you can suffer it to posse, and labor the yarne, ashes, and lie a pretty while together; then carry it to a well, riuer, or other cleane scouring water, and there rinse it as cleane as may be from the ashes,
                     Whitening of yarne.
                   then take it, and hang it vp vpon poales abroad in the aire all day, and at night take the slippings downe, and lay them in water all night, then the next daie hang them vp again, and if any part of them drie, then cast water vpon them, obseruing euer to turne that side outmost which whiteth slowest, and thus doe at least seuen daies together, then put all the yarne againe into a bucking tub without ashes, and couer it as before with a bucking cloth, and lay thereupon good store of fresh ashes, and driue that buck as you did before, with very strong seething lies, the space of half a daie or more, then take it foorth, posse it, rinse it, and hang it vp as you did before on the daies, and laying it in water on the nights another weeke, and then wash it ouer in faire water, and so drie it vp: other waies there are of scouring and whiting of yarne; as steeping it in branne and warme, water, and then boiling it with Ozier sticks, wheat-straw water and ashes, and then possing, rinsing, and bleaching it vpon hedges, or bushes; but it is a foule and vncertaine waie, and I would not wish any good House-wife to vse it.
               
                  
                     Of winding yarne.
                  After your yarne is scoured and whited, you shall then winde it vp into round bals of a reasonable bignesse, rather without bottomes then with any at all, because it may deceiue you in the waight, for according to the pounds will arise your yards and lengths of cloth.
               
                  
                     Of warping and weauing.
                  After your yarne is wound and waighed, you shall carry it to the Weauers, and warpe it as was before shewed for wollen cloth, knowing this, that if your Weauer bee

honest and skilfull hee will make you good and perfect cloth of euen and euen, that is iust the same waight in weft that then was in wrap; as for the action of weauing it selfe, it is the worke-mans occupation, and therefore to him I referre it.
               After your cloth is wouen,
                     The scowring and whiting of Cloth.
                   and the web or webs come home, you shall first lay it to steepe in all points as you did your yarne, to fetch out the soyling and other filth which is gathered from the Weauer; then rinse it also as you did your yarne, then bucke it also in lie and ashes as before said, and rinse it, and then hauing loops fixt to the seluedge of the cloth spread it vpon the grasse, and stake it downe at the vttermost length and breadth, and as fast as it dries water it againe, but take heed you wet it not too much, for feare you milde or rot it, neither cast water vpon it till you see it in manner drie, and be sure weekely to turne it first on one side, & then on the other, and at the end of the first weeke you shall buck it as before in Lie and Ashes: againe then rinse it, spread it, and water it as before; then if you see it whites apace, you need not to giue it any more bucks with the ashes and the cloth mixt together: but then a couple of cleane bucks (as was before shewed in the yarne) the next fortnight following; and then being whitened enough, drie vp the cloath, and vse it as occasion shall require; the best season for the same whitening being in Aprill and May. Now the course and worst huswifes scoure and white their cloath with water and branne, and buck it with lie and greene hemlocks: but as before I said, it is not good, neither would I haue it put in practise. And thus much for Wool, Hempe, Flax, and Cloth of each seuerall substance.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII. Of Dairies, Butter, Cheese, and the necessarie things belonging to that Office.
               
                  THere followeth now in his place after these knowledges alreadie rehearsed, the ordering and gouernment of Dairies, with the profits and commodities belonging to the same.
                     Of Kine.
                   And first touching the stocke wherewith to furnish Dairies, it is to be vnderstood that they must be Kine of the best choice and breed that our English houswife can possibly attain vnto, as of big bone, faire shape, right bred, and deep of milke, gentle, and kindely.
               
                  
                     Bignesse of Kine.
                  Touching the bignesse of bone, the larger that euery cow is, the better she is: for when either age, or mischance shall disable her for the paile, being of large bone she may be fed, and made fit for the shambles & so no losse, but profit, and any other to the paile as good and sufficient as her selfe.
               For her shape it must a little differ from the Butchers rules;
                     Shape of Kine.
                   for being chose for the Dairie, she must haue all the signes of plenty of milke, as a crumpled horne, a thinne necke, a hayrie dewlappe, and a very large vdder, with foure tears, long, thicke, and sharpe at tke ends, for the most part either all white, of what colour soeuer the cow be; or at least the fore part thereof, and if it bee well haird before and behinde, and smooth in the bottome, it is a good signe also.
               As touching the right breed of Kine through our nation generally affoordeth very good ones,
                     The breed of Kine.
                   yet some countries doe farre exceed other countries; as Chesshire, Lanca-shire,

Yorke-shire, and Darbie-shire for blacke Kine; Glocester-shire, Somerset-shire, and some part of Wilt-shire for red Kine, and Lincolne-shire pide kine: and from the breeds of these Countries generally doe proceed the breeds of all other, howsoeuer dispersed ouer the whole Kingdome. Now for our huswifes direction, she shall choose her dairie from any of ther best breeds before named, according as her opinion and delight shall gouerne her, onely obseruing not to mix her breeds of diuers kindes, but to haue all of one intire choice without variation, because it is vnprofitable; neither must you by any meanes haue your Bull a forrener from your Kine, but absolutely either of one Countrie, or of one shape and colour: Againe, in the choice of your Kine you must looke diligently to the goodnesse and fertility of the soile wherein you liue, and by all meanes buy no Kine from a place that is more fruitfull then your owne, but rather harder; for the latter will prosper and come on, the other will decay and 
                     •
                  all into disease; as the pissing of blood, & such like, for which disease and all other you may finde assured cures in a little booke I published, called Cheape and good.
               
               For the depth of milke in Kine (which is the giuing of most milke) being the maine of a Hus-wifes profit,
                     Depth of milke in Kine.
                   shee shall be very carefull to haue that quallity in her beasts. Now those Kine are said to be deepest of milk, which are new bare; that is, which haue but lately calued, and haue their milke deepe springing in their vdders, for at that time she giueth the most milke; and if the quantity then be not conuenient, doubtles the cow cannot be said to be of deepe milch:
                     Quantity of Milke.
                   and for the quantity of milke, for a Cow to giue two gallons at a meale, is rare, and extraordinarie; to giue a gallon and a halfe is much, and conuenient, and to giue but a gllon certain is much, and not to be found

fault with: againe those Kine are said to be deep of milke, which though they giue not so exceeding much milke as others, yet they giue a reasonable quantity, and giue it long as all the yeer through, whereas other Kine that giue more in quantity, will goe drie, being with calf some three moneths, some two, and some one, but these will giue their vsual measure, euen the night before they calue; and therefore are said to be Kine deepe of milke. Now for the retained opinion, that the Cow which goeth not drie at all,
                     Of the going dry of Kine.
                   or very little, bringeth not foor
                     •
                  h so good a Calfe as the other, because it wanteth much of the nourishment it should enioy, it is vaine and friuolous; for should the substance from whence the milke proceedeth conuert to the other intended nourishment, it would be so superabundant, that it would conuert either to disease, or putrifaction: but letting these secret reasons passe, there be some kine which are so excedingly full of milke, that they must be milkt at least thrice a day, at morning, noone, and euening, or else they will shed their milke, but it is a fault rather then a vertue, & proceedeth more from a laxatiuenesse or loosenesse of milke, then from any abundance; for I neuer saw those three meales yet equall the two meales of a good Cow, and therefore they are not truly called deepe of milke.
               
                  
                     Of the gentlenes of Kine.
                  Touching the gentlenesse of kine, it is a vertue as fit to be expected as any other; for if she be not affable to the maide, gentle, & willing to come to the paile, and patient to haue her duggs drawne without skittishnesse, striking or wildnesse, shee is vtterly vnfitte for the dayrie.
               
                  
                     Of kindlines in Kine.
                  As a Cow must be gentle to her milker, so she must bee kind in her owne nature; that is, apt to conceiue, and bring foorth, fruitfull to nourish, and louing to that which springs from her; for so she bringeth foorth a double profit;

the one for the time present which is in the dairy; the other for the time to come; which is in the maintenance of the stocke, and vpholding of breede.
               The best time for a Cow to calue in for the Dairie,
                     The best time to calue in, for the dairy or breede.
                   is in the later end of March, and all Aprill; for then grasse beginning to spring to its perfect goodnesse, will occasion the greatest increase of milke that may be: and one good early Cow will counteruaile two later, yet the calues thus calued are not to be reared, but suffered to feed vpon their Dammes best milke, and then to be sold to the Butchers, and surely the profit will equall charge; but those Calues which fall in October, Nouember, or any time of the depth of winter may well be reared vp for breed, because the maine profit of the dayrie is then spent, and such breede will hold vp and continue the stocke, prouided that you reare not vp any calues which are calued in the prime daies, for they generally are subiect to the disease of the sturdy, which is dangerous and mortall.
               The Housewife which only hath respect to her Dairy,
                     Roaring of Calues.
                   and for whose knowledge this discourse is written (for we haue shewed the Grasier his office in the English Husband-man) must reare her Calues vpon the finger with floten milke, and not suffer them to run with the dammes, the generall manner whereof, and the cure of all the diseases incident to them and all other cattell is fully declared in the booke called Cheape and good.
               
               To proceed then to the generall vse of Dairies,
                     The generall vse of Dairies.
                   it consisteth first in the cattell (of which we haue spoken sufficiently) then in the howers of milking, the ordering of the milke, and the profits arising from the same.
               The best and most commended howers for milking are indeed but two in the the day,
                     The howers of milking.
                   that in the spring and summer time which is the best season for the dairie, is betwixt

fiue and sixe in the morning, and sixe and seauen a clock in the euening: and although nice and curious Hus-wiues will haue a third houre betwixt them, as betweene twelue and one in the after-noone, yet the better experienst doe not allow it, and say as I beleeue, that two good meales of milke are better euer then three bad ones; also in the milking of a Cow, the woman must sit on the neere side of the Cow,
                     Manner of milking.
                   she must gently at first handle and stretch her dugges, and moisten them with milke that they may yeeld out the milke the berter and with lesse paine: shee shall not settle her selfe to milke, nor fixe her paile firme to the ground till she see the Cow stand sure and firme, but be ready vpon any motion of the Cow to saue her paile from ouerturning; when she seeth all things answerable to her desire, shee shall then milke the Cow boldly, and not leaue stretching and straining of her teats till not one drop of milke more will come from them, for the worst point of Hus-wifery that can bee, is to leaue a Cow halfe milkt; for besides the losse of the milke, it is the only way to make a Cow drie and vtterly vnprofitable for the Dairy: the Milke-mayd whilst she is in milking, shal do nothing rashly or suddenly about the Cow, which may affraight or amase her, but as she came gently, so with all getlenes she shall depart.
               
                  
                     The ordering of milk.
                  Touching the well ordering of milke after it is come home to the Dairy, the maine point belonging thereunto is the Hus-wiues cleanlinesse in the sweet and neate keeping of the Dairy-house; where not the least moat of any filth may by any meanes appeare, but all things either to the eye or nose so void of sowernesse or sluttishnesse, that a Princes bed-chamber must not exceed it: to this must be added the sweet and delicate keeping of her milke vessels,
                     Ordering of milk vessels.
                   whether they be of wood, earth, or lead, the best of

which is yet disputable with the best Hus-wifes; only this opinion is generally receiued, that the woodden vessell which is round and shallow is best in cold vaults, the earthen vessels principall for long keeping, and the leaden vessell for yeelding of much creame: but howsoeuer, any and all these must be carefully scalded once a day, and set in the open aire to sweeten, lest getting any taint of sowernesse into them, they corrupt the milk that shall be put therein.
               But to proceed to my purpose,
                     Silling of milke.
                   after your milk is come home, you shall as it were straine it from all vncleane things through a neate & sweet kept syle, the form whereof euery Hus-wife knowes, and the bottome of this sile, through which the milke must passe, shal be couered with a very cleane washt fine linnen cloth, such an one as will not suffer the least mote or haire to goe through it: you shall into euery vessell sile a pretty quantity of milk, according to the proportion of the vessell, the broader it is, the shallower it is, the better it is, and yeeldeth euer the best creame, and keepeth the milke longest from sowring.
               Now for the profits arising from milke,
                     Profits arising from milke.
                   they are three of especiall account, as Butter, Cheese, and Milke, to be eaten either simple or compounded: as for Curds, sowre Milke, or Whigge, they come from secondary meanes, and therefore may not be numbred with these.
               For your Butter which onely proceedeth from the Creame,
                     Of butter.
                   which is the very heart and strength of Milke, it must be gathered very carefully, diligently, and painefully: And though cleanlinesse be such an ornament to a Hus-wife, that if she want any part thereof, shee looseth both that and all good names else: yet in this action it must be more seriously imploied then in any other.
                     Of fleeting Creame.
                  
               
               To beginne then with the fleeting or gathering of

your Creame from the Milke, you shall doe it in this manner: the Milke which you did milke in the morning you shall with a fine thinne shallow dish made for the purpose, take of the Creame about fiue of the clocke in the euening; and the Milke which you did milke in the euening, you shall fleete and take of the Creame about fiue of the clocke the next morning; and the creame so taken off, you shall put into a cleane sweet and well leaded earthen pot close couered,
                     Of keeping Creame.
                   & set in a coole place: And this creame so gathered you shall not keepe aboue two daies in the Summer, and not aboue foure in the Winter, if you will haue the sweetest and best butter; and that your Dairie containe fiue Kine or more; but how many or few soeuer you keep, you shall not by any meanes preserue your Creame aboue three daies in summer, and not aboue sixe in the Winter.
               
                  
                     Of churming Butter and the daies.
                  Your Creame being neately and sweet kept, you shall churme or churne it on those vsuall daies which are fittest either for your vse in the house, or the markets adioining neere vnto you, according to the purpose for which you keepe your Dayrie. Now the daies most accustomable held amongst ordinary Huswiues, are Tuesday and Friday: Tusday in the afternoon, to serue Wednesday morning market, and Fryday morning to serue Saturday market; for Wensday and Saturday are the most general market daies of this Kingdome, and Wenseday, Friday, and Saturday,
                     Manner of churming.
                   the vsual fasting daies of the weeke; & so meetest for the vse of butter. Now 
                     •
                  or churming, take your creame and through a strong and cleane cloth straine it into the churme; and then couering the churme close, and setting it in a place fit for the action in which you are imploid (as in the summer in the coolest place of your dairy; and exceeding early in the morning, or very late in the

euening, and in the winter in the warmest place of your dairie, and in the most temperate howres, as about noone, or a little before or after, and so churne it, with swift strokes, marking the noise of the fame which will be solid, heauy and intyre, vntill you heare it alter, and the sound is light, sharp, and more spirity: and then you shal say that your butter breakes, which perceiued both by this sound the lightnesse of the churne-staffe, and the sparkes and drops, which will appeare yellow about the lippe of the churne, and clense with your hand both the lidde and inward fides of the churne, and hauing put all together you shall couer the churne againe, and then with easie stroakes round, and not to the bottome, gather the butter together into one intire lumpe and body, leauing no peeces thereof seuerall or vnioyned.
               Now for as much as there bee many mischiefes and inconueniencies which may happen to butter in the churning,
                     Helps in churning.
                   because it is a body of much tendernesse, and neither will endure much heate, nor much cold: for if it bee ouer heated, it will looke white, crumble, and be bitter in taste; & if it be ouer cold it will not come at all, but make you wast much labour in vaine, which faults to help if you churne your butter in the heat of Sommer it shall not be amisse, if during the time of your churning you place your churn in a paile of cold water as deepe as your Creame riseth in the churne; and in the churning thereof let your stroakes goe slow, and be sure that your churn be cold when you put in your creame: but if you churne in the coldest time of winter, you shall then put in your creame before the churne be cold after it hath been scalded; and you shall place it within the aire of the fire and churne it with as swift stroakes, and as fast as may be, for the much labouring thereof will keepe it in a continuall

all warmth,
                     The handling of butter
                   and thus you shall haue your butter good, sweet, and according to your wish. After your butter is churnd, or churnd and gathered well together in your churne, you shall then open your churne, and with both your hands gather it well together, and take it from the buttermilke, and put it into a very cleane boule of wood, or panshion of earth sweetned for the purpose, and if you intend to spend the butter sweet and fresh, you shall haue your boule or p
                     •
                  nshion filled with very cleane water, and therein with your hand you shall worke the butter, turning, and tossing it to and fro till you haue by that labour beaten and washt out all the buttermilke, and brought the butter to a firme substance of it selfe,
                     Clensing of butter.
                   without any other moisture: which done, you shall take the butter from the water, and with the point of a knife scoch and slash the butter ouer and ouer euery way so thicke as is possible, leauing no part through which your knif must not passe; for this will clense and fetch out the smallest haire or mote, or ragge of a strainer, and any other thing which by casuall meanes may happen to fall into it.
               
                  
                     Seasoning of Butter.
                  After this you shall shread the butter in a boule thin, and take so much salt as you shall think conuenient, which must by no meanes be much for sweet butter, and sprinkle it thereupon, then with your hands worke the butter and the salt exceedingly well together, and then make it vp either into dishes, pounds, or halfe pounds at your pleasure.
               
                  
                     Of May butter.
                  If during the month of May before you salt your butter you saue a lumpe thereof, and put it into a vessell, and so set it into the sunne the space of that moneth, you shall finde it exceeding soueraigne & medicinable for wounds, straines, aches, and such like grieuances.
               Touching the poudring vp or potting of butter, you

shall by no meanes as in fresh butter wash the buttermike out with water,
                     Of powdering vp or potting of Butter.
                   but onely worke it cleere out with your hands: for water wil make the butter rusty, or reesse; this done you shall weigh your butter, and know how many pounds there is thereof: for should you weigh it after it were salted, you would be deceiu'd in the weight: which done, you shall open the butter, and salt it very well and throughly, beating it in with your hand till it bee generally disperst through the whole butter; then take cleane earthen pots, exceedingly well leaded least the brine should leake through the same, and cast salt into the bottome of it: then lay in your butter, and presse it downe hard within the same, and when your pot is filled, then couer the top thereof with salt so as no butter be seene: then closing vp the pot let it stand where it may be cold and safe: but if your dairy be so little that you cannot at first fill vp the pot, you shall then when you haue potted vp so much as you haue, couer it all ouer with salt.
               Now there be hus-wiues whose dairies being great, can by no meanes conueniently haue their butter contained in pots;
                     Of great dairies and their customes.
                   as in Holland, Suffolke, Norfolke, and such like, and therfore are first to take barrels very close and wel mad
                     •
                  , and after they haue salted it well, they fill their barrels therewith; then they take a small stick, cleane, and sweete, and therewith make diuerse holes downe through the butter, euen to the bottome of the larraill: and then make a strong brine of water and salt which will beare an egge, and after it is boild, well skimm'd and cool'd; then poure it vpon the toppe of the butter till it swimme aboue the same, and so let it settle. Some vse to boile in this brine a branch or two of Rosemary, and it is not amisse, but pleasant and wholsome.
               Now although you may at at any time betwixt May and
                     When to pot butter.
                  
                  
                  September pot vp butter, obseruing to doe it in the coolest time of the morning: yet the most principall season of all is in the Month of May onlie; for then the aire is most temperate, and the butter will take salt the best, and the least subiect to reesing.
               
                  
                     Vse of Buttermilke.
                  The best vse of buttermilke for the able Hus-wiue is charitably to bestow it on the poore Neighbors, whose wants doe daily crie out for sustenance: and no doubt but she shall finde the profit thereof in a diuine place, as well as in her earthly businesse: But if her owne wants command her to vse it for her owne good, then shee shall of her buttermilke make curds in this manner:
                     Of Buttermilke Curds
                   she shall take her butermilke and put it into a cleane earthen vessell, which is much larger then to receiue the Butter-milke onely; and looking vnto the quantity thereof, shee shall take as it were a third part so much new Milke and set it on the fire, and when it is ready to rise, take it off and let it coole a little; then powre it into the buttermilke in the same manner as you would make a posset, and hauing stirred it about let it stand: then with a fine skummer when you will vse the curds (for the longer it stands the better the curds will eate) take them vp into a cullander and let the whey drop well from it: and then eate them either with Creame, Ale, Wine, or Beere; as for the whey you may keepe it also in a sweet stone vessell: for it is that which is called VVhigge,
                     Of Whigge.
                   and is an excellent coole drink and a wholsome; and may very well be drunke a summer through in sted of any other drinke, & without doubt wil slake the thirst of any labouring man as well, if not better.
               
                  
                     Of Cheese.
                  The next maine profit which ariseth from the Dairy is Cheese, of which there be diuers kinds, as new Milke, or morrow milke Cheese, nettle Cheese, floaten milk Cheese, and eddish, or after much Cheese, all which haue

their seuerall orderings & compositions as you shall perceiue by the discourse following: yet before I doe begin to speake of the making of the Cheese, I will shew yow how to order your Cheeselep-bag or runnet, which is the most principall thing wherewith your Cheese is compounded, and giueth the perfect tast vnto the same.
               The Cheeselepbagge or runnet which is she stomacke bagge of a young suckling calfe,
                     Of the Cheslep bag or runnet.
                   which neuer tasted other food then milke, where the curd lieth vndisgested. Of these bags you shall in the begining of the yeere prouide your selfe good store, and first open the bagge and poure out into a cleane vessell the curd and thicke substance thereof; but the rest which is not curdled nou shall put away: then open the curd and picke out of it all manner of motes, chiers of grasse, or other filth gotten into the same: Then wash the curd in so many cold waters till it be as white and cleane from all sorts of motes as is possible; then lay it one a cleane cloth that the water may draine from it, which done, lay it in another dry vessell, then take a handfull or two of salt and rub the curd therewith exceedingly: then take your bag and wash it also in diuers cold waters till it be very cleane, and then put the curd and the salt vp into the bag, the bag being also well rub'd within with salt: and so put it vp, and salt the outside also all ouer: and then close vp the pot close and so keepe them a full yere before you vse them. For touching the hanging of them vp in chimney corners (as course Hus-wiues doe) is sluttish, naught, and vnholsome, and the spending of your runnet whilst it is new, makes your Cheese haue and proue hollow.
               When your runnet of earning is fit to be vsed, you shall season it after this manner;
                     Seasoning of the runnet.
                   you shall take the bagge you intend to vse, and opening it, put the curd into a

stone morter or a bowle, and with a wooden pestell or a roling pinne beat it exceedingly; then put to it the yelkes of two or three egges, and halfe a pint of the thickest and sweetest creame you can fleete from your milke, with a peny-worth of saffron finely dryed and beaten to powder, together with a little Cloues and Mace, and stirre them all passing well together till they appeare but as one substance, and then put it vp in the bagge againe: then you shall make a very strong brine of water and salt, and in the same you shall boile a handfull or two of Saxifrage, and then when it is cold clare it into a cleane earthen vessell; then take out of the bagge halfe a dozen spoonfull of the former curd and mix it with the brine, then closing the bagge vp againe close hang it within the brine, and in any case also steepe in your brine a few Wall nut-tree leaues & so keepe your runnet a fortnight after before you vse it; and in this manner dresse all your bagges so, as you may euer haue one ready after another, and the youngest a fortnight old euer at least, for that will make the earing quicke and sharp, so that foure spoonfulls thereof will suffice for the gathering and seasoning of at least twelue gallons of milke, and this is the choisest and best earning which can possible be made by any Hus-wife.
               
                  
                     To make a new-mike cheese compound.
                  To make a new milke or morning milk cheese, which is the best Cheese made ordinarily in our kingdome; you shall take your milk early in the morning as it comes from the Cow, and file it into a cleane tubbe, then take all the creame also from the milke you milk the euening before, and straine it into your new milke; then take a pretty quantity of cleane water, and hauing made it scalding hot, powre it into the milke also to scauld the creame and it together, then let it stand, and coole it with a dish rill it be-no more then luke warme; then go to the pot where your

earning bagges hangs, and draw from thence so much of the earning without stirring of the bagge, as will serue for your proportion of milke, and straine it therein very carefully; for if the least mote of the curd of the earning fall into the cheese, it will make the Cheese rot and mould; when your earnings is put in you shall couer the mike, and so let it stand halfe an howre or thereabouts; for if the earning be good it will come in that space; but if you see it doth not, then you shall put in more: being come, you shall with a dish in your hand breake and mash the curd together, possing and turning it about diuersly: which done, with the flat palms of your hands very gently presse the curd downe into the bottome of the tub, then with a thinne dish take the whey from it as cleane as you can, and so hauing prepared your Cheese-fat answerable to the proportion of your curd, with both your hands ioined together, put your curd therein and breake it and presse it downe hard into the fat till you hane fild it; then lay vpon the top of the curd your flat cheese-boord, and a little small weight thereupon, that the whey may drop from it into the vnder vessell; when it hath done dropping take a large cheese-cloth, and hauing wet it in the cold water lay it on the cheese-boord, and then turne the cheese vpon it; then lay the cloth into the cheese fat; and so put the cheese therein againe, and with a thin slice thrust the same down close on euery side; then laying the cloth also ouer the top to lay on the cheese-boord, and so carry it to your great presse, and there presse it vnder a sufficient waight; after it hath been there prest halfe an howre, you shall take it and turne it into a drie cloth, and put it into the presse againe, and thus you shall turne it into drie cloathes at least fiue or sixe times in the first day, and euer put it vnder the presse againe, not taking it therefrom till the next day in

the euening at soonest, and the last time, it is turned you shall turne it into the dry fat without any cloth at all.
               When it is prest sufficiently and taken from the fat, you shall then lay it in a kimnell, and rub it first on the one side and then on the other with salt, and so let it lie all that night, then the next morning, you shall doe the like again and so turne it vpon the brine, which comes from the salt two or three dayes or more, according to the bignesse of the cheese, and then lay it vpon a faire table or shelfe to drie, forgetting not euery day once to rubbe it all ouer with a cleane cloth, and then to turne it till such time that it be throughly drie and fit to goe into the presse; and in this manner of drying you must obserue to lay it first where it may drie hastily, and after where it may drie at more leasure; thus may you make the best and most principall cheese.
               
                  
                     Cheese of two meales.
                  Now if you will make Cheese of two meales, as your mornings new milke, and the euenings Creame milke, and all you shall doe but the same formerly rehearsed. And if you will make a simple morrow milke Cheese which is all of new milke and nothing els;
                     Cheese of one meale.
                   you shall then doe as is before declared, onely you shall put in your earning so soone as the milke is fild (if it haue any warmth in it) and not scald it; but if the warmth be lost you shall put it into a kettell and giue it the aire of the fire.
               
                  
                     Of f
                           ••
                        ttle Cheese.
                  If you will haue a very dainty nettle Cheese, which is the finest summer Cheese which can be eaten; you shall doe in all things as was formerly taught in the new milke Cheese compound; Onely you shall put the curd into a very thin cheese-fat, not aboue halfe an inch or a little better deepe at the most, and then when you come to dry them assoone as it is draind from the brine, you shall lay it vpon fresh nettles and couer it all ouer with the same;

and so lying where they may feele the aire, let them ripen therein, obseruing to renew your nettles once in two dayes, and euery time you renew them, to turne the Cheese or Cheeses, and to gather your Nettles as much without stalkes as may be, and to make the bed both vnder and aloft as smooth as may be, for the more euen and fewer wrinkles that your Cheese hath, the more daintie is your Hous-wife accounted.
               If you will make floaten Milke Cheese,
                     Of floaten milk-cheese.
                   which is the courfest of all Cheeses; you shall take some of the Milke and heate it vpon the fire to warme all the rest: but if it be so sower that you dare not aduenture the warming of it for feare of breaking, then you shall heate water, and with it warme it; then put in your earning as before shewed, and gather it, presse it, salt it, and drie it as you did all other Cheeses.
               Touching your eddish Cheese or winter Cheese,
                     Of eddish cheese.
                   there is not any difference betwixt it and your summer Cheese touching the making thereof onely, because the season of the yeere denieth a kindly drying or hardning thereof, it differeth much in taste, and will bee soft alwaies; and of these eddish Cheeses you may make as many kinds as of summer cheeses, as of one meale, two meales, or of Milke that is floaten.
               When you haue made your Cheese,
                     Of whey and the pr
                           •
                        
                        fits.
                   you shall then haue care of the Whey, whose generall vse differeth not from that of butter-milke, for either you shall preserue it to bestow on the poore, because it is a good drink for the labouring man, or keepe it to make curds out of it, or lastly to nourish and bring vp your swine.
               If you will make curds of your best Whey,
                     Of whey curds.
                   you shall set it vpon the fire, and being ready to boile, you shall put into it a pretty quantitie of butter-milke, and then as you

see the Curds arising vp to the top of the Whey, with a skummer skim them off, and put them into a Cullender, and then put in more butter-milke, and thus doe whilest you can see any Curds arise; then the Whey being drained cleane from them, put them into a cleane vessell, and so serue them forth as occasion shall serue.
            
            
               CHAP. V. The Office of the Malster, and the seuerall secrets, and knowledges belonging to the making of Malte.
               
                  IT is most requisite and fit that our Hous-wife be experienced and well practised in the well making of Malt, both for the necessarie and continuall vse thereof, as also for the generall profit which accrueth and ariseth to the husband, houswife, and the whole familie: for as from it is made the drinke, by which the houshold is nourished and sustained, so to the fruitfull husbandman (who is the master of rich ground, and much tillage) it is an excellent merchandize, and a commodity of so great trade, that not alone especiall Townes and Counties are maintained thereby, but also the whole Kingdome, and diuers others of out neighboring Nations. This office or place of knowledge belongeth particularly to the Hous-wife; and though we haue many excellent Men malsters, yet it is properlie the worke and care of the woman, for it is a house-worke, and done altogether within dores, where generally lieth her charge; the Man only ought to bring in, and prouide the graine, and excuse her from portage or too heauie burthens; but for the Art of making the

Malt, and the seuerall labours appertaining to the same, euen from the Fat to the Kilne, it is onely the worke of the Houswife and the Maid-seruants to her appertaining.
               To begin then with the first knowledge of our Malster,
                     Election of Corne for Malt.
                   it consisteth in the election and choise of graine fit to make Malt on, of which there are indeed truly but two kinds, that is to say, Barley, which is of all other the most excellent for this purpose; and Oates, which when Barly is scant or wanting, maketh also a good and sufficient Malt: and though the drinke which is drawne from it be neither so much in the quantitie, so strong in the substance, nor yet so pleasant in the taste, yet is the drink verie good and tolerable, and nourishing enough for any reasonable creature. Now I do not denie, but there may be made Malt of Wheate, Pease, Lupins, Petches and such like, yet it is with vs of no retained custome, nor is the drink simply drawne or extracted from those graines, either wholsome or pleasant, but strong and fulsome; therefore I thinke it not fit to spend any time in treating of the same. To speake then of the election of Barly, you shall vnderstand that there be diuers kinds thereof, according to the alteration of soyles, some being big, some little, some full, some emptie, some white, some browne, and some yellow: but I will reduce all these into three kinds, that is, into the Clay-Barly, the Sand-Barly, and the Barly which groweth on the mixt soyle. Now the best Barly to make Malt on, both for yeelding the greatest quantitie of matter, and making the strongest, best and most wholsome drink, is the Clay barly wel drest, being cleane Corne of it selfe, without Weede or Oates, white of colour, full in substance, and sweete in taste: that which groweth on the mixt grounds is the next; for though it

be subiect to some Oates and some Weedes; yet being painefully and carefully drest, it is a faire and a bould corne, great and full; and though somewhat browner then the former, yet it is of a faire and cleane complexion. The last and worst graine for this purpose is the sand Barly, for although it bee seldome or neuer mixt with Oates, yet if the tillage bee not painefully and cunningly handled, it is much subiect to Weedes of diuers kinds, Tares, Fetches, and such like, which drinke vp the liquor in the brewing, and make the yeeld or quantitie thereof very little and vnprofitable: besides, the graine naturally of if selfe hath a yellow, withered, emptie huske, thicke and vnfurnished of meale, so that the drinke drawne from it can neither be so much, so strong, so good, nor so pleasant; so that to conclude, the cleane Clay-barley is best for profit in the sale-drinke for strength and long lasting. The Barly on the mixt grounds will serue well for housholds and Families: and the Sand-barly for the poore, and in such places where better is not to be gotten. And these are to bee knowne of euery Husband or Huswife; the first by his whitenesse, greatnesse and fulnesse: the second by his brownenesse, and the third by his yellownesse, with a darke browne nether end, and the emptines and thicknesse of the huske (and in this election of Barley you shall note, that if you find in it any wild Oats, it is a signe of a rich clay-ground, but ill husbanded, yet the Malt made thereof is not much amisse, for both the wilde Oate and the perfit Oate giue a pleasant sharpe rellish to the drinke, if the quantitie bee not too much, which is euermore to be respected. And to conclude this marter of election, great care must be had of both Husband and Huswife, that the Barley chosen for Malt, bee exceeding sweete, both in smell and taste, and verie cleane drest: for

any corruption maketh the Malt loathsome, and the foule dressing affoordeth much losse.
               After the skilfull election of graine for Malt,
                     Of the Malt house, and the situation.
                   the Huswife is to looke to the situation, goodnesse and apt accommodation of the Malt-house; for in that consisteth both much of the skill, and much of the profit: for the generall situation of the house, it would (as neere as can bee) stand vpon firme drie ground, hauing prospect euery way, with open windowes and lights to let in the Wind, Sunne and Ayre, which way the Malster pleaseth, both to coole and comfort the graine at pleasure, and also close-shuts or draw-windowes to keepe out the Frosts and Stormes, which are the onely lets and hinderances for making the Malt good and perfit; for the modell or forme of these houses, some are made round, with a Court in the middle, some long, and some square, but the round is the best and the least laborious; for the Cesternes or Fats being placed (as it were) at the head, or beginning of the cirkle, and the Pumpe or Well (but the Pumpe is best) beeing close adioyning, or at least by conueyance of troughes made as vsefull as if it were neere adioyning, the Corne beeing steepte, may with one persons labour and a shouell, bee cast from the Fatt, or Cesterne to the flowre and there coucht; then when the couch is broken it may in the turning either with the hand or the shouell, bee carried in such a circular house round about from one flowre to another, till it come to the kilne, which would also bee placed next ouer against the Pumpe and Cesternes, and all contained vnder one rooffe; and thus you may emptie steeping after steeping and carrie them with one persons labour from flowre to flowre, till all the flowres be 
                     •
                  ild: in which circular motion you shall find, that euer that which was first steep
                     •
                  ,

shall first come to the Kilne, and so consequently one after another in such sort as they were steeped, and your worke may euermore be constant, and your flowres at no time emptie but at your owne pleasure, and all the labour done onely with the hand and shouell, without carrying or recarrying, or lifting heauie burthens, which is both troublesome and offensiue, and not without much losse, because in such cases euer some graine scattereth. Now ouer against the Kiln-hole or furnace (which is euermore intended to be on the ground) should a conuenient place be made to pile in the fuell for the Kilne, whether it bee Straw, Bracken, Furres, Wood, Coale, or other fewell; but sweet Straw is of all other the best and nearest. Now it is intended that this Malt-house may be made two stories in height, but no higher: ouer your Cesternes shalbe made the Garners wherein to keepe your Barley before it be steeped: in the bottoms of these Garners, standing directly ouer the Cesterns, shall bee conuenient holes made to open and shut at pleasuer, through which shall run downe the Barley into the Cesterne. Ouer the bed of the Kilne can be nothing but the place for the Hairecloth, and a spacious roofe open euery way, that the smoke may haue free passage, and with the least ayre bee carried from the Kilne, which maketh the Malt sweete and pleasant. Ouer that place where the fewell is piled, & is next of all to the bed of the Kilne, would likewise bee other spacious Garners made, some to receiue the Malt assoone as it is dried with the Come and Kilne-dust, in which it may lie to mellow and ripen; and others to receiue the Malt after it is skreened and drest vp; for to let it be too long in the Come, as aboue three moneths at longest, will make it both corrupt, and breed Weeuels and other Wormes, which are the greatest destroyers of

Malt that may be. And these Gamers should be so conueniently plac't before the front of the Kilne-bed, that either with the shouell or a small scuttle you may cast, or carrie the Malt once dried into the Garners. For the other part of the flowres, they may bee imployed as the ground-flowres are for the flourishing of the Malt when it comes from the Cesterne: and in this manner, and with these accommodations you may fashion any Malthouse either round, long, square, or of what proportion soeuer either your estate, or the conuenience of the ground you haue to build on shall administer.
               Next to the cite or proportion of the ground,
                     Of Malt-flowres.
                   you shal haue a principall care for the making of your Malt-flowres, in which (all be Custome, and the Nature of the soyle binds many times a man to sundrie inconueniences, and that a man must necessarily build according to the matter he hath to build withall, from whence ariseth the many diuersities of Malt-flowres, ye
                     •
                  ) you shall vnderstand, that the generall best Malt-flowre, both for Summer and Winter, and all seasons, is the eaue or vaulted 
                     ••
                  ch which is hewed out of a drie and maine greet
                     •
                  e rock, for it is both warme in Winter, coole in Summer, and generally comfortable in all seasons of the yeere whatsoeuer. For it is to be noted, that all bee housewiues doe giue ouer the making of Malt in the extreame heate of Summer, it is not because the Malt is worse that is made in Sommer then that which is made in Winter, but because the flowres are more vnseasonable, and that the Sunne getting a power into such open places, maketh the graine which is steeped to sprout and come so swiftly, that it cannot indure to take time on the flowre, and get the right seasoning which belongeth to the same: whereas these kind of vaults being drie, and as it were coucht

vnder the ground, not onely keepeth out the sunne in summer, which maketh the Malt come much too fast, but also defendeth it from frosts and cold bitter blasts in sharpe winters, which will not suffer it to come, or sprout at all; or if parte doe come and sprout, as that which lieth in the hart of the bed; yet the vpper parts and outside by meanes of extreame cold cannot sprute; but being againe dried, hath his first hardnes, and is one and the same with raw Barley; for euery Hus-wife must know, that if Malt doe not come as it were altogether, and at an instant, and not one come more then another, the Malt must needs bee very much imperfit: The next flower to the Caue, or drie-sandy rocke, is the Flower which is made of earth, or a stiffe strong binding Clay well watred, and mixt with horse dung, and soape-ashes, beaten and wrought together, till it come to one solled firmnes; this Flower is a very warme comfortable Flower in the winter season, and will helpe the grayne to come and sprout exceedingly, and with the helpe of windowes to let in the cold aire, and to shut out the violent reflection of the sunne, will serue very conueniently for the making of Malt, for nine monthes in the yeere, that is to say, from September till the end of May; but for Iune, Iuly, and August, to imploy it to that purpose, will breed both losse, and incumbrance: The next flower to this of earth, is that which is made of plaster, or plaster of paris, being burnt in a seasonable time, and kept from wet, till the time of shooting, and then smoothly laid, and well leuelled; the imperfection of this plaster Flower is onely the extreame coldnesse thereof, which in frosty and colde seasons, so bindeth in the heart of the graine, that it cannot sprout, for which cause it behooueth euery Maltster that is compelled to these Flowers,

to looke well into the seasons of the yeere, and when hee findeth either the Frosts, Northerne blasts, or other nipping stormes to rage too violently, then to make his first couches or beds, when the graine commeth newly out of the Cesterne, much thicker and rounder then otherwise he would doe, and as the cold abateth, or the corne increaseth in sprouting, so to make the couches or beds thinner and thinner; for the thicker and closer the graine is coucht and laid together, the warmer it lieth; and so catching heate, sooner sprouteth, and the thinner it lieth the cooler it is, and so much the slower in sprouting. This flowre, if the windowes be close, and guard of the Sunne sufficiently, will (if necessitie compel) serue for the making of Malt ten moneths in the yeere, onely in Iuly and August which containe the Dog-dayes, it would not be imployed, nor in the time of any violent Frost, without great care and circumspection. Againe, there is in this flowre another fault, which is a naturall casting out of dust, which much sullieth the graine, and being dried makes it looke dun and foule, which is much disparagement to the Malster; therefore she must haue great care that when the Malt is taken away, to sweepe and keepe her flowres as cleane and neate as may be. The last and worst is the boarded flowre, of what kind soeuer it be, by reason of the too much heate thereof, and yet of boarded flowres the Oaken boarded is the coolest and longest lasting; the Elme or Beech is next; then the Ashe, and the worst (though it be the fairest to the eye) is the Firre, for it hath in it selfe (by reason of the Frankensence and Terpentine which it holdeth) a naturall heate, which mixed with the violence of the Sunne in the Summer-time, forceth the graine not onely to sprout, but to grow in the couch, which is much losse, and a foule imputation. Now

these boarded flowres can hardly be in vse for aboue fiue moneths at the most, that is to say, October, Nouember, December, Ianuarie and Februarie; for the rest, the Sun hath too much strength, and these boarded flowres too much warmth; and therefore in the coolest times it is good to obserue to make the couches thin, whereby the aire may passe thorow the corne, and so coole it, that it may sprout at leasure. Now for any other flowre besides these already named,
                     Imperfect Flowres.
                   there is not any good to malt vpon; for the common flowre which is of naturall earth, whether it be Clay, Sand or Grauell, if it haue no mixture at all with it more then it owne nature, by oft treading vpon it, groweth to gather the nature of saltnesse or Saltpeter into it, which not onely giueth an ill taste to the graine that is laid vpon the same, but also his moysture and moldines, which in the moyst times of the yere arise from the ground, it often corrupteth and putrifieth the corne. The rough paued flowre by reason of the vneuenes, is vnfit to malt on, because the graine getting into the crannies doth there lie, and are not remoued or turned vp and downe as they should be with the hand, but many times is so fixed to the ground, it sprouteth and groweth vp into a greene blade, affording much losse and hindrance to the owner. The smooth paued slowre, or any flowre of stone whatsoeuer, is full as ill; for euery one of them naturally against much wet or change of weather, will sweate and distill forth such abundant moisture, that the Malt lying vpon the same, can neither dry kindly and expell the former moisture receiued in the cesterne, but also by that ouermuch moysture many times rotteth, and comes to be altogether vseles. Lastly, for the flowre made of Lime and Haire, it is as ill as any formerly spoken of, both in respect of the nature of the Lime, whose heate and sharpnes is a

maine enemy to Malt, or any moist corne, as also in respect of the weaknes and brittlenes of the substance thereof, being apt to molder and fall in peeces with the lightest treading on the same, and that lime and dust once mixing with the corne, it doth so poison and suffocate it, that it can neither sprout, nor turne seruiceable for any vse.
               Next vnto the Malt-flowres,
                     Of the Kilne and the building thereof.
                   our Malster shall haue a great care in the framing and fashioning of the Kilne, of which there are sundrie sorts of moddles, as the ancient forme which was in times past vsed of our fore-fathers, being only made in a square proportion at the top with small splints or rafters, ioyned within fower inches one of another, going from a maine beame crossing the mid part of that great square: then is this great square from the top, with good and sufficient studds to be drawne slopewise narrower and narrower, till it come to the ground, so that the harth or lowest part thereof may bee not aboue a sixth part to the great square aboue, on which the Malt is laid to be dried, and this harth shall bee made hollow and descending, and not leuell nor assending: and these Kilnes do not hold any certaine quantitie in the vpper square, but may euer bee according to the frame of some being thirty foot each way, some twenty, and some eighteene. There be other Kilnes which are made after this maner open and slope, but they are round of proportion; but both these kind of Kilnes haue one fault, which is danger of fire; for lying euery way open and apt for the blaze, if the Malster be any thing negligent either in the keeping of the blaze low and forward, or not sweeping euery part about the harth any thing that may take fire, or foreseeing that no straws which do belong to the bedding of the kilne do hang downe, or are loose, wherby the fire may take hold of them, it is very possible that the Kilne

may be set on fire, to the great losse and often vndoing of the owner.
               
                  
                     The perfit Kilne.
                  Which to preuent, and that the Malster may haue better assurance and comfort in her labour, there is a Kilne now of generall vse in this Kingdome, which is called a French Kilne, being framed of Bricke, Ashler, or other fire-stone, according to the nature of the soyle in which Husbands and Huswiues liue: and this French Kilne is euer safe and secure from fire, and whether the Malster wake or sleepe, without extreame wilfull negligence, there can no danger come to the Kilne; and in these Kilnes may be burnt any kind of fewell whatsoeuer, and neither shall the smoke offend or breed ill taste in the Malt, nor yet discolour it, as many times it doth in open Kilnes, where the Malt is as it were, couered all ouer, and euen parboyld in smoke: so that of all sorts of Kilnes whatsoeuer, this which is called the French Kilne, is to bee preferred and onely embraced. Of the forme or modell whereof, I will not here stand to intreate, because they are now so generally frequent amongst vs, that not a Mason or Carpenter in the Kingdome but can build the same; so that to vse more words thereof were tediousnesse to little purpose. Now there is another kind of Kilne which I haue seene (and but in the West-countrie onely) which for the profitable quaintnesse thereof, I tooke some especiall note of, and that was a Kilne made at the end of a Kitchin Raunge or Chimney, being in shape round, and made of Brick, with a little hollownesse narrowed by degrees, into which came from the bottom and midst of the Kitchin-chimney a hollow tunnell or vault, like the tunnell of a Chimney, and ran directly on the back-side, the hood or backe of the Kitchin-chimney; then in the midst of the Chimney, where the greatest

strength of the fire was made, was a square hole made of about a foote and a halfe euery way, with an Iron thicke plate to draw to and fro, opening and closing the hole at pleasure; and this hole doth open onely into that tunnell which went to the Kilne, so that the Malt being once laid, & spread vpon the Kilne, draw away the Iron plate, and the ordinarie fire with which you dresse your meate, and performe other necessarie businesses, is suckt vp into this tunnell, and so conuaieth the heate to the Kilne, where it drieth the Malt with as great perfection, as any Kilne that euer I saw in my life, and needeth neither attendance or other ceremony more, then once in fiue or sixe houres to turne the Malt, and take it away when it is dried sufficiently: for it is here to bee noted, that how great or violent soeuer the fire be which is in the Chimney, yet by reason of the passage, and the quantitie thereof, it carrieth no more but a moderate heate to the Kilne; and for the smoke, it is so carried away in other loopeholes which run from the hollownesse betweene the tunnell and the Malt-bed, that no Malt in the world can possibly be sweeter, or more delicately coloured: onely the fault of these Kilnes are, that they are but little in compasse, and so cannot drie much at a time, as not aboue a quarter or ten strike at the most in one drying, and therefore are no more but for a mans owne particular vse, and for the furnishing of one setled familie; but so applied, they exceede all the Kilnes that I haue seene whatsoeuer.
               When our Malster hath thus perfited the Malt-house and Kilne,
                     Bedding of the Kilne.
                   then next looke to the well bedding of the Kilne, which is diuersly done according to mens diuers opinions; for some vse one thing, and some another, as the necessitie of the place, or mens particular profits

draw them. But first to shew you what the bedding of a Kilne is, you shall vnderstand, that it is a thin couering laid vpon the open rafters, which are next vnto the heate of the fier, being made either so thin or so open, that the smallest heate may passe thorow it, and come to the corne: this bed must be laid so euen and leuell as may be, and not thicker in one place then another, lest the Malt drie too fast where it is thinnest, and too slowly where it is thicke, and so in the taste seeme to bee of two seuerall dryings: it must also be made of such stuffe, as hauing receiued heate, it will long continue the same, and be an assistant to the fire in drying the corne: it should also haue in it no moyst or dankish propertie, least at the first receiuing of the fire, it send out a stinking smoke, and so taint the Malt: nor should it bee of any rough or sharpe substance, because vpon this bed or bedding is laid the haire-cloth, and on the haire-cloth the Malt, so that with the turning the Malt, and treading vpon the cloth, should the bed be of any such roughnesse, it would soone weare out the haire-cloth, which would be both losse and ill hous-wifery, which is carefully to be eschewed. But now for the matter or substance whereof this bedding should bee made, the best, neatest, and sweetest, is cleane long Rie straw, with the eares onely cut off, and the ends laid euen together, not one longer then another, and so spread vpon the rafter of the Kilne as eu
                     •
                  n and thin as may be, and laid as it were straw by straw in a iust proportion, where skill and industrie may make it thin or thicke at pleasure, as but the thicknesse of one straw, or of two, three, foure or fiue, as shall seeme to your iudgement most conuenient, and then this, there can be nothing more euen, more drie, sweete, or open to let in the heate at your pleasure: and although in the old open Kilnes it be subiect

to danger of fire, by reason of the quicknesse to receiue the flame, yet in the French Kilnes (before mentioned) it is a most safe bedding, for not any fire can come neere vnto it. There bee others which bed the Kilne with Mat; and it is not much to bee misliked, if the Mat bee made of Rye-straw sowed, and wouen together according to the manner of the Indian Mats, or those vsuall thin Bent-Mats, which you shall commonlie see in the Summer time, standing in Husbandmens Chimnies, where one bent or straw is laid by another, and so wouen together with a good strong pack-thread: but these Mats according to the old Prouerbe (More cost more Worship,) for they are chargeable to bee bought, and verie troublesome in the making, and in the wearing will not out-last one of the former loose beddings; for if one thread or stitch breake, immediatelie most in that row will follow: onely it is most certaine, that during the time it lasteth it is both good, necessarie and hansome. But if the Mat bee made either of Bulrushes, Flaggs, or any other thicke substance (as for the most part they are) then it is not so good a bedding, both because the thicknesse keepeth out the heate, and is long before it can bee warmed; as also in that it euer being cooled, naturally of it selfe draweth into it a certaine moysture, which with the first heate beeing expelled in smoke, doth much offend and breed ill taste in the Malt. There bee others that bed the Kilne with a kind of Mat made of broad thinne splints of wood wrought checker-wise one into another, and it hath the same faults which the thicke Mat hath; for it is long in catching the heate, and will euer smoke at the first warming, and that smoke will the Malt smell on

euer after; for the smoke of wood is euer more sharpe and piercing then any other smoke whatsoeuer. Besides, this wooden mat, after it hath once bedded the Kilne, it can hardly afterward bee taken vp or remoued; for by continuall heate, being brought to such an extreme drienesse, if vpon any occasion either to mend the Kilne, or clense the Kilne, or doe other necessarie labour vnderneath the bedding, you should take vp the wooden mat, it would presently crack and fall to peeces, and bee no more seruiceable. There be others which bed the Kilne with a bedding made all of wickers, or small wands foulded one into another like a hurdle, or such like wandworke; but it is made very open, euery wand at least two or three fingers one from another: and this kind of bedding is a very strong kind of bedding, and will last long, & catcheth the heat at the first springing, only the smoke is offensiue, and the roughnesse without great care vsed, will soone weare out your haire-cloth: yet in such places where straw is not to bee got or spared, and that you are compelled onely to vse wood for your fuell in drying your Malt, I allow this bedding before any other, for it is very good, strong and long-lasting: besides, it may be taken vp and set by at pleasure, so that you may sweepe and clense your Kilne as oft as occasion shall serue, and in the neate and fine keeping of the Kilne, doth consist much of the huswiues Art; for to be choakt either with dust, durt, soote or ashes, as it shewes sluttishnesse and sloth, the onely great imputations hanging ouer a huswife, so they likewise hinder the labour, and make the Malt drie a great deale worse, and more vnkindly.
               
                  
                     Of fuell for the drying of Malt,
                  Next the bedding of the Kilne, our Malster by all meanes must haue an especiall care with what fuell shee drieth the Malt; for commonly according to that it euer

receiueth and keepeth the taste, if by some especiall Art in the Kilne that anoyance be not taken away. To speake then of Fewels in generall, they are of diuers kinds according to the natures of soyles, and the accommodation of places in which men liue; yet the best and most principall fewell for the Kilnes (both for sweetnesse, gentle heate, and perfit drying) either good Wheate-straw, Rie-straw, Barley-straw, or Oaten-straw; and of these the Wheate-straw is the best, because it is most substantiall, longest lasting, makes the sharpest fire, and yeelds the least flame: the next is Rie-straw, then Oaten-straw, and last Barley-straw, which by reason it is shortest, lightest, least lasting and giueth mode blaze then heate, it is last of these whi
                     •
                  e strawes to be chosen; and where any of these faile, or are scarce, you may take the stubble or after-crop of them, when the vpper part is shorne away; which being well dried and housed, is as good as any of the rest already spoken of, and lesse chargeable, because it is not fi
                     •
                   for any better purpose as to make fodder, meanure, or such like, of more then ordinary thatching, & so fittest for this purpose. Next to these white strawes, your long Fennerushes, being very exceedingly well withered and dried, and all the sappie moysture gotten out of them, and so either safely housed or stacked, are the best fuell: for they make a very substantiall fire, and much lasting, neither are apt to much blazing, nor the smoake so sharpe or violent but may very well be indured: where all these are wanting, you may take the straw of Pease, Fetches, Lupins, or Tares, any of which will serue; yet the smoke is apt to taint, and the fire without preuention drieth too suddenly and swiftly. Next to cleane Beane-straw, or straw mixt of Beanes and Pease together; but this must be handled with great discretion, for the substance containeth so

much heate, that it will rather burne then drie, if it be not moderated, and the smoke is also much offensiue. Next to this Beane-straw is your Furres, Gorse, Whinnes, or small Brush wood, which differeth not much from Beane-straw; onely the smoke is much shaper, and tainteth the Malt with a much stronger sauour. To these I may adde Braken or Braks, Ling, Heath, or Brome, all which may serue in time of necessitie, but each one of them haue this fault, that they adde to the Malt an ill taste or sauour. After these I place Wood of all sorts, for each is alike noysome, and if the smoke which commeth from it touch the Malt, the infection cannot bee recouered; from whence amongst the best husbands haue sprung this opinion, that when at any time drinke is ill ta
                     •
                  ted, they say straight, it was made of Wood-dried Malt. And thus you see the generalitie of fuels, their vertues, faults, and how they are to be imployed. Now for Coale of all kinds, Turfe o
                     •
                   Peate, they are not by any meanes to bee vsed vnder Kilnes, except where the furnaces are so subtiltie made, that the smoke is conuaied a quite contrarie way, and neuer commeth neere the Malt; in that case in skilleth not what fuell you vse, so it bee durable and cheape, it is fit for the purpose, onely great regard must be had to the gentlenesse of the fier; for as the old Prouerb is (Soft fier makes sweete Malt) so too rash and hastie a fire scorcheth and burneth it, which is called amongst Maltsters Firefangd; and such Malt is good for little or no purpose: therefore to keepe a temperate and true fire, is the onelie Arte of a most skilfull Maultster.
               
                  
                     The making of the Garners.
                  When the Kilne is thus made and furnished of all necessaries duely belonging to the same, our Maltsters next care shall bee to the fashioning and making of

the Garners, Hutches, or Holds in which both the Malt after it is dried, and the Barley before it be steeped, is to be kept and preserued; and these Garners or Safes, for Corne are made of diuers fashions, and diuers matters, as some of Boards, some of Bricks, some of Stone, some of Lime and Haire, and some of Mud, Clay or Loame: but all of these haue their seuerall faults; for Wood of all kinds breedeth Weeuell and Wormes which destroy the Graine, and is indeed much too hot: for although Malt would euer bee kept passing drie, yet neuer so little ouer-plus of heate withers it, and takes away the vertue; for as moysture rots and corrupts it, so heate takes away and decayeth the substance. Bricke, because it is laid with Lime, is altogether vnholsome, for the Lime being apt at change of weather to sweat, moystneth the graine, and so tainteth it, and in the driest seasons with the sharpe hot taste, doth fully as much offend it: those which are made of Stone are much more noysome, both in respect of the reasons before rehearsed, as also in that all Stone of it selfe will sweate, and so more and more corrupteth the Graine which is harboured in it. Lime and Haire being of the same nature, carrieth the same offences, and is in the like sort to be eschewed. Now for Mud, Clay, or Loame, in as much as they must necessarily be mixed with wood, because otherwise of themselues they cannot knit or bind together, and besides, that the clay or loame must bee mixt either with chopt-hay, chopt-straw, or chopt-litter, they are as great breeders of wormes & vermin as wood is, nor are they defences against Mice, but easie to be wrought through, and so very vnprofitable for any husband or huswife to vse. Besides, they are much too hot, and being either in a close house neere the kilne,

or the back or face of any other Chimney, they drie the Corne too sore, and make it dwindle and wither, so that it neither filleth the bushell, nor inricheth the liquor, but turnes to losse euery way. The best Garner then that can be made both for safetie and profit, is to be made either of broken tile-shread, or broken bricks, cunningly and euen laid, and bound together with Plaster of Parris, or our ordinarie English Plaster, or burnt Alablaster, and then couered all ouer both within and without, in the bottome and on euery side, at least three fingers thicke with the same Plaster, so as no bricke or tile-shread may by any meanes bee seene, or come neere to touch the Corne; and these Garners you may make as bigge, or as little as you please, according to the frame of your house, or places of most conuenience for the purpose, which indeed would euer bee as neere the Kilne as may be, that the ayre of the fire in the dayes of drying may come vnto the same, of else neere the backs or sides of Chimneis, where the ayre thereof may correct the extreame coldnesse of the pl
                     •
                  ster which of all things that are bred in the earth, is the coldest thing that may be, and yet most drie, and not apt to sweate, or take moysture but by some violent extremity, neither wil any worme or vermine come neere it, because the great coldnesse thereof is a mortall enemie to their natures, and so the safest and longest these Garners of Plaster keepe all kind of Graine and Pulse in the best perfection.
               
                  
                     The making of cesternes.
                  After these Garners, Hutches, or large Keepes for Corne are perfitted and made, and fitly adioyned to the Kilne, the next thing that our Maulster hath too looke vnto, is the framing of the Fats or Cesterns, in which the Corne is to bee steeped, and they are of two sorts, that is, either of Coopers worke, being great Fats of wood,

or else of Masons worke, being Cesternes made of stone; but the Cesterne of stone is much the better, for besides that these great Fats of wood are very chargeable and costly (as a Fat to containe foure quarters of graine, which is but two and thirtie bushels, cannot bee afforded vnder twenty shillings), so likewise they are very casuall and apt to mischance and spilling; for besides their ordinarie wearing, if in the heate of Summer they be neuer so little neglected without water, and suffered to ouer-drie, it is ten to one but in the Winter they will bee ready to fall in peeces; and if they be kept moyst, yet if the water be not oft shifted and preserued sweet, the Fat will soone taint, and being once growne faultie, it is not onely irrecouerable, but also whatsoeuer commeth to be steeped in it after, will be sure to haue the same sauour, besides the wearing and breaking of Garthes and Pluggs, the binding, clensing, sweetning, and a whole world of other troubles and charges doe so daily attend them, that the benefit is a great deale short of the incumbrance; whereas the Gesterne is euer ready and vsefull, without any vexation at all, and being once wel and sufficiently made, will not neede trouble or reparation (more then ordinary washing) scarse in an hundred yeeres. Now the best way of making these Mault-cesterns, is to make the bottomes and sides of good tile-shreads, fixed together with the best Lime and Sand, and the bottome shall bee raised at least a foote and a halfe higher then the ground, and at one corner in the bottome a fine artificiall round hole must be made, which being outwardly stopt, the Maultster may through it draine the Cesterne drie when shee pleaseth, and the bottome must bee so artificially leueld and contriued, that the water may haue a true descent to that hole, & not any remaine behind when it is opened.

Now when the modell is thus made of tile-shread, which you may doe great or little at your pleasure, then with Lime, Haire and Beasts-blood mixed together, you shall couer the bottome at least two inches thick, laying leuell and plaine as is before shewed: which done, you shall also couer all the sides and top, both within and without with the same matter, at least a good fingers thicknesse, and the maine wall of the whole Cesterne shall bee a full foot in thicknes, as well for strength and durablesse, as other priuate reasons for the holding the graine and water, whose poyze and weight might otherwise indanger a weaker substance. And thus much concerning the Malthouse, and those seuerall accommodations which doe belong vnto the same.
               
                  
                     The manner how to make Malt.
                  I will now speake a little in generall as touching the Art, skill and knowledge of Malt making, which I haue referred to the conclusion of this Chapter, because whosoeuer is ignorant in any of the things before spoken of, cannot by any meanes euer attaine to the perfection of most true and most thriftie Malt-making: To begin then with this Art of making, or (as some terme it) melting of Malt, you shall first (hauing proportioned the quantitie you meane to steepe, which should euer be answerable to the continent of your Cesterne, and your Cesterne to your flowres) let it either run downe from your vpper Garner into the Cesterne, or otherwise be carried into your Cesterne, as you shall please, or your occasions desire, and this Barley would by all meanes be very cleane, and neatly drest; then when your Cesterne is filled, you shall from your Pumpe or Well conuey the water into the Cesterne, till all the Corne be drencht, and that the water floate aboue it: if there be any Corne that will not sinke, you shall with your hand stirre it about,

and wet it, and so let it rest and couer the Cesterne; and thus for the space of three nights you shall let the corne steepe in the water. After the third night is expired, the next morning you shall come to the Cesterne, and plucke out the plug or bung-sticke which stoppeth the hole in the bottome of the Cesterne, and so draine the water cleane from the Corne, and this water you shall by all meanes saue, for much light Corne and others will come forth with this draine-water, which is very good Swines meate, and may not be lost by any good huswife. Then hauing drained it, you shall let the Cesterne drop all that day, and in the euening with your shouell you shall empty the Corne from the Cesterne vnto the Malt-flowre, and when all is out, and the Cesterne clensed, you shall lay all the wet corne on a great heape round or long, and flat on the top; and the thicknesse of this heape shall be answerable to the season of the yeere; for if the weather bee extreame cold, then the heape shall be made very thicke, as three or foure foote, or more, according to the quantitie of the graine: but if the weather be temperate and warme, then shall the heape be made thinner, as two foote, a foote and a halfe, or one foote, according to the quantitie of the graine. And this heape is called of Malsters a Couch or Bed of raw Malt. In this couch you shall let the Corne lie three nights more without stirring, and after the expiration of the three nights, you shall looke vpon it, and if you find that it beginneth but to sprout (which is called coming of Malt) though it bee neuer so little, as but the verie white end of the sproute peeping out (so it be in the outward part of the heape or Couch) you shall then breake open the Couch, and in the middest (where the Corne lay neerest) you shall find the sprout or Come of a greater largenesse; then with your

shouell you shall turne all the outward part of the couch inward, and the inward outward, and make it at least three or foure times as big as it was at the first, and so let it lie all that day and night, and the next day you shall with your shouell turne the whole heape ouer againe, increasing the largenes, and making it of one indifferent thicknesse ouer all the flowre; that is to say, not aboue a handfull thicke at the most, not failing after for the space of fourteene dayes, which doth make vp full in all three weeks, to turn it all ouer twice or thrice a day according to the season of the weather, for if it be warme, the malt must be turnd oftner; if coose, then it may lie closser, thicker and longer together; and when the three weeks is fully accomplisht, then you shall (hauing bedded your kilne, and spread a cleane harie-cloth thereon) lay the malt as thinne as may be (as about three fingres thicknes) vpon the hariecloth,
                     The drying of Mault.
                   and so drie it with a gentle and soft fire, euer and anon turning the mault (as it drieth on the kilne) ouer and ouer with your hand, till you find it sufficiently well dryed, which you shall know both by the ta
                     •
                  t when you bite it in your mouth, & also by the falling off of the come or sprout, when it is throughly dried. Now assoone as you see the come beginne to shed, you shall in the turning of the mault rub it well betweene your hands, and scower it, to make the come fall away; then finding it all sufficiently dried, first put out your fire, then let the malt coole vpon the kilne for foure or fiue houres, and after raising vp the foure corners of the haire-cloth, and gathering the mault together on a heape, empty it with the come and all into your garners, and there let it lie (if you haue not present occasion to vse it) for a moneth or two or three to ripen, but no longer, for as the Come or dust of the kilne, for such a space melloweth and ripeneth

the Malt, making it better both for sale or expence, so to lie too long in it doth ingender Weeuell, Wormes and Vermine which doe destroy the Graine.
               Now for the dressing and clensing of Malt at such time as it is either to be spent in the house,
                     The dressing of Malt.
                   or sold in the Market, you shall first winnow it with a good wind either from the ayre, or from the Fan; and before the winnowing you shall rub it exceeding well betweene your hands to get the Come or sproutings cleane away: for the beautie and goodnesse of Malt is when it is most smug, cleane, bright, and likest to Barley in the view, for then there is least waste and greatest profit: for Come and dust drinketh vp the liquor, and giues an ill taste to the drinke. After it is well rubd and winnowed, you shall then ree it ouer in a fine siue, and if any of the Malt be vnclensed, then rub it againe in the fiue till all bee pure, and the rubbings will arise on the top of the siue, which you may cast off at pleasure, and both those rubbings from the siue and the Chaffe and dust which commeth from the winnowings should be safe kept, for they are very good Swines meate, and feede well mixt either with whay or swillings: and thus after the Malt is red, you shall either stacke it vp for especiall vse, or put it into a well clensed Garner, where it may lie till there be occasion for expence.
               Now there be certaine obseruations in the making of Malt,
                     Obseruations in the making of Malt.
                   which I may by no meanes omit: for though diuers opinions doe diuersly argue them, yet as neere as I can, I will reconcile them to that truth, which is most consonant to reason, and the rule of honestie and equalitie.
               First, there is a difference in mens opinions as touching the constant time for the mellowing and making of the Malt; that is, from the first steeping to the time of drying; for some will allow both Fat and Flowre hardly a fortnight,

some a fortnight and two or three dayes, and doe giue this reason; first, they say it makes the Corne looke whiter and brighter, and doth not get so much the fullying and foulenesse of the flower, as that which lieth three weekes, which makes it a great deale more beautifull and so more sallable: next, it doth not come or shoote out so much sprout, as that which lieth a longer time, and so preserueth more heart in the graine, makes it bould and fuller, and so consequently more full of substance, and able to make more of a little, then the other much of more; and these reasons are good in shew, but not in substantiall truth: for (although I confesse that Corne which lieth least time of the flowre must be the whitest and brightest) yet that which wanteth any of the due time, can neither ripen, mellow, nor come to true perfection, and lesse then three weekes cannot ripen Barley: for looke what time in hath to swell and sprout, it must haue full that time to flourish, and as much time to decay: now in lesse then a week it cannot do the first, & so in a week the second, and in another weeke the third; so that in lesse then 3. weekes a man cannot make perfit Malt. Againe, I confesse, that Malt which hath the least Come, must haue the greatest kernell, and so bee most substantiall; yet the Malt which putteth not out his full sprout, but hath that moysture (with too much haste) driuen in which should be expelled, can neuer bee Malt of any long lasting, or profitable for indurance, because it hath so much moyst substance as doth make it both apt to corrupt & breed worms in most great abundance: it is most true, that this hastie made Malt is fairest to the eie, and will soonest be vented in the Market; and being spent assone as it is bought, little or no losse is to be perceiued, yet if it be kept 3 or 4 months, or longer (vnlesse the place where it is kept be like a Hot-house)

it will so danke and giue againe, that it will be little better then raw Malt, and so good for no seruice without a second drying: besides, Malt that is not suffred to sprout to the full kindly, but is stopt as soone as it begins to peepe, much of that Malt cannot come at all, for the moystest graines doe sprout first, and the hardest are longer in breaking the huske; now if you stop the graine on the first sprouts, and not giue all leisure to come one after another, you shall haue halfe Malt and halfe Barley, and that is good for nothing but Hens and Hogs Trough. So that to conclude, lesse then three weeks you cannot haue to make good and perfect Malt.
               Next there is a difference in the turning of the Malt, for some (and those be the most men Malsters whatsoeuer) turne all their Malt with the shouell, and say it is most easie, most speedy, and dispatcheth more in an houre, then any other way doth in three; and it is very true, yet it scattereth much, leaueth much behind vnturn'd, and commonly that which was vndermost, it leaueth vndermost still, & so by some comming too much, & others not comming at all, the Malt is oft much imperfect, & the old saying made good, that too much haste, maketh waste. Now there are others (and they are for the most part weomen Malsters) which turne all with the hand, and that is the best, safest, & most certaine way; for there is not a graine which the hand doth not remoue & turne ouer & ouer, and layes euery seuerall heape or row of such an euen & iust thicknesse, that the Malt both equally cōmeth, & equally seasoneth together without defect or alteration: and though he that hath much Malt to make, will be willing to hearken to the swiftest course in making, yet he that will make the best Malt, must take such conuenient leisure, and imploy that labour which commeth neerest to perfection.
               Then there is another especiall care to bee had in the

coming or sprouting of Malt, which is, that as it must not come too little, so it must not by any meanes come too much, for that is the grossest abuse that may be: and that which we call comed or sprouted too much is, when either by negligence for want of looking to the couch, and not opening of it, or for want of turning when the Malt is spread on the flowre, it come or sprout at both ends, which Husbands call Akerspyerd; such corne by reason the whole heart of substance is driuen out of it, can bee good for no purpose but the Swine-trough, and therefore you must haue an especiall care both to the well tending of the couch, and the turning the Malt on the flowre, and be sure (as neere as you can by the ordering of the couch, and happing the hardest graine inward and warmest) to make it all Come very indifferently together. Now if it so fall out that you buy your Barley, and happen to light on mixt graine, some being old Corne, some new Corne, some of the heart of the starke, and some of the stadle, which is an ordinarie deceit with Husbandmen in the Market, then you may be well assured, that this graine can neuer Come or sprout equally together; for the new Corne will sprout before the old, and the stadle before that in the hart of the starke, by reason the one exceedeth the other in moistnesse: therefore in this case you shall marke well which commeth first, which will be still in the heart of the Couch, and with your hand gather it by it selfe into a seperate place, and then heape the other together againe; and thus as it cometh and sprouteth, so gather it from the heape with your hand, and spread 
                     •
                  t on the flowre, and keepe the other still in a thicke heape till all be sprouted. Now lastly obserue, that if your Malt be hard to sprout or Come, and that the fault consist more in the bitter coldnes of the season, then any defect of the

corne, that then (besides the thicke and close making of the heape or couch) you faile not to couer it ouer with some thicke wollen clothes, as course Couerlids, or such like stuffe, the warmth whereof will make it Come presently: which once perceiued, then forthwith vncloth it, and order it as aforesaid in all points. And thus much for the Art, order, skill & cunning belonging to Maltmaking.
               Now as touching the making of Oates into Malt,
                     Of Oatemeale.
                   which is a thing of generall vse in many parts of this Kingdome where Barley is scarce, as in Chesheire, Lancasheire, much of Darbisheire, Deuonsheire, Cornwall, and the like, the Art and skill is all one with that of Barley, nor is there any variation or change of worke, but one and the same order still to be obserued, onely by reason that Oates are more swift in sprouting, and apter to clutter, ball and hang together by the length of the sprout then Barley is, therefore you must not faile but turne them oftner then Barley, and in the turning bee carefull to turne all, and not leaue any vnmoued. Lastly, they will need lesse of the flowre then Barley wil, for in a full fortnight, or a fortnight and two or three dayes you may make very good and perfit Oatemalt. But because I haue a great deale more to speake particularly of Oates in the next Chapter, I will here conclude this, and aduise euery skilfull huswife to ioyne with mine obseruations her own tried experience, and no doubt but she shall find both profit and satisfaction.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of the excellency of Oates, and the many singular vert
                     •
                  es and vses of them in a family.
               OAts although they are of all manner of graine the cheapest, because of their generalitie being a graine

of that goodnesse and hardnesse, that it will grow in any soyle whatsoeuer, be it neuer so rich, or neuer so poore, as if Nature had made it the onely louing companion & true friend to mankinde; yet is it a graine of that singularity for the multiplicity of vertues, and necessary vses for the sustenance and support of the Family, that not any other graine is to be compared with it, for if any other haue equall vertue, yet it hath not equall value, and if equall value, then it wants many degrees of equall vertue; so that ioyning vertue and value together, no Husband, Houswife, of House-keeper whatsoeuer, hath so true and worthy a friend, as his Oates are.
               
                  
                     Vertue of Oates to Cattell.
                  To speake then first of the vertues of Oates, as they accrew to Cattell and creatures without doore, and first to begin with the Horse; there is not any food whatsoeuer that is so good, wholsome, and agreeable with the nature of a Horse, as Oates are, being a Prouendar in which hee taketh such delight, that with it he feedeth, trauelleth, and doth any violent labour whatsoeuer with more courage and comfort, then with any other food that can be inuented, as all men know, that haue either vse of it, or Horses; neither doth the Horse euer take surfeit of Oates, (if they be sweet and dry) for albe he may well be glutted or stalled vpon them (with indiscreet feeding) and so refuse them for a little time, yet he neuer surfeiteth, or any present sicknesse followeth after; whereas no other graine but glut a Horse therewith, and instantly sicknes will follow, which shewes surfeit, and the danger is oft incurable: for we reade in Italy, at the siege of Naples, of many hundred Horses that dyed on the surfeit of wheate; at Rome also dyed many hundred Horses of the plague, which by due proofe was found to proceed from a surfeit taken of peason & fetches; and so I could runne ouer all other graines, but it is

needlesse, and farre from the purpose I haue to handle: suffice it, Oates for Horses are the best of all foodes whatsoeuer, whether they be but onely cleane thresht from the straw, and so dryed, or conuerted to Oatmeale, and so ground and made into Bread, Oates boyl'd and giuen to a Horse whilst they are coole and sweet, are an excellent foode for any Horse in the time of disease, pouerty, or sicknesse, for they scower and fat exceedingly.
               In the same nature that Oates are for Horses, so are they for the Asse, Mule, Camell, or any other Beast of burthen.
               If you will feede either Oxe, Bull, Cow, or any Nea
                     •
                  e whatsoeuer, to an extraordinary height of fatnesse, there is no foode doth it so soone as Oates doth, whether you giue them in the straw, or cleane thresht from the sheafe, and well winnowed; but the winnowed Oate is the best, for by them I haue seene as Oxe fed to 20 pound, to 24 poūd, and 30 pounds, which is a most vnreasonable reckoning for any beast, onely fame & the tallow hath bin precious.
               Sheepe or Goats may likewise be fed with Oates, to as great price and profit as with Peas, and Swine are fed with Oates, either in raw Malt, or otherwise, to as great thicknesse as with any graine whatsoeuer; onely they must haue a few Pease after the Oates to harden the fat, or else it will waste, and consume in boyling. Now for holding Swine, which are onely to be preserued in good flesh, nothing is better then a thin mange made of ground Oates, whey, Butter-milke, or other ordinary washe or swillings, which either the Dayry, or Kitchin affordeth; nor is there any more soueraigne or excellent meate for Swine in the time of sicknesse, then a mange made of ground Oates and sweete Whey, warmed luke-warme on the fier, and mixt with the powder of Raddle, or red Oaker.

Nay, if you will goe to the matter of pleasure, there is not any meate so excellent for the feeding, and wholesome keeping of a kenell of hounds, as the Maugge made of ground Oates and scalding water, or of beefe-broth, or any other broth, in which flesh hath been sodden; if it be for the feeding, strengthning and comforting of Greyhounds, Spaniels, or any other sort of tenderer Dogges, there is no meat then sheeps-heads, haire and all, or other intralls of sheepe chopt and well sodden, with good store of Oate-meale.
               Now for all manner of Poultrie, as Cocks, Capons, Hens, Chickens of great size, Turkeys, Geesse, Ducks, Swannes and such like, there is no food feedeth them better then Oates, and if it bee the young breede of any of those kinds, euen from the first hatching or disclosing, till they be able to shift for themselues, there is no food better whatsoeuer then Oate-meale greetes, or fine Oate-meale, either simple of it selfe, or else mixt with milke, drinke, or else new made Vrine.
               
                  
                     Vertue of oates.
                  Thus much touching the vertues and quality of Oates or Oate-meale, as they are seruiceable for the vse of Cattle and Poultrie. Now for the most necessarie vse thereof for man, and the generall support of the familie, there is no graine in our knowledge answerable vnto it; first, for the simple Oate it selfe (excepting some particular physicke helpes, as frying them with sweete butter, and putting them in a bag, and very hot applied to the belly or stomack to auoyde collick or windinesse, and such like experiments) the most especial vse which is made of them is for Malt to make Beare or Ale of which it doth exceeding wel, and maintaineth many Townes and Countries; but the Oate-meale which is drawne from them, being the heart and kernell of the Oate, is a thing of much rarer

price and estimation; for to speake troth, it is like Salt of such a generall vse, that without it hardly can any Family be maintained:
                     Making of oate-meale.
                   therefore I thinke it not much amisse to speake a word or two touching the making of Oatmeale, you shall vnderstand then, that to make good and perfit Oate-meale, you shall first drie your Oates exceeding well, and then put them on the Mill, which may either be Water-mill, Wind-mill, or Horse-mill (but the Horse-mill is best) and no more but crush or hull them; that is, to carrie the stones so large, that they may no more but crush the huske from the Kirnell: then you shall winnow the hulls from the kirnels either with the wind or a Fan, and finding them of an indifferent cleannesse (for it is impossible to hull them all cleane at the first) you shall then put them on againe, and making the Mill goe a little closer, run them through the Mill againe, and then winnow them ouer againe, and such greets or kirnels as are cleane huld and well cut you may lay by, and the rest you shall run through the Mill againe the third time, and so winnow them againe, in which time all will be perfit, and the greets or full kirnels will seperate from the smaller Oate-meale; for you shall vnderstand, that at this first making of Oate-meale, you shall euer haue two sorts of Oate-meales; that is, the full whole greete or kirnell, and the small dust Oate-meale: as for the course hulles or chaffe that commeth from them, that also is worthy sauing, for it is an excellent good Horse-prouender for any plow or labouring Horses, being mixt with either Beanes, Pease, or any other Pulse whatsoeuer.
               Now for the vse and vertues of these two seuerall kinds of Oate-meales in maintaining the Family,
                     The vertues of oate-meale.
                   they are so many (according to the many customes of many Nations) that it is almost impossible to reckon all; yet (as neere

as I can) I will impart my knowledge, and what I haue cane from relation: first, for the small dust or meale Oat-meale, it is that with which all pottage is made and thickned, whether they be meate-pottage, milke-pottage, or any thicke or else thin grewell whatsoeuer, of whose goodnesse and wholsomnes
                     •
                  e it is needlesse to speake, in that it is frequent with euery experience: also with this small Meale Oat-meale is made in diuers Countries sixe seuerall kinds of very good and wholsome bread, euerie one finer then other, as your Anacks, Ianacks, and such like. Also there is made of it both thick and thin Oaten-Cakes, which are very pleasant in taste, and much esteemed: but if it be mixed with fine Wheate-meale, then it maketh a most delicate and daintie Oate-cake, either thick or thin, such as no Prince in the world but may haue them serued to his table; also this small Oate-meale mixed with blood, and the liuer of either Sheepe, Calfe or Swine, maketh that pudden which is called the Haggas or Haggus, of whose goodnesse it is in vaine to boast, because there is hardly to bee found a man that doth not affect them. And lastly, from this small Oat-meale by oft steeping it in water and clensing it; and then boyling it to a thicke and stiffe Ielly, is made that excellent dish of meat, which is so esteemed in the West parts of this Kingdome, which they call Wash-brew, and in Chesheire and Lankasheire they call it Flamerie or Flumerie, the wholsomnes and rare goodnesse, nay, the very Physick helpes thereof, being such and so many, that I my selfe haue heard a very reuerend and worthily renowned Physition speake more in the commendations of that meate, then of any other foode whatsoeuer: and certaine it is, that you shall not heare of any that euer did surfeite of this Wash-brew or 
                     •
                  lammerie; and yet I haue seene them of very daintie

and sicklie stomacks which haue eaten great quantities thereof, beyond the proportion of ordinary meates. Now for the manner of eating this meate, it is of diuers diuerly vsed; for some eate it with Honie, which is reputed the best sauce; some with Wine, either Sacke, Clarret or White; some with strong Beare or strong Ale, and some with milke, as your abilitie, or the accommodations of the place will administer. Now there is deriued from this Wash-brew another courser meate, which is as it were the dregges, or grosser substance of the Wash-brew, which is called girt-brew, which is a well filling and sufficient meate, fit for seruants and men of labour; of the commendations whereof, I will not much stand, in that it is a meat of harder disiestion, and fit indeed but for strong able stomacks, and such whose toyle and much sweate both liberally spendeth euill humors, and also preserueth men from the offence of fulnes and surfeits.
               Now for the bigger kind of Oate-meale, which is called Gerts, or Corne-Oate-meale, it is of no lesse vse then the former, nor are their fewer meates compounded thereof: for first, of these Gerts are made all sorts of Puddings, or Pots (as the West-countrie tearmes them) whether they be blacke, as those which are made of the blood of Beasts, Swine, Sheepe, Geesse, Red or Fallow Deere, or the like, mixt with whole Gerts, Suet and wholsome Hearbs: or else white, as when the Gerts are mixt with good Creame, Egges, Bread-crummes, Suet, Currans, and other wholsome Spices. Also of these Gerts are made the good Friday pudding, which is mixt with egs, milt, suet, peniroyall, & boild first in a linnen bag, & then stript and butterd with sweet butter. Againe, if you rost a Goose, & stop her belly with whole gerts, beaten together with egs, and after mixt with the grauie, there cannot bee a

better or more pleasanter sauce: nay, if a man bee at sea in any long trauel, he cannot eate a more wholesome and pleasant meate then these whole greetes boild in water till they burst, and then mixt with butter, and so eaten with spoones; which although sea-men call simply by the name of Loblolly, yet there is not any meate how significant soeuer the name be, that is more toothsome or wholsome. And to conclude, there is no way or purpose whatsoeuer to which a man can vse or imploy Rice: but with the same seasoning and order you may imploy the whole greetes of Oate-meale, and haue full as good and as wholesome meate, and as well 
                     ••
                  sted; so that I may wel knit vp this Chapter with this aprobation of Oatemeale, that the little charge and great benefit considered, it is the very crowne of the Huswifes garland, and doth more grace her table and her knowledge, then all graines whatsoeuer; neither indeed can any Familie or Houshold bee well and thriftily maintained, where this is either scant or wanting. And thus much touching the nature, worth, vertues, and great necessitie of Oates and Oate-meale.
            
            
               
               Chapter VII. Of the Office of the Brew-ho
                     •
                  ses, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the necessarie things 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  WHen the English Hous-wife showes how to preserue health by wholsome Physick
                     •
                   to 
                     〈…〉
                   both the proportions and compositions of the same. And for as much as drinke is in euery house more generally spent then bread, being indeed 
                     〈…〉
                   the very substance of all entertainement
                     〈…〉
                   beginne with it,
                     Diuersities of drinkes.
                   and therefore you shall know that generally our kingdome hath ou
                     •
                   two kindes of drinkes, that is to say, Beere and Ale, but particularly fowre, as Beere, Ale, Perry and Cider; and to these we may adde two more, as Meede and Metheglin, two compound drinkes of honie and hearbes, which in the places where they are made, as in Wales and the marches, are renouned for exceeding wholsome and cordiall.
               To speake then of Beere,
                     Strong beere
                   although bee-diuers kindes of tastes and strength thereof, according to the allowance of malt, hoppe, and age giuen vnto the same; yet indeed there can be truly sayd to be but two kindes thereof; namely, ordinary beere and March beare, all other beeres being deriued from them.
               Touching ordinary Beere,
                     Of ordinary ry Beere.
                   which is that wherewith either Nobleman; Gentleman, 
                     〈…〉
                   Hu
                     •
                  bandman shall maintaine his family the whole yeere
                     •
                   it is 
                     〈◊〉
                   fi
                     •
                  st

that our English Hus-wife respect the proportion or allowance of malt due to the same, which amongst the best Husbands is thought most conuenient, and it is held, that to draw from one quarter of good malt three Hoglheads of beere, is the best ordinary proportion that can be allowed, and hauing age and good caske to lie in, it will be strong enough for any good mans drinking.
               
                  
                     Of brewing ordinary Beere.
                  Now for the brewing of ordinary Beere, your malt being well ground and put in your Mash-fat, and your liquor in your leade ready to boile, you shall the
                     •
                  by little and little with scoopes or pailes put the boiling liquor to the mault, and then stirre it euen to the bottome exceedingly well together (which is called the mashing of the malt) then the liquor swimming in the top couer all ouer with more malt, and so 
                     〈◊〉
                   it stand an howre and more in the mash-fat, during which space you may if you please heate more liquor in your lead for your second or small drinke; this done, plucke vp your mashing stroame, and let the first liquor runne gently from the malt, either in a cleane trough or other vessels prepared for the purpose, and then stopping the mash-fat againe, put the 
                     •
                  econd liquor to the mault and stirre it well together; then your leade being emptied put your first liquor or wort therein, and then to euery quarter of malt put a pound and a half of the best hops you can get; and boile them an hower together, till taking vp a dishfull thereof you see the hops shrinke into the bottome of the dish; this done put the worth through a straight fiue which may draine the hoppes from it into your cooler, which standing ouer the Guil-fat, you shall in the bottom thereof set a great bowle with your barme, and some of the first wor
                     •
                   (before the hops come into it mixt together) that it may rise therein, and then let your wort drop or run gently into the dish

with the barme which stands in the Guil fat, and this you shall do the first day of your brewing, letting your cooler drop all the night following, and some part, of the next morning, and as it droppeth if you finde that a blacke skumme or mother riseth vpon the barme, you shall with your hand take it off and cast it away, then nothing being left in the cooler, and the beere well risen, with your hand stirre it about and so let it stand an hower after, and then beating it and the barme exceeding well together, tunne it vp in the Hogsheads being cleane washt and s
                     ••
                  lded, and so let it purge: and herein you shall obserue not to run your vessels too full, for feare thereby it purge too much of the barm away: when it hath purged a day and a night, you shall close vp the bung holes wiah clay, and only for a day or two after keepe a vent-hole in it, and af
                     •
                  er close it vp as close as may bee. Now for your second or small drinke which are left vpon the graine, you shall suffer it there to stay but an hower or a little better, and th
                     •
                  n drain it off also; which done, put it into the lead with the former hop
                     •
                   and boile the other also, then cleere it from the hops and couer it verie close till your first beere be tunn'd, and then as before put it also to barme and so tunne it vp also in smaller vessels, and of this second beere you shall not draw aboue one Hogshead to three of the better. Now there be diuers other waies & obseruations for the brewing of ordinarie Beere, but none so good so easie, so readie and quicklie performed as this before shewed: neither will anie beere last longer or ripen sooner, for it may bee drunke at a fortnights age, and will last as long and liuely.
               Now 
                     •
                  or the brewing of the best March Beere you shall allow to a Hogs-head thereof a quarter of the best malt,
                     Of brewing the b
                           •
                        st March beere.
                   well ground: then you shall take a pecke of pea
                     •
                  e, halfe a pecke of Wheate, and halfe a pecke of Oates and grind

them all very well together, and then mix them with your malt: which done, you shall in all points brew this beere as you did the former ordinary beere: onely you shall allow a pound & a halfe of hops to this one Hogshead: and whereas before you drew but two sorts of beere: so now you shall draw three: that is a Hogs-head of the best, and a Hogs-head of the second, and halfe a Hogs-head of small beere without anie augmentation of hops or malt.
               This march Beere would be brewd in the moneths of March or Aprill, and should if it haue rightlie a whole yeere to ripen: it will last two, three and foure yeers if it lie coole and close, and indure then dropping to the last drop, though with neuer so much leasure.
               
                  
                     Brewing of strong ale.
                  Now for the brewing of strong Ale, because it is drink of no such long lasting as Beere is, therefore you shall brew lesse quantitie at a time thereof, as two bushels of northerne measure, (which is foure bushels or half a quarter in the South) at a brewing, and not aboue, which will make fourteene gallons of the best Ale. Now for the mashing and ordering of it in the mash-fat, it will not differ any thing from that of beere; as for hops, although some vse not to put in any, yet the best Brewers thereof wil allow to fourteene gallons of Ale a good 
                     ••
                  pen full of Hops, and no more, yet before you put in your Hops, as soone as you take it from the graines you shal put it into a vessell and change it, or blinke it in this manner: put into the Wort a handfull of Oake bowes and a P
                     •
                  wter dish, and let them lie therein till the Wor
                     •
                   looke a little paler then it did at the first, and then presently take out the dish and the leafe, and then boile it a full houre with the Hops as aforesaid, and then clense it, and set it in vessels to coole; when it is no more but milke warme, hauing set your Barme to rise with some sweet Wort: then put all into the

guilfat, and as soone as it riseth, with a dish or bowle beate it in, and so keepe it with continuall beating a day and a night at least, and after tun it. From this Ale you may also draw halfe so much very good middle Ale, and a third part very good small Ale.
               Touching the brewing of Bottle-ale,
                     Brewing of Bottle Ale.
                   it differeth nothing at all from the brewing of strong Ale, onely it must be drawne in a larger proportion, as at least twentie gallons of halfe a quarter; and when it comes to bee changed you shall blinke it (as was before shewed) more by much then was the strong Ale, for it must be pretty and sharpe, which giueth the life and quicknes to the Ale: and when you tun it, you shall put it into round bottles with narrow mouths, and then stopping them close with corke, set them in a cold sellar vp to the wast in sand, and be sure that the corkes be fast tied in with strong packethrid, for feare of rissing out, or taking vent, which is the vtter spoile of the ale. Now for the smal drinke arising from this bottle Ale, or any other beere or ale whatsoeuer, if you keep it after it is blinkt and boiled in a close vessel, and then put it to barm euery morning as you haue occasion to vse it, the drinke will drinke a great deale the fresher, and bee much more liuelie in taste.
               As for the making Perry and Cider,
                     Of making Perry or Cyder.
                   which are drinks much vsed in the west parts, and other Countries wel stored with fruit in this kingdome; you shall know that your Perry is made of Peares only, and your Cider of Apples; and for the manner of making thereof, it is done after one fashion, that is to say, after your Peares or Apples are well pickt from stalkes, rottennesse and all manner of other filth, you shall put them in the presse mill which is made with a mil-stone running round in a circle, vnder which you shall crush your Peares or Apples, and then straining

them through a bagge of haire-cloth, tunne vp the same after it hath beene a littlr setled into Hogs-heads, Barrels and other close vessels.
               Now after you haue prest all, you shall saue that which is within the haire cloth bagge, and putting it into seueral vessels, put a pretty quantity of water thereunto, and after it hath stood a day or two, and hath beene well stirred together, presse it ouer also againe, for this will make a small perry or cider, and must be spent first. Now of your best sider that which you make of your summer or sweet fruite, you shall call summer or sweet cider or perrie, and that you shall spend first also; and that which you make of the winter and hard fruite, you shall call winter and sowre cider, or perry; and that you may spend last, for it willen dure the longest.
               
                  
                     Of Baking.
                  Thus after our English Huswife is experienc't in the brewing of these seuerall drinkes, she shall then looke into her Bake-house, and to the baking of all sorts of bread, either for Masters, Seruants, or Hinds, and to be ordering and compounding of the meale for each seuerall vse.
               
                  
                     Ordering of Meals.
                  To speake then first of meales for bread, they are either simple or compound, simple, as Wheate and Rie, or compound, as Rie and Wheate mixt together, or Rie, Wheate and Barley mixt together; and of these the oldest meale is euer the best, and yeeldeth most so it be sweet and vntainted, for the preseruation wherof, it is meet that you clense your meale well from the branne, and then keepe it in sweet vessels.
               
                  
                     Baking manchets.
                  Now for the baking of bread of your simple meales, your best and principall bread is manchet, which you shal bake in this manner; first your meale being ground vpon the black stones if it be possible, which make the whitest flower, and boulted through the finest boulting cloth,

you shall put it into a clean Kimnel, and opening the flower hollow in the midst, put into it of the best Ale-barme the quantity of three pints to a bushell of meale, with som salt to season it with: then put in your liquor reasonable warme and kneade it very well together with both your hands and through the brake, or for want thereof, fold it in a cloth, and with your feete tread it a good space together, then letting it lie an howre or thereabouts to swell take it foorth and mold it into manchets, round, and flat, scotch about the wast to giue it leaue to rise, and prick it with your knife in the top, and so put it into the Ouen, and bake it with a gentle heate.
               To bake the best cheate bread,
                     Baking cheate bread
                   which is also simply of wheate onely, you shall after your meale is drest and boulted through a more course boulter then was vsed for your manchets, and put also into a clean tub, trough, or kimnel, take a sowre leauen, that is, a peece of such like leauen saued from a former batch, and well fild with salt, and so laid vp to sower, and this sower leauen you shall breake in small peeces into warme water, and then straine it, which done make a deepe hollow hole, as was before said in the midst of your flower, and therein power your strained liquor; then with your hand mixe some part of the flower therewith, till the liquor be as thicke as pancake batter, then couer it all ouer with meale, and so let it lie all that night, the next morning stirre it, and all the rest of the meale wel together, and with a little more warme water, barme, and salt to season it with, bring it to a perfect leauen, stiffe, and firme; then knead it, breake it, and tread it, as was beforesaid in the manchets, and so mould it vp in reasonable bigge loaues, and then bake it with an indifferent good heat: and thus according to these two examples before shewed, you may bake any bread leauend or

vnleauend whatsoeuer, whether it be simple corne, as Wheate or Rie of it selfe, or compound graine as wheat and rie, or wheat and barley, or rie and barley, or any other mixt white corne; only because Rie is a little stronger graine then wheate, it shall be good for you to put your water a little hotter then you did to your wheate.
               
                  
                     Baking of brown bread.
                  For your browne bread, or bread for your hinde-seruants, which is the coursest bread for mans vse, you shall take of barly two bushels, of pease two pecks, of wheat or Rie a pecke, a peck of malt; these you shall grind altogether and dresse it through a meale siue, the putting it into a sower trough set liquor on the fire, and when it boils let one put on the water, and another with a mash-rudder stir some of the flower with it after it hath been seasoned with salt, and so let it be till the next day, and then putting to the rest of the flower, worke it vp into stiffe leauen, then mould it and bake it into great loaues with a very strong heate: now if your trough be not sower enough to sower your leauen, then you shall either let it lie longer in the trough, or else take the helpe of a sower leauen with your boiling water: for you must vnderstand, that the hotter your liquor is, the lesse will the smell or ranknesse of the pease be receiued. And thus much for the baking of any kinde of bread, which our English Huf-wife shall haue occasion to vse for the maintenance of her family.
               
                  
                     Generall obseruations in the brew-hause and Bake-house.
                  As for the generall obseruations to be respected in the Brew-house or Bake-house, they be these: first, that your Brewhouse be seated in so conuenient a part of the house, that the smoke may not annoie your other more priuate roomes; then that your furnace bee made close and hollow for sauing fewell, and with a vent for the passage of smoake least it taint your liquor; then that you preferre a copper before a lead, next that your Mash-fat be euer

neerest to your leade, your cooler neerest your Mash-fat, and your Guilfat vnder your cooler, & adioining to them all seueral cleane tubs to receiue your worts & liquors: then in your Bake-house you shall haue a faire boulting house with large Pipes to boult meale in, faire troughes to laie leauen in, and sweet safes to receiue your branne: you shall haue boulters, searses, raunges and meale siues of all sorts both fine & course; you shall haue faire tables to mould on, large ouens to bake in the soales thereof rather of one or two intire stones then of many bricks, and the mouth made narrow, square and easie to be close couered: as for your peeles, cole-rakes, maukins and such like, though they be necessary yet they are of such general vse they need no further relation. And thus much for a ful satisfaction to all the Husbands and Huswifes of this kingdome touching Brewing, Baking, and all what else appertaineth to either of their offices.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   