
      
         
            
            
            MARKHAMS METHOD OR EPJTOME: WHEREIN IS SHEWED his aprooued Remedies for all diſeaſes whatſoeuer incident to Horſes, Oxen, Kine, Bulls, Calues, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, Swine, Dogs of all kind, Conies, all ſorts of Poultrye, all Water-ſoule, as Geeſe, Ducks, Swans, and the like,) Pigeons, all ſinging Birds, Hawks of all kind; and other Creatures ſeruiceable for the vſe of man:
            Deuided into twelue generall Points or Heads.
            By GERVASE MARKHAM. Gentleman.
            
            Printed at London by G. E. for Thomas Langley, and are to be ſold at his ſhop ouer againſt the 
                  〈…〉
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGT WORSHIPFVLL AND his moſt deare reſpected friend Maiſter IOHN MASSY of Codington in Cheſhire.
            
               GOod Sir, Hee that much doth, may much miſcarry, becauſe danger euer is the Companion with labour: and in theſe dayes mens braines are ſo ſickly and ſubiect to

take ſurfaits, eſpecially where either the feaſt is (in their owne conceits) too full, or the diſhes not dreſt anſwerable to their ſtomacks, that, to bee a Cook to pleaſe all mens varieties, were to aſcribe a cunning hardly beſtowed vppon Angels; from which conſideration I haue beene many times induced to haue obſcured this ſmall and inreſpeccted Epitome, as willing to hold from miſtaking mindes (which poyſon with falſe conſtruction) a benefit ſo good and certaine, as I know they will be fruitfull in diuulging my diſpraiſe, and finding knots in ſmooth ruſhes, adding to my title, vaine prate and oſtentation; But by many

of my better friendes, and ſome whoſe approued wiſedomes are worthy, and ſome whoſe knowne loues doe and euer ſhall gouerne mee, I am inforced to diſesteeme the vaine battery of the enuious, and boldly publiſh this Treatiſe, which I doubt not but will bee a generall good to all the whole Kingdome, for whoſe ſeruice I was onely created. As for your worthy ſelfe who was the firſt that euer beheld it, and to whoſe handes it flew before it had taken any perfit or true forme, as knowing how able you were both to iudge of the defects, and to crowne the perfections, not a Gentleman in this Kingdome of

your ranke going one steppe before you, either in loue or knowledge of Horſemanſhip: To whom I ſay but you ſhould I ſend this my last Infant; to bee nouriſhed and defended, ſince it pleaſed you to accept it with much loue, when it was vnlikely of life any where but in your boſome. Then worthy Sir, let mee beſeech you to take it to Protection, and whilst nothing but enuy aſſaults it, bee you its conſtant guardian; But when eyther a ſtronger or better skill proues ie vaine, then leaue it againe to my ſelfe, and wee will both dye inreſpected; till when, (which will not bee whilst any thing is) at least

not whilst Men ride on Horſebacke, I will euer rest a faithfull and true Cabanet, full of your Goodnes.
            
               GERVASE MARKHAM.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the old and new Readers.
            
               THis is an Age, (gentle Reader) of much inquiſition & examination of mens printed workes: neither is it in my conceit either vnreaſonable or vnneceſſary that men ſhould giue account for their labours, eſpecially where they make the world beleeue

they doe the world a particular profit, for otherwiſe the world might come to bee coſened: Therefore for my ſelfe, thus me thinkes I heare the world ſay: Sir why loade you thus both mens mindes and the Booke-ſellers ſtalles with ſuch change and variety of bookes, all vppon one ſubiect, as if men were tyed to your readings? mee thinks the little Pamphlet you firſt publiſht, might haue giuen ſatisfaction; To this I anſwer: that Pamphlet was the milke of my firſt experience, drawne, not to nouriſh the world, but to giue a little ſatiſfaction to a noble Kinſman I had, from whom a very corrupt copy was ſtolne, and in printing without my knowledge; ſo that to ſhield both mine owne ſhame and the bookes, I was compeld to put it forth in that manner as it went,

& then, many iudicious Gentlemen in the ſame art found faint in the breefnes therof, ſaying, that the ſcanting of my rules took away much ſatiſfaction from the yong ſcholler, an that there was a lameneſſe therein, becauſe I had not handled the whole members of the art, but heere a finger and there a toe, as I was led by mine owne fancy. Hence it came I writ the great Boohe Cauelorice, and in it omitted nothing in my knowledge appertinent to Horſemanſhip: but by reaſon of a too greedy and haſty Booke-ſeller, and the diſtributing of the worke into the handes of many Printers, it was not onely exceeding falſly printed, but alſo moſt part of the booke of cures left out, which was ſuch a maime to the booke, that I was many yeares ſtird vp by my friends to repaire that error; which I did by writing that booke intituled the Maſter-peece, wherein I haue ſet

downe euery diſeaſe & euery medicine, ſo full & ſo exactly that there is not a farrier in this kingdome, which knowes a medicine for any diſeaſe, which is true & good indeed, but I wil find the ſubſtance thereof in that booke yet this book did not ſatiſfie my friends, for they ſaid though it was a worke right good and neceſſary, yet the greatneſſe of the booke and the great price thereof, depriued poore men of the benefit; and that the multiplicity of the medicines, and the coſt of the ingredients, were ſuch as poore men ſtood amazed at, and found that their beaſts periſht before they could compaſſe that ſhould cure them: from hence onely I haue with much labour and experience found out the Contents of this booke, where with twelue medicines, not oftwele pence coſt, and to bee got commonly euery where, I will cure all

the diſeaſes that are in Horſes, whatſoeuer, and they almoſt 300. This booke I hope the price will not hinder, for it is determined onely for the good of the needfull, to whoſe vſe if it proue as fortunate as it is faithfully and iuſtly ſet downe, they will haue cauſe to praiſe God and loue me.
            
               GERVASE MARKHAM.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               A briefe Preface of the nature of the Horſe.
               
                  A Horſe, of all the vnreaſonable creatures vpon the earth, is of the greateſt vnderſtanding, hauing in them (as the Schole men affirme) a certaine naturall inſtinct, not onely of the knowledge of their riders, and keepers, but alſo of their owne generation and deſcent, knowing their Sires, and Dams, in ſuch wiſe that they will refuſe (as Pliny ſaith) to couple, or ingender with them: they are alſo of all creatures, the apteſt to learne any motion, and the readieſt to obey their teachers, hauing a greater loue to exerciſe then any other beaſt. They are of infinite great courage and valour, taking an exceding delight in the warres, and (as ſome Schole-men affirme) haue a certaine foreknowledge of battell, and will prepare themſelues man-like for the ſame. They wil mourne for the loſſe, or deathes of their maiſters, and are ſo apt to endure labor, that it is written of the horſes of the Sama
                     •
                  rans, that they would gallop a hundred and fifty miles end-wayes, without reſt or ſtay: they ate naturally of

long life, and by choice keeping, haue bene brought to ſumme vp fifty yeares; but for thirty yeares it is much ordinary. The Mares are leſſe liued, as till twenty, or fiue and twenty at the moſt. They are of all beaſts the moſt beautifull of ſhape, they are fit for the ſaddle at foure yeares of age, for the warres at ſix, for the race at eight, and for hunting, or for extreame matches, at ten or eleuen: the females beare their Foales full eleuen months, and foale in the twelfth: the beſt time for their ingendring is in March at the increaſe of the Moone, or in the middle part thereof, and the Mare foaleth her foale ſtanding: they are ſuppoſed to be ſo louing and kinde to their generation, that if a foale looſe the damme, yet the other mares which are milche, will of their owne accord lend their teates, and feede or nurſe vp the orphan foale. Horſes are ſubiect to more diſeaſes then any other beaſt, for they haue full as many as belongeth vnto a man; and yet notwithſtanding, all thoſe diſeaſes may be cured by twelue medicines onely, as you ſhall finde by reading of the ſequell which followeth.
               
                  
                  How to cure all the infirmities in Horſes, either inward, or outward, with twelue medicines onely, and all not worth twelue-pence.
               
               The firſt poynt.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All Feuers in generall.
                     The peſtilence.
                     A Horſe taken.
                     The falling euill.
                     The palſey, or ſhaking euill.
                     The night mare.
                     Hyde-bound,
                     All conſumptions.
                     The breſt griefe.
                     The anticor.
                     All tyredneſſe:
                     The loathing of meat.
                     Caſting out of drinke.
                     All ſurfeits.
                     The hungry euill,
                     Sicke liuer.
                     Sicke gall.
                     Sicke ſpleene.
                     Sicke kidneys.
                     The yellowes.
                     The dropſie.
                     Coſtiuenes in the body.
                     The Botts.
                     All wormes.
                     Piſſing bloud.
                     The mattering yard.
                     Shedding of the ſeed.
                     Falling of the yard.
                     Eating of hens dung.
                     The falling of the creſt.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  If the horſe haue bene brought weake by ſickneſſe, and that you finde it proceedeth from ſome inward infection, or corruption of bloud, you ſhall giue him in the morning faſting two ſpoonefull of the powder of Diapente, well brewed and toſt to and fro in a pinte of ſweete wine, as Muſkadine, or Malmſey, and then ride or walke him vp and downe in the Sunne an hower after: then ſet him vp very warme in the ſtable, and let him faſt an hower, and then giue him ſuch prouender as he will eate, and his hay ſprinkled with a little water: But if his ſicknes proceed from any colde cauſe, as from ouer-riding, and too ſodaine cooling, or from waſhing when he was hot▪ or ſuch like, then you ſhall giue the ſame quantity of Diapente in Sacke, or other hot wine, in the ſame manner, as aforeſaid: But if his ſicknes be leſſe contagious, or that wine is not ready to be had, then you ſhall giue the ſame quantity of the aforeſaid powder, either in a quart of ſtrong Ale, or a quart of ſtronge Beere, obſeruing all the inſtructions formerly declared. Now for this powder which is called Diapente, or (of ſome) Horſe Methridate, becauſe it is a generall Antidote

or preſeruatiue againſt al poyſonous infection, you ſhall make it in this manner. Take of Aristolochia rotunda, of Gentiana, of Mirrhe, of Bachilauri, and of Ebori, of each a like quantity, beat them all togither in a morter to a very fine powder, and then ſearſe it till not any groſſnes be left, and then keepe it either in a cloſe pot, or in a bladder, and vſe it as before ſaide when you ſhall haue occaſion, and obſerue to doe it diuers mornings togither, if the ſicknes be violent. Now for as much as this powder may many times be wanting, or at leaſt hard to come by on the ſodaine, therefore in caſe of ſuch extreamity you ſhall take a good handfull of Cellodine, rootes and leaues and all, and hauing pickt and clenſed them, you ſhall take of Wormewood, and of Rue, of each halfe an handfull, boyle theſe in a pottle of ſtronge Ale or Beere, till a full halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and preſſe the hearbes excedingly, and then diſſolue into the drinke almoſt halfe a pound of ſweete butter, and an ounce and a halfe of the beſt treakle: and being no more but luke warme, giue it the horſe to drinke in the morning faſting, and ride or walke him an hower after it, then ſet him vp warme, and let him faſt an other hower, then giue him meate as aforeſaid: and doe thus diuers mornings according

to the greatnes of his ſicknes. Now in this cure, you muſt by no meanes forget to let the horſe bloud in the neck-veine, an hower or two before you giue him the firſt drinke, and let him bleede till you ſee the corrupt bloud change & begin to looke pure, to know which, you ſhall ſaue the firſt bloud, and the laſt bloud, in two ſaucers, and as they coole, they will eaſily ſhewe you the difference. Now if your horſe happen to fall ſodenly ſicke vnder you, as you trauell, when there is no towne nor helpe neere you, then you ſhall preſently light from his backe, and with a ſharp poynted knife, or bodkin, or for want of both, with a ſtronge poynt tagge, you ſhall pricke him in the roofe of the mouth amongſt the barres, ſomewhat neere to his vppermoſt teeth, and make him bleed well, walking him foreward, and ſuffering him to champe and eate his owne bloud which is very wholeſome, and almoſt a preſent cure: Now if the bloud ſtanch of it ſelfe (as commonly it will) then you ſhall preſently piſſe in his mouth, and ſo ryde him with all gentleneſſe and eaſe home-ward, and being ſet vp warme, waſh his mouth and noſtrills with vineger, and the next morning let him bloud in the necke-veine, and giue him either of the drenches before preſcribed, and no doubt

but you may hold on your iourney without danger. Now if in the pricking of the horſe in the mouth, you either ſtrike your knife too deepe, or elſe cut the veine in ſunder, whereby you cannot ſtanch the bloud (as it many times hapneth) in this caſe you ſhall put ſome big roūd peece of wood into the horſes mouth (to keepe him from byting) and then take a little of the fine downe of a Hares ſkinne, or a Conies ſkinne, or (for want of them) the fine linte of any wollen cloth, and hold it hard to the wound and it will ſtanch it, neither will it be lickt away with the horſes tongue.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All head-ach.
                     All frenzie.
                     The lethargie.
                     The ſtaggers.
                     The poſſe.
                     All coldes.
                     All coughes, or wet or dry.
                     All ſhortnes of breath.
                     Broken winde.
                     Rotten lungs.
                     The Glangers.
                     Mourning of the chyne.
                     Laxe, or looſenes.
                     The bloudy fluxe.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  For any of theſe diſeaſes of the head, or

lunges, or other parts by them offended, you ſhall in any wiſe firſt let the horſe bloud in the necke-veine, and let him bleed exceeding well, that is to ſay, till you ſee the bloud change, and that corruption come to pureneſſe, then ſtanch the veine, and take of Aſſaefetida as much as a haſſell nut, and diſſolue it in a ſaucer full of ſtrong wine vineger, and then take fine flaxe hurds and dip them therein, and then ſtop the ſame hard into the horſes eares, and with a needle and a thred ſtich the tippes of the horſes eares together, to keepe the medicine in from ſhaking forth▪ then take of the white cankerous moſſe, which growes vpon an old oake pale, or other oake wood, a good handfull or more, and boyle it in a pottle of new milke till one halfe be conſumed then ſtrayne it, and preſſe the moſſe excedingly, and being luke warme giue it the horſe to drinke faſting in the morning, and ride or walke him an hower after it gently, then ſet him vp warme, and hauing ſtood an hower, then offer him ſuch meat as he will moſt willingly eate, and in any wiſe ſprinckle his hay with water, and thus doe diuers mornings together, according to the greatnes of his ſicknes: but if you ſhall perceiue that he caſteth foule and filthy matter at his noſtrils, then you ſhall euery morning as ſoone as you

haue giuen the drench, take of Auripigmentum two drammes of Tuſſilaginis made into powder as much, then with Turpentine worke them to a ſtiffe paſt, and make little round cakes thereof, the compaſſe of a groat, but much thicker, and dry them a little; then take a chafing diſh and coales, and laying one or two of theſe cakes thereon, couer them with a tunnell, ſuch as you tunne wine or beere into bottles with, that the ſmoake may aſcend through the ſame: then hauing made the horſes head faſt, put the ſmoak to his noſtrils, and perfume him well with the ſame, and though at the firſt he be ſomwhat coy to take the ſmoake, yet hauing once felt the ſmell thereof, he will take ſuch delight therein, that he will of his owne accord thruſt his noſe to the ſame: aſſone as you haue perfumed your horſe, you ſhall ride him forth till he begin to ſweat, and then bring him home and ſet him vp warme, and hauing ſo ſtood an hower or more, then giue him meate as before ſayd, but by no meanes let him drinke any cold water, either in his ſicknes or out of his ſicknes, but when you may ride him after it, which if either weaknes, leaſure, time or place doe hinder you to doe, then you ſhall heate a pottle of water on the fire ſcalding hot, & put it into a gallō or two of cold water, ſo that it

may onely take the coldneſſe away▪ and then caſt a handfull or two of ground malt or wheat branne into the ſame and ſo giue it the horſe to drinke.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.
                  
                  
                     Impoſtumes in the Eares.
                     The Vines.
                     Vlcers in the noſe.
                     All wens whatſoeuer.
                     The Colt euill.
                     Sweld ſtones.
                     Incording or burſting.
                  
               
               
                  The third Medicine.
                  For any of theſe outward infirmities or ſwellings, you ſhall take a penniworth of pepper beaten to fine pouder, a ſpoonefull of Swines greaſe, the iuyce of a handfull of Rue, two ſpoonfull of ſtrong wine vinegar, and mixe them well altogether: then if the ſwelling be about the horſes head, face, or throat, you ſhall take flaxe hurds and ſteepe them therein, and ſtop it hard into the horſes eares and ſtich the tippes together with a needle and a thread, as in the ſecond medicine,

renewing it once in two dayes till the ſwelling goe away. But if it be in any other part of the body, then with this oyntment you ſhall anoynt the greeued place twice a day, till the infirmity conſume away. Now for the ſwelling about the Cods or priuy members, it ſhall be good before you anoynt them with this oyntment, to bath them well with cold water, as either by trotting the horſe into ſome deepe ponde, or els by taking a paile of cold water, and dipping a cloth into the ſame, to bath, clap, and waſh the Cods therewith, then drying them with another cleane cloth, lay on the oyntment, which is a preſent cure.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The pole euill.
                     Swelling after bloodletting.
                     The withers hurt.
                     All galld backs.
                     All ſtittfaſts.
                     The nauell-gall.
                     The Strangle.
                     The botch in the groyne.
                     All Fiſtulas.
                     Biting with venomous beaſts or wormes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The fourth medicine.
                  For any of theſe filthy impoſthumations, galls or ſwellings, you ſhall take the earth lome of a mudde wall which hath no lime in it, but onely earth, ſtraw, or litter, and you ſhall boyle it in ſtrong wine vinegar till it become very thicke like a pultus, then being very hot apply it to the ſore, renewing it once in twelue or foure and twenty houres, and it will not only ripen it and breake it, but alſo draw it, ſearch it, and heale it moſt perfectly: as experience wil manifeſt it.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fift medicine following.
                  
                  
                     Mangines in the maine.
                     Mangines in the tayle.
                     The Mallander.
                     The Sellander.
                     The paines.
                     The Scratches.
                     All kyb'd heeles.
                     The leproſie.
                     The farcye.
                     The generall ſcab.
                     All lice or nittes or other vermine.
                  
               
               
                  The fift Medicine.
                  Firſt in any wiſe you ſhall let the horſe blood in the necke-veine, and you ſhall ſuffer

him to bleed very well (becauſe corruption of blood is the onely breeder of theſe infirmities) then hauing with knife, launcet, curry combe, hayre-cloth, or ſuch like, opened the knots or puſtules, and rubd away al ſkurfe or filthineſſe, laying the ſores open and raw and as it were ready to bleede, then you ſhall take of yellow A ſnicke beaten to fine powder, and clarified hogges greaſe, of each a little quantity, and beat them well together till they come to a perfect oyntment, then hauing tyed the horſes head vp faſt to the rack, in ſuch wiſe that hee can neither licke nor bite himſelfe, with this oyntment anoynt all the ſores & other offended places very well ouer, holding ſome hot barre of iron or fire-ſhouell heated againſt the ſame, that the oyntment may the better and ſpeedilier enter into the ſame: and being thus anoynted, let him ſtand the ſpace of two or three houres at the leaſt tyed as beforeſaid: which done, take of the ſtrongeſt vrine you can get, and with the ſame waſh away all the oyntment whereſoeuer it was layd, and then vntye the horſe and put him to his meate: and thus doe once a day, till the ſores drye vp and beginne to ſhill away.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſixt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All woundes in generall.
                     All Synewes cut.
                     All woundes with ſhot.
                     Burning with lime.
                     Mad dogge biting.
                     Foundering.
                     Frettizing.
                     Surbaiting.
                     All looſe hoofes,
                     Caſting of the hoofe.
                     Hoofe-bound.
                  
               
               
                  The ſixt Medicine.
                  Take of Turpentine, waxe, and hogges greaſe, of each a like quantity, firſt melt the yellow waxe and hogges greaſe vppon a ſoft fire, then take it off and diſſolue the turpentine into it, and ſtirre it very well together, then put it into a Gally pot and let it coole: & with this ſalue, tent, or plaiſter any wound or ſore, & it wil heale it: alſo with the ſame anoint the cronets of your horſes hoofes, and putting wheat branne vnto it, being boyling hot, ſtop vp your horſes feet therewith, in caſe either of founder, frettize, ſurbat, or ſuch like infirmity.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſeauenth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All old vlcers.
                     The Shackle gall.
                     The Canker,
                     The Anbury.
                     All bruiſes broken.
                     All ouer-reaches.
                     The crowne ſcab,
                     The crownet hurt.
                     Grauelling.
                     Prick in the ſoale.
                     A retrait.
                     Cloying.
                     The rotten fruſh.
                  
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the way onley contained in the ſeauenth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The bloudy rifts.
                     The bladders.
                     The lampas.
                     All mouth Cankers.
                     All heat in the mouth.
                     The tongue hurt.
                     The paps.
                     The tooth-ake,
                     Shedding of hayre.
                     The felter worme.
                  
               
               
                  The ſeauenth Medicine.
                  Take of new milke three quarts, a good handfull of Plantaine, let it boyle till a full pint be conſumed, then take three ounces of Allome, and one ounce & an halfe of white ſugar Candy, both beeing made into a very fine pouder, and three ſpoonefull of ſtrong

wine vineger, and put them into the milke, then let it boyle a little till it haue a hard curde, then ſtraine it and ſaue the whay, wherwith you ſhall firſt bath the ſore, the whay being made warme: then with a cleane cloth dry the ſore, and then apply to it this ſalue: take of turpentine, yellow-waxe and hogs-greaſe of each an ounce, and of verdigreaſe ground to fine pouder an ounce and a halfe, mixe all theſe very wel together on a ſoft fire, & then put it into a gally pot and let it coole: but in caſe where the bruiſe is not broken, yet likely to breake, there you ſhall only apply the fourth medicine onely, mentioned before.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the eighth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All conuulſions of ſinewes.
                     All Crampes whatſoeuer.
                     The necke-cricke.
                     Shoulder ſplat.
                     All ſweld legges.
                     Ouer-reach in the backe ſinew.
                     All windgalls.
                     Wrench in the nether ioynt.
                     All bruiſes vnbroke.
                     All ſtraines whatſoeuer.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The eight Medicine.
                  Take ſtrong wine vineger & patch greaſe of each a like quantity and boye it on the fire then with wheate branne make it into a hot pultus and being ſo warme as the horſe may well indure it, apply it twice a day to the grieued place, but in caſe the ſorance bee where you cannot bind any pultus vnto it, then you ſhall onely take patch greaſe and being mol
                        •
                     en very hot with the ſame, bath the horſe twiſe or thrice a day and giue him very moderate excerciſe before and after his dreſſing, and it will not onely take away all paine and anguiſh but alſo remooue all ſwellings, gourdings, or any other eyeſore whatſoeuer.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ninth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All light galls.
                     To ſkinne ſores.
                     To dry vp humors.
                  
               
               
                  The ninth Medicine.
                  Firſt bath the ſore place with hot moulten Butter, then ſtrow vppon it the pouder of Roſſen, laſtly take a ſpoonefull or two of very thicke Creame, and with the ſoote of a Chimney bring it to a very thicke paſt, then ſpread it alſo vpon the ſore and it will heale drye and ſkinne it in a ſhort ſpace.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the tenth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All watry eyes.
                     All blood-ſhotten eies
                     All dimneſſe of ſight.
                     The pin and web in the eye.
                     All Pearls or ſpots.
                     All lunaticke eyes.
                     All vlcers in the eyes.
                     All cankers in the eyes.
                     All Fiſtulas in the eies.
                     The hawe in the eye.
                  
               
               
                  The tenth Medicine.
                  Take true ground-Iuy, which of ſome is called alehoofe, and beat it well in a morter, and if it be very drye drop a little white roſe-water into it, or a little of the water of the hearbe Eyebright, then ſtraine it well into a cleane glaſſe, and with that iuyce waſh, anoynt, or tent the ſores in the eyes at leaſt three or foure times a day: as for the hawes or hogs in a horſes eyes, euery common Smith knowes in what ſort to cut them away, and that eaſily.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the eleuenth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All ſplents.
                     All Spauens.
                     All Curbs.
                     All ringbones.
                     All quitterbones.
                     All bony excreſcions.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The eleuenth Medicine.
                  Take white Arſnicke ground to pouder and make a little ſlit vppon the head of the excreſcion the length of a barley corne, and downe to the bone, then rayſe vp the ſkinne with a fine cornet, and put in as much of the Arſnicke as wil lye vppon a three halfepence, and then bind vpon the ſore a little dry flaxe hurds, which done tye vp the horſes head to the racke, ſo as he may not bite the ſore place, and let him ſo ſtand the ſpace of two or three houres, for in that time the anguiſh will bee gone and the medicine will haue done working, then put the horſe to his meat either in the houſe or abroad, and the excreſcion will rotte & fall away of it ſelfe, which ſeene you may heale vp the ſore, either with the ſixt or the ninth medicine ſpecified before.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the twelfth Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All broken bones,
                     All bones out of ioynt.
                     Swaying of the backe▪
                     
                     Weakeneſſe in the backe.
                     Horſe-hipped.
                     Horſe-ſtifled.
                  
               
               
                  The twelfth Medicine.
                  The bones being placed in their true and proper places, according to the forme of the

member, you ſhall firſt bath the grieued place with warme patch greaſſe, then clap about it a bynding plaſter of pitch, roſen, maſticke, and ſallet oyle, well mixt togither and molten on the fire, then fould the limbe about with ſine flaxe hurds, and then ſplent it with broade, flat, ſtrong and ſoft ſplents, and remoue not the dreſſing for the ſpace of fifteene dayes, except you finde the roulers to ſlacken which is a very good ſigne and then you may ſtrayten them againe, or if you finde the member increaſe in ſwelling, and that the roulers grow as it were ſtraiter and ſtrayter then you may giue the members eaſe, for it is a ſigne it was rould too ſtraight before, and thus you ſhal dreſſe it but twice in thirty dayes, or there abouts, in which time the bones will be knit, but if through the breatch or diſlocation, you finde any groſe ſubſtance to appeare about the grieued place, then you ſhall twice or thrice a day bath it with hot patch greaſſe, & that wil take away the eie ſore in a ſhort ſpace.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               The emperour of all medicines concerning Horſes, The ſecond poynt.
               TAke of wheat meale ſix pounds, or as much as wil bring all the other ſimples following to a ſtiffe paſte: of Annis-ſeeds two ounces, of Commig-ſeedes ſix drams, of Carthamus one dram and a halfe, of Fenugreeke ſeed one ounce and two drammes, of Brimſton one ounce and a halfe, of Sallet oyle, one pint and two ounces, of Hony one pound & a halfe, of white wine foure pints, and all this muſt be made into a very ſtiffe paſt, the hard ſimples being pounded and fearſt to a fine powder and ſo mixt with the wet ſimples, after this paſt is thus made, it muſt be kept in a very cleane cloth, and when you haue occaſion to vſe it, you ſhall take there of as much as will make a round ball as big a mans fiſt, and this ball you ſhall by continuall waſhing or lauingng diſſolue in a gallon or two of faire running water, and ſo giue it the horſe to drinke, either after his heates, or after any violent labour or exerciſe, or when he is ſicke poore, leane, or inwardly diſeaſed, and full of foule ſurfaits, and then you ſhall ſuffer him to

drinke thereof as much and as oft as he pleaſeth. Now it may be at the firſt, that partly through the colour thereof, & partly through the ſmell, the horſe will be coy to taſt it, but care not you therefore, but be ſure to keepe him from all water elſe but it onely, and that he may the readier take it, you ſhall doe well at firſt to offer him this water in the darke, that the colour may not offend him, of which when he hath but once taſted, he will then forſake all water whatſoeuer to drinke of this water onely, as I haue often knowne by experience. Now touching the vertues which appertaine to this medicine, they are theſe: firſt if your horſe be neuer ſo poore, leane, ſurfaited and diſeaſed, if you giue your horſe of this water with the ball diſſolued in it as aforeſaid, it will in fourteene dayes not onely clenſe and ſcowre him from all infirmitie, but alſo feede him and make him ſat with good and ſound fleſh, ſo as he ſhall be fit either for the Market, or for preſent trauell: Secondly, if your horſe be inwardly foule and fatt, and haue either by orderly or diſorderly riding had his greaſe molten within him, then this medicine vſed as aforeſaid, is a moſt excellent and ſoueraine purge or ſcowring, and maketh the horſe not onely auoid all ſuch filthy and ill matter as lies molten in his body, and would

breed moſt dangerous and mortall ſickneſſes, but alſo it comforteth and ſtrengthneth the inward parts, and breedes great courage and ſpirit in the horſe, whence it comes to paſſe that it is of eſpeciall and great vſe for hunting horſes, & rūning horſes, to be giuen after their heates, becauſe it doth clenſe the body, preuents all inward ſickneſſes, keepes a horſe coole and ſoluble in his body, and adds more courage & mettle then any other foode whatſoeuer: Laſtly the vſe of this medicine one fortnight is as good as a quarter of a yeares graſſe at any time of the yeare, and worketh as many and more good effects, eſpecially in this, that this medicine is to be had at al times, and graſſe is to be had but onely in the Summer ſeaſon: and whereas at graſſe (if it be ranke and ſweet) a horſe is in danger of many ſickneſſes, as the yellowes, ſtaggers, and many other which proceed from the corruption of the bloud, or the heat of the ſeaſon, by the vſe of this medicine all thoſe infirmities are taken away, and the horſe recouereth fleſh, ſtrength, and liuelihood of ſpirit, without any danger, as proofe ſhall teſtifie, much better then my writing.
            
         
         
            
            The third poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in Cattell, as Oxe, Cowe, Bull, or Calfe, with ſeauen medicines onely.
            
               The Caracter, or nature of the Oxe, Bull, Cowe, or Calfe.
               THe Oxe, Bull, Cowe, or Calfe, for indeed they are but one & the ſelfe ſame in generation, are beaſts naturally of a ſlow and heauy diſpoſition, yet fit for the draught, being temperately handled, and eſpecially the Oxen or Bulls, the Cowes may be and are ſomtimes imployed in the ſame worke, but yet they are more fit for the paile, or for yeelding of milke, which they yeeld in greater aboundance then any other beaſts whatſoeuer, their fleſh is the beſt and moſt wholſomeſt for the ſuſtenance of man, and therefore when they are paſt labour, or other commodity, they may be fedde and ſould to the ſhambles: The fat of theſe beaſts is ſoft, and apt vpon any violent exerciſe to melt whence it proceeds that in their labour they may not be driuen aboue an ordinary foote-pace: their ſkinnes are of very

great price, being a leather of that firme, faſt and hard compoſition, that with ordinary liquering or working in oyle, it withſtandeth all wet and weather, and out weareth all other leather whatſoeuer. Of theſe kinde of Cattell with vs in this Iland of great Brittaine are foure ſorts: the firſt, and beſt, are thoſe which are bred in the weſt parts, as in Somerſetſhire, Gloſter-ſhire, Dorſet-ſhire, and the Countries adioyning, theſe are for the moſt part of a bloud red colour, with great, large, and long bodies, tall of ſtature, and ſlenderly caſt downewards, their hornes are little and crooked, and the milke which the Cowes giue is the moſt beſt and wholſomeſt of all other. The ſecond ſort are bred in the countries of Darby-ſhire, Cheſſe-ſhire, Lancha-ſhire, Yorke-ſhire, and the countries adioyning: theſe are for the moſt part of a coole blacke colour, with large bodyes and ſhort legges, ſtately large and white hornes, and the Cowe moſt fruitfull of all other for breed. The third ſort are bred in Lincolneſhire and the countries adioyning and are of a pied colour, very tall, and large of body, onely ſlender and long legged. The fourth ſort are bred in the extreameſt part of the North as in Northumberland and beyond the Tweede, they are the leaſt of all the other with ſhort low

bodies and very little hornes, yet is their fleſh moſt excellent and the ſweeteſt beefe of allother, whence our ancient heardsmen conclude, that the weſt country beaſt is beſt for the paile, the yorkſhire beſt for the hide & tallow, the Lincolnſhire for trauell, and the Northumberland for the ſhambles: they haue all as many diſeaſes as the horſe, yet all may be cured by ſeauen medicines onely.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured in Cattell by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All Feuers.
                     The peſtilence.
                     The gargill.
                     The mourraine.
                     All miſliking.
                     All leannes.
                     All fluxes.
                     The piſſing of blood.
                     Hide-bound.
                     The drie ſkinne.
                     The Lunge-growne.
                     Swallowing of all poiſon whatſoeuer.
                     All wormes.
                     Vomiting of blood.
                     Milting.
                     To prouoke vrine.
                     The ouerflow of the gall.
                     A Cow wethered.
                     All faintnes.
                     How to breed milke.
                     The Pantas.
                     The loſſe of the cud.
                     The rot.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  Firſt aſſoone as you perceiue your beaſt to droop, you ſhall in any wiſe let him bloud in

the necke veine, and let him bleede well (that is to ſay) till you ſee alteration in the blood; then take of plantaine, of rewe, of wormwood, of houſleike, of woodroſſe, of ſheppards purſe, of Smallage, and of galworte▪ of each of theſe (or of ſo many as you can conueniently get) halfe a handful, beat them wel in a morter and then mixe therewith a pinte of vrine & a handfull of henns dunge ſtrayned all together exceeding much, then put this Iuyce ſo ſtrayned to a full ale-quarte of ſtronge beere or ſtrong ale, & ſo ſet it on the fire and boyle it till a full halfe bee conſumed, then take it from the fire, & diſſolue into it halfe an ounce of the beſt treacle and a ſpoonfull of the iuyce of Garlicke, then take of Myrhe, of Iuory, of Bay-berries, of Cinamon, and of Annis ſeedes beaten to fine pouder two good ſpoonefull, and brew it very well with the ale, then being ſufficiently wel cool'd giue it the beaſt to drinke with a horne, early in the morning faſting, and chaſe the Beaſt vp and downe, halfe an houre after, then put him where hee may come to no meate for an houre and an halfe after, and thus do two or three mornings together according to the greatnes of his ſicknes: But if you find his dewe-lap begin to ſwell, then you ſhall with a ſharp knife ſlit it, and opening of the skinne you ſhall thruſt into

it halfe a handfull of Speare-graſſe and ſalt chopt together, and then ſtitch it vp againe and anoint it with butter and tarre mixt together, and ſo put the beaſt to a freſh paſture, but by no meanes let the graſſe be too ranck, for that is moſt dangerous.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The belly ake.
                     All colds in generall.
                     Dropping noſtrils.
                     All coſtiuenes.
                     All coughes or hauſts.
                     All ſhortneſſe of breath.
                     A generall purge for Cattell.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  Firſt, you ſhall in any wiſe let the beaſt bloud, as in the former Medicine, then take a quart of ſtronge Ale and boyle it on the fier and ſcume it well, then take it of and diſolue into it a ſpounfull of tarre and a ſpounfull of the Iuice of Garlike, which done take of ſugarcandy of Fenugreeke, and of brimſtone, all being beaten to a fine pouder, the quantity of three ſponfull, brew them well together with the Ale till it be ſufficiently well cold, then put to it a quarter of a pint of Sallet-oyle and ſo giue it the beaſt to drinke faſting,

and chaſe him and vſe him as was before preſcrybed in the former Medicine.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third Medecine following.
                  
                  
                     The Sturdy,
                     The neck gald,
                     The neck bruyſd,
                     The neck ſweld,
                     The cloſh,
                     All ſwellings in generall in any part.
                     All impoſtumes,
                     All Byles,
                     All Botches,
                     The dew-boulne,
                     Catell goared
                     All wounds what-ſoeuer.
                  
               
               
                  The third Medecine.
                  Firſt in caſe of the ſturdy you ſhall open the skull vpon the forehead and take out the blader, then heale the ſore with the ſalue following, but in caſe of deweboulne where the bleane riſeth on the tongue or in the mouth, there you ſhal firſt break the bleane, and thruſt out the filth then rub the ſore with ſalte and earth, and after apply the ſalue following, which is this. Take the greene leaues of Ariſtolochia of freſh greaſe, of tallow, of the aſhes of an old burnt ſhoe, of terpentine, of tarre, and of lyllie roots of each a like quantity, beate them all in a morter till they come to a perfit ſalue which if it proue too lenwicke or moyſt then you ſhall take as much yellow

waxe as will ſtiffen it, and with this ſalue anoynt the ſore places, and it is a preſent remedie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Al theſe infirmities are cured by the fourth Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The Barbs,
                     The Bleane,
                     The Canker in the mouth,
                     Looſe teeth,
                     The tonge venomed
                     The falling of the palate.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Medicine.
                  Firſt thtuſt your hand into the beaſts mouth, and if there be any Bliſters riſen or the pallat falne, rub the one away and put vp the other, then take of woodbine leaues, of Sage, of Plantain and of Salt, of each halfe an handfull, boyle them well in a quart of running water, a pint of vinegar, & halfe a pint of hony, then with the water waſh the ſore places very well and it is a preſent remedy,
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fift Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All ſore eies,
                     The haw in the eie,
                     The pinne in the eie,
                     The web in the eye,
                  
               
               
                  The fift Medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall let the horſe blood in the temple

veines, and cut out the hawes if they offend him, which euery ordinary Smith can doe, then take an egge and open it in the crowne, and put out halfe the white, then fill it vp againe with ſalt, and then roſte it in the hot embers ſo long and ſo hard that you may beat it to a fine powder, which done, diſſolue ſome of that powder in a ſpoonefull of the water of eiebright, and a ſpoonefull of the iuyce of houſe-leeke, & with the ſame waſh the beaſts eye twice or thrice a day, & it is a preſent remedie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſixt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The worme in the tayle.
                     The generall ſcabbe.
                     The party colour ſcab.
                     The Itch or ſcurſe.
                     The byting of a mad dogge.
                     The byting with venemous beaſts
                     All lyce or tickes.
                     All prickes with thornes, or ſtubbes.
                     To be ſhrewe-runne.
                  
               
               
                  The ſixt medicine.
                  You ſhall firſt make a ſtrong lye with old vrine, and the aſhes of aſh-wood, then take a pynte of this lye and adde to it of tarre, o
                        •
                      blacke ſope, of coperas, of boares greaſe, of brimſton, of peper, of ſtaues-aker, and of

plantaine of each a like quantity, as much as will bring the lye to a thicke and ſtiiffe ſalue, then with the ſame annoynt all the ſore places: but in caſe the beaſt be ſhrew runne onely and haue no other infirmity, then you ſhall take a bramble which groweth at both ends, and with the ſame beate all ouer the body of the beaſt, and if you can conueniently, you ſhall alſo drawe his whole body vnder a bramble which groweth at both ends as aforeſayd.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſeuenth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All ſtaines whatſoeuer
                     All ſorenes in the ſinewes.
                     All ſtifnes in the neck.
                     The goute.
                     All broken bones.
                     Al grieues in the houes
                     The foule.
                  
               
               
                  The ſeauenth medicine.
                  Take mallowes, chikweede, and galling-gall, and boyle them in vrine, butter, burgundy, pitch, tallow, and linſeed oyle till they be ſo ſoft that you may beat them to a ſalue, which done, apply that ſalue to the grieued place very hot, either as an oyntment, or as a pultus, and it is a preſent remedy, as hath bene often proued.
               
            
         
         
            
            The fourth poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in Sheep with ſix medicines onely.
            
               The Caracter or nature of the Sheepe.
               SHeepe are naturally of a hot diſpoſition, weake & tender, yet ſo free from gredines that they will liue of leſſe foode then any other beaſt of their bignes: they are of a moſt ſingular profit and eſteeme, as hauing in them not about them any thing which is not of ſome good vſe, the worſt of which are their houes, and yet the very treading of them vpon the ground are a good manuring and inriching of the ſame: as for their fleeces, their fleſh and other intralls, who knowes not the excellent goodnes thereof? The Rams and Ewes are fit for generation from two yeares of age till they be ten, and after that they are onely for the ſhambles: the Ewes carrie their lambes in their bodyes a hundred and fifty dayes and no longer, according to common computation. Sheepe in our Iland of great Brittaine (which is not inferior to any kingdome in the world for the excellencie of good

Sheepe) are of ſundry natures, according to the alteration of the climats, for where the ground is moſt firtile, there the ſheep are large of body, and deepe woold, yet is the ſtaple but of an indifferent finenes, rather inclining to ſome courſenes, then yeelding the beſt thrid others are bred of a more barraine and wilde earth, yet if the leare be colde then is the ſtaple moſt courſe, and the wooll both ſhort and harie, and the leaſt that are bred on the moſt barraine earth, though the ſheepe be the leaſt of body, and the leaſt of burthen, yet if the leare be warme and well coloured, the wooll is of all the fineſt, and the ſtaple of a fine and ſilke-like handling. To conclude, it is better and more naturall for a ſheepe to be bred abroade in the fields amongſt the flocke then domeſticke at home in the houſe, for ſo ſhall both his fleſh and fleece be better both for the taſt, and for all other ſeruice.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in ſheepe are cured by the first medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All Feuers.
                     The red water.
                     The lunge-ſick.
                     All coughes,
                     All colds.
                     All diſeaſes of the gall.
                     The Iaundiſſe.
                     All ſicknes comming of choller.
                     
                        All tough fleagme.
                     The Poxe.
                     The wood euill.
                     The crampe.
                     All licking of poyſon
                     To cauſe eaſie deliuerance.
                     To increaſe milke.
                     All wormes inward.
                     The loſſe of the cud.
                     The Staggers.
                     The generall rot.
                     Water in the belly.
                  
               
               
                  The first Medicine.
                  Take of wormewood flowers, of rue, of Coltsfoote, of lunge-wort, of plantaine, of lettice, of roſemary, of cinquefoyle, of horſemint, of dyll, of Sage, of tanſcy, and of holy thiſtle, or of ſo many of thoſe as you can conueniently get, of each a like quantity and beat them very well in a morter, then ſtraine forth the iuyce thereof, and to a pint of a very ſweet honnied water made with the beſt honny and running water, adde fiue or ſixe ſpoonefull of this iuyce, then ſet it on the fire and boyle it with two ſpoonfull of the pouder of anny ſeeds, licoras, long pepper, and bayberries made of equall quantities, then being taken from the fire put in as much ſweet butter as a walnut, and two ſpoonfull of that Salt which is called Adcoces, which is ſalt gathered (and made by the violence of the ſunnes heat) vppon the ſalt marſhes after the tide is gone away, or for want of it (becauſe it is ſcarſe) you may take as much of the beſt Spaniſh

ſalt, and all being well ſtirred together, ſo ſoone as it is luke warme giue it the ſheepe to drinke with a horne, and morning and euening rubbe his mouth very well with the ſalt aforeſaid, and it is a certaine cure, and hath beene often proued.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The Scabbe or Itch.
                     All maggots whatſoeuer.
                     The worme in the clawe.
                     All wild fier.
                     The Sturdy.
                     The turning euill.
                     The more founde.
                     Sheepe taggd.
                     Sheepe belted.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall let the Sheepe bloud in the eye-veines, then take tarre and freſh greaſe of each a like quantity, and mixing them wel together with a little Brimſtone and the iuyce of Cheruile, bring it to a ſalue, and with the ſame (after you haue bared, clenſed, and made all the ſore places raw) anoint all the grieued place, or in caſe of the ſturdy after you haue opened the skull and taken out the bladder, plaſter the ſore therewith, and it is a certaine cure.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All paine in the ioynts.
                     All bones out of ioynt.
                     All Broken bones.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Medicine.
                  Firſt after you haue placed the member right (which you may doe by the example of the ſound member) then you ſhall bath the grieued place wel with butter and beere, then make a ſcarcloth of patchgreaſe and yellow waxe, and warming it very hot lap it about the member, and if need require then ſplent it, and in caſe the member be broken renew it not til fifteene dayes be paſt, otherwiſe renew it once in three dayes.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All greiues in the eyes.
                     All dimneſſe of ſight.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth Medicine.
                  You ſhal firſt let the ſheepe bloud in the eye-veines, then take of the iuyce of Cellodine, that is to ſay, of the leaues in ſummer and of the roots in winter, and with the ſame waſh the ſheeps eyes, and it will helpe them.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fift medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All greiues in the mouth.
                     All looſeneſſe of teeth.
                  
               
               
                  The fift Medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhal let the ſheepe bloud in the gummes, then you ſhall take of earth, of Sage and of Salt, of each a like quantity, and beat them well together, and with the ſame rub the mouth of the ſheep very well, but eſpecially where it is greeued▪ and it helpeth.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſixt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All ſickneſſe in Lambes.
                     Lambes that are yeaned ſicke.
                  
               
               
                  The ſixth Medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhal take vp the lambe and breath into the mouth thereof, then ſuckell or feede it with mares milke and a little water mixt together and made luke warme, and in any caſe during the ſicknes keepe it very warme for that is the greateſt nouriſhment that can bee giuen vnto them, and beſt agreeth with them.
               
            
         
         
            
            The fift poynt. How to cure all the Diſeaſes in Goates with two Medicines onely.
            
               The Carracter or nature of Goates.
               GOates are naturally of a wanton, light, & ayry diſpoſition, giuen to much wildnes whence it comes that they are in many countries preſerued, as wee preſerue our Deere wild, and for the chaſe, and ſurely they will make excellent ſport in their hunting: They doe bring forth their young kids in more abundance then ſheepe doe lambes, for they doe ſeldome bring forth vnder two, very often three, and ſometimes foure, they carry their kids in their bodyes fiue monthes as ſheepe doe, and ſeldome growe barraine but through extreame fatnes, they begin very early to goe to the bucke as in the firſt yeare, whence it comes that they continue not long in bearing as not aboue three or foure yeares at the moſt: Their greateſt and beſt foode is the brouzing vppon young trees and therefore they ſhould ſo go to the buck, that they

might bring forth their yong ones in the month of March or Aprill, when euery tree begins to bud: They are naturally euer good Phiſitions for themſelues▪ and when they find any imperfection wil ſeeke out cures for the ſame, as by letting themſelues blood vppon briers, thornes, bulruſhes and ſuch like, they are much ſubiect to aborſement or caſting of their yong ones, eſpecially in extreame cold ſeaſons, whence it comes that they ſhould haue euer a ſhed prouided for thē in the winter ſeaſon: The hayre of the goates in ſome countryes is yearely ſhorne off, and a courſe ſtuffe made thereof▪ wherewith they cloth the meaner ſort of people: They do naturally ſee as well by day as by night, and their ages are beſt knowne by the knots and round riſings about the nether part of their hornes. To conclude, their teeth are very dangerous for the ſpoyling of young trees, eſpecially the oliue tree, which if they but chance to lick on the tree, neuer beareth any fruite after it.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in Goates are cured by the firſt Medicine.
                  
                  
                     The peſtilence,
                     The dropſie,
                     Hardnes to kidd,
                     The Staggers.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall let the Goate bloud vnder the eies, and in the tayle, then you ſhall take of celladine leaues, of ruſhes, of reedes greene and of wormewood of each a like quantity, beate them in a morter and ſtraine out the iuyce: then take foure or fiue ſpoonfull of that iuyce and mixe it with a pince of veruine and water, then put in a ſpoonfull of ſalte, & halfe a ſpoonfull of cloues beaten to fine pouder, & being luke warme giue it the Goate to drinke faſting, and let it faſt two houres after it.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſeond medicine.
                  
                  
                     All ſtoppings in the teats,
                     The tuell ſtopt,
                     The tetter,
                     The dry ſcabbe,
                     The itch,
                     All maggots.
                     All flye-blowings.
                  
               
               
                  The Second medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall take and clenſe away all the filth and ſcurffe which any way ſtoppeth or offendeth the grieued place, then take of honey, of Capons-greaſe, of blacke ſope, of tarre, of brimſton, and of the ſoote of a chimney, of each a ſpoonefull, and of Goates milke fiue ſpoonefull, mixe them all very well together till it come to a perfect oyntment,

then it with annoynt the ſore place very well, morning and euening; and if the ſtoping haue bene very longe, or that the Goate be much inwardly dryed, then you ſhall take two inches of a ſmale candles end and thruſt it vp into the Coates tuell, in the manner of a ſuppoſitory, and it will not onely clenſe the bagge and giue the Goate greate eaſe in his body, but alſo keepe the place from ſtopping euer after.
               
            
         
         
            The ſixt poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in Swine with three medicines onely.
            
               The Caracter or nature of the Swine.
               SWine are naturally of a ſluttiſh, ſloathfull, and deuouring diſpoſition, giuen onely to gredyneſſe and ſpoyle, whence commeth the ſaying of the huſbandman, that the ſwine is neuer good till he be in the diſh: they are of moſt creatures the moſt apoundant in their breede, for they bring forth their litters three times in the yeare, and will bring forth ten

twelue, fifteene, and twenty ſomtimes in a litter, yet they wil neuer bring vp more pigges then ſhe hath teates to giue ſuck with: ſuch pigges as are piggd the begining or the laſt of December haue teeth immediatly, the other haue not. Swine, of all other beaſts, doe ſoneſt ſhewe their ſicknes, for if you pull but a briſtle from their backes and finde it bloudy at the neather end, or if he carry his neck on the one ſide, you may be well aſſured of preſent ſicknes: Swine are to be vſed three ſeuerall wayes in the houſe, that is, for brawne, for bacon, and for porke: for brawne, the bore is onely in vſe, and he is to be franke fed, and not ſtye fed for the franke hardneth the fleſh beſt: the Hogge is beſt for porke, moſt tender and ſweeteſt, and fitteſt for preſent ſeruice: and the ſpayd Guylt, or ſpayd or guelt Sowe is beſt for bakon: feedeth ſoundeſt, taketh fat ſooneſt, and hangeth by the walles vncorrupt longeſt▪ As there be houſehold and tame ſwine, ſo there be alſo wilde and ſauadge ſwine, and they are ſomwhat leſſe then the tame ſwine, yet by much more fierſe and cruell, they differ little or nothing in nature, onely they are by their wildnes and much ranging, a great deale leſſe apt to take infirmity or be ſicke: To conclude, they are a good and wholſome meate, hauing nothing

in them or about them vſeleſſe, as is found by daily experience.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in Swine are cured by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All feuers.
                     All hid ſickneſſes.
                     The mourraine.
                     The peſtilence.
                     The Catharre.
                     The gall.
                     The meazle.
                     The poxe.
                     The laxe.
                     All vomiting.
                     The ſleeping euill.
                     All paine in the myte.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall let the Swine blood in the tayle, and vnder the eares, then binde vp the ſores with the greene barkes of oziers, which done, you ſhall take of barley meale two or three handfull, of red oaker and hens dunge of each a handfull, of the iuice of liuer wort, gall wort, and wormewood halfe a pynte, of treakle an ounce, mixe all theſe well with a pottle of honey and vrine blended together, then put it into a gallon or two of ſweete warme waſh or ſwillings▪ and ſo giue it the ſwine to drinke, and annoynt all the ſore places of his body with brimſton & bores greaſe mixed together, and during the time of his ſicknes let his foode be onely dry beanes ſpelted on a mill.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All impoſtumes.
                     All leanenes or miſlike
                     All ſcurfe or mangines.
                     Swine that are luggd
                     All maggots in the eares.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall let the ſwine bloud in the tayle as aforeſayde, then if the impoſthume be rype, launce it, and thruſt out the filth, then heale the ſore with tarre and butter mixt togither, but if the impoſtume be hard then onely rub it with wheat meale and ſalt till it diſſolue, but if the infection be vniuerſall then annoynt the ſwine all ouer with boares greaſe, brimſton, vineger, blacke ſoape and hony mixt togither, each of like quantity, and hauing formerly rubd all the ſcurfe and filth away with a wooll card.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All vnnaturalnes in Sowes deuouring their births.
                  
               
               
                  The third Medicine.
                  If your Sowe be giuen to much vnnaturalnes, and that ſhe will deuoure her pigges ſo ſoone

as ſhe hath pigged them, you ſhall watch her piging and take them away as they fall, then take the wreckling or worſt pigge, and annoynt & bath it all ouer with the iuyce of the hearb Stonecroppe, and then giue it the Sowe to deuoure, which ſo ſone as ſhe hath done, it will immediately make her ſo exceding ſick and cauſe her to vomite ſo excedingly, that ſhe will neuer after doe the ſame againe.
               
            
         
         
            The ſeauenth poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in Dogges, with three medicines onely.
            
               The Caracter, or nature of the Dogge.
               THere be of Doggs diuers kindes, though all concurre & come to one nature in the matter of diſeaſes and infirmity,The Grey-hound. for there is firſt the Grey-hound which exceedeth in ſwiftnes, and is preſerued for the chaſe, as ether to courſe the wilde Deere, the Hare, the Bore, the Wolfe, or other vermine, he is a beaſt of infinite valoure and ſpirit, yet tender and apt by his fierſenes to much caſualty, and his onely vertue conſiſteth in the ſwiftnes of

his foote. Then there is the Hound which is of a more duller temper, whoſe onely glory is in his ſmell,The Hound hunting and finding out by his ſcent the tractes and footeſtepes of all ſorts of wilde beaſts: in which he ſhoweth ſo much cunning, that not any winding, turning, or art full double can preuent his ſearch, hee is both valiant and induſtrious, and ſo vnappaled with labour, that only by the continuance of his toyle hee maketh himſelfe maiſter of what prey ſoeuer he hunteth. Next vnto them is the Spaniell, which alſo is ſingular for his ſmell vppon Birdes, and the hound vppon Beaſts:The Spaniell. whence it comes that neither Partrige, Pheſant, Raile, Quaile, Pecock nor any other Bird can eſcape their ſearch, they are of all other Dogges the moſt louingeſt, humbleſt, and moſt familiar with the man: then there is the water Spaniell, whoſe ſcent is alſo his only glory, yet that ſcent is taken aloft from the ayre vppon the water, whereby it comes to paſſe that no water foule is ſafe from his ſearch, he is alſo of a moſt exceeding ſtrong conſtitution, being ſo very able to indure the cold, that no ſharpneſſe of winter nor froſt troubleth him, but the water is as familiar with him as the ayre: Then there is the Maſtiue, whoſe vertue is onely in his courage, ſtrength, ſharpnes of tooth, and aptnes

to encounter with any fierce wilde beaſt, as Lyons, Beares, Bulls, Wolues, Tigers, and ſuch like, againſt which they are ſo apt, wiling, and ſo cunning in their fight, that they ſildom or neuer part but victors.Tumblers & Mongrils To conclude, for your Tumbler or Lurcher, whoſe delight is onely in killing the Cony, for the Lice
                     •
                  cea which onely enuieth the Foxe, and for your generall Mongrils whoſe vſes are either for chaſing away vermine or defence of the huſbandmans yard, they were, and are in their ſpeciall natures and qualities with the other forenamed dogges, and touching their diſeaſes, they are cured by one and the ſelfe ſame medicines.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in dogges are cured by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All wormes inwardly.
                     All coldes or ſtoppings.
                     The ſtone.
                     Coſtiuenes or belly-bound.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  Make a ſtrong decoction of worme-wood and of Southern-wood, then take a pint of the decoction and diſſolue into it as much Aloes as halfe a hazell nut, and a good ſpoonfull of the pouder of Iuory and Brimſtone mixt together, then being luke warme giue

it the Dogge to drinke, and adminiſter at his tuell two inches of a candles end in maner of a ſuppoſitory.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All lice or fleas.
                     All wormes outwardly.
                     All Serpent-bitings.
                     All mad Dogge bitings.
                     All Galls or tetters.
                     All itch or ſcab or mangie.
                     All hurts by wild beaſts.
                     All gallings of feet.
                     All frettizing in the feet.
                     The Canker.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  Make a ſtrong decoction of Rewe, Sage, Mints, and a handfull or two of ſalt, then with the decoction waſh ouer all the Dogges body, then take treakle, hogges-greaſe, yellow waxe turpentine and coperas of each a like quantity melt and mingle them together and with that oyntment anoynt all the ſore places, eſpecially thoſe which hee cannot come to licke, or elſe ſcratcheth moſt, and it will ſpeedily cure him.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All tirednes.
                     All wounds whatſoeuer.
                     All bruiſes.
                     All paine in the eares.
                  
               
               
                  The third medicine.
                  Frſt if the wound be great and gaping or in any fleſhy part, you ſhall ſtitch it vp with a needle and a little red ſilke, then take the yelke of an egge, and as much ſoot of a chimney, and twice ſo much of the iuyce of greene tobacco, and the iuyce of Mellilot, with as much freſh butter as will bring all theſe to a ſalue, being molten and mingled well together on a ſoft fire, then with this ſalue either tent or plaiſter the greeued place, and it is a preſent remedy for all the former greeuances, as hath beene often by me and others experienced.
               
            
         
         
            
            The eighth poynt. How to cure all the Diſeaſes in Conies or Hares, with one Medicine onely.
            
               The Character of Hares or Conies.
               HAres or Conies are ſmall Beaſts of a much more melancholy diſpoſition then other beaſts, whence commeth the hardnes of their liuing, for as it is written they will feed fat with the white rinde of the froſt, or the ſnow either: certaine it is that in the froſt and ſharpeſt time of winter they feed beſt, becauſe then the froſt biting the foggy graſſe maketh it moſt ſweet, vppon which they delight moſt to feede: they are aboundant in their increaſe bringing forth their broods once euery month, and of thoſe broodes not vnder three or foure at the leaſt: neither doth ſhe ſo ſoone diſburden one broode but ſhe preſently runneth to the bucke and ingendreth for another: the male of theſe kindes are very vnnaturall, for if they can find where the yong ones are kindled, they preſently deuoure them: whence it comes to paſſe that the female at

her time compleat withdraweth her ſelfe and hideth her yong, daubing and damming vp the hole till they bee able to runne and ſhife for themſelues, and then ſhe openeth the hole by little and little, giuing them liberty to take the ayre and vſe their owne exerciſe: as for the profit of them, beſides their fleſh, which is an excellent food, their ſkins are of great price, be a moſt excellent furre, and little inferiour for warmth, ſweetnes, and goodnes, to any other: againe, the wool or haire of them is very good to make felts of, and indeed is ſo ſoft and fine that it is but a little inferior to the beauer: with which wool if it be mixed it maketh a moſt perfect and good felt. To conclude, they are beaſts of much hardnes, and therefore no long life, and they take delight in hard and ſandy grounds which are drye, for they haue no greater enemy then the wet, whence it proceedeth that their greateſt infirmity is rottennes: yet ſuch Hares or Connies as doe liue and delight in the clay earthes are euer the greateſt, fatteſt, ſtouteſt, and beſt either for the diſh, or any ſport whatſoeuer.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All Conies or Hares are ſubiect but to two infirmities onely, which are cured by this one medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The Rotte,
                     Madnes.
                  
               
               
                  The Medicine.
                  For theſe infirmities aboue named, you ſhall onely take the fineſt, ſweeteſt, and dryeſt hay you can get, and mixe it very well with the herbe hare-thiſtle, and therewith feede your Conies and Hares eſpecially in the winter ſeaſon, and it will not only preuent the infirmities, but alſo recouer and cure the ſickneſſes, when at any time they are infected.
               
            
         
         
            
            The ninth poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in Poultrye, as Cockes, Hens, Capons, Chikens, Turkies, Peacockes, Pheaſants, Partrige, Quales, Rayles, Doues of all kinde, and ſuch like with foure medicines onely.
            
               The Carracter or natures of all ſorts of Poultrye.
               THe Cocke, from whence the Henne, Capon & Chicken proceedeth,The Cocke and his kinde & ſo all one, being the centinell & watch of the houſe, is a luſty, proude, valiant, and couragious birde, taking both delight in himſelfe and in other mens praiſes of him. It is writ of them that they are Aſtronomers, and know the courſe of the ſtarres; certaine it is that they keepe a true diſtance in their times, and crowe more after proportion then order, they are great commanders and rulers of their owne kinde, and ſo iealous of their wiues, that they will die ere any ſtrange Cocke inioy the leaſt ſhowe of their preſence. Of all beaſts whatſoeuer, none but he reioyceth after the act of generation:

the Hens are no leſſe valiant then the Cocks if they be true bred, and will with their oppoſites fight to the laſt drop: they are exceding louing and naturall to their young, and will not onely fight in their defence, but alſo ſtarue themſelues to giue the Chickens ſuſtenance. Your Turkey is not vnlike vnto theſe birds, for the Cocke is proude▪ valiant,The Turkey and apt to fight, onely the Hens are much leſſe naturall, though ſomewhat more doting, for from her too much loue ſhe will drawe her Chickens abroad, and by her wandring will looſe them, neuer reſpecting her number, but ſo long as ſhe hath one to follow her, ſo long ſhe reſpecteth not what hapneth to the reſt. Of this nature alſo is the Peacocke,The Peacocke who for beauty, pride, and vnderſtanding excedeth all other birds, yet onely are careleſſe of their young. The Peacocke is a birde of long life, ordinarily liuing to the yeares of fiue & twenty or vpwards, he is a diſh much vſed at banquets, for ſhowe, more then for raſt, for his fleſh is not held exceeding wholeſome: for it is certaine that if he be neuer ſo well and dry roſted ouer night, yet he will be bloud-rawe the next day following. Now contrary to the Peacocke; the Pheaſant, Partridge,The Pheaſant the Partrige, Quaile and Raile. Quaile and Raile, are excellent birds for the table, and more dainty and wholſome then any other:

they are alſo excellent flights, and make rare ſport before the hauke, they flye not high but nere to the ground, and though not very nimble of winge, yet ſwift after they are on winge: they loue not to flye long by reaſon of their much earneſtneſſe, but muſt haue many reſts, but being ſo ſlaine with the hauke, they are the beſt, tendereſt, and moſt pleaſing foode: they bring forth their broods in great aboundance, and hauing once diſcloſed them, the young ones are able to defend themſelues by flight, euen when the ſhel is on their crownes: ſo ſtrong & wilie they are by nature as houſe Doues are, of an innocent nature, and very chaſt, and neither male nor female change their make, but keepe together one true to the other, liuing as coupled by the bond of marriage, keeping their owne hen continually neuer viſiting the holes of others, vnleſſe they be ſingle by the death of their make: The females are humble to their males: the male and female are both carefull of their young ones, nay, you ſhall haue the Cocke oft times chaſtice the hen if ſhe keepe not the neſt well, and yet kinde they be to them when they are about to build, lay, and ſet, as may be ſeene by their readines to them in that caſe: when the hen cometh off the neſt, the Cocke goeth on preſently. The Cocke will goe abroad

and firſt feede himſelfe well, and gorge himſelfe, & when he commeth home will diſgorge himſelfe againe, feeding his hen or his young ones. Stock-doues liue ordinarily (as Pliny affirmeth) thirty yeares. The Turtle doues of all the reſt are the louingſt to their make: for you ſhall ſee them alwaies flye together, vnleſſe the one of them be kild, then the other will not liue long after but pine away.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in Poultrye are cured by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The fluxe of the belly.
                     Drowſines of the braine.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  You ſhall take peaſe-branne and ſcald it, either with water or ſweet whay, and giue it the poultrye to eate, and it will ſtop any ſcowring in theſe houſe-foule whatſoeuer, as hath bene often experienced.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſtopping of the belly.
                     All molten greaſe.
                     To auoid bruiſ'd bloud.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  Take either bread made of wheat, or wheat corne, but bread is the better, and put it into a ſmall trough, then put to the ſame a good quantity of mans vrine newly made & warme, and let the poultrye eate the bread or corne out of the vrine, and it will ſcowre them.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The pip.
                     The roope.
                     All lice.
                     The ſtinging by wormes or venemous thinges.
                  
               
               
                  The third medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall pull away the ſcale from the pip, and the black ſcurfe from the roope, and lay the ſore raw and bare, then take of ſalt, Rue, Pepper, and ſweet butter, of each a like quantity, and beat them togither in a morter till it come to a ſalue, then with the ſame annoynt the ſores and it helpeth.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All ſore eyes
                     All dimnes of ſight.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The fourth medicine.
                  Take a leafe or two of ground Iuy, or as ſome call it alehoofe, and chawe it well in your mouth, then ſucking the iuyce thereof hard, ſpit it into the eyes of your poultrye, and thus doe twice or thrice a day, and it is a moſt certaine cure, and often proued.
               
            
         
         
            The tenth point. How to cure all the diſeaſes in water-foule, as Geeſe, Duckes, Swanns, Taylls, Widgeons, Sheldraks, Plouers, Herns, Puets, Bytters, Gulls, and ſuch like, with one medicine onely.
            
               The Character and natures of wilde Foule.
               WIlde Foule though they differ much in name and proportions, yet in their generall natures there is ſmall variety: they all loue to liue together in flockes and heards, and in like manner they flye together, yet not in route but like ſouldiers either in ſingle or double files, and for the moſt part they flye triangle wiſe, one as it were leading the way, and the reſt in two wide branches following,

by which meanes they gather more winde vnder them, and are more able to mount their flights higher, which is that in which they moſt ioy: ſome write they flye ſo cloſe one after another that the hindmoſt reſteth his head on him that flyeth before him: how euer it is moſt certaine that they fly in a moſt decent and comely order: They doe for the moſt part keepe euer one neſt, and in nouriſhing their young are moſt carefull and diligent, hyding them in holes, and in ſedge buſhes, and neuer diſcouering them till they be able by ſtrength of winge to ſaue themſelues in flying. They are of all creatures moſt vigilant and watchfull, ſildome ſleeping but when they are guarded by ſome of their owne company. They bring forth their broods commonly once a yeare, yet ſometimes twice: yet thoſe foule are rather domeſticall then wilde, for ſuch fruitfulnes euer ſpringeth from ſome extraordinary keeping.
            
            
               
                  
                     All water foule for the moſt part are ſubiect but to one infirmity onely, which is cured by this one medicine following.
                  
                  
                     The Gargill.
                  
               
               
                  The Medicine.
                  Take a cloue of Garlicke cleane pilld, and

bruiſe it a little, and then roule it vp in ſweet butter in the faſhion of a Capons cram, and ſo giue it to your foule, and thus giue about three cloues of Garlicke at one time, and no more, and it is a preſent cure for this diſeaſe, or for any other inward ſickneſſe which ſhall offend your water-foule at any time whatſoeuer.
               
            
         
         
            The eleuenth poynt. How to cure all the diſeaſes in ſinging birdes▪ as the Nightingale, Lynnet, ſolitary Sparrow, Goldfinch, Bull-finch, Myſkin, Spynke, Canary-byrde, Cordiall, Larke, Callander, Black-birde, Robin, Throſtell, and ſuch like with three Medicines onely.
            
               The Character, and nature of all manner of ſinging Birdes.
               ALl ſinging Birdes generally doe once a yeare change their colours in feathers, and altet their voyce in ſinging, and that in ſuch ſort that of a ſodaine a man would ſay they were other birdes, which is a thing which

hapneth not vnto the greater foules except it be onely the Crane, for they will at ſome times of the yeare grow blacker then at other ſome, eſpecially in their old age: ſo likewiſe the black-bird will grow reddiſh,The Black-bird. and in ſummer he ſingeth cleare and tunable, and in winter hee ſtutreth and ſtammereth, but in December commonly hee is cleane mute and dumbe altogether: alſo after the black-bird is a yeare old, and eſpecially the males, their billes turne white like Iuory,The Throſtle or Mauis. ſo likewiſe the Throſtles or Mauiſſes all ſummer are painted about the necks with ſundry colours, but in the winter they are all of one colour. The Nightingale alſo ſingeth almoſt fifteene dayes together in the height of the ſpring,The Nightingale. and will learne eaſily to whiſtle: and ſo generally all other ſinging birds ſing more at one time of the yeare then at another, except it bee ſuch birdes as are altogether domeſticall and tame, vſed onely to heare muſicke, the voyces of men, and continuall clamors, candle light and torch light, ſuch I ſay will not onely ſing all the yeare long, but alſo all day and night without ceaſing, as may bee dayly diſcernd in many Noblemen and Gentlemens houſes. Theſe ſinging Birdes ſeldome ſing the firſt yeare, onely in the winter time they wil a little record, and then when the Spring

approacheth they will breake forth with their voices, and ſound their notes full and perfect, And of all theſe ſinging birdes, the Linnet, Robin, Bulfinch, Stare,The Linnet The Robin redbreſt. The Bullfinch. is moſt docible and apteſt both to tune, and to learne all ſeuerall tunes: they take delight in their cages and ſeruitude, onely they are apt to feed ſodenly, and with their too much fatnes often corrupt and dye ſodenly, therefore it is not good at any time to let them bee without chalke, ſugar or chickweed, which is a great preſeruatiue and preſent helpe againſt the diſeaſe of fatnes, and you muſt ſhift them in a freſh Cage euery month, and take their dung from them euery morning, and then blow their meat, and when you ſhift their cages, put the two dores together and blow on them, and they will ſhift themſelues, for to handle them is dangerous, and when they moult or caſt their feathers, ſprowt a little wine on them, and it will the ſooner make them moult their old coat: and for thoſe birdes that you would teach and bring vp to whiſtle, you muſt hang their Cages in ſuch a place where they ſhal not heare the chirping of Sparrowes for naturally they will rather take the wild note, as I haue knowne by experience, & haue heard birdes, ſome crow like a Cocke, and counterfeit notes of birdes of other kinds contrary

to their owne kind:The Stare. The Stare of all other Brides is very apt, ready, and tractable to be taught to whiſtle, and ſpeake any thing without cutting or clipping the tongue, as I haue heard many ſpeake as plaine as any parrat, but you muſt keepe them couered all ouer ſauing a place where they may ſee their meat and water, and as you would teach a parrat, ſo teach them: And for the dieting of Birdes, the Stare feedeth cheefely on raw beefe and bread ſoaked in water,Dieting of birdes. both mixt together and ſmall minced: the Blackbird and thruſh feedeth on raw beefe being whole, and ſtickt on a ſtick in their Cage: the Bullfinch and Linnet feede on Rapeſeedes, but you muſt take heed of muſtardſeed, for they are like to the rape ſeedes, and will make them pine away: The Canary Bird doth feed on canary ſeedes and rapeſeedes mixt together: The Robin and Nightingale feede on oatmeale, or raw meat: but if you get them now and then ſome of the wormes, that doe breed among the flower at the bakers, it will much auaile them.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities in ſinging Birdes are cured by the first Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All melancholly.
                     Leannes or miſlike,
                     Strangling of the breſt.
                     Moutting.
                     All lite.
                     The Roupe.
                     The Pthiſicke.
                     The Apoplexie.
                     To bring the voyce againe.
                     The pippe.
                     All coſtiuenes.
                     The priuie ſicknes.
                  
               
               
                  The firſt medicine.
                  Take Sugar, Saffron and figges, of each a like quantity, and either chaw them or beat them in a morter, till they come to a paſt, and then giue it the bird to eat during the time of her ſickneſſe, and into her water put mellon ſeedes bruiſed and chopt very ſmall, prouided euer that you forget not in caſe of the pippe, or roope, firſt to pluck off the ſcale or ſcab, and then to giue the medicines after.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All fores or wounds.
                     All impoſtumes,
                     All Gouts.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond medicine.
                  Take of Butter and of h
                        ••
                     s greaſe, of each

a like quantity, and melte them and mixe them well together vppon a ſoft and gentle fire, then with a feather dipt into it when it is reaſonably warme anoint all the ſore places, and if the wound be very great or deepe, then with a fine needle or a little red ſilke ſtitch it vp, and then anoint it, and thus doe twice a day at the leaſt and it will helpe them.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All blindneſſe.
                     All ſore eyes.
                     All dimneſſe of ſight.
                  
               
               
                  The third Medicine.
                  Take halfe a ſpoonfull of cleare running water, and a full ſpoonefull of the iuyce of beets and mixe them very well together, then with a feather either anoint the birdes eyes, or taking a little of it into your mouth, ſpirt it into the birdes eyes, and thus do twice or thrice a day at leaſt, and it will helpe them preſently.
               
            
         
         
            
            The twelfth and laſt poynt. How to cure all the Diſeaſes in Haukes of what nature or quality ſoeuer they be, with ſixe Medicines onely.
            
               The Character or nature of all ſorts of Haukes.
               THere be in Falconry, ſixteene kindes of Haukes or birds that liue vpon prey, and though euery one haue in them a ſpeciall note or Character of much valour, yet ſome are much more valiant then other ſome, as the Eagle, the Vulture, the Gerfaulcon, Faulcon, and ſuch like, are more valiant then the Goſſehauke, Lanner, Kilt, Ringtaile, and ſuch like. The valiant hauke euer truſſeth her prey in the ayre, the leſſe valiant taketh her prey neere vnto the ground, and moſt commonly vpon the ground. The valiant haukes alwaies builde vpon the hie rockes, and on the ſteepe cliffes, againſt which the rage of the Sea and water continually beateth. And the leſſe valiant haukes build in tall timber trees where they haue ſome ſhelter and refuge: as for thoſe which build in ſome walls, or vpon the ruins

of ould houſes, as the Keſtrills and ſuch like, they are moſt baſe and cowardly, and neither fit for vſe nor imployment. The long wingd haukes are fitteſt for the riuer, and kill both the Herne and other ſmaller foule, as is the Mallard and Tayle▪ and the ſhort wingd haukes will kill the Hare alſo. The Merlin and Hobby take moſt delight in killing the Larke: the Sparrow-hauke sn killing the Black-bird, and the Muſket in killing the Sparrowe onely, many other flights there be, as at the Pye, Iay and ſuch like, but they are to be meaſured according to the mettle of the Hauke, for they are flights of danger and force, ond therefore it behoues the hauke to haue much cunning and much exerciſe before ſhe be brought to ſuch flights, leaſt that her mettle and raſhnes become her owne ruine, as many Faulkoners finde in daily experience.
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities in Haukes are cured by the firſt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All inward and priuy ſickneſſes of body.
                     The pantas.
                     Caſting of the gorge.
                     All ſorts of wormes.
                     Purging of glut.
                     Coſtiuenes in the body.
                     To cauſe diſgeſtion.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The firſt Medicine.
                  Take as much Agaricke as a peaſe and wrap it either in a warme Pidgions heart, or Chickens heart, or any other warme & bloudy fleſh, and giue it the hauke to eate faſting in the morning, and it is a moſt ready and certaine cure.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſecond medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All priuy grieues in the head.
                     All rhumes.
                     The Rye.
                     All apoplexies.
                  
               
               
                  The ſecond Medicine.
                  Take as much muſtardſeed bruiſd as will lye vpon a three halfe-pence, and lap it as aforeſaid, either in a warme Pidgions heart, Chickens heart, or other warme fleſh, and then dip it in the iuyce of Roſemary and Sage well mixt together, and ſo giue it the hauke to eate faſting in the morning, and it will not onely purge and clenſe her, but alſo comfort and ſtrengthen the brayne excedingly, as by proofe you ſhall finde.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the third Medicine following.
                  
                  
                     
                     All diſeaſes in the eies.
                     All dimnes of ſight.
                     All bloud-ſhotten eies
                     The pynne and web.
                  
               
               
                  The third Medicine.
                  Take of the iuyce of ground Iuy or ale-hoofe halfe a ſpoonefull, and put it to as much fine ſearſt ginger as will lye on a three halfe-pence, and being well mixt togerher with a ſmall ſoft feather annoynt the haukes eye therewith, morning, noone, and night, and it is a moſt certaine cure, and often approued.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fourth medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All diſeaſes in the mouth
                     The Frounce.
                     All Cankers.
                  
               
               
                  The fourth medicine.
                  Take roch alume and beate it to as fine a powder as you can poſſible get it, then take a ſpoonefull or two of the ſtrongeſt and beſt wine vineger, and mixe your allome with the ſame till it be as thicke as puddle, then take a fine rag of cambricke or lawne, and dip it therein, and with the ſame rub the ſores well till they be ready to bleede, both morning, noone, and night, and it will cure it in a ſhort ſpace.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the fift medicine following.
                  
                  
                     All impoſthumes.
                     All wounds whatſoeuer.
                     All bruiſes whatſoeuer
                     All excreſcions.
                     The formicas.
                     To ſtanch blood.
                  
               
               
                  The fift medicine.
                  Firſt where there is any excreſcion of horny or bony ſubſtance, you ſhall cut it away, and lay the ſore open and bare, and then apply the ſalue which followeth, but in caſe of wounds, if the wound be great or deepe, you ſhall firſt ſtitch it vp with a fine needle and a litle red ſilke, then take twenty raiſons of the ſunne, and hauing pickt out the ſtones, boyle them in halfe a pinte of wine till it be thicke like pap, then beat it well together, and being very warme apply it to the ſore places, renewing it once in foure and twenty howers till all the ſoares be healed: but if the fluxe of bloud be great, then you ſhall take merchants waxe and drop it vpon the veine which bleedeth, & it will preſently ſtanch it.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     All theſe infirmities are cured by the ſixt medicine following.
                  
                  
                     
                     The pinne in the foote
                     The broken pounce.
                     Bones broken.
                     Bones out of ioynt.
                  
               
               
                  The ſixt medicine.
                  Firſt you ſhall place the member right if there be either breath or diſlocation, then take of Galbanum, of white Pich, and of Turpentine of each a like quantity, and melt them together on a ſoft fire, then plaiſter-wiſe ſpread it vpon a linnen cloth and ſo fould it about the ſore, then ſplent it if neede require, otherwiſe onely roule it vp with a fine linnen ragge, and the remedy will ſoone be effected, as hath bene often by me and others ſeene, and proued by experience.
               
            
            
               The nature of red and fallow Deere.
               THough the Deere by a ſecret inſtinct of nature and the Prouidence of God are their owne Phiſitian & not needing the helpe of man, yet becauſe they are ſo ſeruiceable for the vſe of man. I thought it not much impertinent from my diſcourſe to ſhew their Character or nature. The Hart of all other beaſts loueth to heare muſicke, and meruaileth at all thinges that he ſeeth, and taketh great

pleaſure to behold them, as hath beene often ſeene by their gazing at the bowe and arrowes of the hunter, or at a Carter and the like, they are at mighty enmity with Serpents and renew their ſtrength by eating of them, they haue alſo a ſtrange property, that if they goe to feed in yong ſprings or coppes they go full againſt the wind, and ſo can tell whether there be any perſon there or not: and if any man chance to ſpit or piſſe vppon any ſpring or branch in the coppes, they will find it out preſently and vtterly abandon the place: being hunted and ready to bee taken by the houndes, they will for their laſt refuge fly to houſes and places of reſort, rather yeelding to man then to the dogges: and as Plinie ſaith they can indure to ſwimme thirty miles endwayes: and when they are to paſſe any great riuer to goe to rut in ſome Ile or foreſt, they aſſemble themſelues together in great heards, and knowing the ſtrongeſt and beſt ſwimmer they make him goe formoſt, and then hee which commeth ſecond ſtayeth vp his head vppon the back of the firſt, and all the reſt in like manner euen vnto the laſt: the formoſt being weary the ſecond taketh his place, and he cometh backward: they go to rut about the middeſt of September, and beare their young ones 8. monthes: ſomtimes they bring

two calues at once: their little ones they practiſe and exerciſe to vſe their legges from the very beginning, leading them vp to high rocks, teaching them to leape, run, & fly away acquainting them with their dens and ſecret places of harbor: the males are horned, and they aboue all other liuing Creatures caſt them euery yeare once at a certaine time of the ſpring, and to that purpoſe a little before their mewing they ſeeke out the moſt ſecret corners and moſt out of the way to hide themſelues: when they are Pollards they keepe cloſe hidden as if they were diſarmed: and all this they doe as if they enuied that men ſhould haue good of any thing they had. Their age may bee knowne by their heads, (for euery yeare they haue one more branch then they had the laſt yeare before) vntil they come to ſixe, after which time: they come new euer alike, ſo that their age cannot be diſcerned any more by their head, but their marke is taken by their mouth and teeth: for as they grow in age they haue few or no teeth at all: yet the branches grow out of the root, wheras all the while they were yonger they vſed to haue them breake forth and ſtanding out at the very forehead. At the firſt when they breake out againe, they be like to the glanduells or kernells of drye ſkin, that new put

forth, then grow they with tender ſtalkes to certaine round and long knots couered all ouer with a certaine plume downe like veluet, ſo long as they be deſtitute of their hornes & perceiue their heads naked, they go forth to releefe by night, and as they grow bigger and bigger they harden them in the hot Sunne, eftſoones making proofe of them againſt trees: and when they perceiue they be tough and ſtrong enough, then they go abroad boldly. The Harts and Hindes may liue an hundred yeares and vpward.
               Thus gentle Reader I haue breefely ended my ſhort Epitome, crauing nothing but this at thy handes, that when thou haſt made triall of theſe my approued remedies and findeſt the profit to redound to thy ſelfe (as many heeretofore haue done) praiſe God, and thinke well of me thy friend.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A briefe Table ſhewing the Contents of the twelue Poynts handled in this BOOKE.
            
               THe firſt Point ſheweth the Character or nature of the Horſe; and how the Horſe, being ſubiect almoſt to 300 diſeaſes, yet all may be cured by twelue medicines, and commonly to be gotten. Fol. 3 &c.
               The ſecond Point containeth the rareſt Medicine that euer was found out for Horſes. from Fol. 21 to 24
               The third Poynt ſheweth the nature of the Oxe, Bull, and Calfe, and how to cure all the diſeaſes incident to them with ſeauen medicines as, from Fol. 24 to 33
               The fourth poynt ſheweth the nature of Sheepe, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with ſixe medicines, from Fol. 33 to 39
               The fift point ſheweth the nature of Goats, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with two medicines▪ as from Fol. 39 to 42
               
                  The ſixt point ſheweth the nature of Swine and how to cure all diſeaſes in them with three medicines, from Fol. 42 to 46
               The ſeauenth Poynt ſheweth the nature of all kind of Dogges, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with three medicines onely, from Fol. 46 to 51
               The eighth Point ſheweth the nature of Hares and Conies, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with one onely medicine, from Fol. 51 to 54
               The ninth point ſheweth the nature of all ſorts of Poultrye as, Cockes, Hennes, Capons, Chickens, Turkies, Peacocks, Pheaſants, Partriges, Quailes, Cranes, Houſe-doues, Stocke-doues, Turtle-doues, and the like, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them wtth foure medicines, from Fol. 54 to 59
               The tenth Point ſheweth the nature of al Waterfoule, as Swannes, Geeſe, Duckes Tayles, Widgions, Sheldrakes, Plouers, Herns, Puets, Bitters, Gulles, and ſuch like, and how to cure the diſeaſes in them with one medicine onely, from Fol. 59 to 61
               The eleuenth Poynt ſheweth the nature of all ſinging and whiſtling birdes, as Nightingale, Robbin, Bullfinch, Linnet, ſolitary, Sparrow, Goldfinch, Miskin, Spinke, Canary bird, Calander, Blackbird, Throſtle, Cordiall

Larke and ſuch like and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with three medicines as from Fol. 61 to 67.
               The twelfth and laſt Poynt ſheweth the Character and nature of all ſorts of Haukes, and how to cure all the diſeaſes in them with ſixe Medicines, as from Fol. 67. to 73.
               And concludeth with the nature of red and Fallow Deare.
            
            FJNIS.
            
         
      
   