
      
         
            
            
            HONOVR IN HIS PERFECTION: OR, A TREATISE IN COMMENDATIONS OF THE Vertues and Renowned Vertuous vndertakings of the Illustrious and Heroyicall Princes HENRY Earle of Oxenford. HENRY Earle of Southampton. ROBERT Earle of Essex, AND The euer praise-worthy and much honoured Lord, ROBERT BARTVE, Lord Willoughby, of Eresby: With a Briefe Cronology of Theirs, and their Auncestours Actions.
            And to the eternall memory of all that follow them now, or will imitate them hereafter, especially those three Noble Instances, the Lord Wriouthesley, the Lord Delaware, and the Lord Montioy.
            
            
               — At nunc horrentia Martis
               Arma virum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Cano —
            
            LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop, for Beniamin Fisher, and are to be sold at his shop in Pater noster Row, at the Signe of the Talbot. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONOVR, AND Eternall Memorie of the Foure Illustrious, Great, Heroyicall and Noble Houses; The House of OXFORD, The House of SOVTHAMPTON, The House of ESSEX, And the House of WILLOVGHBY, and to alll the liuing Braunches, Males and Females which truly deriue themselues from any of those long honoured and Princely Families.
            
               IF I should labor (right Honourably honourable, and you glorious Branches of these goodly Cedars which I would preserue to Eternitie) to giue a generall contentment to all which shall vouchsafe to looke vpon this litle Treatise: my worke would be infinite, and the ende like a shadow euer farthest off when I did couet to be most neere it; for it is a maxime: That he which did well, offended some, yet an Apostle; Hee that did worst, pleased many, and yet was but a Beast; and He that did best of all, could not please all, and yet was God; So various are the mindes of men, and so curious the dyet of those which feede on varietie;

Besides Slaunder (who hath much Tongue and litle Fore-head, who is not pleased, but in licking of Vlcers. Is euer so Impudent, that it dare mis-interpret, Nickname and abuse any vertuous meaning: therefore to these children of Spleene and Passion (who are mouthd like Anius-Satire, & can blow both hot & cold at one instant) I direct none of my Labours; But to You, You that are the Issues of true Honour; You in whom they all liue of whom I haue written; You whom Goodnesse will not gine leaue to doe or thinke any thing euill; to You, in all humblenesse, I direct this Seruant of your Families Vertues: doe not imagine it is a Chronickle of all their Noble Actions, farre be it from my weaknesse to aime at a Worke of such merit: let it suffice it is but an Essay or Imperfit offer of those excellencies, which no doubt, will hereafter draw a Penne of Immortalitie to to crowne them. Nor was this done so much to extoll and renowne them, as to quicken and set on fire the noble hearts of many others, which now like some of the Statues or the Monuments in

West-Minster lye sleeping on their Elbowes: Thus if the Worke bee taken, it hath got a true Coniecture, if otherwise, that men bee couetous, and will seeke for more then my Knowledge is able to pay; Let them not blame mee, if I giue there expectations leaue to perish, and only submit my selfe, and my Labour to Your noble Censure, beseeching Your Charitie to protect it, whilst my selfe will euer liue,
            
               
                  A deuoted and true admirer of your honourd Vertues G. M.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE FOVRE REGIMENTS.
            
               
                  The Ear. of Southampton. Col.
               Sr. Iohn Burlacy Lieu. col.
               Sr. Iarret Ashley. Ser. Maior.
               
                  Lord Wryothesley.
               
               
                  Lord Montioy.
               
               Sr. Thomas Littleton.
               
               Captaine Henry Barkley.
               
               Captaine Crumwel.
               
               Captaine Hubbert.
               
               Captaine Iames Iucks.
               
               Captaine Goring.
               
               Captaine Conieres.
               
               
                  The Earle of Oxford. Col.
               Sr. Iames Leuyston. Lieu. col.
               Captaine Seton. Ser. Maior.
               
                  Lord Delaware.
               
               Sir Dudly North.
               
               Sir William Heydon.
               
               Sir William Brunckard.
               
               Sir Iohn Weintworth.
               
               Sir Henry Crofts.
               
               Sir Edward Hawley.
               
               Captain Henry Weintworth.
               
               Captaine William Ramsey.
               
               
                  The Earle of Essex. Col.
               Sr. Charles Rich. Liu. col.
               Captain Swanton. Ser. Mai.
               Sr. Walter Deuoreux.
               
               Sr. Robert Knolles.
               
               Sr. Iohn Ouzley.
               
               Sr. Sigismond Zinzan.
               
               Captaine Throgmorton.
               
               Captaine Terringham.
               
               Captaine Weynman.
               
               Captaine Higham.
               
               Captaine Daues.
               
               
                  The Lord Willoughby. Col.
               Sr. Edw. Conwey. Lieu col.
               Cap. Tho. Conwey. Ser. Mai.
               Sr. Peregrine Bartue.
               
               Sr. Iohn Ratcliffe.
               
               Captaine Conwey.
               
               Captaine Hunks.
               
               Captaine Clapton.
               
               Captaine Terwitt.
               
               Captaine Ashburnham.
               
               Captaine Vane.
               
               Captaine Goodrycke.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            HONOVR IN HIS PERFECTION.
            
               THE greatest and most glorious worke that euer the supreame and diuine Maiestie brought to passe, was the Creation of the World:The excellencie aed necessitie of a Souldier.
                The most excellentest thing that he therein created was Man, And the most necessariest function which he ordained for the propagation both of the one and others Glory, was a Souldier: Then a Souldier nothing more needfull, nothing more absolute, more perfit.The antiquity of a Souldier.
                It began with the World, for when Adam offended, a fierie Sword in the hand of an heauenly Souldier draue him out of Paradise.
            A Souldier is the right arme of Iustice,What a Souldier is, and his duties and carries the Sword; Wisedome is the left, and beares the Ballance, without a Souldier no estate, no Commonwealth can flourish: Who shall vnmaske false pretences, but the Souldier? who shall confound the secret subtill Traitor, but the Souldier? who shall tread downe the publike daring Rebell, but the Souldier? and indeed,

who shall or can doe right to all men, but the Souldier?
            
            If then the Souldier be thus good, thus ancient, thus iust,What Glories attend a Souldier.
                and thus needfull, how many Glories ought to crowne and attend him? why all whatsoeuer that can be accounted Glorious, as the conquest ouer Daunger, ouer Labour, and ouer Passion; the defence of true Religion, true Titles, and true vndertakings: He shall haue all the Glories of the Earth, as praise from the Greatest, reuerence from the wisest, and wonder from all: he shal haue the Glories of Garments; as Crowns, Garlands, Plumes, and Scarfes; the glorie of Place, as the Chaire for Counsell, and the Chariot for triumph; the glory of Buriall, as Tombes, Temples, Hearses, Epitaphs; nay after all, the glory of Eternitie, that is, famous Cronicles to keepe his Name and Reputation to eternall memorie, and Heauen for his soule, where he shall liue with God for euer.
            
               Why the Souldier is glorifiedBut some here wil aske me, why shal a Souldier haue all these glories? only because he is needfull, because he is ancient, because he is iust? yes, for them an infinite number of other Vertues; for in the Souldier lies the protection of Ladies, the defence of Orphanes, the reliefe of Widowes, the support of weaknesse; the strength of goodnesse, & the vtter destruction of all that can be named vitious; it is his Actions which must make vp the myrror wherein true Honour is to be seene, his words that must pull Truth from darkenesse; and his Thoughts which (being euer busie in Heauen) must keepe the Earth in forme and true order: It is his Vallour that must make all dangers assaileable; his Wisdome that must make a separation betwixt good and euill, his Temperaunce that must

quench the flames of Princes angers, and his Iustice that must distribute to all the portion of equitie.
            Is the Souldier thus excellent?The Reward of a Souldier.
                O then! what Reward can be good enough, great enough for so infinit perfection? only three Coynes must make vp the full summe, wherewith to repay and reward euery well deseruing Souldier: The first is Fame,
               
                  Fame.
                or Good report which all men owe, not only to those which defend them, but to all that vndertake or performe any noble Action; this if we scant, we take from them the foode of their Reputation, and starue all their worthy Actions; The second is Wealth,
               
                  Wealth.
                or a competent and bountefull maintenance to support the Souldier in his place, and make him capable of glorious vndertakings, which abated or detained it takes from the Body strength, from the Heart courage, and from the Minde hope, leauing behind in the emptie places nothing but anger and enuie; The last & best of all is Honour, this the Prince ought to giue to desert;
                  Honour.
                this the Souldier ought to receiue for desert: this when the Prince hath giuen, the people must and ought to admire, for Let all men honour whom the Prince honoureth; this when it is neglected, Gratitude sits wringing of her hands, and cryes, O Seneca! where are thy Benefits?
            But some will aske me, what is this Honour which I make so excellent, and that it is the only Reward for a Souldier; I answer with Cassanaeus,
               What Honour is. that Honour is the witnesse of the excellencie in a man; but chiefly according to his Vertue, and therfore according to Vertue & dignitie are Honors to be giuen; It is that (saith he)

which is to be preferred before all earthly things, because it and honestie doe walke continually hand in hand with mans life, it is not comprehended within the compasse of this word Praise or Laude;The difference betwixt Honor and Laude. no, it is of much greater excellencie; for Honour is euer of it selfe and in it selfe, but Praise is euer deriued from another; to conclude, Honour is the food of euery great spirit, and the very god which creates in high minds Heroicall actions; it is so dilicate and puer that any excesse doth staine it, any vniust action dishonours it, any motion that smels either of folly, of sloath, or of rashnesse, puts it out of countenance; but an ignoble deed that vtterly ruines it: This is Honour, and this is no vnnecessary thing, for it is all the reward that Vertue can bestow vpon her selfe or fixe vnto the deserts of the Souldier which is the most needfull calling. It is that which preserues Order, and knits together the bodie of euery Common-wealth, for take away Honour, where is our Reuerence? take away Reuerence? what are our Lawes? and take away Law, and man is nothing but a grosse masse of all impietie. Neither is this Honour any new thing,The antiquitie of Honour. for it was inuested into Adam at his creation, and thence decended to Noah; from Noah it came to Abraham, from Abraham it came to Moses, from Moses to Salomon, from Salomon to the Incarnation of our Sauiour, and from him to the end of the World; and as it is thus ancient, so is Honour likewise eternall:Honour is eternall. for that Honour which is worthily giuen, worthily receiued, and worthily preserued, that Honour can not be said euer to die, for the memorie is euerlasting, and the reward can neuer perish; witnesse the Trumpet of Moses, the Harpe of

               Dauid, and the holy song in foure parts of the blest Euangelists: As it is eternall,Honour vniuersall. so it is also Generall and dispierced, not confin'd or bounded within limits, it flyes ouer all the corners of the Earth, and couers the face thereof as with a Curtaine; there is no Nation so vnfortunate, nor no people so stupid, but in some religious and formall manner they receiue, preferre, and esteeme of Honour, witnesse the infinite Titles of Honour which are at this day giuen through all Nations; And reason it should be so esteemed, if for no other cause,The priuiledges of Honour yet for the priuiledges which depend and belong vnto it, as precendancie and prioritie of place, and the glories and beauties which belong to the best place; as to some the Throne, to some the Chaire, to some the Bench, and to some the Altar. It hath priueledge of Ornament, as Crownes, and Scepters, Coronets, Swords, and Bautricks, Gloues, and Spurs, Mantels, Pales, and Surcoats, and a world of other, according to the greatnesse of the Title, and custome of Kingdomes: Honour hath also the priuiledge of person, for it is held ignoble in any man to doe iniury to a noble Captiue, and howsoeuer they may be commanded, yet they may not be tormented; it hath priuiledge to dispence with yeares, with Lawes, with Customes, and to conclude, it is only Honour which hath priuiledge to bestow Honours.
            
            Thus thou seest O Britaine (and see it with all thine eies) what a true Souldier is,Inuocation on Great Britane.
                how necessary, how ancient, how iust, and how glorious: Thou seest also the Reward, which in duty thou art bound to bestow vpon him, Fame, Wealth, and Honour. O then rouse thee from thine easie bed of Securitie, and breake from thy

heauy eye-lids thy long slumber of Peace, and looke O looke now vpon thy Princely Souldiers, looke vpon these foure Noblemen,The foure Vndertakers. 
               Oxford, Southampton, Essex, and Willoughby, who like the foure Seasons of the yeare, ioyne together to make thee a plentifull haruest of thine owne hearts wishes: Looke vpon these, and loue them, looke vpon these and admire them: These goe not, to acquire Honour, for they haue infinite Oceans of their owne, and infinite Seas can deriue from their fore-fathers Vertues; but these goe to doe the worke of Honour, a worke which I hope God and his Angels will further with prosperitie, and all good men will praise to the very last Generation: These goe not to make themselues greater then they are,What they goe to doe. but to manifest to the World, that they owe vnto God this seruice for the greatnesse which they hold; these clamber not vp to catch the Moone, but rather looke lower then themselues, that they may finde out Heauen; these goe not to pay a new fine for new Honours newly receiued from a bountifull Maiestie. But these goe to pay the old rent which they doe, and their fore-fathers did owe to thee O Britaine, and him that in thee is the Lords anointed; to conclude, these go not to put thee in hope of what they may do by any new attemptings, but rather to giue thee assurance what they will doe (God prospering them) by their old most noble examples.
            
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Britaine.I say againe, then rouse thy selfe O Britaine, and giue vnto these thy Worthies, giue vnto these thy Souldiers that Reward which is due to their Goodnesse, giue them Fame, giue them noble Fame, giue them Fame euerlasting, fill euery Trumpet full of their

praises, and let no sounds be heard in thy Streetes, but such as may beare vpon them the eccho of their renoune and vertue;An Incouragement to her friends. blesse those which shall blesse them, and curse those which shall curse them; say vnto those which shall wish them good lucke, you are my children, and my breasts shall nourish you; to those which sing praise of them, you are my Swannes and I haue Laurell to crowne you; to those which shall Register their good actions, I haue Chronicles, and you shall write them; and to those which shall pray for them, I haue Pulpets, and onely you shall speake in them.Who are her foes. But vnto those who shall murmure against them; to those which mis-interpret, disgrace, depraue, or wish ruine to their proceedings, say vnto them, they are the bastards of the great Whore, and they and their seede haue beene accursed before all Generations; say indeed plainly (and say truly) that they are the sons of the deuill, begotten on the Pope, nurst vp by the Iesuite (which is the eldest sonne of Murther) and protected by that Nymrod which hunteth after Kings, and thinkes the whole World too little for his backe-Burthen: This say vnto them, and forsake them; spue them out of thy mouth, cast them from thy breast, and let them only find their portions amongst those Fugitiues, which (hauing no Vertues to carry along with them) are truly wretched, truly miserable, in euery habitation.
            Giue vnto thy Souldiers of thy wealth,Gifts for her friends. of thy riches, bring them offerings and oblations of thy store, such as may incourage them to goe forward in thy worke, and strengthen and support them against all the deadly assaults of Necessitie, nor of thy 
                  〈◊〉
                and

vnworthy store,Difference of gifts. of thy leane Cattell, and thy blasted fruit, of thy mouldy bread or putrifide water, but bring them of the ripest clusters of thy best grapes, the fatlings of thy flockes, and the best Iewels which adorne thee; this will expresse the worthinesse of thy nature, and this will make them finde out dores and waies to enter and conquer all impossibilities;The effects of good gifts. this will make them so vigilant and watchfull in occasions, so carefull and secure in all attemptings, and so prouident and valyant in the conquest of euery daunger, that as Pericles said to the Athenians, so will they say to their followers, If no men but we leade you to death you shall be immortall. Lastly, giue vnto these good ones the full measure of all true Honour and Renowne; let them haue Honour in thy Streetes, in thy Houses, in thy Courts, in thy Churches, and in all places; let their Statues adorne thy best roomes, let their Chronicles furnish thy best Lybraries, and let their memories keepe thy children awake to the end of all posteritie.How to helpe weake minde. When thou wilt seeke to erect or build vp a great Spirit in a weake breast, when thou wilt vnder-prop the declining or falling Vertue of a misled goodnesse, when thou wilt reuiuee a courage that is murtherd by Fortune, or Stiffled by Ingratitude, when thou wouldst inflame a soule that hath beene quencht with too much Austeritie, or dampt and halfe smotherd vp with contempt; or indeed, when thou wouldst to any great one doe a great, a good, and a noble office, then reade vnto them the Stories of these Noblemens liues, and the Stories of their Noble Progenitors; for beleeue it, if there be in those lost ones any matter whereon to worke, if they

be not all dead flesh, all fleame, or all snow water; these and their Auncestours are Sunnes, whose fires are able to quicken and giue life; nay euen to create and giue being to the driest piece of Noble earth that euer was forsaken.
            And first begin with Oxford,
               The Storie of the House of Oxford compared with Caesar.
                whose Honour is as old as the Roman Monarchie; shew them, that when Coesar flourisht then Verus grew and brought forth flowers and fruits, as noble as auncient, and though in euery degree not so potent and admired, yet (by the oddes of ambition) a thousand times more wholsome and more glorious, and what is a blessing aboue all blessings, many Ages longer lasting; for what is left of Coesar but his name, when of that Verus is yet left a Vere, and to our fore-fathers many Veres, as good, as excellent as Coesar, but by many degrees much more fortunate; for though Coesar were neuer so Noble by his Birth, neuer so happy in his Conquests, neuer so much beloued for particular Vertues; yet by a Iury of two and fiftie of his Peeres, he was condemned of Ambition; euery one gaue him a wound, and euery wound sealed vpon his body the sentence of guiltie, so that howsoeuer he fell after an vniust manner; yet he iustly fell, for the action was vniust to which he aspired: neither at this day is there left any of his bloud, no, not any small sprig or spray of his most extrauagant Braunches: the House of Austria, though they borrow his name for glory sake, yet they cannot begge his pedigree for truth sake; they haue much of Coesars Maiestie, but not all Coesars vertue: Whereas our Vere, was with Coesar as noble, as good, as auncient as he was, and is with vs as great,

as worthy, as renowned, and as hopefull as euer his Auncestours was,A memorabse note. and what is the most memorablest and most glorious Sunne which euer gaue light or shine to Nobilitie? our Veres, from the first houre of Coesar to this present day of King Iames (which is aboue a thousand seuen hundred yeares agoe) neuer let their feet slip from the path of Nobilitie, neuer knew a true ecclipse of glory, neuer found declination from Vertue, neuer forsooke their Countrie being wounded, or their lawfull Kiug distressed, neuer were attainted, neuer blemisht, but in the puritie of their first Garments and with that excellent white and vnspotted innocencie wherewith it pleased the first Maiestie to inuest them, they liued, gouerned, and dyed, leauing the memory thereof on their Monuments, and in the peoples hearts; and the Imitation to all the Princes of the World, that either would be accounted good men or would haue good men to speake good things of their actions.
            
               The Storie of Iohn Earle of Oxford the 15. Earle.Witnesse to this (amongst the infinite Stories of this noble House) the memorable Actions of that high and Illustrious Prince, that neuer enough to be praised great one, Iohn Earle of Oxford, who in the daies of Henry the sixt, tooke that deuout and Religious King his Soueraigne, and the sonne of Henry the fift (his fathers Soueraigne) into his armes, and protected him against the many fearefull and terrible assaults of the great House of Yorke; staid him when he was falling, raised him vp when he was fallen, reteined him, and put new oyle to his lampe when all the first glory was wasted, and till the power of all powers would giue him leaue to proceede no further, he

held vp the poore weake royall barke (contrary to all probabilitie) against all the waues, windes, and tempests of misfortunes; Insomuch, that Edward the fourth (amazed at his actions) said,
                  Edward the 4. his opinion of Oxford.
                that Oxford was an Eagle in the Warres, and soared aboue the Clouds when he thought to take him, but fell suddenly vpon those which held him farther off, and shewed them destruction: and the Duke of Glocester being asked his opinion of this Earle, said, He was the best Sword and Buckler that euer defended the House of Lancaster, whereas if hee had beene his friend, his conscience would haue told him, that a wiser Prince there was not any found; a more couragious the World bare not, and a better there could not be; and to this his after actions gaue testimonie, for when he had seene the last ruine of his royall Master, with whom although he could not vtterly fall, yet hee must of necessity a little decline, and although the smallest capitulation might haue made him greater then his owne desires, or full as great as the greatest of his friends wishes, yet did neither the one nor the other moue him, but he is content to sit silent, and fixing his heart neither on this side nor beyond the loue of his Country, but iust vpon that obiect, watches and consumes his times to behold what constellation rules her: as soone as he espies that Canicular starre Richard the third to arise,
                  Oxford against Rchard the third. and sees how he burnes vp the Nobilitie, wasts the Gentry, brings into contempt the Clergie, and leaues no moisture to supple the whole face of the Land, but blood & weepings; then this Romane Eagle, Iohn of Oxford rouses himselfe,
                  Oxford comes to Earle Richmund,
                shakes his wings, and flyes into the bosome of Henry Earle of Richmund the greatest and

next suruiuing branch of the House of Lancaster: him she inspires with the knowledge of his own right, with wisdome how to chalenge that right, and with courage how to gaine it; hee giues him a feeling of those calamities which call vpon him, shewes how needfull it is that those teares should be dryed; and lastly, with what ease his Sword may performe both the one and the other cuer:
                  Oxford brings Richmund into England. This done, hee brings him into England, pitches his Tents neere vnto Bosworth, makes that field a Theater, where Richmund acts his part so to the life, that Honour comes downe from Heauen to dwell with him and his posteritie for euer: and Richard acts his part, so for life, that valour and courage appeare glorious, how euill soeuer the cabinet be which containes them; and betwixt these, Oxford acts his part with such Iustice,
                  Oxfords actions at Bosworth field. that wheresoeuer his sword comes, Angels seeme to weild it while Victorie Crownes it; neither did he in this Battaile suit his place according to his greatnesse, which Reason and the necessitie of those times would haue wisht to haue beene most secure, (for there were greater expectations in him then Hazard) but hee makes his Greatnesse now to serue the necessitie of the place, and where danger appeared most powerfull, there he made his abode, and there he triumphed. The Front or Vanguard that day of the Earle of Richmunds Armie were Archers,
                  Oxford leades the Vanguard. and these the Earle lead, these hee brought on with such brauery, these hee ordered with such skill, and these he taught to fight with such noble encouragements, that euery shower of arrowes which he sent to the Enemie, fell like Tempests vpon them, so that some split with the Lightning, some perisht with

the blow, and a world of hearts fell downe with amazement; whilst still this braue Earle keepes his constant behauiour, and like a Thunderbolt flyes through his enemies Battalions and breakes them asunder, and when any of his party began to droope, it is said, that the very sight of him and his actions, like liquid Bitumen set them new on fier and made their flames so strong there was no power to quench them;
                  Oxford wonne the field. thus he brought victorie to the wisest of Princes (Henry the seuenth) and restored againe to its former greatnesse the almost lost House of royall Lancaster; and that it might neuer fall againe, he ioyned it in a perpetuall loue-knot, with the House of Yorke, making the white Rose and the Red one entier flower, by the happy and blest Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth daughter to Edward the fourth; vnto which Obligation only the Earle of Oxford first bound the Earle of Richmund before he vndertooke his quarrell; what shall we say more of this excellent Prince, this good Prince;
                  Oxfords happinesse. but only thus, that as few or none equalled his great deeds, so fewe or none ariued at his great reward, for his life was happy and crownd with all the blessings which Greatnesse could desire; as the loue and fauour of a wise King, the respect of a powerfull Nobilitie, and the admiration of a strong and potent people. So also was his death happy, for he dyed ere any of these blessings could wither, and so carryed them all to the graue greene and flourishing. Lastly, he was blest in his posteritie, for he left an Issue behind him, which were then as hopefull, and proued after as fortunate, and of this Issue Time hath yet neuer found an end; neither doe I thinke

it euer shall while Vertue ruleth.
            
               A discourse of Iohn the 16. Earle of Oxford.
               After this, Iohn succeeded, his sonne; who in the daies of Henry the eight, shewed equall vallour, and encountered with equall Fortune, all which to expresse at large, were to turne a short Encomium into a large Chronicle, and therefore to those Annals I referre you: only as Geographers doe demonstrate out infinite Riuers by small lines, and huge Cities by little prickes; so I will by a short relation of one of his smalest actions discouer the vnbounded greatnes of his minde, and the rare temper of his condition.
            
               
                  Oxford kils a Wild Boare.Being in France vpon serious negotiations for the King his Master; this Earle of Oxford was entertained with all the pompe and State that either Pleasure or Magnificence could produce; and amongst the rest, by reason of his warlike disposition, he was inuited to the hunting of a wilde Boare, a sport mixt with much danger, and deseruing the best mans best care for preseruation of his safetie; whence it comes, that the Frenchmen when they hunt this beast are euer armed with light Armes, mounted on horse-backe, and hauing chasing staues like launces in their hands, To this sport the Earle of Oxford goes; but no otherwise attyred then as when hee walked in his owne priuate bed-Chamber, only a dauncing rapyer by his side; neither any better mounted, then on a plaine English Tracconer, or an ambling Nagge; Anone the Boare is put on foote (which was a Beast both hudge and fierce) the chase is eagerly pursued, many affrights are giuen, & many dangers escaped; at last the Earle weary of the toyle or else vrged by some other necessitie, alights from his horse and walkes alone by himself

on foot, whē suddenly down the path in which the Earle walked, came the inraged Beast, with his mouth all foamie, his teeth whetted, his bristles vp, & al other signes of fury and anger; the Gallants of France cry vnto the Earle to run aside & saue himself, euery one hallowed out that he was lost, & (more then their wishes) none there was that durst bring him succour: But the Earle (who was as carelesse of their clamours, as they were carefull to exclame) alters not his pace nor goes an haires bredth out of his path, and finding that the Boare and he must struggle for passage, drawes out his Rapyer, and at the first encounter, slew the Boare: which when the French Nobilitie perceiued,The Frenchmens admiration. they came galloping in vnto him and made the wonder in their distracted amazements, some twelue times greater then Hercules twelue labours, all ioyning in one, that it was an act many degrees beyond possibilitie, and that he was infinitely beholden to diuine aid, for hee had done more then man could promise to himselfe, or was likely for man euer to performe hereafter; and some of the greater sort (who had a stronger tie of his familiaritie) began in the way of admiration to reprehend his too much ouer-daring, saying O my Lord, why would you ingage your person thus dangerously, you haue done an act aboue courage, and escapt your death beyond hope: but the Earle seeing their distraction, replyed (my Lords) what troubles you, or what myrackle haue I done of which I haue no feeling, is it the killing of this English Pyg? why euery boy in my Nation would haue performed it, they may be Bug-beares to the French, to vs they are but seruants; I tel you, had an heard of Lyons

beene in his place, I would haue done as much, and said vnto them with the Poet, Dominum cognoscite vestrum, I tell you man was created Master of all liuing Creatures; at this the French were mute and only said amongst themselues, that his valour and his Fortune had shakt hands and agreed to raise his name aboue comparison and so they returned to Paris with the slaine Beast, where the wonder did neither decrease nor die, but to this day liues in many of their old Annals.
            
               
                  Edward the 17 Erle of Oxford.
               Descend but to the noble Father of this princely Oxford now liuing, and you shall finde, that although the blessed armes of Peace, in the blessed daies of the euer blessed Elizabeth, did so foulde and imbrace our Kingdome about, that euery valiant arme for want of imployment, lay as it were manakled and fettered from the vse of weapon; yet this Nobleman breakes off his Gyues, and both in Italie, France, and other Nations, did more Honour to this Kingdome then all that haue trauelled since he tooke his iourney to heauen. It were infinite to speake of his infinite expence, the infinite number of his attendants, or the infinite house he kept to feede all people; were his president now to be followed by all of his ranke, the Pope might hang himselfe for an English Papist; discontentment would not feede our enemies Armies, nor would there be either a Gentleman or Scholler to make a Masse-Priest or a Iesuite; that he was vpright and honest in all his dealings the few debts he left behinde him to clog his suruiuours, were safe pledges; and that hee was holy and Religious the Chapels and Churches he did frequent, and from whence no

occasion could draw him; the almes he gaue (which at this day would not only feede the poore, but the great mans family also) and the bountie which Religion and Learning daily tooke from him, are Trumpets so loude, that all eares know them; so that I conclude, and say of him, as the euer memorable Queene Elizabeth said of Sir Charles Blount, Lord Montioy, and after Earle of Deuonshire, that he was Honestus, Pietas, & Magnanimus.
            
            What shall I speake of the two famous wonders of our Land,Sir Francis Vere and Sir Horace Vere.
                the euer memorable Sir Francis Vere deceased; and Sir Horace Vere now liuing, his noble brother: to speake of one action, were to draw thousands into my remembrance; or to name one place, were to lay the Map of almost all Europe before me: and therefore I will referre you to the Chronicles of Spaine and Portugale, where as long as there stands a Cales, or abides an Iland of the Azores, you shall see a Vere in a Souldiers Triumph. Looke in many of the viewes of France, and there you shall finde Vere armed: see the Stories of the dissentions in Germanie, and there you shall finde Vere strugling with Honour; nay, looke in all that hath beene written in the Neatherlands, within the compasse of the longest memory now liuing, and belieue it in euery page, in euery action, Vere cannot be omitted: only in that Storie there is one pretty secret or mysterie which I cannot let passe vntouched, because it brings many difficulties or doubts into the minde of an ignorant Reader; and that is, the mistaking of names, for the Authour of that Worke bindes himselfe too strictly to the Scripture phrase, which is to

make one name to containe another; as the name Adam to containe the name Eua also, and the word man to containe the word woman also; and so the Authour speaking of many notable and famous exploits fortunately performed, deliuers you peraduenture but the name of Nassau, or the Dutch, and such like; whereas in truth and true meaning, the name of Vere should euer be included within them, & the sence so read, the Story is perfect. I speak not this to derogate any thing from the excellencies of that most excellent Prince to whose Vertues I could willingly fall down & become a bond-flaue; for the whole World must allow him a Souldier vnparaleld, and a Prince of infinite merit: but only to shew that the least spark of Vertue which is, cannot chuse but repine when it finds a great Vertue iniur'd by a pen whose blaunching might make the whole World forgetfull.
            
               
                  Henry Earle of Oxford the 18. Earle.Lastly, thou shalt not neede to reade, but with thy finger point at the life of the now Earle of Oxford, of whom but to speake reasonable truthes (such is the poison of Enuy,) euery good word would be accounted flattery, and to speake any thing contrary to goodnesse, Truth her selfe would swear it were meere Falshood; Therefore I will forbeare his Chronicle, and only say thus, that his Cradle did point him out a Souldier; for he brought that spirit with him into the World, and that spirit he hath still nourisht; for diuide his Age into three parts, and I thinke two of them haue beene bestowed on Forraine Nations; neither hath he let slip any occasion (how great or low soeuer) which might put him into action,Sir Horace Vere.
                hee hath hung about the neck of his noble Kinsman like a rich

Iewell, and the one hath so adorned the other, the one with Counsell, the other with obedience; the one shewing what to doe, the other doing what was fit to be done, that if there be a hope whereon mortalitie may build, there is none more strong, then that wee haue of this Nobleman. Goe on then great Prince in this braue careire of Honour, and fixe for thine obiect the designes of thy famous Auncestour; and as he restored the lost House of Lancaster; so I Prophesie, if thou beest not the head, yet thou wilt bee the right arme to the body which shall bring backe againe to the royall owner the now wasted Palatinate.
            
            Now for a Conclusion to this Noble House, Know thou whatsoeuer thou art which shalt reade this discourse, that albe I nominate here but foure Earles, and the first in the daies of Henry the sixt; yet there haue beene of the name of Vere eighteene Earles of Oxford; of which the first, Aubery Vere was created Earle of Oxford, and High Chamberlaine of England, to him and his heires males for euer, in the daies of Henry the first, who was sonne to William the Conquerour, which is Honour almost as early as could be; for before the Conquest there is no certaintie any of Honour hereditarie in this Land: and thus they haue successiuely followed till this day.
            Next (O Britaine) reade vnto thy softer Nobilitie the Storie of the Noble House of Southampton;The Storie of the House of Southampton.
                That shall bring new fier to their blouds, and make of the little sparkes of Honour great flames of excellency; shew them the life of Thomas Wriothesley Earle of Southampton,
               
                  Thomas Earle of Southamton.
                who was both an excellent Souldier, and an admirable Scholler, who not only serued the great

King his Master (Henry the eight) in his warres, but in his Counsell Chamber; not only in the field, but on the Bench, within his Courts of ciuill Iustice: This man for his excellent parts, was made Lord Chauncelour of England where he gouerned with that integritie of heart and true mixture of Conuience and Iustice, that he wonne the hearts both of the King and people.
            
               
                  Henry Earle of Southampton.
               After this noble Prince succeeded his sonne Henry Earle of Southampton, a man of no lesse vertue, prowesse, and wisedome, euer beloued and fauoured of his Prince, highly reuerenced and fauoured of all that were in his owne ranke, and brauely attended and serued by the best Gentlemen of those Countries wherin he liued; his muster role neuer consisted of foure Lackeys and a Coachman, but of a whole troupe of at least an hundred well mounted Gentlemen and Yeomen; he was not knowne in the Streetes by guarded Liuories, but by Gold Chaines; not by painted Butterflies, euer running as if som monster pursued them, but by tall goodly fellowes that kept a constant pace both to guard his person, and to admit any man to their Lord which had serious businesse. This Prince could not steale or drop into an ignoble place, neither might doe any thing vnworthy of his great calling; for hee euer had a world of testimonies about him.
            
               
                  Henry, second of that name Earle of Southampton.
               When it pleased the diuine goodnesse to take to his mercy this great Earle; hee left behinde to succeede him Henry Earle of Southampton his Sonne (now liuing) being then a childe; But here mee thinkes Cinthius aurem vellet, something puls me by

the elbow, & bids me forbeare, for flatterie is a deadly sinne,The Iourney to the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                and will damme Reputation: But shall I that euer loued and admired this Earle, that liued many yeares where I daily saw this Earle; that knew him before the warres, In the warres, and since the warres; shall I that haue seene him indure the worst mallice or vengeance, that the Sea, Tempests, or Thunder could vtter, that haue seene him vndergoe all the extremities of warre, that haue seene him serue in person on the enemy, and against the enemy: shall I that haue seene him receiue the reward of a Souldier (before the face of the Enemie) for the best act of a Souldier (done vpon the Enemie:) Shall I be scarrd with shadowes? No; Truth is my Mistresse, and though I can write nothing which can equall the least sparke of fire within him, yet for her sake will I speake some thing which may inflame those that are heauy and dul and of mine owne temper.
            This Earle (as I said before) came to his Fathers dignitie in his childhood,The Earles education. spending that and his other yonger times in the studie of good Letters (to which the Vniuersitie of Cambridge is a witnesse) and after confirmed that Studie with trauell and forraigne obseruation.
            As soone as he came to write full and perfit Man,His going to the warres. he betooke himselfe vnto the warres, was made Commander of the Garland, one of Queene Elizabeth (of famous memorie) her best ships; and was Vice-Admirall of the first Squadron. In his first putting out to Sea, hee saw all the Terrours and Euils which the Sea had power to shew to mortaiitie insomuch,

that the Generall and the whole Fleete (except some few shippes,
                  Robert Earle of Essex.
                of which this Earles was one) were driuen backe into Plimouth, but this Earle in spight of stormes, held out his course, made the coast of Spaine, and after vpon an Aduiso returned. The Fleete new reenforst made fourth to Sea againe with better prosperitie, came to the Ilands of the Azores, and there first tooke the Iland of Fiall,
               
                  Fiall taken. sackt and burnt the great Towne, tooke the high Fort which was held impregnable; and made the rest of the Ilands, as Pike, Saint Georges, and Gratiosa, obedient to the Generals seruice;
                  Robert Earle of Essex.
                Then the Fleete returning from Fiall, it pleased the Generall to diuide it, and he went himselfe on the one side of Gratiosa, and the Earle of Southampton with some three more of the Queenes Ships and a few small Marchants Ships sailed on the other, when early in a morning by spring of day, This braue Southampton light vpon the King of Spaines Indian Fleete laden with Treasure,Spaines Indian Fleete beaten. being about foure or fiue and thirty Saile, and most of them great warlike Gallioons; they had all the aduantage that sea, winde, number of ships or strength of men could giue them; yet like a fearefull heard they fled from the fury of our Earle; who notwithstanding gaue them chase with all his Canuase; one he tooke, and sunke her, diuers hee dispierst which were taken after, and the rest he draue into the Iland of Tercera, which was thē vnassaileable. After this,The Earle of Essex.
                he ioyned with the Generall againe, and came to the Iland of Saint Michaels, where they tooke and spoiled the Towne of Villa Franca;
                  Villa Franca taken, and a Carrackt split. and at Porte Algado made a Charrackt runne on ground and split her selfe; after being ready to depart, the enemie taking

aduantage of our rising, and finding that most of our men were gone aboard,The Enemies assault, and are beaten. & but only the General, the Earle of Southamptō, Sr. Francis Vere, & som few others left on Shoare, they came with their vtmost power vpon them, but were receiued with so hot an incounter, that many of the Spaniards were put to the sword, and the rest inforced to runne away: and in this skirmish no man had aduantage of safetie, for the number was (on our part) so few, that euery man had his hands imployment; and here the Earle of Southampton ere he could dry the sweat from his browes, or put his sword vp in the scaberd, receiued from the Noble Generall, Robert Earle of Essex, the order of Knighthood.
                  Southampton Knighted.
            
            After this,
                  Southampton goes to Ireland. he returned for England and came fortunately home, but fel he here a sleep with any inchantment either of Peace or Pleasure? O no; but here he did, as it were, but new begin the progresse of his more noble actions: for now the wilde and sturdy Irish rebels (fatned with some Conquests, and made strong with forraigne aide, to get more Conquest) began to rage like wilde Boares, and to root vp euery fruitfull place in that Kingdome, so that without a sodaine chastisement, it was likely the euill would grow past all cuer; To this worke the Earle of Southampton buckles on his Armour, and after the Generall was chosen, which was Robert Earle of Essex, he is the first tenders his seruice; he is instantly made Lieutenant Generall of the Horse, prepares for the expedition, and with all possible speed came into Ireland, there he was a principall instrument in calming all the turmoiles, and ceasing the seditions in Munster,
               He appeases Munster.
                reducing

that fruitfull and well peopled Prouince to their auncient and true obedience, and making those which fauour and grace could not reclaime, by force of Armes to lye humbly prostrate before him; witnesse Mongarret, Donna-spaniah, the Souggan, Oni-mac-Rori, and a world of others, which being the wickednest of men, came and threw themselues at the feete of the Generall, and only cryed out for the Queenes and his mercy; Thus he also reduced the Country of 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and diuers other places, and then returned.
            But is here an end of his progresse in the warres: questionlesse the whole world would haue so imagined, for his deare and dread Soueraigne, the euer memorable Elizabeth dying, the next that succeeds is the incomparable King Iames; he enters not with an Oliue Branch in his hand, but with an whole Forrest of Oliues round about him; for he brought not Peace to this Kingdome alone, but almost to all the Christian Kingdomes in Europe: he closed vp both ours and our neighbours Ianus Temple, and writing Beati pacifici, found both the worke and the Reward in his admirable proceedings; here our great Earle stops, but retires not; hee keepes his first ground, and the King (like the Sunne which suruaies althings) found hat he was fit for either the one or the other seruice; Peace and Warre were to him but a couple of hand-maids, and he knew how to employ either according to their Vertue: hence he makes him a Priuie Counsellour of the State, and in that seruice he spent the marrow and strength of his age.
            Now at last, when Mischiefe and Policie went about by delicate and inchanting poisons, not only to

stifle our Peace, but to murther and confound all our louing neighbours which guard vs; and that Charitie her selfe complained how our almes were much to penurious; he who is one of the first which rises vp to this labour of amendment: but our Southampton, he whom although the priuiledge of white haires, the testimonie of his former actions, and the necessitie of his imployments in the present state, might haue pleaded many vnrefellable excuses; yet he is the sonne of Honour, and with her he will liue and die in all occasions; hence he embarks himself into this present action: Go on then braue Earle, and as thou art by yeares, experience, and the greatnesse of thy former places and commandments in the warres, the eldest sonne of Honour in this Army, so giue vnto these thy Companions examples of thy goodnesse; shew them the true paths of Honour, and be thou the Eies and Conduct to leade to the restitution of the lost Palatinate, for therein consists my Prophesie.
            After this (O Britaine) reade to thy growing spirits the euer memorable Storie of the Noble House of Essex;The Storie of the House of Essex.
                euery small tittle of that glory is able to make a very earthy soule glorious, how much more then a soule of any reasonable good composition? thou needest not reade it in any lowd key, for the whole World is but a Theater of their Renowne, the Tongues of all people make but vp the Trumpet which speakes them, and it is Eternitie it selfe which shall keepe them to euerlasting memorie.
            Speake then first of the Noble Walter,
               
                  Walter Deuereux Earle of Essex.
                Earle of Essex (I do not meane that in this Treatise thou shouldst

speake of all his Noble actions; for great Volumes are to little to containe them:) But like an Index or Table vnto greatnesse, point out where those glories may be better discerned: Let it suffice me to say hee was a man compounded of the foure Vertues, as of foure Elements, Honour, Valour, Bountie, and Humilitie; for the first he had it from his Birth, and made an augmentation of it in his life, for from Vicount he became an Earle; the second could neuer be seperated from his Bloud, and he exprest it in his profession, for he was a Souldier; the third was the foundation of his disposition, for he could not indure to see merit weeping; and the fourth was the Issue of al the others goodnesses; for he could neuer indure to imagine his owne shadow a haires breadth greater then those that did walke hand in hand with him. This Earle was by Queene Elizabeth, of famous memorie, made Lord Marshall of Ireland; It was he that brought the great O-neale into subiectiō made the first euil Desmund put on the yoake of true, obedience, and reduced that barbarous Nation to their first rules of noble ciuility: which when he had performed to the admiration of all men; he then returned to Dublin, and there dyed, and was buried at Caermarden in Wales (where hee was borne) and there his memorie will liue for euer.
            
               
                  Robert Earle of Essex.
               After him succeeded in his dignitie his deare sonne Robert (surnamed the Great) Earle of Essex, a man of whom it behoueth euery man to be carefull how to write, because his excellent parts were so great, and the enuy which attends such excellency is so boundlesse; that grow the Rush neuer so smoothe, yet there will be a knot, and let the speech be neuer so modest,

yet there will be too much or too little spoken; Therefore, I will only flye to my Mistresse Truth, and vnder her protection giue a glaunce at some part of his Story.
            This Earle was by his father left young vnto the World;The Earles education. and therefore by his mother trained vp to the knowledge both of Armes and Letters, and that with such a carefull (yet Noble) seueritie, that the Vniuersity wherein he liued will and must confesse, that not the porest Pentioner or House-scholler whatsoeuer kept his acts or disputations more duly, freely, and out of his owne knowledge and readings then this Earle did, nor had the Vniuersitie (at that time) any wit more pretious then other (being of his time) to which he was not an oponent, so excellent ripe was his Vnderstanding, & so delicate his deliuery of those things which hee vnderstood: As soone as he left the Vniuersitie, he was call'd for to the Court, where his Soueraigne (the wisest of all Soueraignes) threw vpon him all possible Fauours; and although for his youth and beauty he might, like Pirocles, haue made Basilius doat on his sweetnesse, yet such was his caryage, that he was able to haue giuen Ornament to any Counsell Chamber.
            In this first flourishing time of his youth,His seruice in the Low-countries. 
               Spaine tyranizing too hardly vpon our best Neighbours the Neatherlands, the euer memorable and renouned Queene Elizabeth, takes them to her protection, and with a Royall Army, vnder the conduct of Robert Earle of Leicester preuents those Tempests which else might fall vpon them; In this Armie, Robert Earle of Essex is made Lieutenant Generall of the Horse, in

which charge he bore himselfe so nobly, and with such Brauerie of spirit, that whilst Arnam, or the Sconces, Duesburie, Zutfen, Deuentrie, Blankenburie, and a world of other places (taken from the enemie) stand, the renowne of this Noble man can neither perish nor be forgotten.
            
               The Earle of Essex seruice in Portugal.
               He is no sooner entranchised from this seruice, but the poore King of Portugale, Don Antonio (held violently out of his right by the King of Spaine after the death of Sebastian) comes into England, fals at the feet of the great Queene Elizabeth; shewes his Iniury, and pleads to her mercy, for Succour: Shee who was altogether a plentifull Fountaine of pittie; after cautious and assurances giuen of the reuolt of the Portugals, if an Army should be brought to relieue him, presently vouchafes him aide, and sends away a Royall Army, vnder the conduct of the second Hannibal of the World, Sir Iohn Norris Knight, and that much Sea-loued Gentleman, Sir Frauncis Drake.
            
            
               The Earle of Essex seruice in France.
               In this expedition, Essex desires to bee imployed; but his Soueraigne, who held him either too pretious, or the action too low; or else had imployments for him of greater and higher nature, refuseth to admit him; which hee perceiuing, and being all then on fire, and such a fire as no imployment of Peace was able to quench, secretly and vnknowne to any creature, but his dearest obseruer Sir Roger Williams, hee stole from the Court (and the Ships beeing ready to dis-imboage), put himselfe aboard, and so went the whole voyage, what there hee did the very Gates of Lysbone can testifie, and the Suburbs at this day are ficke

of his ruines, and had the Citizens beene halfe as faithfull as he was Valiant, Don Antonio and his seede had in probabilitie worne the Crowne till this houre. The Groine will speake of him, for she felt him; nay, generally all Portugale did admire him, and to the whole Kingdome and people of Spaine his name was dreadfull.
            Some few yeares after this expedition ended,The Earle of Essex seruice in France
                it pleased God by the hand of a paricide Villane (a Popish Fryar, one that the Deuill and the Iesuites had beene long in breeding) to suffer the life of Henry the third of France to be taken away, whose next Successour was Henry the fourth (sirnamed the Great) of the House of Burbone, and then King of Nauarre; but vp starts the Deuils ministers, by the name of Leaguers, or the League, and they with-stood that inuincible Prince, so powerfully (though treacherously) that the distressed King is compelled to complaine to the great Mistresse of comfort, the renowned Elizabeth: Shee presently vouchsafes him aide, and vnder the conduct of this most excellent Earle, Robert Earle of Essex (whom she made her Generall) she sent into France (number for number) the goodliest, the richest, and the most glorious Army that euer the Sunne shined on. O! yet me thinkes I see the enter-view,The meeting of the Earle and the King. or first meeting betweene the King and this Earle, where the Flowers of England and the Flowers of France mixing together, gold so reflected vpon gold, that the Ayre and the Earth seemed all to be one flame, and the Sunne blushing, shrunke to see his glory ecclipsed.
            The Earle had not beene many daies in France,
               
but he reduced to the Kings obedience all the Country of Normandie, the Citie of Roan only excepted, against which the Earle laid a strong siege, & brought it to that low ebbe of safetie, that hee offered to giue it the King when he pleased; for he had made breaches so large, and passages so easie, that there was no difficultie in the conquest; but the King said, He desired to winne France, not to conquer France; so that the worke by sufferance grew longer, yet in the ende hee made it become prostrate to the Kings obedience. What shall I say to the actions of this great Earle? but only thus, that Fortune (in these daies) was so far from displeasing him, that shee seemed to labour for nothing so much as for his exaltation.
            
               The Earles iourney to Cales.
               After he had finished his great worke in France, and was returned home with the admiration and applause of both Kingdomes, and had receiued from his great Mistresse a condigne reward (for the Queene made him the Master of the Ordnance.) After some few yeares spent in Peace, occasion being offered, by the iniuries of the King of Spaine (then liuing) who like a Lyon lay euer sleeping with his eyes open, to catch all aduantages which might any waies molest vs: The Queene with a Royall Armie, vnder the conduct of this thrice Noble Earle, sent him into the very heart and bowels of Spaine, I mean to the most feeling members, and fruitfullest parts of all that Kingdome; here in this Iourney, he tooke the Towne of Cales, sacked it and burnt it; and brought away not onely all the wealth of the place, but of all the Country round about it. After his departure thence, hee came into Portugale, and there tooke the Towne of Pharo, and

sackt it, & had his Commission giuen his great heart libertie, I thinke his Lordship found easinesse enough to haue sackt also both Siuil and Lisbone; but laden with these spoiles, he returned home, and brought into England an infinite masse of wealth.
            The next yeare following this expedition,The Earles iourney to the Azores.
                hee (by the Queenes appointment raised vp an other Army, and went with it to the Ilands of the Azores, belonging to the King of Spaine, being nine in number, to wit, Saint Michaels, Saint Maries, Tercera, Gratiosa, Fiall, Pike, Saint Georges, Flores, and Coru
                     •
                  , and most of these well fortified, strongly guarded, and of great consequence: for they are the very Store-houses or garners which giue reliefe to all the King of Spaines shipping, in their returne from the West Indies: All these Ilands this Noble Earle tooke, some hee sackt, & some he ransomed, & the entier wealth he brought home into England; for which braue exploit and many others, the Queene created him Earle Marshall of England.
            After he had reposed himselfe a little at home (for I cannot call it rest) the Irish Rebels,The Earles seruice in Ireland.
                vnder the Generall conduct of the Earle of Tiron, but especially in Vlster: vnder the conduct of the bastard sonne of Desmount, Oni-mac, Sori; and others in Munster: vnder the conduct of Filo-macesufe, and Redmeale his broin Lemster; and vnder the conduct of Captaine Terrol in both East-meathe and West-meathe, had set all Ireland on fire by their treacherous and base combustions: To suppresse this, the Noble Essex is called for, and made Lieutenant of Ireland, a Royall Armie is raised, and with it hee came into that much ruined

Kingdome, where betwixt May day and Michaelmas he brought Munster into obedience; draue all the Rebels out of Lenster, made East-meathe and Westmeathe as peaceable as any part of England; setled in quietnesse the greatest part of Conagh, euen from Athlone to the foot of the vnfortunate Curlewes; and brought the Earle of Tiron himselfe to a fearefull Capitulation; But then other Planets rising, and this Noble Earles fortunes beeing to be gouerned by new constellations; he is compelled to returne for England, and so shooke hands with the warres for euer.
            
               
                  Robert, second of that name Earle of Essex.
               After him succeeded in his dignities his sonne Robert Earle of Essex, now liuing, whom he left vnto the world young and tender, yet a Souldier from his cradle; for his whole delight was in Martial Exercises, & of this I dare iudge, because I professe it, that when he was a very child, both in yeares and strength, few horsemen in the Kingdome (the Gentleman that taught him excepted) did ride better,Mr. Henry Alexander.
                valianter, or with more discretion and iudgement; In the Vniuersitie he spent his first time, where he got both admiration, loue, and Learning; and indeed being the sonne of that Father, the very naming of his Name, was enough to raise an army to gaze vpon him, & cry out, That Heauen would protect him: From the Vniuersitie, he betook himself to trauell, wherin he spent many yeares for the bettering of his knowledge,The Earle went a Captaine into the Palatinate.
                and some in beholding the warres in the Neatherlands, being an obiect to which his heart was fixed; as soone as occasion was offered he entred himselfe into the lyst of Souldiers like a Soulder, humbling himselfe to the lowest degree (considering his greatnesse) that thereby

he might make his Scale more noble and persit. In the Palatinate he did both Summer and Winter, held out all extremities, and in despite of Famine, Sword, and Sicknesse returned home with Honour.
            
            Now last of all (new matter being offered) he hath put himselfe on this present action;The Storie of the House of Willoughby.
                Proceede in it braue Earle, and prosper; thou that art the Image of thy Fathers body, be the imitatour of his actions, and I doubt not but Heauen will powre vpon thee a ten times treble measure of his blest and Glorious Rewards: go on I say couragiously, and be the Heart of this warlike preparation; the large heart, the vnyeelding heart, that thou maist inflame & burne all things before thee, till the Enemie be glad that thy Masters Children will receiue their Inheritance, for so my hopes Prophesie, and so I hope God himselfe hath spoken.
            Lastly,
                  William Lord Willoughby.
                reade (O Britaine) to thine vnkindled spirits the Storie of the House of Willoughby; a Storie, that whosoeuer will turne ouer that great Volume, shall finde it full of Honour, full of wonder, full of Vertue, full of great actions: for mine owne part, I can but touch at the names, the matter and Substance lies at large inrolled by a much better pen-man.
            And first (as fittest for this short discourse, and omitting many that went before him) I will begin with William Lord Willoughby, in the daies of King Henry the eight, who was a man of infinite courage and vertue, of high thoughts, deepe wisdome, and discreete caryage; hee commanded (whilest he liued) in all the Kings Warres; went on euer with renowne, and came off euer with glory; insomuch, that Henry the eight

(that potent King) held him as one of the richest Iuels which adorne his Kingdome, and thought no fauour too deare or pretious for such great deseruings, but the best things on earth are euer subiect to Mortalitie; for it pleased God, when this braue Lord was in his greatest prosperitie of Fortune, and the highest fauour with his Soueraigne, to take him to his mercy; and he died without any Issue male of his body, and only left behind him a Daughter and heire called Katherine,
               
                  Katherine Duchesse of Suffolke.
                which was maryed to that great heroyicall Lord Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, so that the King seeing the name of Willoughby, which he loued so dearely, and had so dearely deserued at his Royall hands, likely to be lost in this sweete Lady, began to take it to his consideration, and to make as it were a monument to preserue this great Name, and to giue it still a quickning life in his remembrance; hee called for a well-loued Kinsman of this Lord Willoughbies, and created him (in memorie of the other) Lord Willoughby of Param: But see the effect & working of Prouidence, after the death of the Duke of Suffolke, this Lady Katherine his Duchesse maryed with Bar
                  
                     •
                  ue, by whom shee had a sonne (borne beyond the Seas) which she called Peregrine, and was in her right Lord Willoughby of Eresby. To tell the Storie of this great Duchesse life, how worthily, Religiously, and bountifully shee liued here in England; how malitiously, cruelly, and treacherously shee was hunted, and pursued for her life, ouer all Christendome, by an whole Kennell of the Popes worst deuouring Woolues: to tell the dangers shee escaped, the magnanimitie

shee vsed, the extremities shee was put to; to tell the snares that were laid to intrap her; and the pretty sleights, her sweetnesse vsed to escape them; to see how busie the Deuill was to vndermine her, and how strong God was to protect her, would raise vp amazement, euen in stones, and make the Earth cry out, O Dea certe.
            
            After her succeeded Peregrine,
               
                  Peregrine Lord Willoughby.
                Lord Willoughby, the myrror and myrackle of his time. This man must needes bee a Souldier; for hee was borne in the Warres, nurst in the Warres, brought vp in the Warres; his whole life nothing but a Storie of the Wars, and the last act of his life was playd in a Town of Garison: Of this mans actions, all the Neatherlands can report (and especially Bergenupzone) for in them, where was any fury of Warre, out of which hee brought not Triumph; and the Duke of Parma himselfe, wheresoeuer his Chronickle is read of the Neatherlands, must bee contented (if Truth bee witnesse) to haue this Lord Willoughby triumphant against him. France, thou must likewise bee a Trumpet of this Noblemans Glory; and Paris thou must bee an euidence too strong to bee refelled, thou knowest hee blew vp thy Ports, and battered downe thy Walls, and had not the Kings mercy throwne cold water on his anger, tis well knowne hee had wrapt thee vp in a bloudy mantell; for exceeding great were his designes, and very good both his successe and Fortune; so that lawfully (without arrogance) he might haue assumed Coesars inscription, which was

               Veni, vidi, vici, for althings proued easie to his vndertakings.
            
               The Lord Willoughby made gouernour of Berwicke.
               Lastly, when hee had performed all his great Mistresses commandements, and brought peace to her Neighbours, he then returned into England, where in recompence of his great seruices, she made him Gouernour of her warlike Towne of Berwicke, and in that Gouernment, with peace of contience, and the loue of all sorts of People: he died, and was exceedingly lamented.
            
               
                  Robert Lord Willoughby.
               After him succeeded in his dignitie, Robert Lord Willoughby his sonne, now liuing, who hitherto hath followed his Fathesr step for step to Honor; put on his Armour almost as soone, and had imployments been as frequent and abundant as in the daies of his Father, doubtlesse he had ariued at a great part of his glories: notwithstanding, he did neither neglect, nor loose time, but tooke hold vpon all occasions; neither did Peace or Ease cast any such mist about him, but that our Royall King Iames his great Master, found him worthy of imployment; so that when his deare Brother, the King of Denmarke stood oppressed with Iniurious Neighbours, it pleased him (for his Vertues sake) to elect this Noble man, and made him Generall of an Army which he sent to his succour: There this Lord acted all the parts of a most glorious Souldier; for he gaue to the King of Denmarke all satisfaction, made the enemie feele his courage, and his friends taste his loue; he cloathed euery great desert with Honour, and euery lesse with his Bounty, so that after his worke finished, he returned home with praise, and found fauour in the eies both of his great Master, and Royall Mistresse.
            
               After this expedition, the peacefulnesse of the times kept both his body and minde a prisoner, till now at last, our Neighbours harmes teaching vs how to husband safetie, hath giuen libertie to this new Armie; in which this Lord is a principall Commander: Goe on then braue Lord in this braue designe, and make euery obstacle the Enemie would finde to deterre or hinder thee, a new spurre to quicken thy resolution, & a new flame to kindle thine anger; thou hast a plentifull Catalogue of presidents in thine owne Bloud, reade them ouer and ouer; and when this great Substance of Martaill resolutions shall bee brought to a comely and inuincible Body; be thou the prosperous and successefull Foote, which in despite of all oppositions, shall march forward and bring the rest to the long wisht for Palatinate. Doe this prosperously, doe this bouldly, for I presage it is a worke to which God hath called thee, and Angels will clap their wings when they see it effected.
            When (O Britaine) thou hast read these foure Chronicles to thy younger Schollers;A remembrance of the Lord Wriothesley, the Lord De-Ware, and the Lord Montioy.
                if thou findest any heauie or vnapt for Noble Action; especially, where youth and abilitie of body hath giuen incouragement of better hopes, then point them out these three young Coesars: the Lord Wriothesley; the Lord La-Ware, and the Lord Montioy, let them looke vpon them with admiration, and when they haue perfitly viewed them, let them sigh and blush for shame that they are not equall partners of their vndertakings; let them behold the obiect whereat they looke, and they shall finde it is sacred and not profane, a marke of holinesse, not a blazing meteor of greatnesse; looke on

the chaine which drawes them, and they shall finde it iustice, not the quarrel of earthly passion; and let them looke at the end whereat they would aime, and they shall finde it is Heauen and the Communitie with Saints, not the Court (which is the Theater of worldly praise) nor the Princes fauour: But if all this preuaile not, but still this secure Slumber of Peace will lye heauy vpon them; then stirre vp thy warme bloud, and modestly thus chide them:
            Tell them, that as the King is the great maine Ocean or Sea of all Honour, and may bestow his waters freely at his pleasure; so he expects from those which are his pettie Riuers, that hourely to him they pay backe their Tributes: That hand which giues Honor, euer lookes from the honour'd hand to receiue some seruice; Then you (O you yong men, you ablemen) you that haue receiued honors beyond expectations, fauours past hope, and wealth past merit: Looke whether your Riuers be not conuerted to standing lakes, and no Tribute returned, and whether your seruices be not concealed, whilest poore barren wishes only make good the place of a dead duty; if you finde these falts amend them, if you finde these falts forsake them.
            Againe, tell these great ones (whom hardly Thunder can awaken) that when they neglect Honour, they neglect and are rebellious against God, and it is a meere folly for them to hope to rule men, when they will not be ruled by him that made them; But they will answere thee, that greatnesse of place, giues them priuiledge from Censure, and so they can cary a faire shew, no matter for sufficiencie. Reply thou that it is folly to thinke so, for assure them that a superficiall

shew of sufficiencie, is but like small Wines which will not keepe, and being once tainted, no poison like that of Contempt.
            Say vnto those which are dull, and want good matter whereon to build great thoughts, that as small springs are soone emptied if they be often drawne; so spirits that haue weake foundations, silence is good to make them seeme wise; but when Wisedome comes to proue them, euery imagined good thing (in them) fals asunder like so many disioyned peices.
            Tell the phantasticke Mimmickes of honour, those which are caried away with euery shadow of fauour or fashion, that neuer fixe vpon any thing that is constant or serious; that alwaies hunt after vanities, and thinke no exercise in Armes so meritorious, as tossing a Shyttelwike: tell them the study of vaine things is a toilesome Idlenesse, and a painefull Folly; the spirit which is strucke with this disease, are very hardly cured; neither can their curiositie in this kinde (how carefull soeuer) afford them any thing but Ignorance; and belieue it, there is nothing more dishonourable or daungerous either to Court or Common-wealth, then an Ignorant great one: Tell them that Henry the Great of France, call'd Ignorant Noble-men Golden Calues, and all that did Reuerence to them, were worthy to perish for Idolatrie: It was his opinion, that Noblemen might bee borne good, Generous, and capable of Vertue; but Instruction only makes them wise: Wisedome cannot be gotten without paine, she cannot be sold, or if she could, it is ten to one, this sort of Nobilitie would

neuer buy her, there are so many follies to step betwixt her and them, which are both cheape, and euer ready to pull downe the market.
            Lastly, and for a Conclusion of this small Treatise, say to him, whatsoeuer hee be that shall taxe me of bitternesse, or thinke I haue gone beyond the bounds of good manners in seeking to aduise them, who are aboue the rule of my knowledge, and that whatsoeuer is aboue me doth nothing belong vnto me, tell them they are mistaken: Bid them call to minde, that the Tree which grew from Romulus Iaueling (when he threw it into the ground) was walled about by the Romans, and kept so carefully, that if any man (of what degree soeuer) saw the leaues begin to wither, he presently gaue an allarum to the whole Citie, and cryed for water as if all had beene on fire: In like manner, Subiects haue cause to grieue and call out, when as those plants, from whence the hope to gather the strength of Protection, the fruits of Iustice and the shadow of their rest, doe wither either through the negligence of those which should prune and preserue them, or through the want of good Sap, which might be infused into them by due watering and manuring.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   