
      
         
            
            
            A Zealous prayer to God, vſed and ſaid euery day by the
poore Priſoners of the Marſhalſey, for all their good Benefactors.
            
               
                  O
                Moſt gratious God and our louing Father, looke downe
for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, vpon vs thy poore children with
thine eyes of mercy, and let thine eares be opened vnto
our prayers. We confeſſe holy Father, that we are not
worthy to open our ſinfull mouthes to ſpeake vnto thy holy
Maieſte nor to receiue any good thing from thée, becauſe
we haue like Prodigall children miſſpent thy bleſſings,
and in the whole courſe of our liues haue erred and ſtrayed from thee,
and thy holy waies, and thereby haue diſhonoured thee and giuen euill example
vnto others. We confeſſe alſo that thou haſt iuſtly ſhut vs vp in priſon,
as men vnworthy of the liberty and Communion of Saintes, ſo as we
cannot viſit thy holy Temple to ſee the beauty of thy face by hearing of thy
worde, and praiſe thee in the congregation as they doe. O that we had eyes
to ſee and hearts to lament our ſinnes, that haue brought this vpon vs: Sathan
hath blinded vs ſo as we cannot ſee, and hardned our hearts, ſo as we
cannot lament: O thou moſt gratious God and louing Father, take pittie
on vs thy poore children for Chriſt his ſake, and ſhew thy mercy in ſending
thy holy Spirit into vs, to deſtroy this power of Sathan within vs, and to
ſanctifie vs throughout in bodies and in ſoules, that from hencefoorth we may
glorifie thee with our bodies and ſoules.
            And where as now by reaſon of our impriſonment, we can not goe abroad
to labour for our liuing, we might ſtarue and periſh, were it not but
that thou of thy mercy and goodnes haſt ſtirred vp many of thy children to
reléeue vs, we doe moſt humbly thank thée for them, and doe hartely beſéech
thée euen for Ieſus Chriſt his ſake, to reward them ſeauen-fould, and
to let thy bleſſing euer remaine vpon them and theirs. We beſéech thee
alſo for our enemies, that it would pleaſe thee to forgiue them, and to
graunt vs alſo grace to forgiue them. And wherein-ſoeuer wee haue giuen
iuſt cauſe of offence vnto them we beſeech thee to forgiue vs, and to
graunt them grace alſo to forgiue vs. And in thy good time giue deliueraunce
vnto vs from our impriſonment, in the meane while continue thy goodnes
towardes vs, and aboue all graunt vs patience and the inward ſtrength
and comfort of thy Holy Spirit and grace to profit dayly more and more to
amendment of lite by thy correction, to thy glorie and our euerlaſting comfort
through Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, to whom with thée and the holy Ghoſt,
be all honor, thankes, praiſe and glorie, both now and for euermore. Amen.
            
         
      
   