
      
         
            
            THE METAMORPHOsis of Pigmalions Image. AND Certaine Satyres.
            AT LONDON, Printed for Edmond Matts, & are to be sold at the signe of the hand and Plough in Fleetstreete. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORLDS MIGHTIE MONARCH, GOOD OPINION
            
            Sole Regent of Affection, perpetuall Ruler of Iudgement, most famous Iustice of Censures, onely giuer of Honor, great procurer of Aduancement, the Worlds chiefe Ballance, the All of all, and All in all, by whom all things are yt that they are. I humbly offer thys my Poem.
            
               THou soule of Pleasure, Honors only substance,
               Great Arbitrator, Vmpire of the Earth,
               Whom fleshly Epicures call Vertues essence,
               Thou moouing Orator, whose powrefull breath
               Swaies all mens iudgements. Great OPINION,
               Vouchsafe to guild my imperfection.
            
            
               
               If thou but daine to grace my blushing stile,
               And crowne my Muse with good opinion:
               If thou vouchsafe with gracious eye to smile
               Vpon my young new-borne Inuention,
               Ile sing an Hymne in honor of thy name,
               And add some Trophie to enlarge thy fame.
            
            
               But if thou wilt not with thy Deitie
               Shade, and inmaske the errors of my pen,
               Protect an Orphane Poets infancie,
               I will disclose, that all the world shall ken
               How partiall thou art in Honors giuing:
               Crowning the shade, the substance praise depriving.
            
            
               W. K.
            
         
         
            
            THE ARGVMENT of the Poem.
            
               
                  PIgmalion whose chast mind all the beauties in Cyprus could not ensnare, yet at the length hauing carued in Iuorie an excellent propoition of a beauteous woman, was so deeplie enamored on his owne workmanship, that he would oftentimes lay the Image in bedde with him, and fondlie vse such petitions and dalliance, as if it had been a breathing creature. But in the end, finding his fond dotage, and yet perseuering

in his ardent affection, made his deuout prayers to Venus, that shee would vouchsafe to enspire life into his Loue, and then ioyne them both together in marriage. VVherevpon Venus graciously condiscending to his earnest sute, the Mayde, (by the power of her Deitie) was metamorphosed into a liuing VVoman. And after, Pigmalion (beeing in Cyprus,) begat a sonne of her, which was called Paphus, wherupon, that Iland Cyprus, in honor of Venus, was after, and is now, called by the inhabitants, Paphos.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To his Mistres.
            
               MY wanton Muse lasciuiously doth sing
               Of sportiue loue, of louely dallying.
               O beauteous Angell, daine thou to infuse
               A sprightly wit, into my dulled Muse.
               I inuocate none other Saint but thee,
               To grace the first bloomes of my Poesie.
               Thy fauours like Promethean sacred fire,
               In dead, and dull conceit can life inspire,
               Or like that rare and rich Elixar stone,
               Can turne to gold, leaden inuention:
               Be gracious then, and daine to show in mee,
               The mighty power of thy Deitie.
               And as thou read'st, (Faire) take compassion,
               Force me not enuie my Pigmalion.
               
               Then when thy kindnes grants me such sweet blisse,
               I'le gladly write thy metamorphosis.
            
         
         
            
            
            PIGMALION.
            
               1.
               
                  PIgmalion, whose hie loue-hating minde
               Disdain'd to yeeld seruile affection,
               Or amorous sute to any woman-kinde,
               Knowing their wants, and mens perfection.
               Yet Loue at length forc'd him to know his fate,
               And loue the shade, whose substance he did hate.
            
            
               2.
               For hauing wrought in purest Iuorie,
               So faire an Image of a Womans feature,
               That neuer yet proudest mortalitie
               Could show so rare and beautious a creature.
               (Vnlesse my Mistres all-excelling face,
               Which giues to beautie, beauties onely grace.)
            
            
               
               3.
               Hee was amazed at the wondrous rarenesse
               Of his owne workmanships perfection.
               He thought that Nature nere produc'd such fairenes
               In which all beauties haue their mantion.
               And thus admiring, was enamored
               On that fayre Image himselfe portraied.
            
            
               4.
               And naked as it stood before his eyes,
               Imperious Loue declares his Deitie.
               O what alluring beauties he descries
               In each part of his faire imagery!
               Her nakednes, each beauteous shape containes.
               All beautie in her nakednes remaines.
            
            
               
               5.
               He thought he saw the blood run through the vaine
               And leape, and swell with all alluring meanes:
               Then feares he is deceiu'd, and then againe,
               He thinks he see'th the brightnes of the beames
               Which shoote from out the fairenes of her eye:
               At which he stands as in an extasie.
            
            
               6.
               Her Amber-coloured, her shining haire,
               Makes him protest, the Sunne hath spread her head
               With golden beames, to make her farre more faire.
               But whē her cheeks his amorous thoughts haue fed,
               Then he exclaimes, such redde and so pure white,
               Did neuer blesse the eye of mortall sight.
            
            
               
               7.
               Then view's her lips, no lips did seeme so faire
               In his conceit, through which he thinks doth flie
               So sweet a breath, that doth perfume the ayre.
               Then next her dimpled chin he doth discry,
               And views, and wonders, and yet view's her still.
               "Loues eyes in viewing neuer haue their fill.
            
            
               8.
               Her breasts, like polisht Iuory appeare,
               Whose modest mount, doe blesse admiring eye,
               And makes him wish for such a Pillowbeare.
               Thus fond Pigmalion striueth to discry
               Each beauteous part, not letting ouer-slip
               One parcell of his curious workmanship.
            
            
               
               9.
               Vntill his eye discended so farre downe
               That it descried Loues pauillion:
               Where Cupid doth enioy his onely crowne,
               And Venus hath her chiefest mantion:
               There would be winke, & winking looke againe,
               Both eies & thoughts would gladly there remaine.
            
            
               10.
               Who euer saw the subtile Citty-dame
               In sacred church, whē her pure thoughts shold pray,
               Peire through her fingers, so to hide her shame,
               When that her eye her mind would faine bewray.
               So would he view, and winke, and view againe,
               A chaster thought could not his eyes retaine.
            
            
               
               11.
               He wondred that she blusht not when his eye
               Saluted those same parts of secrecie:
               Conceiting not it was imagerie
               That kindly yeelded that large libertie.
               O that my Mistres were an Image too,
               That I might blameles her perfections view.
            
            
               12.
               But when the faire proportion of her thigh
               Began appeare. O Ouid would he cry,
               Did ere Corinna show such Iuorie
               When she appear'd in Venus liuorie?
               And thus enamour'd, dotes on his owne Art
               Which he did work, to work his pleasing smart.
            
            
               
               13.
               And fondly doting, oft he kist her lip.
               Oft would he dally with her Iuory breasts.
               No wanton loue-trick would he ouer-slip,
               But still obseru'd all amorous beheasts.
               Whereby he thought he might procure the loue
               Of his dull Image, which no plaints coulde moue.
            
            
               14.
               Looke how the peeuish Papists crouch, and kneele
               To some dum Idoll with their offering,
               As if a senceles carued stone could feele
               The ardor of his bootles chattering,
               So fond he was, and earnest in his sute
               To his remorsles Image, dum and mute.
            
            
               
               15.
               He oft doth wish his soule might part in sunder
               So that one halfe in her had residence:
               Oft he exclaimes, ô beauties onely wonder,
               Sweet modell of delight, faire excellence,
               Be gracious vnto him that formed thee,
               Compassionate his true-loues ardencie.
            
            
               16.
               She with her silence, seemes to graunt his sute.
               Then he all iocund like a wanton louer,
               With amorous embracements doth salute
               Her slender wast, presuming to discouer
               The vale of Loue, where Cupid doth delight
               To sport, and dally all the sable night.
            
            
               
               17.
               His eyes, her eyes, kindly encountered,
               His breast, her breast, oft ioyned close vnto,
               His armes embracements oft she suffered,
               Hands, armes, eyes, tongue, lips, and all parts did woe.
               His thigh, with hers, his knee playd with her knee,
               A happy consort when all parts agree.
            
            
               18.
               But when he saw poore soule he was deceaued,
               (Yet scarce he could beleeue his sence had failed)
               Yet when he found all hope from him bereaued,
               And saw how fondly all his thoughts had erred,
               Then did he like to poore Ixion seeme,
               That clipt a cloud in steede of heauens Queene.
            
            
               
               19.
               I oft haue smil'd to see the foolery
               Of some sweet Youths, who seriously protest
               That Loue respects not actuall Luxury,
               But onely ioy's to dally, sport, and iest:
               Loue is a child, contented with a toy,
               A busk-point, or some sauour still's the boy.
            
            
               20.
               Marke my Pigmalion, whose affections ardor
               May be a mirror to posteritie.
               Yet viewing, touching, kissing, (common fauour,)
               Could neuer satiat his loues ardencie:
               And therefore Ladies, thinke that they nere loue you,
               Who doe not vnto more then kissing moue you.
            
            
               
               21.
               For my Pigmalion kist, viewd, and imbraced,
               And yet exclaimes, why were these women made
               O sacred Gods, and with such beauties graced?
               Haue they not power as well to coole, and shade,
               As for to heate mens harts? or is there none
               Or are they all like mine? relentlesse stone.
            
            
               22.
               With that he takes her in his louing armes,
               And downe within a Downe-bed softly layd her.
               Then on his knees he all his sences charmes,
               To inuocate sweet Venus for to raise her
               To wished life, and to infuse some breath,
               To that which dead, yet gaue a life to death.
            
            
               
               23
               Thou sacred Queene of sportiue dallying,
               (Thus he begins,) Loues onely Emperesse,
               Whose kingdome rests in wanton reuelling,
               Let me beseech thee show thy powerfulnesse
               In changing stone to flesh, make her relent,
               And kindly yeeld to thy sweet blandishment,
            
            
               24
               O gracious Gods, take compassion.
               Instill into her some celestiall fire,
               That she may equalize affection,
               And haue a mutuall loue, and loues desire.
               Thou know'st the force of loue, then pitty me,
               Compassionate my true loues ardencie.
            
            
               
               25
               Thus hauing said, he riseth from the floore,
               As if his soule diuined him good fortune,
               Hoping his prayers to pitty moou'd some power.
               For all his thoughts did all good luck importune.
               And therefore straight he strips him naked quite.
               That in the bedde he might haue more delight.
            
            
               26
               Then thus, Sweet sheetes he sayes, which nowe doe couer,
               The Idol of my soule, the fairest one
               That euer lou'd, or had an amorous louer.
               Earths onely modell of perfection,
               Sweet happy sheetes, daine for to take me in,
               That I my hopes and longing thoughts may win.
            
            
               
               27
               With that his nimble limbs doe kisse the sheetes,
               And now he bowes him for to lay him downe,
               And now each part, with her faire parts doe meet,
               Now doth he hope for to enioy loues crowne:
               Now doe they dally, kisse, embrace together,
               Like Leda's Twins at sight of fairest weather.
            
            
               28
               Yet all's conceit. But shadow of that blisse
               Which now my Muse striues sweetly to display
               In this my wondrous metamorphosis.
               Daine to beleeue me, now I sadly say.
               The stonie substance of his Image feature,
               Was straight transform'd into a liuing creature.
            
            
               
               29
               For when his hands her faire form'd limbs had felt,
               And that his armes her naked wast imbraced,
               Each part like Waxe before the sunne did melt,
               And now, oh now, he finds how he is graced
               By his owne worke. Tut, women will relent
               When as they finde such mouing blandishment.
            
            
               30.
               Doe but conceiue a Mothers passing gladnes,
               (After that death her onely sonne hath seazed
               And ouerwhelm'd her soule with endlesse sadnes)
               When that she sees him gin for to be raised
               From out his deadly swoune to life againe:
               Such ioy Pigmalion feeles in euery vaine.
            
            
               
               31.
               And yet he feares he doth but dreaming find
               So rich content, and such celestiall blisse.
               Yet when he proues & finds her wondrous kind,
               Yeelding soft touch for touch, sweet kisse, for kisse,
               He's well assur'd no faire imagery
               Could yeeld such pleasing, loues felicity.
            
            
               32.
               O wonder not to heare me thus relate,
               And say to flesh transformed was a stone.
               Had I my Loue in such a wished state
               As was afforded to Pigmalion,
               
               Though flinty hard, of her you soone should see
               As strange a transformation wrought by mee.
            
            
               
               33.
               And now me thinks some wanton itching eare
               With lustfull thoughts, and ill attention,
               List's to my Muse, expecting for to heare
               The amorous discription of that action
               Which Venus seekes, and euer doth require,
               When fitnes graunts a place to please desire.
            
            
               34.
               Let him conceit but what himselfe would doe
               When that he had obtayned such a fauour,
               Of her to whom his thoughts were bound vnto,
               If she, in recompence of his loues labour,
               Would daine to let one payre of sheets containe
               The willing bodies of those louing twaine.
            
            
               
               35.
               Could he, oh could he, when that each to eyther
               Did yeeld kind kissing and more kind embracing,
               Could he when that they felt, and clip▪t together
               And might enioy the life of dallying,
               Could he abstaine midst such a wanton sporting
               From doing that, which is not fit reporting?
            
            
               36.
               What would he doe when that her softest skin
               Saluted his with a delightfull kisse?
               When all things fit for loues sweet pleasuring
               Inuited him to reape a Louers blisse?
               What he would doe, the selfe same action
               Was not neglected by Pigmalion.
               
            
            
               
               37.
               For when he found that life had tooke his seate
               Within the breast of his kind beauteous loue,
               When that he found that warmth, and wished heate
               Which might a Saint and coldest spirit moue,
               Thē arms, eyes, hands, tong, lips, & wanton thigh,
               Were willing agents in Loues luxurie.
            
            
               38.
               Who knowes not what ensues? O pardon me
               Yee gaping eares that swallow vp my lines
               Expect no more. Peace idle Poesie,
               Be not obsceane though wanton in thy rimes.
               And chaster thoughts, pardon if I doe trip,
               Or if some loose lines from my pen doe slip,
            
            
               
               39.
               Let this suffice, that that same happy night
               So gracious were the Gods of marriage
               Mid'st all there pleasing and long wish'd delight
               
                  Paphus was got: of whom in after age
               
                  Cyrus was Paphos call'd, and euermore
               Those Ilandars do Venus name adore.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            SATYRES.
            
               
               
               The Authour in prayse of his precedent Poem.
               
                  NOw Rufus, by old Glebrons fearefull mace
                  Hath not my Muse deseru'd a worthy place?
                  Come come Luxurio, crowne my head with Bayes,
                  Which like a Paphian, wantonly displayes
                  The Salaminian titillations,
                  Which tickle vp our leud Priapians.
                  Is not my pen compleate? are not my lines
                  Right in the swaggering humor of these times?
                  O sing Peana to my learned Muse.
                  
                     Io bis dicite. Wilt thou refuse?
                  Doe not I put my Mistres in before?
                  And pitiously her gracious ayde implore?
                  
                     Doe not I flatter, call her wondrous faire?
                  Vertuous, diuine most debonaire?
                  Hath not my Goddesse in the vaunt-gard place,
                  The leading of my lines theyr plumes to grace?
                  And then ensues my stanzaes, like odd bands
                  Of voluntaries, and mercenarians:
                  Which like Soldados of our warlike age,
                  March rich bedight in warlike equipage:
                  Glittering in dawbed lac'd accoustrements,
                  And pleasing sutes of loues habiliments.
                  Yet puffie as Dutch hose they are within,
                  Faint, and white liuer'd, as our gallants bin:
                  Patch'd like a beggars cloake, and run as sweet
                  As doth a tumbrell in the paued street.
                  And in the end, (the end of loue I wot)
                  
                     
                     Pigmalion hath a iolly boy begot.
                  So Labeo did complaine his loue was stone,
                  Obdurate, flinty, so relentlesse none:
                  Yet Lynceus knowes, that in the end of this,
                  He wrought as strange a metamorphosis.
                  Ends not my Poem then surpassing ill?
                  Come, come, Augustus, crowne my laureat quill.
                  Now by the whyps of Epigramatists,
                  
                  Ile not be lasht for my dissembling shifts.
                  And therefore I vse Popelings discipline,
                  Lay ope my faults to Mastigophoros eyne:
                  Censure my selfe, fore others me deride
                  And scoffe at mee, as if I had deni'd
                  Or thought my Poem good, when that I see
                  My lines are froth, my stanzaes saplesse be.
                  
                     Thus hauing rail'd against my selfe a while,
                  Ile snarle at those, which doe the world beguile
                  With masked showes. Ye changing Proteans list,
                  And tremble at a barking Satyrist.
               
            
            
               
               SATYRE. I. Quedam videntur, et non sunt.
               
                  I Cannot show in strange proportion,
                  Changing my hew like a Camelion.
                  But you all-canning wits, hold water out,
                  Yee vizarded-bifronted-Ianian rout.
                  Tell mee browne Ruscus, hast thou Gyges ring,
                  That thou presum'st as if thou wert vnseene!
                  If not. Why in thy wits halfe capreall
                  Lett'st thou a superscribed Letter fall?
                  And from thy selfe, vnto thy selfe doost send,
                  And in the same, thy selfe, thy selfe commend?
                  For shame leaue running to some Satrapas,
                  
                  Leaue glauering on him in the peopled presse:
                  
                     Holding him on as he through Paules doth walke,
                  With nodds and leggs, and odde superfluous talke:
                  Making men thinke thee gracious in his sight,
                  When he esteemes thee but a Parasite.
                  For shame vnmaske, leaue for to cloke intent,
                  And show thou art vaine-glorious, impudent.
                  Come Briscus, by the soule of Complement,
                  I'le not endure that with thine instrument
                  (Thy Gambo violl plac'd betwixt thy thighes,
                  Wherein the best part of thy courtship lyes)
                  Thou entertaine the time, thy Mistres by:
                  Come, now lets heare thy mounting Mercurie,
                  
                  VVhat mum? giue him his fiddle once againe,
                  Or he's more mute then a Pythagoran.
                  
                  
                     But oh! the absolute Castilio,
                  
                  He that can all the poynts of courtship show.
                  He that can trot a Courser, breake a rush,
                  And arm'd in proofe, dare dure a strawes strong push.
                  He, who on his glorious scutchion
                  Can quaintly show wits newe inuention,
                  Aduauncing forth some, thirstie Tantalus,
                  
                  Or els the Vulture on Promethius,
                  
                  With some short motto of a dozen lines.
                  He that can purpose it in dainty rimes,
                  Can set his face, and with his eye can speake,
                  Can dally with his Mistres dangling seake,
                  And wish that he were it, to kisse her eye
                  And flare about her beauties deitie.
                  
                     Tut, he is famous for his reueling,
                  For fine sette speeches, and for sonetting;
                  He scornes the violl and the scraping sticke,
                  And yet's but Broker of anothers wit.
                  Certes if all things were well knowne and view'd
                  He doth but champe that which another chew'd.
                  Come come Castilion, skim thy posset curd,
                  Show thy queere substance, worthlesse, most obsurd.
                  Take ceremonius complement from thee,
                  Alas, I see Castilios beggery.
               
               
                  O if Democritus were now aliue
                  How he would laugh to see this deuill thriue!
                  And by an holy semblance bleare mens eyes
                  
                     When he intends some damned villanies.
                  
                     Ixion makes faire weather vnto Ioue,
                  
                  That he might make foule work with his faire loue,
                  And is right sober in his outward semblance,
                  Demure, and modest in his countenance;
                  Applies himselfe to great Saturnus sonne,
                  Till Saturns daughter yeeldes his motion.
                  Night-shining Phoebe knowes what was begat,
                  A monstrous Centaure, illegitimate.
               
               
                  Who would not chuck to see such pleasing sport.
                  To see such troupes of gallants still resort
                  Vnto Cornutos shop. What other cause
                  But chast Brownetta, Sporo thether drawes?
                  
                     Who now so long hath prays'd the Choughs white bill
                  That he hath left her ne're a flying quill:
                  His meaning gain, though outward semblance loue;
                  So like a Crabfish Sporo still doth moue.
                  Laugh, laugh, to see the world Democritus
                  
                  Cry like that strange transformed Tyreus.
                  
                  Now Sorbo with a fayned grauity
                  Doth fish for honour, and high dignity.
                  Nothing within, nor yet without, but beard
                  Which thrice he strokes, before I euer heard
                  One wise graue word, to blesse my listning eare.
                  But marke how Good-opinion doth him reare.
                  See, he's in office, on his foot-cloth placed;
                  Now each man caps, and striues for to be graced
                  
                     With some rude nod of his maiestick head,
                  Which all doe wish in Limbo harried.
                  But ô I grecue, that good men daine to be
                  Slaues vnto him, that's slaue to villany.
                  Now Sorbo swels with selfe conceited sence,
                  Thinking that men doe yeeld this reuerence
                  Vnto his vertues: fond credulity!
                  Asse, talke of Isis, no man honours thee.
               
               
                  Great Tubrios feather gallantly doth waue,
                  Full twenty falls doth make him wondrous braue.
                  Oh golden Ierkin! royall arming coate!
                  Like ship on Sea, he on the land doth slote.
                  He's gone, he's shipt, his resolution
                  
                     Pricks (by heauen) to this action.
                  The poxe it doth: not long since I did view
                  The man betake him to a common stew.
                  And there (I wis) like no quaint stomack't man
                  Eates vp his armes. And warres munition
                  His wauing plume, falls in the Brokers chest.
                  Fie that his Ostridge stomack should disgest
                  His Ostridge feather: eate vp Venis-lace.
                  Thou that did'st feare to eate Pore-Iohns aspace.
                  Lie close ye slaue at beastly luxury;
                  Melt and consume in pleasures surquedry.
                  But now, thou that did'st march with Spanish Pike before,
                  Come with French-pox out of that brothell dore.
                  The fleet's return'd. What newes from Rodio?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hote seruice, by the Lord, cryes Tubrio.
                  Why do'st thou halt? Why six times throgh each thigh
                  
                  Pusht with the Pike of the hote enemie.
                  Hote seruice, hote, the Spaniard is a man,
                  I say no more, and as a Gentleman
                  I serued in his face. Farwell. Adew.
                  
                  VVelcome from Netherland, from steaming stew.
                  Asse to thy crib, doffe that huge Lyons skin,
                  Or els the Owle vvill hoote and driue thee in.
                  For shame, for shame, lew'd liuing Tubrio
                  
                  Presume not troupe among that gallant crue
                  Of true Heroike spirits, come vncase,
                  Show vs the true forme of Dametas face.
                  Hence, hence ye slaue, dissemble not thy state
                  
                     But hence-forth be a turne-coate, runnagate.
                  Oh hold my sides, that I may breake my spleene,
                  With laughter at the shadowes I haue seene.
               
               
                  Yet I can beare with Curios nimble feete
                  Saluting me with capers in the streete,
                  Although in open view, and peoples face,
                  He fronts me with some spruce, neate, sincopace.
                  Or Tullus, though when ere he me espies
                  Straight with loud mouth (a bandy Sir) he cries.
                  Or Robrus, vvho adic't to nimble fence,
                  Still greetes me vvith Stockadoes violence.
                  These I doe beare, because I too vvell know
                  They are the same, they seeme in outward show.
                  
                     But all confusion seuer from mine eye
                  This Ianian-bifront hypocrisie.
               
            
            
               
               SATYRE. 2 Quedam sunt, et non videntur.
               
                  I That euen novv lisp'd like an Amorist,
                  Am turn'd into a snaphaunce Satyrist.
                  O tytle, which my iudgement doth adore!
                  But I dull-sprighted fat Boetian Boore,
                  Doe farre of honour that Censorian seate.
                  But if I could in milk-white robes intreate
                  
                     Plebeians fauour, I would shew to be
                  
                     Tribunus plebis, gainst the villany
                  Of these same Proteans, whose hipocrisie,
                  Doth still abuse our fond credulity.
                  But since my selfe am not imaculate,
                  But many spots my minde doth vitiate,
                  
                     I'le leaue the white roabe, and the biting rimes
                  Vnto our moderne Satyres sharpest lines;
                  VVhose hungry fangs snarle at some secret sinne.
                  And in such pitchy clouds enwrapped beene
                  His Sphinxian ridles, that old Oedipus
                  
                  Would be amaz'd and take it in foule snufs
                  That such Cymerian darknes should inuolue
                  A quaint conceit, that he could not resolue.
                  O darknes palpable! Egipts black night!
                  My wit is stricken blind, hath lost his sight.
                  My shins are broke, with groping for some sence
                  To know to what his words haue reference.
                  Certes (sunt) but (non videntur) that I know.
                  Reach me some Poets Index that will show.
                  
                     
                     Imagines Deorum. Booke of Epithites,
                  
                     Natales Comes, thou I know recites,
                  And mak'st Anatomie of Poesie.
                  Helpe to vnmaske the Satyres secresie.
                  Delphick Apollo, ayde me to vnrip,
                  These intricate deepe Oracles of wit.
                  These darke Enigmaes, and strange ridling sence
                  Which passe my dullard braines intelligence.
                  Fie on my senceles pate; Now I can show
                  Thou writest that which I, nor thou, doo'st know.
                  Who would imagine that such squint-ey'd sight
                  Could strike the worlds deformities so right.
                  But take heede Pallas, least thou ayme awry
                  Loue, nor yet Hate, had ere true iudging eye.
                  
                     Who would once dreame that that same Elegie,
                  That faire fram'd peece of sweetest Poesie,
                  Which Muto put betwixt his Mistris paps,
                  (When he (quick-witted) call'd her Cruell chaps,
                  
                  And told her, there she might his dolors read
                  Which she, oh she, vpon his hart had spread)
                  Was penn'd by Roscio the Tragedian.
                  Yet Muto, like a good Vulcanian,
                  
                  An honest Cuckold, calls the bastard sonne,
                  And brags of that which others for him done.
                  Satyre thou lyest, for that same Elegie
                  
                     Is Mutos owne, his owne deere Poesie:
                  
                  VVhy tis his owne, and deare, for he did pay
                  Ten crownes for it, as I heard Roscius say.
                  
                     VVho would imagine yonder sober man,
                  That same deuout meale-mouth'd Precisean,
                  That cries good brother, kind sister, makes a duck,
                  After the Antique grace, can alwayes pluck
                  A sacred booke, out of his ciuill hose,
                  And at th'op'ning, and at our stomacks close
                  Sayes with a turn'd-vp eye a solemne grace
                  Of halfe an houre, then with his silken face
                  Smiles on the holy crue, And then doth cry
                  O manners! ô times of impurity!
                  VVith that depaints a church reformed state,
                  The which the female tongues magnificate:
                  Because that Platos odd opinion,
                  Of all things (common) hath strong motion
                  
                     In their weake minds. Who thinks that this good man
                  Is a vile, sober, damn'd, Polititian?
                  Not I, till with his baite of purity
                  He bit me sore in deepest vsury.
                  No Iew, no Turke, would vse a Christian
                  So inhumanely as this Puritan.
                  
                     Diomedes Iades were not so bestiall
                  As this same seeming-saint, vile Canniball.
                  Take heede ô world, take heede aduisedly
                  Of these same damned Anthropophagy.
                  I had rather be within a Harpies clawes
                  Then trust my selfe in their deuouring iawes.
                  Who all confusion to the world would bring
                  Vnder the forme of their new discipline.
                  
                     O I could say, Briareus hundred hands
                  Were not so ready to bring Ioue in bands
                  As these to set endles contentious strife
                  Betwixt Iehoua, and his sacred wife.
                  But see who's yonder, true Humility
                  The perfect image of faire Curtesie.
                  See, he doth daine to be in seruitude
                  Where he hath no promotions liuelihood.
                  Marke, he doth curtsie, and salutes a block,
                  Will seeme to wonder at a wethercock,
                  Trenchmore with Apes, play musick to an Owle,
                  Blesse his sweet honours running brasell bowle:
                  Cries (brauely broake) when that his Lordship mist,
                  And is of all the thurnged scaffold hist.
                  
                     O is not this a curteous minded man?
                  No foole, no, a damn'd Macheuelian.
                  Holds candle to the deuill for a while,
                  That he the better may the world beguile
                  That's fed with shows. He hopes thogh som repine,
                  VVhen sunne is set, the lesser starres will shine:
                  He is within a haughty malecontent,
                  Though he doe vse such humble blandishment.
                  But bold-fac'd Satyre, straine not ouer hie,
                  But laugh and chuck at meaner gullery.
                  In fayth yon is a well fac'd Gentleman,
                  See how he paceth like a Ciprian:
                  Faire Amber tresses of the fairest haire
                  That ere were waued by our London aire,
                  
                     Rich laced sute, all spruce, all neat in truth.
                  Ho Linceus! What's yonder brisk neat youth
                  Bout whom yon troupe of Gallants flocken so?
                  And now together to Brownes common goe?
                  Thou knowst I am sure, for thou canst cast thine eie
                  Through nine mud wals, or els odd Poets lie.
                  Tis loose legg'd Lais, that same common Drab,
                  For from good Tubro looke the mortall stab.
                  Ha ha, Nay then I'le neuer raile at those
                  That weare a codpis, thereby to disclose
                  VVhat sexe they are, since strumpets breeches vse,
                  And all mens eyes saue Linceus can abuse.
                  Nay steed of shadow, lay the substance out,
                  Or els faire Briscus I shall stand in doubt
                  
                     VVhat sex thou art, since such Hermaphrodites
                  Such Protean shadowes so delude our sights.
               
               
                  Looke, looke, with what a discontented grace
                  
                     Bruto the trauailer doth sadly pace
                  Long VVestminster, ô ciuill seeming shade,
                  Marke his sad colours, how demurely clad,
                  Staidnes it selfe, and Nestors grauity
                  Are but the shade of his ciuility.
                  And now he sighes. O thou corrupted age,
                  
                  Which slight regard'st men of sound carriage,
                  Vertue, knowledge, flie to heauen againe
                  Daine not mong these vngratefull sots remaine.
                  Well, some tongs I know, some Countries I haue seene
                  And yet these oily Snailes respectles beene
                  
                     
                     Of my good parts. O worthles puffie slaue!
                  Did'st thou to Venis goe oft els to haue?
                  But buy a Lute and vse a Currezan?
                  And there to liue like a Cyllenian?
                  And now frō thence what hether do'st thou bring?
                  But surpheulings, new paints and poysonings?
                  
                     Aretines pictures, some strange Luxury?
                  And new found vse of Venis venery?
                  VVhat art thou but black clothes? Say Bruto say
                  Art any thing but onely say array?
                  Which I am sure is all thou brought'st from France,
                  Saue Naples poxe, and French-mens dalliance.
                  From haughty Spayne, what brought'st thou else beside,
                  But lofty lookes, and their Lucifrian pride?
                  
                     From Belgia what? but theyr deepe bezeling,
                  Their boote-carouse, and theyr Beere-buttering.
                  Well, then exclaime not on our age good man,
                  But hence poluted Neopolitan.
               
               
                  Now Satyre cease to rub our gauled skinnes,
                  And to vnmaske the worlds detested sinnes.
                  Thou shalt as soone draw Nilus riuer dry,
                  As clense the world from foule impietie.
               
            
            
               
               SATYRE. 3. Quedam et sunt, et videntur.
               
                  NOw grim Reprofe, swel in my rough-heu'd rime.
                  That thou maist vexe the guilty of our time.
                  Yon is a youth, whom how can I ore'slip,
                  Since he so iumpe doth in my mashes hit?
                  He hath been longer in preparing him
                  Then Terence wench, and now behold he's seene.
                  Now after two yeeres fast and earnest prayer,
                  The fashion change not, (least he should dispaire
                  Of euer hoording vp more faire gay clothes)
                  Behold at length in London streets he showes.
                  His ruffe did eate more time in neatest setting
                  Then Woodstocks worke in painfull perfecting.
                  
                     It hath more doubles farre, then Aiax shield
                  When he gainst Troy did furious battell weild.
                  Nay he doth weare an Embleme bout his necke.
                  For vnder that fayre Russe so sprucely set
                  Appeares a fall, a falling-band forsooth.
                  O dapper, rare, compleat, sweet nittie youth!
                  
                     Ie'u Maria! How his clothes appeare
                  Crost, and recrost with lace, sure for some feare,
                  Least that some spirit with a tippet Mace
                  Should with a gastly show affright his face.
                  His hat, himselfe, small crowne & huge great brim,
                  Faire outward show, and little wit within.
                  And all the band with feathers he doth fill,
                  Which is a signe of a fantasticke still,
                  
                     As sure, as (some doe tell me) euermore
                  A Goate doth stand before a brothell dore.
                  His clothes perfum'd, his fustie mouth is ayred,
                  His chinne new swept, his very cheekes are glazed.
                  But ho, what Ganimede is that doth grace
                  The gallants heeles. One, who for two daies space
                  
                  
                     Is closely hyred. Now who dares not call
                  This Aesops crow, fond, mad, fantasticall.
                  Why so he is, his clothes doe sympathize,
                  And with his inward spirit humorize.
                  An open Asse, that is not yet so wise
                  As his derided fondnes to disguise.
                  Why thou art Bedlam mad, starke lunaticke,
                  And glori'st to be counted a fantastick,
                  
                     Thou neyther art, nor yet will seeme to be
                  Heire to some vertuous praised qualitie.
                  O frantick men! that thinke all villanie
                  The compleate honors of Nobilitie.
                  Whē some damn'd vice, som strange mishapen sute,
                  Makes youths esteeme themselues in hie repute.
                  O age ! in which our gallants boast to be
                  Slaues vnto riot, and lewd luxury!
                  Nay, when they blush, and thinke an honest act
                  Dooth their supposed vertues maculate!
                  Bedlame, Frenzie, Madnes, Lunacie,
                  I challenge all your moody Empery
                  Once to produce a more distracted man
                  Then is inamorato Lucian.
                  
                  
                     For when my eares receau'd a fearefull sound
                  That he was sicke, I went, and there I found
                  Him layd of loue, and newly brought to bed
                  Of monstrous folly, and a franticke head.
                  His chamber hang'd about with Elegies,
                  With sad complaints of his loues miseries:
                  His windowes strow'd with Sonnets, and the glasse
                  Drawne full of loue-knots. I approcht the Asse,
                  And straight he weepes, and sighes some sonnet out
                  To his faire loue. And then he goes about
                  For to perfume her rare perfection
                  With some sweet-smelling pinck Epitheton.
                  Then with a melting looke he writhes his head,
                  And straight in passion riseth in his bed;
                  
                     And hauing kist his hand, stroke vp his haire,
                  Made a French conge, cryes. O cruell feare
                  
                  To the antique Bed-post. I laught a maine
                  That down my cheeks the mirthful drops did raine.
                  Well he's no Ianus, but substantiall,
                  In show, and essence a good naturall.
                  When as thou hear'st me aske spruce Duceus
                  
                  Frō whence he comes. And hee straight answers vs,
                  From Lady Lilla. And is going straight
                  To the Countesse of ( ) for she doth waite
                  His comming. And will surely send her Coach,
                  Vnlesse he make the speedier approch.
                  Art not thou ready for to breake thy spleene
                  At laughing at the fondnes thou hast seene
                  
                     In this vaine-glorious foole? When thou dost know
                  He neuer durst vnto these Ladies show
                  His pippin face. VVell, he's no accident,
                  But reall, reall, shamelesse, impudent.
                  And yet he boasts, and wonders that each man
                  Can call him by his name, sweet Ducean:
                  
                  And is right proude that thus his name is knowne.
                  I, Duceus, I, thy name is too farre blowne.
                  The world too much, thy selfe too little know'st
                  Thy priuate selfe. Why then should Duceus boast?
                  But humble Satyre, wilt thou daine display
                  These open naggs, which purblind eyes bewray?
                  Come, come, and snarle more darke at secrete sin,
                  vvhich in such Laborinths enwrapped bin,
                  
                     That Ariadne I must craue thy ayde
                  To helpe me finde where this soule monster's layd,
                  Then will I driue the Minotaure from vs,
                  And seeme to be a second Theseus.
                  
               
            
            
               
               REACTIO.
               
                  NOVV doth Ramnusia Adrastian,
                  
                  Daughter of Night, and of the Ocean
                  Prouoke my pen. VVhat cold Saturnian
                  
                  Can hold, and heare such vile detraction?
                  Yee Pines of Ida, shake your fayre growne height,
                  For Ioue at first dash will with thunder fight.
                  Yee Cedars bend, fore lightning you dismay,
                  Yee Lyons tremble, for an Asse doth bray.
                  VVho cannot raile? vvhat dog but dare to barke
                  Gainst Phaebes brightnes in the silent darke?
                  vvhat stinking Scauenger (if so he will
                  Though streets be fayre,) but may right easily fill,
                  His dungy tumbrel? sweep, pare, wash, make cleane,
                  Yet from your fairnes he some durt can gleane.
                  The windie-chollicke striu'd to haue some vent,
                  And now tis flowne, and now his rage is spent.
                  
                     So haue I seene the fuming waues to fret,
                  And in the end, naught but white soame beget.
                  So haue I seene the sullen clowdes to cry,
                  And weepe for anger that the earth was dry
                  After theyr spight, that all the haile-shot drops
                  Could neuer pierce the christall water tops,
                  And neuer yet could worke her more disgrace
                  But onely bubble quiet Thetis face.
                  Vaine enuious detractor from the good
                  vvhat Cynicke spirit rageth in thy blood?
                  Cannot a poore mistaken title scape
                  But thou must that into thy Tumbrell scrape?
                  Cannot some lewd, immodest beastlines
                  Lurke, and lie hid in iust forgetfulnes,
                  But Grillus subtile-smelling swinish snout
                  Must sent, and grunt, and needes will finde it out?
                  
                     Come daunce yee stumbling Satyres by his side
                  If he lift once the Syon Muse deride.
                  Ye Granta's white Nymphs, come & with you bring
                  Some sillabub, whilst he doth sweetly sing
                  Gainst Peters teares, and Maries mouing moane,
                  And like a fierce enraged Boare doth foame
                  At sacred Sonnets. O daring hardiment!
                  At Bartas sweet Semaines, raile impudent
                  At Hopkins, Sternhold, and the Scottish King,
                  At all Translators that doe striue to bring
                  That stranger language to our vulgar tongue,
                  Spett in thy poyson theyr faire acts among.
                  Ding them all downe from faire Ierusalem,
                  And mew them vp in thy deserued Bedlem.
                  Shall Painims honor, their vile falsed gods
                  With sprightly wits? and shall not we by ods
                  
                     Farre, farre, more striue with wits best quintessence
                  To adore that sacred euer-liuing Essence?
                  Hath not strong reason moou'd the Legists mind,
                  To say the fayrest of all Natures kinde
                  The Prince by his prerogatiue may claime?
                  Why may not then our soules without thy blame,
                  (vvhich is the best thing, that our God did frame)
                  Deuote the best part to his sacred Name?
                  And with due reuerence and deuotion
                  Honor his Name with our inuention?
                  No, Poesie not fit for such an action,
                  It is defild with superstition:
                  It honord Baule, therefore polute, polute,
                  Vnfit for such a sacred institute.
                  So haue I heard an Heritick maintaine
                  The Church vnholy, where Iehouas Name
                  
                     Is now ador'd: because he surely knowes
                  Some-times it was defil'd with Popish showes.
                  The Bells profane, and not to be endur'd,
                  Because to Popish rites they were inur'd.
                  Pure madnes peace, cease to be insolent,
                  And be not outward sober, inlye impudent.
                  Fie inconsiderate, it greeueth me
                  An Academick should so senceles be.
                  Fond Censurer! Why should those mirrors seeme
                  So vile to thee? vvhich better iudgements deeme
                  Exquisite then, and in our polish'd times.
                  May, run for sencefull tollerable lines.
                  What, not mediocria firma from thy spight?
                  But must thy enuious hungry fangs needs light
                  On Magistrates mirrour? must thou needs detract
                  And striue to worke his antient honors wrack?
                  
                     What, shall not Rosamond, or Gaueston,
                  
                  Ope their sweet lips without detraction?
                  But must our moderne Critticks enuious eye
                  Seeme thus to quote some grosse deformity?
                  Where Art, not error shineth in their stile,
                  But error and no Art doth thee beguile.
                  For tell me Crittick, is not Fiction
                  
                  The soule of Poesies inuention?
                  Is't not the forme? the spirit? and the essence?
                  The life? and the essentiall difference?
                  Which omni, semper, soli, doth agree
                  To heauenly discended Poesie?
                  Thy wit God comfort mad Chirurgion
                  What, make so dangerous an Incision?
                  At first dash whip away the instrument
                  Of Poets Procreation? fie ignorant!
                  
                     When as the soule, and vitall blood doth rest
                  And hath in Fiction onely interest?
                  What Satyre sucke the soule from Poesie
                  And leaue him spritles? ô impiety!
                  Would euer any erudite Pedant
                  
                  Seeme in his artles lines so insolent?
                  But thus it is when pitty Priscians.
                  VVill needs step vp to be Censorians.
                  When once they can in true skan'd verses frame
                  
                     A braue Encomium of good Vertues name.
                  
                  Why thus it is, when Mimick Apes will striue
                  vvith Iron wedge the trunks of Oakes to riue.
                  But see, his spirit of detraction
                  Must nible at a glorious action.
                  
                     Euge! some gallant spirit, some resolued blood
                  vvill hazard all to worke his Countries good
                  
                     And to enrich his soule, and raise his name
                  vvill boldly saile vnto the rich Guiane.
                  
                  What then? must straight some shameles Satyrist
                  vvith odious and opprobrius termes insist
                  To blast so high resolu'd intention
                  vvith a malignant vile detraction?
                  So haue I seene a curre dogge in the streete
                  Pisse gainst the fairest posts he still could meete.
                  So haue I seene the march wind striue to fade
                  The fairest hewe that Art, or Nature made.
                  So Enuy still doth barke at clearest shine
                  And striues to staine heroyick acts, deuine.
                  vvell, I haue cast thy water, and I see
                  Th'art falne to wits extreamest pouerty,
                  Sure in Consumption of the spritely part.
                  Goe vse some Cordiall for to cheere thy hart:
                  
                     Or els I feare that I one day shall see
                  Thee fall, into some dangerous Litargie.
                  But come fond Bragart, crowne thy browes with Bay
                  Intrance thy selfe in thy sweet extasie.
                  Come, manumit thy plumie pinion,
                  And scower the sword of Eluish champion,
                  Or els vouchsafe to breathe in wax-bound quill,
                  And daine our longing eares with musick fill:
                  Or let vs see thee some such stanzaes frame
                  That thou maist raise thy vile inglorious name.
                  Sommon the Nymphs and Driades to bring
                  Some rare inuention, whilst thou doost sing
                  So sweet, that thou maist shoulder from aboue
                  
                  The Eagle from the staires of freendly Ioue:
                  
                  And leade sad Pluto Captiue with thy song,
                  Gracing thy selfe, that art obscur'd so long.
                  
                     Come somewhat say (but hang me when tis done)
                  Worthy of brasse, and hoary marble stone;
                  Speake yee attentiue Swaines that heard him neuer
                  Will not his Pastorals indure for euer?
                  Speake yee that neuer heard him ought but raile
                  Doe not his Poems beare a glorious faile?
                  Hath not he strongly iustled from aboue
                  The Eagle from the staires of friendly Ioue?
                  
                  May be, may be, tut tis his modesty,
                  
                     He could if that he would, nay would if could I see.
                  Who cannot raile? and with a blasting breath
                  Scorch euen the whitest Lillies of the earrh
                  Who cannot stumble in a stuttering stile?
                  And shallow heads with seeming shades beguile?
                  Cease, cease, at length to be maleuolent,
                  To fairest bloomes of Vertues eminent.
                  
                     Striue not to soile the freshest hewes on earth
                  With thy malitious and vpbraiding breath.
                  
                     Ennie, let Pines of Ida rest alone,
                  For they will growe spight of thy thunder stone,
                  Striue not to nible in their swelling graine
                  With toothles gums of thy detracting braine:
                  Eate not thy dam, but laugh and sport with me
                  At strangers follies with a merry glee.
                  Lets not maligne our kin. Then Satyrist
                  I doe salute thee with an open fist.
               
            
            
               
               SATYRE. 4 Parua magna, magna nulla.
               
                  AMbitious Gorgons, wide-mouth'd Lamians,
                  
                  Shape-changing Proteans, damn'd Briareans,
                  
                  Is Minos dead? is Radamanth a sleepe?
                  That yee thus dare vnto Ioues Pallace creepe?
                  vvhat, hath Ramnusia spent her knotted whip?
                  That yee dare striue on Hebes cup to sip?
                  Yet know Apolloes quiuer is not spent
                  But can abate your daring hardiment.
                  
                     Python is slaine, yet his accursed race,
                  Dare looke deuine Astrea in the face:
                  
                     Chaos returne, and with confusion
                  Inuolue the world with strange disunion:
                  
                     For Pluto sits in that adored chaire
                  vvhich doth belong vnto Mineruas heire.
                  O Hecatombe!Hue vsque Xylinum. ô Catastrophe!
                  From Mydas pompe, to Irus beggery.
                  
                     Promethius, who celestiall fier
                  Did steale from heauen, therewith to inspire
                  Our earthly bodies with a sence-full mind,
                  vvhereby we might the depth of Nature find,
                  Is ding'd to hell, and vulture eates his hart
                  vvhich did such deepe Philosophy impart
                  To mortall men. vvhen theeuing Mercury
                  
                  That euen in his new borne infancy
                  Stole faire Apollos quiuer, and Ioues mace,
                  And would haue filch'd the lightning frō his place,
                  But that he feard'd he should haue burnt his wing
                  And sing'd his downy feathers new come spring;
                  
                     He that in gastly shade of night doth leads
                  Our soules, vnto the empire of the dead.
                  When he that better doth deserue a rope
                  Is a faire planet in our Horoscope.
                  And now hath Caduceus in his hand
                  Of life and death that hath the sole command.
                  Thus petty thefts are payed, and soundly whipt,
                  But greater crimes are slightly ouerslipt:
                  Nay he's a God that can doe villany
                  vvith a good grace, and glib facility.
                  The harmles hunter, with a ventrous eye
                  When vnawares he did Diana spie,
                  Nak'd in the fountaine he became straightway
                  Vnto his greedy hounds a wished pray,
                  
                     His owne delights taking away his breath,
                  And all vngratefull forc'd his fatall death.
                  (And euer since Hounds eate their Maisters cleane,
                  For so Diana curst them in the streame.)
                  When strong backt Hercules in one poore night
                  With great, great ease, and wondrous delight
                  In strength of lust and Venus surquedry
                  Rob'd fifty vvenches of virginity.
                  Farre more then lusty Laurence. Yet poore soule
                  He with Acteon drinks of Nemis bole,
                  When Hercules lewd act, is registred,
                  And for his fruitfull labour Deified.
                  And had a place in heauen him assigned
                  When he the world, vnto the world resigned.
                  
                     Thus little scapes are deepely punished,
                  But mighty villanes are for Gods adored.
                  
                     Ioue brought his sister to a nuptiall bed,
                  And hath an Hebe, and a Ganemede,
                  
                  A Leda, and a thousand more beside,
                  His chast Alcmena, and his sister bride:
                  Who fore his face was odiously defil'd
                  And by Ixion grosely got with child.
                  This thunderer, that right vertuously
                  Thrust forth his father from his empery
                  Is now the great Monarko of the earth,
                  Whose awfull nod, whose all commaunding breath
                  Shakes Europs ground-worke. And his title makes Rey
                           •…
                         mi
                           •…
                         De
                           •…
                         que
                  
                  As dread a noyse, as when a Canon shakes
                  
                     The subtile ayre. Thus hell-bred villany
                  Is still rewarded with high dignity.
                  VVhen Sisyphus that did but once reueale
                  That this incestious villane had to deale
                  In Ile Phliunte with Egina faire,
                  Is damn'd to hell, in endles black dispaire
                  Euer to reare his tumbling stone vpright
                  Vpon the steepy mountaines lofty height.
                  His stone will neuer now get greenish mosse
                  Since he hath thus encur'd so great a losse
                  As Ioues high fauour. But it needs must be
                  vvhilst Ioues doth rule, and sway the empery
                  And poore Astrea's sled into an Ile
                  And liues a poore and banished exile:
                  
                     And there pen'd vp, sighs in her sad lament,
                  vvearing away in pining languishment.
                  If that Sylenus Asse doe chaunce to bray,
                  And so the Satyres lewdnes doth bewray,
                  Let him for euer be a sacrifice,
                  Prick, spurre, beate, loade, for euer tyranise
                  Ouer the foole. But let some Cerberus
                  
                  Keepe back the wife of sweet tongu'd Orpheus,
                  
                  
                     Gnato applaudes the Hound. Let that same child
                  Of Night, and Sleepe, (which hath the world defil'd
                  vvith odious railing) barke gainst all the work
                  Of all the Gods, and find some error lurke
                  In all the graces. Let his lauer lip
                  Speake in reproch of Natures workmanship,
                  
                     Let him vpbraid faire Venus if he list
                  For her short heele. Let him with rage insist
                  To snarle at Vulcans man, because he was
                  Not made with windowes of transparant glas
                  That all might see the passions of his mind.
                  Let his all-blasting tongue great errors find
                  In Pallas house, because if next should burne
                  It could not from the sodaine perill turne.
                  Let him vpbraide great Ioue with luxury
                  Condemne the Heauens Queene of ielousie.
                  Yet this same Stygius Momus must be praysed
                  And to some Godhead at the least be raised.
                  But if poore Orpheus sing melodiously,
                  And striue with musicks sweetest symphonie
                  
                     To praise the Gods, and vnaduisedly
                  Doe but ore-slip one drunken Deitie,
                  Forthwith the bouzing Bacchus out doth send
                  His furious Bacchides, to be reueng'd.
                  And straight they teare the sweet Musition,
                  And leaue him to the dogs deuision.
                  
                     Hebrus, beare witnes of their crueltie,
                  For thou did'st view poore Orpheus tragedie.
                  Thus slight neglects are deepest villanie,
                  But blasting mouthes deserue a deitie.
                  Since Gallus slept, when he was set to watch
                  Least Sol or Vulcan should Mauortius catch
                  In vsing Venus: since the boy did nap,
                  Whereby bright Phoebus did great Mars intrap.
                  
                     Poore Gallus now, (whilom to Mars so deere)
                  Is turned to a crowing Chaunteclere;
                  And euer since, sore that the sunne doth shine,
                  (Least) Phoebus should with his all-peircing eyne
                  Disery some Vulcan,) he doth crow full shrill,
                  That all the ayre with Ecchoes he doth fill.
                  Whilst Mars, though all the Gods doe see his sin,
                  And know in what lewd vice he lieuth in,
                  Yet is adored still, and magnified,
                  And with all honors duly worshipped.
                  
                     Fi
                           ••
                        e! small faults to mountaines straight are raised,
                  Slight scapes are whipt, but damned deeds are praised.
                  Fie, fie, I am deceiued all thys while,
                  A mist of errors doth my sence beguile;
                  
                     I haue beene long of all my wits bereauen,
                  Heauen for hell taking, taking hell for heauen;
                  Vertue for vice, and vice for vertue still,
                  Sower for sweet, and good for passing ill.
                  If not? would vice and odious villanie
                  Be still rewarded with high dignity?
                  Would damned Iouians, be of all men praised,
                  And with high honors vnto heauen raised?
                  Tis so, tis so; Riot, and Luxurie
                  Are vertuous, meritorious chastitie:
                  That which I thought to be damn'd hel-borne pride
                  Is humble modestie, and naught beside;
                  That which I deemed Bacchus surquedry,
                  Is graue, and stained, ciuill, Sobrietie.
                  
                  
                     O then thrice holy age, thrice sacred men!
                  Mong whom no vice a Satyre can discerne,
                  Since Lust, is turned into Chastitie,
                  
                  And Riot, vnto sad Sobrietie.
                  
                  Nothing but goodnes raigneth in our age,
                  And vertues all are ioyn'd in marriage.
                  Heere is no dwelling for Impietie,
                  No habitation for base Villanie.
                  Heere are no subiects for Reproofes sharpe vaine,
                  Then hence rude Satyre, make away amaine;
                  And seeke a seate where more Impuritie
                  Doth lye and lurke in still securitie.
                  Now doth my Satyre stagger in a doubt,
                  Whether to cease, or els to write it out.
                  
                     The subiect is too sharpe for my dull quill.
                  Some sonne of Maya show thy riper skill.
                  For I'le goe turne my tub against the sunne,
                  And wistly marke how higher Plannets runne,
                  Contemplating their hidden motion.
                  Then on some Latmos with Endimion,
                  
                  I'le slumber out my time in discontent,
                  And neuer wake to be maleuolent,
                  A beedle to the worlds impuritie;
                  But euer sleepe in still securitie.
                  If thys displease the worlds wrong-iudging sight,
                  It glads my soule, and in some better spright
                  I'le write againe. But if that this doe please,
                  Hence, hence, Satyrick Muse, take endlesse ease.
                  
                     Hush now yee Band-doggs, barke no more at me,
                  But let me slide away in secrecie.
               
               Epictetus
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            Faults escaped.
            PAge 33, line 8, for Asse talke of, read Asse take of. page 34. for Pricks by, read Pricks him by. page 48 li. 2. for oft, read ought. & line 12. for say read sad. Also in page 46. l. 7. & 8. read thus. Tis loose legd Lais, that same common Drab, For whom good Tubrio tooke the mortall stab.
            
         
         
            AT LONDON Printed by Iames Roberts. 1598
         
      
   