
      
         
            
            
            A True report of the taking of Marſeilles by the fauourers of the league togither with the reſcue therof by the kings faithful ſubiects, Wherin may be ſeene the woonderfull prouidence of Almighty God in the deliuerie of them that truſt in him from the trecherous and bloudie deuiſes of their aduerſaries.
            
            Lately tranſlated out of French.
            AT LONDON, Printed by Iohn Windet for Edward Aggas.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The true report of ſuch occurrences as fell out at Marſeiles the 8.9.10. dayes of Aprill. Alſo an aduertiſement concerning the ſame.
            
               IF it be lawfull for any man to peruert al order of Iuſtice & lawe, then muſt it neceſſarily bee lawefull in atchiuing a kingdome, ſayd he who ouerthrewe the eſtate of Rome, thereby euidently giuing to vnderſtande that ſuch as can brooke no peace, neyther be content with their owne, do highly eſtéeme the violation of laws and contempt of Iuſtice, alſo that there is nothing ſo holy or ſacred but they will profane, neyther any wickedneſſe or trecherie ſo great but they will commit, for the atteyning to ſoueraignitie, and after the atteyning thereof, for the mainteynaunce of the ſame, whereof him ſelfe ſoone after ſhewed the experience, as had done alſo Silla and Marius before: for ambition and auarice are paſſions and euen principall grounds of all miſchiefe, procuring the tranſformation of men into all formes and coulours, euen as feare forceth the Chameleon,
               
whereby the infernall furies doe driue them to ſpare neither parents nor friends, no not God himſelfe, whoſe name they do abuſe to the end with greater facilitie to deceiue, ſo as a man would ſuppoſe that being euen conſumed with zeale to Gods houſe they were Helies which ſéeke nothing but reformatiō in religion or that touched with the miſeries of the people they be Moſes who endeuoreth only to deliuer them from this oppreſſion: But entring into déeper conſideration of their dealings, we finde thē to be rather Berchomanes or Noyſes of Candy as the ſucceſſe doe ſhewe, though ouer late for the weale of thoſe who with Eſopes horſe hauing admitted the ſnaffle and ſadle, muſt of force paſſe on in the carrier. The ſhéep ſaith Archidamus, euer ſingeth one ſong, but the ambitious perſon neuer leaueth altering of tunes vntill hee hath atchiued his purpoſe. Cratenus and Antigonas proclaimed nothing but libertie to the Athenians, but hauing once obtained the maſtrie, they fell into an other phraſe. Thoſe men that trouble this eſtate doe proclaime onely zeale to Catholike Religion, & affection to the reformation of the eſtate and reliefe of the people, yea if we will beléeue them, thoſe are the only cauſes of their taking of armes: but if we looke into their actions

not onely paſſed but alſo preſent, wee ſhall finde that vnder this ſo faire a pretence, they ſéeke with Abſalon to ſteale away the peoples heartes, to the ende ſo to vſurpe the eſtate, euen alreadie the moſt incredulous doe beginne to ſmell it out, yea and to feele it to their great damage, verie well perceiuing that the reunion which they ſpeake of, is not ment of the Proteſtants to Romiſh Religion, but of their owne eſtate to the houſe of Lorrain whereto they haue long ſought to perſwade the world yt it doth appertaine: that it is not ye reformation, but the vſurpation of the Realme: neither the reliefe but oppreſſion of the communalty, and therfore do with one accord ſéeing their goods embeſelled, their houſes burned, their wiues and daughters defloured, and ſo many murders committed, exclaime of them, declaring that although their pretenſes were true, yet were the medecine more daungerous and intollerable than the diſeaſe, and that they are craftie Phiſitions that drawe ſo much bloode, and do ſo extremely purge their patients, to the end the ſame neuer recouering, they may become their heires. But leaſt any ſhoulde ſuppoſe that I ſpeake all this without cauſe, or of any particular paſſion, I will prooue it by that which paſſed

at Marſeiles this preſent moneth of Aprill, euen in ſuch manner as an honourable perſon hath ſet it down in a letter to a brother of his: as followeth.
            Brother I writ vnto you at large eyght daies ago, ſince which time we haue had wonderful occurences in this towne of Marſeiles, whereof although you may haue heard before the receipt of theſe preſēts, yet I thought good to write vnto you the perticularities & trueth of al, to the end you may with vs praiſe God for the fauour he hath ſhewed vs. Knowe you therefore that the firſt Conſull of this towne, being gone to the Court about two moneths ſince where he yet remaineth, the ſecond Conſull named Lewes de la Motte de Aries tooke the gouernement vppon him in the abſence of the Lord great Prior, which Conſull hearing of the late troubles of this realme, and in this countrey proſecuted by the Lorde of Vins, he caſt with himſelf how to prepare a way wherby he might vſurpe the ſoueraignitie of Marſeiles and to that entent hee ſecretly practiſed the ſayde Lorde of Vins to ioyne with him, as aſſuring himſelfe that the pretence of warre and league againſt the contemners of Romiſh religion, whereto theſe people are wonderfully addicted, would cauſe them to like of whatſoeuer

his attemptes. And for the atcheiuing of his purpoſe he alſo practiſed two of the captaines of this towne, as good as himſelfe, who eaſily condiſcended to his aduiſe, eſpecially the one called Captaine Boniface, who conditioned with him that firſt hee ſhould make away his brother named Generall Boniface, a man accōpted worth threeſcore thouſand Crownes: further, for the better compaſſing of his enterpriſe he purpoſed to ſeaſe vppon the foretreſſe called Our ladie of the garde before he did innouate any other matter, and therefore the 8. of this preſent moneth hee went to the ſayde foretreſſe vnder coulour of ſéeing whether it were ſufficiently fortefied, the captaine thereof, although he held nothing of the towne, yet ſéeing it was the Conſull, permitted him and thrée more to come in: he beeing entered tooke the ſayd Captaine by the coller offering the dagger to his throat, in caſe he once ſtirred againſt him, and ſo cauſed the gate to be opened and brought in ſouldiers to his behoofe, neyther would he ſuffer the ſayde Captaine to go downe into the towne leſt the people ſhould haue notiſe of his procéedinges. Thus finding himſelfe maiſter of the ſaide foretreſſe he purpoſed the next night to put his practiſe in execution, and to the ende not to faile of his promiſe

to the ſaid Boniface, he cauſed the aforeſaid general Boniface (who the ſame morning was riding to Aix to the Lord great Prior) to ſtay at the gate and ſo procured him to tarrie vntil the next morning vnder pretence of ſending by him a letter of very great importance for the kings ſeruice, to the ſaide Lorde great Prior, The poore generall not ſuſpecting anie harme, & the rather becauſe he had lately Chriſtened his child, did willingly alight and ſtaie his iourney vntill the next day, but before the morning trauayled an other way then hée thought for: for the ſame euening about eight of the clocke, the ſaid Conſul togither with 4. of his confederates came and knocked at the ſaid generals gate, demaunding to ſpeak with his goſſip, who immediatly came downe to ye gate, where after vſual ſalutations he deliuered him the ſaid ſuppoſed letter to the L. great Prior, ſaying to them that were with him do your office, which was the watch word, and ſo preſently they fell vppon the ſaid generall and gaue him foure or fiue blowes with their daggers, who being ſo wounded got vp into ye haule where preſently he fel downe dead, this done his ſaid brother not being far off entred the houſe méerely, and as enheritour began to rifle and ſeaſe vppon what he liſt, while the

Conſul for his part was not idle, for ſtraight-way with a troupe of 25. Hargabuziers he rapped at the Proteſtants doores, and all that hee founde he impriſoned in Saint Iohns Tower, that done with all expedition hée wrote a letter to the Lorde of Vins, the tenure whereof enſueth.
            
               
                  
                     My Lord theſe preſents may be to aſſure you that without diſsimulation the towne of Marſeiles hath openly embraced the partie of God and the eſtate to the ende to make full profeſsion of the Catholike faith, where euery one is reſolued with whatſoeuer their meanes, to cleaue to the league of the Chriſtian and Catholike Princes, alſo to you, whō to the ſame effect wee beſeech to come vnto vs, and if you take the way of Aix, you may come to Porneux or Fumeau, but if you take any other, take the way to S. Iaquaries or Gemenes, for we doe ſend to all the villages to aſsiſt you with victuals aid and fauor, and in caſe they do otherwiſe we wil rote them out, yea if neede be, we will bring the Canon denouncing your enimies to be ours, and thoſe to be our friends that be yours, or ſhall aſsiſt you, taking you into our protection, like as alſo we commit our ſelues to the protectiō of al Chriſtian & Catholike princes & to yours.
                     
This daye was the fort of Our ladie of the garde taken and ſubdued vnto your and our deuotion: Thus beſeeching God the King of Kinges to haue you in his holy keeping:
                  
                     From Marſeiles this eight of Aprill.
                     
                     Your affectionate friendes and ſeruantes:

                           Nicolas Roque,
                           Conſul de Aries, 
                           Conſul Gorgone, 
                           Captaine Antonye Cornich, 
                           Captaine Charles of Caſane,
                           Captaine Boniface,
                           Captaine Taron, 
                           Cap. Tanſe.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            THe next morning he deliuered two proteſtantes to the people to be murdered whom the children dragged vp and downe the towne while the honeſter perſons remained ſhut vp in their houſes, aſwel to eſchewe the viewe of ſuch cruelties, as for feare leaſt ſuch Catholickes as had any thing to loſe, might haue the like entertainment, beſides their doubt ye the Lord of Vins had alreadie brought his power into the towne, & their opinion that whatſoeuer this Conſull had done, was without anie commaundement from the king: for euen his familier friendes before knewe not of it, thus he raigned al that day and the next night. The next day the people knowing that the Lord of Vins his power was not yet entred the towne

tooke heart & together with the chiefeſt among them determined to talke with the conſul, & to enquire by whoſe authoritie & cōmandement he wrought theſe broyles: others began to report throughout the towne yt the Conſull did al of his owne head, in purpoſe to bring in the Lord of Vins & to make him maſter of ye town, ſo that the people, not vſed to ſuch ſubiection, & minding to maintain their liberty, began to quaile in that good opinion which before they had conceiued of the Conſull, which he perceiued or at the leaſt greatly feared, & therefore for a remedy anſwered ſuch as demaunded the reaſon of his doinges, that it was becauſe hee had notice of ſome intelligence which the Proteſtants had practiſed in the towne, for ye preuenting whereof, he had procéeded to the ſhutting of them vp in S Ihons tower, which hee could not ſo well performe, but yt the cōmons had gottē thoſe yt were ſlaine out of his hands: Furthermore, that he thought good there ſhuld be after dinner a méeting of the moſt honorable in ye towne houſe, there to determine therof, alſo that the ſame ſhould be generall & ſo it was at the laſt concluded. Howbeit ſéeing the people begin to quaile, to the ende ſtil to fleſh them on he deliuered them an other priſoner whom he procured to be ſlaine and dragged all

about the towne, therby wéening to encorage the people to proſecute their cruelties, and deſired them ſtil to continue in their affection to the Catholike faith, hauing before made proclamation that all men ſhould weare croſſes in their hats: whē he perceiued that euery one reſolued to appeare at the ſaid aſſemblie, he & his confederates hoped ye ſame to be the readie way to become the ſtrongeſt, and thereuppon concluded among themſelues to cut the throts of all that came, & to that purpoſe to place 60. Harquebuziers in ye town houſe, alſo to ſtrenthen the bodie of the gard yt was beneath. The heads of famelies not fearing any ſuch matter went boldly to the towne houſe, the whole aſſembly conſiſting at the leaſt of 500. perſons al in one haule eaſie to haue ben encloſed & made away. The Conſul oftentimes ran in & out as one vncertain what to do, but in the end reſolued to propound to the whole aſſēbly his iuſtificatiō, wherupon by their coūtenances gathering yt they miſliked his propoſitiō he thought it expedient to go forth & then to murther thē al, howbeit god, as it may be ſaid, not permitting the execution of ſuch crueltie, ſo alienated the ſences and tooke away the wits of all the aſſembly that in liew of reprouing his doings they made no aunſwere to his motion, as ſéeming

to them that he had reaſon in all that he had done, and ſo they brake vp and departed wtout other reſolution, neuertheles being out of ye houſe, gathering their wits togither, they began to feare the comming of ye Lord of Vins and therefore reſolued among themſelues at night to ioyne with the watch, notwithſtanding they had no ſuch cōmandemēt, & ſo to become the ſtronger: on the otherſide ye ſaid Conſul knowing yt the Lord of Vins could not that night bring in his power, & fearing to bée ouer reached commanded the M. of the great Priors galley of Tholouze to prepare the ſaid galley, purpoſing if matters went amiſſe, togither with his aſſociats to enter ye ſaid galley & ſo to depart: he alſo ſent to ye 
               Duke of Florēce 4. galeys which as yt voice went ſtaied in ye Iles to conduct the Duke of Neuers to Luke, willing them to ſend him 200. ſouldiers for the kings ſeruice, & augmentation of ye Cath. faith, which they granted him in cōſideration of his trauel taken ye day before againſt the proteſtāts, but god ſo quickned ye minds of good men yt they taking armes diſplaced ye body of the garde & ſet others in ye roome, & yet wtout violence, ſo to ſée what ye captains of ye town would do of whom two wer partakers in ye cōſpiracy, but they ſeing ſo many new mē which wold not obey thē
               
began to quaile, as did alſo the Conſul aforeſaid, becauſe whereſoeuer they became they ſtill found ſuch as would reſiſt them, which cauſed the ſaid Conſul to get into the watch of Canaillon turning & toſſing all night like a moth about a candle, and ſo comming within the view of the Tower of S. Iohn he drew thitherward and ſo to the chaine where he purpoſed to receiue the 200. Harquebuzieres which ye forenamed 4. Gallies of Florence brought thither at the break of day, but in that place he found fiue hundred harquebuziers, whom whē he beheld he purpoſed to embarke himſelf in a Squiffe & ſo to haue fled to the ſaid Gallies, but he was by them ſtayed, and word ſent to the gard of the Lodge of his being at S. Iohns, wherupon thither reſorted a band of mē, who demanded of him by whoſe authoritie he committed theſe murders, but he ſéeing himſelfe thus caſt away could make no anſwere and ſo was conueyed to the towne houſe, where at ye ſame inſtant euen before his face they choſe 24. of the chief men of the town to order their affaires togither with ye yongeſt Conſul who was but an idiot, and they ſo choſen did immediatly appoint new Captaines, who had quickly aſſembled fiue or ſix thouſand Harquebuziers in the towne, and the ſame once armed

and the town aſſured to the king they preſently diſpatched a meſſenger to the Lorde great Prior then lying at Aix very ſorowfull for the loſſe of a town of ſuch importance, whom they deſired ſpéedely to come to them, and in the meane time they ſeazed vppon the fort of our Lady of the gard, which was ſoone yealded when they that kéept it perceiued the towne to be loſt, & ſo Claud. Boniface was alſo brought to the towne houſe, the reſt ſaued themſelues. The Conſul being degraded from his hood & office, was committed to the kings prison with the ſaid Boniface. The Lord great Prior ariued about a leuen of the clocke at night, & immediatly they began to proſecute the proceſſe of the Conſul and his adherents, which was not perfected before ten of clock the next night and within one houre after, the ſaide Conſul and Captaine Boniface were both hanged before the gate of the late general Boniface, the people hauing continued in armes from the time they were apprehended vntill their execution, This was the end of theſe two Traitors, who were puniſhed according to their deſerts, and reigned but 48. houres: The ſaide Conſuls practiſe tended to become Lord of the towne, and not to vſe the Lord of Vins power except vpon neceſſitie, being alſo determined

to ſacke the ſame, and he had choſen for himſelfe and his chiefe adherents thréeſcore houſes the reſt ſhould haue fallen to his ſouldiers: but God would not permit ſuch miſchiefe, who as we may ſay, wrought mightely, and ſauing vs preſerued alſo the Proteſtants, whom ye Lord great Prior did ſet at libertie the ſame night that he arriued.
            By this little may we euidently ſée that the words and writings of theſe men are no perfite images of their euents, and therfore yt we muſt rather haue recourſe to their actions, which do more liuely expreſſe them, and as effects do neceſſarily plead their cauſe. The dog and the Woolfe are very like, but their déeds do bewray the difference, the one being by thē knowne for a kéeper, the other for a murderer of the flock, and ſaith great Alexander, oftentimes, ſuch as outwardly are clothed in white do vnderneath weare purple garmentes, ſo many times theſe preachers of religion, and reformation of the eſtate doe inwardly hatch Atheiſme and deſtruction of the countrie: and herein we ſée, that it is not religion, but ambition neither the welth, but ſubuertion of the eſtate that cauſeth them to take armes. This Conſuls zeale was tyranny ouer Marſelles, and the religion of Captaine

               Boniface was ſucceſſour to his brother, the reſt of theſe zealous people togither tended to the ſpoile of their town and deſtruction of their countrie.
            But nowe to enter into conſideration of this hypocritical Conſuls pretence. The Proteſtants, ſaith he, had intelligēce in the towne The like ſpeech vſeth the Cardinal of Vaudemount in the diſcourſe of the taking of Verdū
                which he hath procured to be printed, & Antragues vſeth the ſame language to exclude the duke of Montpenſier out of Orleans whether is maieſtie ſent him. Neither is it to be maruelled that they all agrée in one phraſe, as being wholly poſſeſſed with one & the ſame ſpirit who hath ben a lyer from the beginning: But leaſt they ſhould be daunted at ouer ſtrait examination of matters, I woulde aſke them what intelligence the proteſtants had in Chaalon, Diion, Rheins, Maiſiers and Argenteau? It is all as true as the league of Magdeburge in Germany lately concluded by the Lorde of Segur, as they ſay, with the County Palatine, who dyed 8. years before Segar euer ſet foote in Germany, alſo with the protector of Scotland, who deceaſed 5. yeares before: yea & as true as that the proteſtants brake the croſſe of S Martins in the field néere to Paris, whē within few

nights after, the Captain of that quarter ſurpriſed one that was making an end of the breaking thereof, thereby to prouoke the people to ſedition. They muſt vſe ſome better colours in their affaires, for God by his iuſt iudgmēt hath vndoubtedly giuen them ouer to a ſpirite of aſtoniſhment, and therefore O poore nation beware, leaſt they vnder the like pretence, abuſe thée in the ſame maner. Conſider in what predicamét this zealous reformer doth conſtitute the king, the princes of his blood, and generally al that follow not his faction, when he depriueth them of their titles of Catholike & Chriſtian & appropriateth the ſame to his like. This is the honour that he yeldeth to his maieſtie for his ſo often aduenturing his life in ſuch a quarrel. Thou ſhal not ſlander the law, the Prince, or the people and yet theſe great zelators do not onely in words, but alſo in writing continually ſlaunder the king, yea ſo far forth that the Cardinal of Vaudemont endenoreth to perſwade the king that he mindeth to vſe the help of the proteſtants & Turks for the ſubuertion of Catholike religion: let vs therefore enter into the view of this Conſuls conſcience who for the eſtabliſhing of his tyranny & renting this flower from the crowne of France, purpoſeth to vſe the weapons of the

Lord of Vins, though but as a ſcafolde which builders vſe, and which when the building is done they pul downe againe, and theſe trecheries do they learne of that euill ſpirite that directeth al their actions. We may therfore hereby ſee what may be looked for from them. Euen you miniſters of the Clergie, Nobilitie & third eſtate who haue embarked you ſelues wt them They vſe you, but if God ſhould ſo farre affect this realm as to permit them to attain to their purpoſes you ſhould be entreated after ye 
               Marſilian maner. We ſée what Antragues hath alredy done, how he firſt impriſoned, then baniſhed thoſe captains that eſtabliſhed his tyranny. Know you not thoſe whom you follow to be ſuch as are of an vnſatiable ambitiō, whom all the wealth in the worlde cannot content? They wil reſemble this Conſul, who for himſelfe and his aſſociates reſerueth all the beſt houſes, appointing to his ſoldiers thoſe wherin nothing is to be had: but what ſtand I here vpon, when ye whole houſe is ſhared out, what can be left for you? They vſe your help in hunting for their pray, but in deuiding the ſpoile they will imitate ye Lyon. The ſhares laid out they will ſeaſe vppon one, but if you reach toward the other, the lyons claws wil coole you: for men haue no fixed terme in their deſire of

atteining to riches. Theſe are ſubtill Foxes, ſuch as with the ſmoke of faire promiſes doe ſpoile you of al that you haue, that themſelues may ſeaſe thereupon. They be Mermaids, who to the end to procure your ſhipwracke do with their pleaſant ſongs ſeeke to ful you on ſléepe, but with Vliſſes ſtop your eares, and with the Troyans cloſe your eyes againſt this Helein whom they bring into this country to bury vs vp in ye ruines therof. Let vs in this diſcourſe conſider the fruites of couetouſneſſe and ambition, the one procéeding ſo farre 
                  •
               oh horrible among Chriſtians) as to murther his own brother, how Catholike ſo euer, the other to enfringe his vowed faith to his prince and to imbrew his hands in the blood of his fellow citizens, and both togither to enrich themſelues with the ſpoile of their countrie. By this example let vs iudge what elſe we may hope for of theſe reformers, ſauing that hauing begun with the proteſtants they will ende with our ſelues, or rather that as this Conſul beganne with the welthieſt catholicks, ſo wil they procéed with ſuch as among vs ſhalbe of beſt habilitie: yea, who ſhalbe ſafe when the one brother ſpareth not the other: and ſith they begin with the Catholicks, yea with the king himſelfe, whoſe townes & treaſure they daily ſeaze

vppon, whether ſhall we hope for better? The Proteſtants goods are not ſufficient to fill the broken bags or quench the inſatiable thirſt of theſe cormorants and this do not the chifeſt among them conceale, who do account of this realme as of a booty, to the end after the example of Silla to exhibite our goods to ye moſt giuer. If at the beginning of this banquet where to theſe craftie victioners doe enuite vs, they ſet before vs ſuch wine, what ſhal we looke for in the midſt, or at the ende? Let the rich men at the beginning account thēſelues proteſtants, for their faire houſes, goods, and lands are ſo already, & by this tyrants letters we ſée what the poore country men are to look for. Tyrants ſaith Diogines doe vſe their fauorites as bottles, they hang vp the full and caſt of the emptie. If then they ſpare not thoſe, what will they do with the reſt? Doth not Antragues begin to expell the richeſt Catholikes out of Orleans to the end to ſeaze vpon their goods? Antiſthenes did very truly accoūt tyrants worſe then tormenters, for theſe put onely offenders to death, the others ſpare not yt innocent. How happy therefore are thoſe whom other mens harmes can make to beware. Finally I pray you a little with me to ſtay vpon the diligent conſideration of the wonderfull deliuery of

this poore towne, togither we many good people in the ſame. The tyrant hath the fortreſſe: the proteſtantes are chained vp in dongeons, the reſt ſometime ſhut vp in their houſes, ſomtime beſieged in the towne houſe, and ſomtime naked among his weapons: hee hath his power vpon both ſea and land. All this notwithſtanding, God who ſheweth his ſtrength in our weakeneſſe, & preſerueth the weake from the lyons iawes, and in the firy furnace, hath fréed all good men, and kept this place being of ſo great importance to his maieſty. The tyrants heart faileth him at his moſt néede: the Lorde depriueth him of his ſenſes, and he bandoneth his tiranny without any ſtroke ſtroken. None is more coward than a tyrant. God the eſtabliſher of kings doth preſerue them and their eſtates, and although ſomtimes he afflicteth thē with the rebellions of their neareſt friends as he did Dauid, ſo that he bringeth them low as he did Manaſſes and Nabuchadonozer, yet doth he afterward deliuer and raiſe them vp againe. We ſée the ſmal continuance of this tyranny, which laſted but 48. houres: hardly did this tyrant giue his ſubiectes time to eate or drink, ſo ſhort was this bloody tragedie. Theſe were violent ſtormes, and ſoone ouerblowne. This conſpiracie was no ſooner ſprong vp but

it withered again: This is an example of gods iudgements, for ſaith the Apoſtle, Who ſo reſiſteth the power, reſiſteth the ordinance of God, and who ſo reſiſteth Gods ordinance do draw his curſſe vppon them. Theſe be the tyrants which warre againſt God, and againſt whom he ſhooteth the darts of his wrath: Dauid ſhall neuer want power and courage to purſue ſuch Abſalons, neither doth France want trées to hang them vppon, as was this Conſull. France is yet ſufficiently ſtored of true and natural frenchmen, both willing and able to deliuer her from thoſe that haue ſworn her deſtruction. To conclude, thoſe that haue béene ſeduced will reclaime themſelues & ſuch good and honorable perſonages, as hitherto haue kept their houſes, not for feare, but expecting his maieſties commaundement will take the fields to the end altogether vnder his banners to follow the example of the Marſilians.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            
         
      
   