
      
         
            
            
            MARTINS
Months minde,
THAT IS,
A certaine report, and true description of the
Death, and Funeralls, of olde Martin Marreprelate,
the great makebate of England,
and father of the Factious.
            Contayning the cause of his death, the manner
of his buriall, and the right copies both of his
Will, and of such Epitaphs, as by sundrie
his dearest friends, and other of his
well willers, were framed
for him.
            Martin the Ape, the dronke, and the madde,
            The three Martins are, whose workes we haue had.
            If Martin the fourth come, after Martins so euill,
            Nor man, nor beast comes, but Martin the deuill.
            1589.
         
         
            
            
            The Epistle Dedicatorie to Pasquine of
England.
            
               
                  FRiend Pasquine, most harty Commendations.
For I cannot but
both hartelie commend mee to
you,Pasquines Countercuffe. & commend you also▪ The
Cuffe you latelie gaue to Martin
the yonker, in steed of his gloue,
was so smartlie giuen, and sate so
close to his eare; as I must needes praise both your
courage, and cunning in cuffing. And for that both
he, and his good brother, shall not want Cuffes to
keepe themselues warme withall this winter: I haue
giuen them both, now one Cuffe more: which albeit
in truth bee but a whirre
                  •
               ; yet am I clasping my
fist as fast as I can, to giue them one paire of Cuffes
more, that shall bee so soundlie set on, as I doubt not
shall make them stagger.
            
               Martins sonnes saie Martin is dead; I know it to
be no fable: and haue sent you here the true transcript
of all that worthie & memorable historie, containing,
his Sicknes, last Will, Death, Anatomie, Buriall,
               
and Epitaphs, with all other Implements belonging
thereunto. Herein I haue made them but a little merie,1 Old Martins Months minde.
as they doo vs, and bobde them with their owne
bable, which I know must please them (for they are
verie pleasurable Gentlemen as their father was). In
the next that shall bee verie shortlie (which I terme
The suing of Martin Senior his liuerie) wee shall giue
them a Cuffe shall make their eares tingle:2 The suing of yong Martins liuerie. but in the
third which shall be Martins models, (for he is in the
building vaine as his father was) containing the mischiefes
of Martinisme both to the Church and state;3 Martins modells. we shall reach them a rappe, as they will neuer clawe
of, except they scratt off the skinne from the verie
bones, til they come to the Crowes and Pies to help
them: and will prooue in good earnest, what themselues
report of themselues which is better than the
best Iurie (prophecying with Caiphas) that they are
the verie botches and blaines of both those bodies.
            In the meane space (Pasquine) remember your promise.
It growes fast towards Ianuarie: it were time
your Almanacke were out;Pasquins Almanack. and for that it seemeth
you haue some skill in Astrologie, (if it maie be) by
your calculation, let vs haue a glimse at the least, of
the fooles phisnomies. Thus much maie wee coniecture,
without any figure, that they are some yong
Diuells, and that their purpose is to make some hot
worke with vs, (and therefore no maruell that they
haue been so firie heretofore) that haue chosen
a Salpeter man for their foreman,Martin makes gun powder. and a gunne powder
house (an hell on earth) for their printing shop.

But I hope they shall not want Matches to sindge
them with their owne fire, and to blowe vp their
powder and all about their eares.
            But especiallie (Pasquine) for that they are so busie
with other mens doings, and themselues onelie, The
Mirrour of all modestie, honestie, curtesie, humilitie, patience,
and all sanctitie,
               Pasquins Legend. remember your Legende in anie
wise. The liues of such Saincts must needes be a
singular peece of worke, and edifie much; especiallie
against the seuen deadlie sinnes which they neuer
transgresse.Martins neuer transgresse the 7. dead
                     ••
                   sinnes.
               Pride, for they despise all but themselues.
Lecherie, for three at a clappe, their heaths can yeeld
them. Sloath, for though they bee seldome idle, yet
they are neuer well occupied. Gluttonie, for they
would deuoure all. Couetousnes, for they are neuer satisfied.
Wrath, for they doo nothing but quarrell. Enuie,
for they cannot abide anie to haue ought, but
themselues.Their foure Cardinall vertues. But especiallie for the foure Cardinall
vertues: Fortitude, for they hide their heads. Iustice,
for they would take from euerie man his owne.
Wisedome, or els I report me to their wittie conceits.
And Temperance, for they gouern their passions passingly
wel.Their three Theologcall vertues. But for the three Theological vertues they
excell, of all that euer I heard of. Faith, for I doubt
me whether they bee of anie. Hope, which is to see
the ouerthrowe of all. And Charitie, for they detest
and damne all but themselues. And though they
were at the first, and bee still, passing impudent, and
neither feare nor shame to saie anie thing, hiding
their heades, and being out of the reach of all controlement:

(for Qui semel impudentiae fines transierit,
eum bene & kn
                     •
                  uiter, oportet esse impudentem) yet (Pasquine)
since they are now become contemptible, amongst
the most and best, let vs trample on them as
the dirt of the streete; being in verie deed the drosse
and dregges of the Common wealth. And so longing
to heare from you, as you shall from me againe,
(God willing) verie shortlie, I bid you farewell.
            
               Your fast friend, and
fellowe in Armes
Mar-phoreus.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the discreet and indifferent
Reader.
            
               IT is a world to see this
world (good reader)
Neuer deeper dangers
in hand,Martins vnseasonable contentions. nor lesse aduisedlie
regarded. Neuer
sleighter toyes in head,
nor more seriouslie followed. Neuer greater
Tragoedies tendred abroad, nor lighter Comaedies
trauersed at home. Neuer so many
meanes of discorde from others, nor euer so
little concord among our selues. The people
neuer greater benefites, nor more vnthankefull;
neuer more quietnes, nor more vnquiet.
The Prince neuer more gratious, the subiects
for a great part neuer so vngratious. And
to be short, neuer better lawes, nor wiser Magistrates;
yet neuer such libertie in speaking,

impudencie in writing, nor mischiefe in working,
both priuatelie against particuler persons
(and those of the best) for their defacing,
and publiquelie for the vndermining
of the Church, and ouerthrowe of
the common wealth as now. The Authors
hereof,Martins cunning and craftie proceeding in his affaires. though they shot at both at once,
(whereof the one was and is vsed but as the
vnderground worke to blowe vp the other
whereupon it stands which in the sueing of
Martins liuerie shortlie shall be made manifest:)
and desired to see the cleauing of the
pinne, withall the expedition that might possible
be (wherein God be thanked their haste
was more than their good speede): yet proceeded
they therein cunninglie by degrees, as
the Foxe did with the Lyon: first peering at
him a farre of; then looking on him, but behinde
a bush, till at the last, finding his roring
to bee without biting, hee presumed to 
                  •
               ett
cheeke by iole with him: Or as that varlet
did, that by oft striking at the picture painted
on a board, that could not controule him;

aduentured in the end to strike through and
murder the man himselfe.
            For first of all,The foure formes of old Martins schoole. some of them which were
the Petties and Punies of that schoole, whereof
old Martin was the master; though then
he was but as some blinde and obscure parish
Clarke that taught in the Belfrie,The first forme. not presuming,Admonishers.
as hee dooth nowe, to presse into the
Church, (that place in respect of the appurtenances
being fitter for him) began but rawly
with their little a, b, c. And though their fescue
euen▪ then pointed at Capitall letters: yet for
that time, the farthest lesson they tooke foorth
was but Title point in the end; neither could
they come so farre as Estamen, because God
for beginning, was no part of their Crosse
rowe. VVho like quaint Querristers (for
they loue Musick as the Ape the whippe)
first entred with their Solfaing notes, but
not one in rule, (for they loue that neither in
word nor deede) and raught onely at the
ragges; which yet made some iagges in the
seameles coate. And like the Saint Nicolas

Clarkes on Salsburie plaine (I vse the similitude,
for that Martin loues Sarum so
well) stept out before vs in the high waie, and
bidde vs stand.
               In the admonition to the Parliament. 
               And these could not abide
rounde heads to weare square cappes,
               
that yet could brooke a round trencher (especiallie
at another mans square table): nor a
standing coller
                answerable to the neck, that
would weare bowcases, and whole butterie
hatches themselues vpon their backes. 
                  Nor
a woman to weare a kercher
                but an inch
beneath the chinne, that would weare themselues
hattes of the Babilonian blocke, a foote
in length at least aboue their heads. 
                  No
crosse in the browe at Baptisme, but neuer
so many, at any time in the bagge. No bells,
but Libells, and bables of their own. No Homelies
read, but their own Hom-lies preached.
No praying, either for women labouring
with child, or thanks giuing for women
deliuered. No more praying against
thunder and lightning, than against sparrowe
blasting.
                  Their own godlie speaches. They would correct Magnificat,
                  
not knowing Quid significat. They
could not like of any Benedictus, for they
were (and yet are still) in their Maledictus
and Malefactus altogether, neither could
they then, or yet can they skill of any thing
else. But these men were but bench whistlers,
and shot but at short butts, and but for points
after an halfepenie the dosen, for that they
would not sit out, but bee counted gamesters,
and bee thought to bee able to shoote in a long
bowe, though but a bolte; or in a Crossebowe,
though neuer so small a quarrell. Yet these
were good fellowes; for they craued but halfe,
for that they thought some had too much; (as
the manner of such make shifts is to do): and
they had some reason for it, for Oxonium
petit aequalia is an olde said sawe, and Soluatecclesia,
was a faire and gentle text for
that purpose.
            Next after these,The second forme. followed another crue,
somewhat more than a good deale quicker
than these;Pistlers. who being past their A, b, c, sought
to put together (and thought withall to put

vs altogether by the eares) and began their
crooked descant, consisting onelie of discords:
and these like lustie cutters,Old Martin in his Epistle. drawing out and
brandishing their blades and threatning vs
with stripes
                yea to make our verie hearts to
ake if we would not yeelde, aduentured to lay
holde fast on our purses, and like strong
theeues in deed proffered to robbe vs of all our
monnie. And the Captaine Cuffe of this bouncing
band, was the old Sheepbiter, the auncient
Gentleman this our young masters Father:
who then was 
                  ••
               pt from the Bellfree, vp
into the Chauncel of the Church. (O that the
bell rope had not staide him by the waie) and
vnder tooke the trauersing of greater matters.
He not content to plucke of the clothes,
pricks at the bodies.Old Martin thorow out al his works. 
               He will pull the Archbishops
and Bishops
                out of their doores by
the eares. Hee will downe with their houses,
though the Gentlemans ancestors neuer built
them. Hee will tumble downe the Churches,
for barnes and stables will serue his deuotion
well inough. Hee must haue their Mannors

and lands, to make himselfe, and his beggarlie
bratts and shifting hang b
                  •
               es, Squires and
Gentlemen. Hee will sweepe away all both
the fish, and the frie at one draug
                  •
               t, with his
netts; and as it were drie vp our verie riuers
with the breath of his mouth; and carie
whole Countries before him; and snatch vp
houses and woods, and dales, and hills, and
people, and all, into his budget: so as none
shall dwell with him vpon t
                  •
               e earth. Naie
he goeth farther, and setting his face against
the heauens, he makes a mock of the Saints of
God;Old Martin in his Epistle. yea the mother of Christ, (with his single
sold Sirs) & the Scriptures themselues he
beastlie abuseth to his hick scorners iestes.
            This man,In his Pistle tacking on a blind iest of a Benefice, to a text of S. Peter. like a madde dogge runneth
at euerie man without regarde, and with
foming mouth, and venemous teeth, biteth
not by the shinnes, but the verie throat, 
                  •
               e
careth not whome; not onelie those, whome

                  •
               ee counteth his enemies (the worst better
than the best of his hey gobetts) but those
also, whome hee saieth vntruesie men call;

               Puritans,
               Martin Iumor in Thes. and himselfe, accounteth his halfe
faced friends, hee snarleth at; and termeth
Traitors, for that they first set them on work,
(as hee pittifullie complaining, sheweth
vnto vs), and now are ashamed of them (as
they well may) and will not gallop with them
so fast as they doo vpon the spurre, and without
the bridle beyond all honestie and discretion.Martin Senior in his Pistle in the margent.
Nay his owne pufellowes (whome indeed
himselfe best knoweth, and with whome
he may be boldest) he coteth with his own liuerie,Martinistes sawcie knaues, by Martins owne testimonie.
and calleth saucie knaues: which me
thinks, sits close to their backs, without pleite
or wrinkle, and fitteth them so well, as no
Tailour in England could doo it better. And
yet he reuealeth the faults of others so whotlie,
and reuileth them so bitterlie, as if that
name at no hand appertained to him, or any of
his. The right of spring of him, that is termed
Sathanas, the accuser of his brethren, and a
verie limme of him, that is called Fur & homicida,
a theefe and a murderer, for he commeth
not but to steale, and kill; and his marks

are no dead marks, but liuings, and liues; and
his arrowes all are forkers, and made for mischiefe,
though fethered yet (as hereafter you
shall heare) with woodcocks whing.
            After him,The third forme. as if hell had been broken
loose;Barbarians. out runnes another rabble, of the same
house and famelie, in the collaterall line of
leudnes, Browne, Barowe, and Greenewood,
that verie three headed Cerberus
the dogge of hell: and these being of the former
consort for taking of our purse (for
that wee should not bee able to see belike to
make Hue and crie after the theeues) would
haue vs whoodwinckt,See D. Somes answere to their positions. and therefore being
verie asses themselues, would needs haue our

                  Vniuersities,
                the onelie meanes of our knowledge
downe. And so might they also the better
afterwards, scatter what heresies soeuer
they should deuise, (for that is their onelie
occupation) as it were in that palpable darkenes,
and beastly barbarisme, without controlment.
These men, must needs (and so doo) dislike
of all degrees; worthie themselues to proceede

by no degrees, but roundels. The Clergie,
they will not afforde so much as an hole
to rest in; vnworthie themselues to haue any
hole (saue the pillorie) to put their heads
in. The Prince, may not medle, (saie they)
in matters of religion. Neither must the
people tarie for the Prince, or Parliament
in Church matters: (neither should
the hangman for such rib
                     •
                  lds). Churches,
they will haue none. Sacraments, they
care for none. Ministers, they neede none.
They make all, and doo all; and are all themselues.

                  All set praiers, are babling and
blasphemie, and such praiers only as themselues
make Ex trumperie, is the onelie pure,
& perfect praying. As for the Lords praier,
that is but a toye, and a plaine mocking of
the Lord to saie it. Yea that it is better for a
man to lie with his Fathers Wife (Quaere
by the waie whether that also be not an artiticle
of their religion); 
                  than to resorte to
the Church, or come into the congregation,
to publique praier. Lucian the Atheist,
               
was neuer so irreligious; nor euer Iulian
the runnagate so blasphemous. And
these comming out as it were with their three
mans song, would confound all, and make a
blacke fanctus of the matter: shooting out
their venemous shafts, with mischeeuous
heads, sharpened vpon Martins most malicious
whetstone. For that they haue issued
from Martins schoole, and are fellowes in
feelde with them, and fight together, against
both the Church & State, in one and the selfe
same quarrell, shall euidentlie bee proued in
Martins liuerie. These are the verie Locustes,
that came from the smoake of the bottomeles
pitte, to darken the Sunne, and the
aire, with faces like men but teeth like Lions,
and tailes like Scorpions, to sting men, being
not men infatuate, but beasts intoxicate,
or rather verie diuels incarnate, sent out to
deceiue and disturbe the world.
            And now last of all (and would GOD it
were so) out steppes mee their Abaddon,
               The fourth forme. a
badde one indeede and the verie worst of all,Seditious.
               
               Martin Senior for sooth, the olde Martins
sonne and 
                  •
               eire (worshipt might hee be) and
together with him, a brother of his, one Martin
Iunior, a pretic stripling, (as he termes
himselfe; and pretie striplings indeede would
they bee, if they were cleane stript, and well
whipt, and trimlie trust vp withall), as verie
varlets both; (they shall pardon me, if for
themselues, I borrowe their owne phrase): as
euer was their Father, or great Grandfather,
or any of that leud linage before them, and
these mens Cater Cosins, on the surer side.
And these, to fill vp the iniquitie of their
forefathers, disdainefullie scorne the Maiestie
of Princes and set light of them:Martin Iu. in Thes. and the
one of them, abusing that most reuerendname,
to the rascall his father, one of the verie
scumme of the people: calleth him a man of
a kinglie nature;
               Martin Sen. in cens. 
               and not onelie that, but in
plaine and flat terme maketh a test of Princes:
               
and the troub
                     ••
                  ng of the State, and
offending of her Maiestie, bee turneth of
with a frumping, forsooth, as though it

were a toie to thinke of it.Pag. 3. 
               And the other
scoffeth at her Maiesties authoritie, scorneth
hir displeasure, iesteth at praying
for hir,
                  Pag. 23. C
                        •
                     nsur. 
                  reuileth her lawes, threatneth her
Magistrates;
                  pag. 22. These things shall euidently be proued in Martins liuer
                        •
                     e. nay hir Maiestie her selfe;
musters her subiects; sturreth vp Clergie
men, Gentlemen, and people:
                and
plainelie with open mouth and full cheekes,
bloweth vp the trumpet to rebellion; and
as it were with banner displaied (though
lurking in his denne) dooth enter the fielde,He braggeth that hee hath 100000. disciples in the realme, and those the strength and sinewes of the land.
and giueth the defiance, except hee haue his
foorth; and pretending his Pistle, bendeth
his Pistoll at vs. Naie further, (that
plainelie proueth him to bee a righte limme
of Antechrist) hee rusheth into mens consciences,
and sitts him downe in the seate
of Gods secrets, and tell vs,Martin Sen. in cens. 
               
                  that such
an one shall haue a fearefull ende,
                for
that forsooth, he resisteth their shamefull beginnings.

                  It shal be the bane to such a one,
both in this life, (as if he had a purpose to kil
him) and in the life to come,
                (as if hee had

the power to damne him. And what is the offence?
To moderate and marshall such miscreants
as himselfe, and his mates are? An
heynous matter. I meruaile then what shall
become of Master Recorder of London,
that euerie moneth, dispatcheth manie lesse
hurtful, and some much more honest, than the
most of these are. Nay the Lorde hath no
parte in such a one;
                whose grace (I vse
that phrase in despite of both the Martins
and al the Martinists) hath more grace, than
all the rabble of such Rakehells, and moste
miserable,
               Martin the Iu. in conclus. 
               and desperate kaitiues. I doo
returne, but their owne verie words, that
themselues lent vnto those that minde not
to borrowe them, nor to be in their debt. And
these lustie youthes, not contented with the
pon, threaten vs the penknife: nor being satisfied
with our purse, hackle at our throate.
And these are (as Martin the more speaketh
more truelie than himselfe is aware of
touching himself and his yoke fellowes) 
                  most
rebellious,
                  Martin Senior his owne words of himselfe and his fellowes cens. pag. 6. and shall sufficientlie be proued in his Liuerie. 
                  and disobedient to all good

proceedings: Traitors and enemies to
her Maiestie: They will ouerthrowe the
states:
                to the which they shall adde thus
much (to make it a perfect and a most true
period) they shewe in their writings, that
they saie in their hearts, there is no God.
            
            For (to leaue furder stirring of this stinking
sinke) it is now come to this passe,The substance and end of Martins lessons. that
if these men may haue their swaie, (but wee
hope first they shall haue their swing) we shall
haue left vs, I will not saie, No cap, no
coats, no monie, no house, no liuing, but
(better no life) no learning, no Magistrats,
no Prince, no Church, no Sacrament, no
praier, no nor God, for vs to worship, or
feare at all. These men, would I call (as I
well might) Monsters; saue that in these
mischeeuous daies, wherein our Europa, i
                  •
               
become an Africa, in bringing dailie foorth
newe monsters, I can account them but ordinarie
Vermin. But verie fitlie haue they taken
their name of Marring; that professe nothing
else but marring: both the names of

men▪ and quiet of the common wealth, and
peace of the Churche, and liuings of the
Church, and Churches themselues: and the
rewards of learning, and places of learning,
and degrees of learning, and learning it selfe:
and the lawes of the land, and the authoritie
of the Prince, and last of all (for what can
be lefte after for the Diuell himselfe) sacraments,
Ministers, praiers, yea the Lordes
praier; and so set their brasen faces against
heauen, and bend their forces against the
Lord himselfe. For they are not onelie now
come to shoote at rouers, and seeke out at euerie
bowte a newe marke; but begin as fast
as they can, (leauing the obscurer hobbs that
first they began with, to shoote a maine
for the vpshot, at the fairest markes of all.Martins Cards.
They are now in hande to shuffle the Cardes
(as ill as they will seeme to loue them) and
to confounde all, to amende their badde
games, hauing neuer a good Carde in their
handes, and leauing the auncient game of

England (Trumpe) where euerie coate,
and sute are sorted in their degree, are running
to their Ruffe where the greatest sorte
of the sute carrieth away the game: and to
their Mawe, where the fiue fingers is a
carde of great strength, and though the King
and the Queene bee in the decke; yet the
knaue must commande all and beare the
swaie.Martins Dice. And that thou maist knowe them to
bee good Dicers, too; when their Dice are
fo cunninglie coggd: as though they cast
Sinnes for the moste parte, yet they maie
in the end with a tripsie Tray, carrie all awaie
smoothe; and come once to the sweepestake,
and make a bare boorde, and howe
they meane than to proceede (if they passe)
shall bee a Mumchaunce for mee; that
are like (as wiser heads no doubte doo see)
to hazard all. For then the Dice are like
to rule all; bee the caster neuer so cunning,
and his heape neuer so great before
him. VVhich point perhappes they will carrie

the cleanlier, couering it with this cloke that
(as they pretend in other matters of lesse moment
by them) to reduce all to the precise
forme of the Primitiue Church; so for this
matter especiallie, they being as it were our
newe Apostles (and verie Apostolique are
their writings no doubte, and their pistles sauoureth
much of the phrase of the Apostles
epistles) all must be sold, and brought to their
feete; that they may set their feete, on the
highest head. For this generation is like the
Iuie, that from the roote groweth vp, and
roundeth it selfe, as it were for pure loue; about
the Elme, and neuer leaueth to creepe
vp, till it 
                  •
               ath aduanced it self to the highest
of all, and suckt out the sappe cleane, and dried
it vp. The greene leaues make a faire and
a glorious shewe, but in the end, when it hath
clunged close, and climbed aloft, it marreth al
both top and trunke.
            Thus haue I shewed thee (gentle Reader)
a short sight of Martins schoole the degrees
of his formes, the summe of his lessons, and the

drift, both of the master and schollers: and
for so much as, the olde Martin is dead, (as
streight thou shalt heare) were it not that we
are bound rather, for the quiet of the Church,
and safetie of the state, as well to wish the vtter
extirpation of al such vntractable and seditious
scisme sowers, as to worke withall, by
all orderlie meanes we may, to effect the same
in time conuenient, before it bee growne to so
great a head, as will trouble the wisest heads,
and the highest head perhapps to help it: wee
might otherwise praie, with the old woman of
Siracusa for the good health and wellfare,Martin must be prayed for. of
these two yong Slipps his sonnes, least after
them come out vnto vs, the great diuell their
grand master Beelzebub himselfe, whose
next forerunner, out of all doubt this race of
Martins is.
            And these are the yonkers that wee now
vndertake;The Martins are allmost become banc
                     •
                  rupts. the olde Martins reuerend
sonne and heire, and his worshipfull Brother;
who being both but newelie come to their Fathers
lands and goods, (I meane his good and

are ful of them, and therefore can make no one
forme of themselues. And this also, with manie
other as materiall points, shall in the next
at large be proued.
            These fellowes,Martin answereth nothing but with whoopes and haloes. haue heretofore been answered
to their chiefest matters (which God
knoweth were both fewe and friuolous) by

                  〈◊〉
                of the best sorte, (an vnfit match for
these of the basest baggagerie) both grauelie,
and learnedly. But as the Ape, the more sagelie
you looke on him, the more he grinneth; and

                  〈…〉
                substantiallie you reason

                  〈◊〉
                him, the lesse he vnderstandeth: so these
Panions, scorning all modestie, and reiecting

                  〈…〉
               , delight in nothing, but in their most
miserable vaine, of resting and foolerie.
            It is therefore thought the best way (for
experience and time tries al things) and some
wisemen wer
                  •
                before of that Iudgement,The best way of answering Martin. and
the wise man himself dooth so aduise vs, and
Martin the foole himselfe is of the same opinion,
to answere the foole
                  •
               , according to their

                  〈…〉
               . For I haue here at this time onelie

plaied with their foolish coxecombe; purposing
in my next, to decipher their knauish
head also: and when they shall put off their
fooles coate, and leaue snapping of their wodden
dagger, and betake themselues to a soberer
kinde of reasoning, (which will bee verie
hard for such vices to doo) to accept of their
glorious gloue. Till then; wee will returne
them the Cuffe, in stead of the gloue, and hisse
the fooles from off the stage, as the readiest
meanes to out-face them; though (besides that
they hide their heads) they be most impudent,
and canot blush. For what face soeuer they set
on the matter, these Iigges and Rimes, haue
nipt the father in the head & kild him cleane,
seeing that hee is ouertaken in his owne foolerie.
               Martin the vice condamneth the Plaiers Eigulus, sigulum.
And this hath made the yong youthes
his sonnes, to chafe and fret aboue measure, especiallie
with the Plaiers, (their betters in
all respects, both in wit, and honestie) whom
sauing their liueries (for indeede they are
hir Maiesties men, and these not so much as
hir good subiects) they call Rogues for playing

their enterludes, and Asses for trauelling
all daie for a pennie; not remembring that
both they,The Martins right roges. & their Father, playing the fooles
without any liuerie, are roges indeed, by the
lawes of this land; and that for nothing, now
two yeares together; are the veriest Asses of
all the rest.
            And yet shalt thou finde (good Reader)
in this iesting with him, (but especiallie in
the next) that the foole is bobbd withall in
good earnest, and that he is proued a plaine
Hermaphrodite,
               Martin an Hermaphrodite. that is both a foolish knaue,
and a knauish foole also; and the veriest foole
in the world, if he be not as very a knaue withall,
may soone see, to what passe, both religion,
& the state would shortlie come, if Mad Martin,
& his mates marrings, and his sonnes
shiftings, might by such as are of might,
(which the GOD of all might forefend) bee
made account of.
            These iests, that now we deale withal, are
partlie the old mans monuments; but especiallie
the elder sonnes censure, and the yongers

               Theses.
               The occasion of this worthie work. The first occasion indeed, grew of this
latter, published by the dawling 
                  Martin Iunior,
by meanes (as himselfe saith) of certaine
maimed, and imperfect Articles,The death of Martin the great. which he
found dropt out of some mans (belike the
hangmans) budget,
               
               Mar. the Iu. in Thes. in the conclusion. (whereof you shall heare
more in the next) wherein hee imagineth his
Father (whose articles they were) to be dead;Martin Sen. in cens.
& that the elder saith also he cā not gainefay;
which is the grounde work and foundation,
of our building, here for this time. VVhat
hee omitted I haue supplied; touching the
cause of his death, and manner of his buriall;
for that I would be lothe so memorable matters,
should be buried with him, (which is but
an Introduction to other matters that shortlie
shall followe, & sit somewhat neerer them;His 
                     •
                  iuerie & Modells.
vpon the truth wherof thou maist much better
build I wis, then vpon their fond & phroenetical
fancies; wherupon they would haue thee,
(if thou were so wise) to found thy faith.
            To conclude; marke Martins life, and his
proceedings; and thou wilt saie, his death, and

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
funeralls were answerable vnto it. And since
he is dead: let him bee buried also, in thy conceit,
and so let his vaine works, together with
his remembrance, lie still (as he dooth) and

                  〈◊〉
                as carrion. And as for these yong Martins,
both the one, and the other, and all the
broode of such beastlie bratts; assure thy self,
they are not long liued: that in the noses of
all, that are not stuft to much with the Pose
of preiudice, but can smell any thing in the
worlde: do euen now, stinke aboue the ground
aliue. Fare well, And if thou wilt fare well indeede:
Beware of Martin.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A true report of
the death and buriall of
Martin Mar-prelate.
            
               Incipit faeliciter.
            
            
               GOod newes to England. Olde
Martin the Marre-all is dead and
buried. Hee telleth you the tale
that knoweth it to bee true. I
pray GOD neuer worse newes
come either to Court, or Countrie,
and all good people say, Amen.
            
            You long (I know) to heare the cause, and manner
of his death, whose life and doings were so infamous;
and many (I doubt not) will thinke, (and
probablie too) that it should bee in reason some
strange, and violent death, that is befalne him; that
was so monstrous and immoderate in all his proceedings;
and that either in the fire, water, or ayre,
that so troubled the earth while he liued vpon it.
The verie truth I will tell you (for pitie it were to
belie the dead) from point to point, without altering

so much as a pinnes point, as neere as my memoric
will giue me leaue, and therefore listen.
            Many are the reports scattered abroad of both,Sundrie reports of Martins death.
(as commonly in such great accidents is accustomed)
and all false. Some say hee was taken by the
Spaniards, and burnt in the Groyne, and they that
report so, say that hee brought the cause thereof
from hence with him, not for religion, but some
other causes that now I omit. Some, that he was
hanged by his owne companie at Lisbone for a mut
                  •
               nie,
which was verie likelie to haue been true also,
that euer was giuen to factions and mutinies,
while he liued here. Some, that comming thence,
hauing before ouerdronke himselfe with the hot
wines of those Countries (which he could not but
loue wel, being so seldome sober for the most part
as he was) he died of a surfet, and was throwne ouer
boord, & so was double drowned both within
and without. Some, that riding in his visitation
his horse stumbled, and he brake his necke which
other some say, was in some other sort, as that hee
wandring to that purpose in the manner of a Gipson,
for that he would not bee knowne, was taken,
and trust vp for a roge, and that onelie knowne to
his companions. Indeede, I denie not, anie one of
these happes were likelie enough to haue befalne
him, and not without his iust deserts: and most
men say, it was well enough, which way soeuer of
these hee ended, and worse (if worse might bee).
Howbeit, it was not that so well, as they do ween

for, (being perhappes reserued for his two sonnes
hereafter) but neither better nor worse than I will
tell you.
            
               Martin Iunior his sonne, who knoweth the
truth as no man better, yet loath to haue it published,
for that it toucheth his, and his friends credite
verie neerelie; seeketh to shadowe it, with other
some-saies: and that you may knowe him to be no
bastard, (though perhappes yet base begotten, for
euen at this Age he doubteth who was his Father,
               Martin Iu. in conclus.
and therefore must we take him to bee terrae filius)
not so much as one word true.
            
               Some saie (quoth he) that he died at the Groyne in
seruice of her Maiestie and his Countrie.
               Martin Senior in censur. 
               But what
saith Martin Senior his sonne and heire, and this mans
brother to that? He die at the Groyne: nay heele be hanged,
erthe die there. Loe Martin Iunior, your bigger
brother (besides the reuerend remembrance of his,
deare Father) giues ye the flat lie; for that he died
not there. And no maruaile. For he neuer liued in
the seruice of her Maiestie, and therefore who wil
beleeue he died in it? He neuer carried so good a
mind to his Prince and Countrie, faithfullie to fight
for it, that would so spitefullie write against it, and
seeke so wickedlie to vndermine it; whose ouerthrowe
he sought (in his kinde) at home as hotlie,
with his shot of inke & paper, as the master of the
Groyne did abroad, with his of powder and pellet.
And therefore say no more so (Petrie Martin) no
man will beleeue it: neither haue 
                  Those others (you

talke of,Martin Iu. in Thes. in the conclus. (The man in the moone belike, and the carter
of Charles waine) any iust Motiues, inducing them
to be of that minde.
                Indeed there died many an honester
man, and much more profitable members
of the Common wealth (the greater though our
griefe yet their glorie that valiantlie triumphed ouer
their cowardlie enemies, and constantly rendred
their liues in their Princes & countries seruice,
which none of you all will euer either liue or dye
in); and if Martin your father & you two Martins
his sonnes, and your mates, had excused them; it
had been a great good turne, both for the Prince
and countrie; especiallie there, where one trouble
State might haue plaied vpon another, and so a
good riddance made of both together.
            After this, as knowing himselfe how ridiculous
a suppose that is he requireth in scorne, of his N
                     •
                  nkaes
the BB. (see how like the old Ape this young
Munkey pattereth) 
                  whether they haue not el
                        •
                     selie
                  Martin Iu. in Thes.
                  murdered the Gentleman in some of their Prisons and
strangled him) knowing him to haue kept himselfe
farre enough from their fingers, as these youthes
themselues minding to be neither valiant Martins
(though they like lustie Martins talke so much of
venturing their liues in the quarrel, & vaunt them
selues to bee the best subiects of the Realme, nor constant
confessors, though they bragge so much of
the goodnes of their cause, which they gloriouslie
guild with the fl
                     ••
                  nting phrase of Sinceritie, and
damme others to the deepe pit of hell for not aduancing
it) doo, and wil doo, I warrant them, (and

they be not caught in the snatch against their will)
for feare of a Lambathisme;
               Martin dares 
                     •
                   not land in his likenes at La
                     •
                  beth staiers. which of all things in
the world they cannot abide.
            Howbeit pretie youth, I must needes confesse
the Tippet you talke of (as il as he loues them) was
verie due vnto thē, (though a much meaner man,
than any of those might haue fitted his neck withall)
and you his sonne & your faire brother withall,
as good a gentleman as he, may liue to enioy it,
and that as your right by course of lawe, being a
portion of the inheritance, that your father l
                  •
               ft vnto
you. But it seemeth your father was not borne
vnto it, for that he died not possessed of it (the more
is the pitie) but purchased it since, belike by his
owne penie.
            
               Or haue you not giuen him (quoth Martin the
Medium) an Italian figge? n
                        •
                      no Matt.
               
               Martin Iu. in Thes. That's a Machiuillian
tricke; and some of your mates are better
acquainted with it.Martin might die of figges but not of reasons. Marie for al sorts of Figges
I will not sweare, let them enquire it; for Martin
was a great surfeter.
            
               Or haue you not choaked him with a fat Prebend or
two?
               
               His sonnes may be choked with le
                     •
                   cost. Much les good Sir, that were a death for an
honest man; neither is there any one of all your
crue, that would not be glad to die that death: but
it will not be, except you will be enstald in a hempen
whood, (for you loue neither silke nor miniuer)
and of that condition (yong Martin) I dare assure
thee foure; and thy elder brother (as reason
is) double the number, for double fee
                  •
               .
            
               
But to leaue thy flim flam tales, and loytering
lies (that canst doo no other if a man should hang
thee) the trueth is this; which my little Martin
knoweth as well as I, and you that are old Martins
friends, report it of my word; for it is as true as
steele.
            After that old Martin,
               The true manner of old Martins death. hauing taken a most desperate
cause in hand, as the troubling of the State,
and ouerthrowe of the Church, (both which attempts
at once, Alexander the Copper Smith, that
did Paule so much harme, would neuer haue aduentured;
nor Herostratus, that burned Dianas temple,
by many degrees came neere vnto) and being therfore
(and well worthie) sundrie waies verie curstlie
handled; as first drie beaten,
               T. C. & therby his bones
broken,A whip for an Ape. then whipt that made him winse, then
wormd and launced, that he tooke verie grieuouslie,The Theater.
to be made a Maygame vpon the Stage, and so
bangd, both with prose and rime on euerie side, as
he knewe not which way to turne himselfe, and
at length cleane Marde:
               Marre-martin. the griefe whereof vext
him out of all crie; and that if he were taken, it
was to be feared he should be made a Bishop (of the
fields) which name he neuer loued, and to weare a
tippet, that he euer detested: but especiallie being
drawne so drie (so as he could say no more,)Martin Iu. in conclus. 
               wherby
his radicall moisture began to faile him, and his
vitall powers in such sort to decaie, as he saw that
he could not long continue; but especiallie, that
his labours being so great, tooke none effect, but

was termed, by some a Vice, by some a Viper,
               This Period Martin is long, but it containeth great store of necessarie matter, and therefore you must beare with it. by
some a Scismatique, by some a Traitor; and that euerie
stage Plaier made a iest of him, and put him
cleane out of countenance, yea his owne familiars
disdained to acknowledge him, and so had both
frends and foes, both good & bad, euen the whole
realme (saue a fewe of his faction) that cried out
shame vpon him (hauing besides of olde as manie
diseases as an horse both HH's and PPé's that had
time out of minde possest him, albeit he bare it out
long with a lustie courage): the old gentleman began
at the length, (being discouraged in his courses)
to droope (as sorowe and shame tameth both
man and beast) and to mislike himselfe (for he termeth
himselfe vnwise,
               Martin Iu. in Thes, In the Proeme. 
               that is to say, a Noddie for
medling with it) and through meere mellanchollie
fell into a feauer (lurdaine) whereby hee grewe so
costiue,In conclus. Martin costiue. 
                  as nothing came from him in three or foure
moneths space.
                And so hauing taken his bedde, he
fent for his Phisitions, (whereof hee had some
choyce) that knewe verie well the constitution of
his bodie, (though not so fit to see into a water)
who albeit at the first touch of the pulse,Martins Phisitions. that went
verie disordredly, perceiued that he was past cure:
yet loath to loose so profitable a member to their
commensing common wealth, they ministred to
him a potion,Martin Iu. in concl. No such pilles as Praehends. 
               (for pilles he could swallow downe none)
whereby (as it falleth out with such as are long
bound) he voyded certaine vncertaine and imperfect
Articles for a farewell to Booke making:
               
               Ibidem. but afterwards

when they perceiued that the force therof
wrought so stronglie vpon him, as that it purged
away all the conscience, wit, and honestie he had; and
that Purgarentur ea,
                  Ibidem. 
                  quae purgari non oportuit (a deadlie
signe, grounded vponan vndoubted maxime of
their Phisick) they came vnto him, & with teares
in their eyes, told him that there was no way with
him but one; and therefore wisht him to set his
worldlie affaires in order,The 
                     〈◊〉
                   resolution of Martins death. that no controuersie
might growe amongst his, after he was gone.
            Wherewith Martin,
               Martins answere to the Phisitions. fetching a deepe sigh: Nay
(quoth he) do what I will, I may not hope for that,
vnlikelie it is, that I should make peace after my
death, that did naught els but make bate while I
was aliue. And withall, calling his sonnes (these
two scapethrifts to him, who like a couple of
good and vertuous Babes stood grinning all the
while, as glad they should enioye their fathers Patrimonie,
and bee chiefe Martins themselues) and
wringing the elder by the hande, with another
great sigh, said to them as followeth.
            
               
                  Oh my sonnes: I see my doings,
                  Martins oratiō at his death to his two sonnes. 
                  and my course misliked
of many, both the good, and the bad; though also I
haue fauourers of both sorts) marie verie fewe of the
good indeede). The Bishops and their traine,
                  Martin Iu. in Thes. In the Proëme. 
                  though
they stumble at the cause; yet especially mislike my manner
of writing. Those whom foolishly men call Puritanes,
like the matter I haue handled; but the forme
they cannot brooke:
                  His fathers own words. 
                  so that herein, I haue them both for mine
aduersaries. And vnwise I was, I confesse, to vndertake

the matter.
                And not onelie that, but (which
much more grieueth mee) I perceiue that euerie
stage plaier,The causes of old Martins sicknes, sorow and shame. if he play the foole but two houres together,
hath somewhat for his labour: and I that
haue taken as great paines, as the veriest foole of
them, haue trauailed with my toyes, now these
two yeares, and gained nothing, saue that I haue
gotten many thousand eye witnesses of my witles
and pitifull conceites,
               Martin Iu. in conclus. Martin Senior in worke for C. 
               and ameuerie where noted for an
ignominious foole and dig
                     •
                  ised Asse.
            
            
               I had thought that my works sauced with those i
                     •
                  sts
would haue had both speedier accesse to the greater
States,
               The great states beholding to Mar. that think their graue heads cannot be mooued to weightie matters but by iests. 
               and better successe with the common people; for
the humors of men in these daies, especiallie those that
are in any place are giuen thereto. But sure I was deceiued:
The one, are wise, and like of no such fooleries:
& the other, now wearie of our stale mi
                  •
               th,
that for a penie, may haue farre better by oddes at
the Theater and Curtaine, and any blind playing
house euerie day.
            These things with other which I wil keepe to
my selfe, that more neerely touch my conceite (for
my conscience alas is purged and gone) to tell you
the plaine trueth, haue broken my heart, and I am
now no man of this world: which I must tell you
in counsell, I take in good part, for that in verie
deed,Martin feared a shrewd turne. I feared a worse turne: that if you my sonnes
take not the better heed, may happe befall you.
            And though I can scarse speake any more: yet
will I straine my selfe, to vse a fewe words vnto

you (for that none but you & our friends be here)
which receiue from me with good regard, as you
tender the stuffing of your doublet coller, being
your fathers last farewel; that may doo you good,
if you haue the wit, or grace (which I much
doubt) to marke them well.
            Three things there are (my sonnes) that were
my bane,Three causes of Martins death. and whereby (which grieueth me most
of al) I did greatest hurt to the cause I vndertooke,
and most grieuouslie offended, both God, and the
world.
            The first was my foolerie;
               1 Foolerie. vnfit (in truth) for the
matter I handled. For though I knowe iesting is
lawfull e
                        •
                     en in the greatest matters,
                  Martin Senior in work for C. 
                  and that the Lord
is she author both of mirth and grauitie,
                yet after that
some of our companions, had dealt sagelie in the
cause, and gained good credite with some of some
sort; in lept I (like a woodcocke I must confesse).
with twatling tales,Martin Senior in his Pistle and worke for C. and Epitome. of Sir Iefries Aletub; and of
Ganmer Gurtons needle; and of beefe and brues; and
rubbing of boules; and cus
                        •
                     ins, and liuerie coates; and
leadeu shooing hornes, and woodden daggers, and 
                        •
                     xecombes,
and such like tr
                        •
                     mperies: with my fond
phrases of parsous, Fukars, and Currats, Confocation
house, Paltripolitanes: so, ho, how, h
                     •
                  : h
                     •
                  : Tse, Tse,
Tse:The quintescence of Martins wit. 
                  whoop and hall
                        •
                     we: fleering, leering, ieeringe and
such paltrie peering (that I am now ashamed to talke
of) in my Epistle: and in my worke for Cooper, Py,
hy, be, hold my cloake some bodie: I wil so bumseage him;
and the foolish tales of the King of M
                        •
                     ie at H
                        ••
                     ct
                        ••
                     de;
                  
and the boy with the red cappe there: and such other
twittle twattles; that indeede I had learned in Alehouses,
and at the Theater of Lanam and his fellowes;
and in one houre ouerthrewe, what the
wiser sort had been working, and with heaue and
shooue, had reared vp and set on end, many yeares
before.Martin mard all with his foolerie. And therefore my sonnes beware of that.
The woodden dagger may not bee worne at the
backe, where S. Paules fword, hangs by the side:
neither can he well finde fault with the corner cap;
that weareth the furd night cappe on his head,Martins wardrop, a woodden dagger & furd night cap. as I
did. These gambols (my sonnes) are implements
for the Stage, and beseeme Iesters, and Plaiers, but
are not fit for Church plotters, nor common wealth
casters, such as wee are: which I must now confesse
was one my foule errors. And therefore
(my good sonnes) auoide it, as you tender the seruice
you haue in hand; and hope one day, to sit alost
in your long wished for Consistorie, amongst
your lay Lordings, which your father hath lost
for euer, through his foolerie.
            The next meanes of my miserie, was my Ribaudrie.
               2 Ribaudrie.
An homelie terme (speciallie of my selfe)
but it is now no time to dissemble; and I wil conceale
nothing, that may tend to your instruction;
whom I would faine bring to some wit & grace,
if it might be, which I could neuer yet doo. And
herein I must confesse, I called them, Asses andOld Martin throughout all his workes.
               Dunces; that I knewe farre better schollers than
my selfe. I noted small faults in them, as bowling,

and by my faith,Martin Sen. in his Pistle. and such other trifles: and knew
farre greater in my selfe, and my purest brethren.
Wherein, my part (I confesse) had been, first priuatelie
to haue warned them: whereas now, I
haue both broken the rule of the Gospell, and giuen
the enemies cause to speake eurill of the Gospell,
which I cannot denic, they soundly preach. I
haue most intemperatly, raised against them, with
most shamefull and vnseemelie termes,The flowre of Martins sweet phrases. as Swinish,
and Antichristian rable, proude, popish, presumptuous,
prophane, paltri
                     •
                  , pestilent, and pernicious Prelates,
wainscot faces, Doltes, Asses, Beastes, Patches, knaues,
kaitiues, lewd swagges, ambicious wretches, and many
other like most filthie phrases, which now grie,
ueth me to the very heart to thinke of, fitter (I confesse)
for Bedlem, than for our pretended puritie.
Wherein,Martin now seeth himselfe in his owne 
                     •
                  lasse. I haue not spared (the more knaue I)
(and with that he strake himselfe on the breast)
such as her Maiestie hath made speciall choise of,
for her Counsell; whereby also, I hindered our
cause more at that time, than I did foresee: and
therein to be plaine, I shewed my selfe the greatest
Asse of all.A Macheuillein tricke of the Martinists yet in practise. Againe (which worse was) manie of
them I slandered against mine owne knowledge;
& thought it enough, if I might but deuise against
them the vilest things of the world, to bring them
in hatred with the credulous multitude: (a di
                  •
               ellish
tricke, my sonnes, which I learned in Machiuell,Old Martin in his 
                     〈◊〉
                   &c.
but take heede of it for it asketh vengeance).
As some to be Papists, whom I knew to be sound

Protestants: some to fauour the Spaniards, who I
knewe detested them: Some to bee traitors, who
my conscience tolde me were good subiects: yea
(if I should speake the truth and shame the diuell)
farre better than my selfe: whereby what I lost,
you may consider of; but gained naught els, saue
that, which commonlie liers doo; which was,
when I spake the trueth, no man would beleeue
me, no not the veriest kennell raker, nor vilest rascall
that was in a countrie, except hee were of our
crue;The greatest part of Martins thousands are such. of which sort indeede, wee haue no small
store. But sonnes, let these fewe words serue herein:
for I am wearie of this rehearsall, that hath
been the verie knife to cut my throte: and therefore
(and you bee wise) see that no such sharpe
stuffe, doo passe your weesell. And the best (when
all is done) is to mend our selues;
                  Martin Iu. in Thes. In the prome old Martins owne words. that the Lord
knoweth haue the greatest need thereof, euen of
all others, the best of vs, be they neuer so bad.
            The third, and last meanes that hath brought 
me to my last end, was worst of all; and that was
(woe is mee therefore) my Blasphemie.
               Blasphemie. For beeing
once entered into the vicelike vaine of foolerie;
and making no respect of men: I was caried
most wickedlie, like a wretch as I was, in a
scorne against the saincts: of GOD, the Scripture
of GOD, and GOD himselfe. I called mine
owne mates, Sainsts; and his Saincts Sirs: 
               wherein
I spared,In his holie Pistle. neither Dauid, nor Peter, nor Paule,
no nor the blessed mother of Christ her selfe:
               
oh vile varlet that I was, (and therewith he whimpered
and put finger in the eye, which was some
signe of grace) whom the spirit of God himselfe
said,Martin mocks the Saincts. speaking within her, that all generations should
still call blessed.
               Preserreth his owne Saincts. For she is blessed, and a glorious
Sainct: and I a shamefull wretch, and most miserable
miscreant. Yea the Scriptures themselues, I
made a mocke of:Iesteth with the Scriptures. for to a text of S. Peter, I tacked
on a blind iest, of the Bishop of Rochesters benefice:
                and
made a fooles motley of it, like a prophane & blasphemous
kaitife as I was: whereby I mooued all
sorts of people,In his Lucianlike Pistle. that professed any religion, to detest
& condemne me for a most manifest Atheist:
of which humour, I feare, many of our hottest fauorites be.
            But let that rest: and let them looke to it themselues,
and others, whom it concernes: and to end
with you, of whom I haue greatest care (being the
liuelie image of my selfe whom I must leaue behinde
me that may continue the memorie of our
house): this is the short & the long, and the somme
of all. Auoide these three rockes, whereon your
father hath made his shipwracke: Foolerie, Ribaudrie,
and Blasphemi
                     •
                  . Be quiet at home; wee haue
troubles enough abroad. It is no time now to play
the fooles:Wise men indeed care for no 
                     •
                  ooles. wise mens heads are occupied about
great matters, & they haue better meanes to make
them merie. And touching the matter you striue
for,Martins mark. take heede what you do: you shoot at Church
liuings; you hope to haue the spoyle. See what

hath come by it in Scotland: Forsee what will become
of it here: forget not the last partition. Omnia
in aduersum spectantia, nulla retrorsum. Remember
the shreddes that fall into the Tailors hell, neuer
come backe to couer your backe. (I m
                  •
               ane the
clawes of our rauenous brethren) If you play the
goose, and lend them a fether to fether their shaft
withall, they will shoot you through:Martin plaies the goose. and then
will you creake out too late, as hee did, Hei mihi
quod propr
                     •
                  s pennis pereo. And so will you Sonnes
both, like a couple of goosecaps, (if you looke not
to it) as your father did, with your own goose quil.
Let thē once cut a helme for their hatchet, but of a
braunch of you, and they will cut downe all the
wood handsmooth: for the which you can blame
nothing, but the foolish handle. The Aegle, watcheth
for Iacke dawe, till he haue broken the shell,Martin like lacke dawe.
that he maie runne away with the kernell. So as,
though they perswade you to chatter like Pies, yet
they wil make right Iacke dawes of you. They will
praise you, as the fox did the foolish Crow: and call
you faire birds, as white as the driuen snowe, and
make you open your mouth to sing, after their
pipe, that they may deceiue you of the meate, you
haue in your mouth. And when they once haue i
                  •
               
they wil then say to you, Nec vocem (stulte) nec mentem
habes.
               A
                     •
                  ue Peri phrasis of Martin. 
               That is, (Martin) you haue plaied the
foole for vs, and you shall haue a fooles reward:
that is, a flap with a foxe taile: and then shall you
be as verie dogbolts, as now the other are dunces,

with them. They will commend you to the skies,
as the Woolfe did the Conie, and the Ramme;
and say to you, O you are no rauenous beasts; you
content your selues with grasse; you eate no flesh;
you feed, and clothe others: but at the last, he will
eate you both (quoth Rei
                     •
                  old the Foxe who is mine
author).Martin the Father and his two yonglings. For his two sonnes are; Emptie bellie, and
Neuer be full, and himselfe is called Deuoure all. To
conclude, (for it is now no time to fiddle out fables,
though it bee the fittest learning for your capacities)
The beastes you hunt withall, must haue
all. And this will bee the end of all, after your hot
hunting; So
                     ••
                   hoc audito abierunt tristes non ausi mutire
contra lupos. And so I wil end: for these are the
things, that haue ended me.
            And therewithal, lifting vp himselfe on his pillowe,
he commanded the elder Martin, to go into
his studie, and to fetch his Will, that lay sealed in
his deske,A fit Label for a 
                     ••
                  beller. and bound fast with an hempen string:
which when he had brought, he commanded to
be broken vp, & to be read in their hearing; which
was as followeth.
            After he had begun with the vsuall stile;Martins Will. next
touching his bodie, (for it should seeme he had
forgotten his soule: for the partie that heard it
told me, he heard no word of it) he would, should
not be buried in any Church,
               The place of his buriall. (especiallie Cathedrall,
which euer he detested) Chappell, nor Churchyard;
for that they had been prophaned, with superstition:
but in some barne, outhouse, or field, (yea rather

ther then faile dunghill) where their priuie prophecyings
had been vsed; without bell, pompe,
or any solemnitie; saue that his friends should
mourne for him in gownes, and whoods, of a
bright yellowe; the whoods made of a straunge
fashion, for no ordinarie thing contented him (belike
with a crest after Hoydens cut) and Minstrells
going before him;The manner of his buriall. wherein hee would haue a
Hornepipe at any hand,Mourning apparell. because he loued that instrument
aboue measure: the rest he referred to
their discretion; but a Rebuke, and a Shame, in my
opinion,Mastins Musicke. were the fittest fiddles for him. Minister
he would haue none to burie him, but his sonne,
or some one of his lay brethren, to tumble him into
the pit. He would not be laid East, and West,
(for hee euer went against the haire) but North,His manner of lying.
and South: I think because ab Aquilone omne malum;
and the South wind euer brings corruption
with it. Tomb he would haue none,Graue. (for feare belike
that his disciples finding the monumēt, wold
commit some Idola
                  ••
               ie to it) nor Epitaph vpon his
graue,Inscription. but in some post, or tree, not farre from it,
he would haue onelie engrauen;
M. M. M.
Whereby his sonnes say, he meant;
Memoriae Martini magni.
But I thinke rather, this;
M
                     •
                  nstrum Mundi Martinus.
            
            
               
This being thus prouided for, afterwards ensued
his bequestes,Martins Legacies. in manner and forme following.
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                            Inprimis, I giue and bequeath, to Martin Senior,
my eldest sonne, and Martin Iunior, my younger
sonne,His Knauerie and Ribaudr
                                 •
                              . ioyntlie, al my knauerie, full and whole; together
with my Ribaudrie, with my two Manners
of lying,His two Manners of lying and slandering. and slandering, annexed thereunto,
to be equallie diuided betwixt them: and for want
of heires of their bodies, vnlawfullie begotten (or
els in this land they are not inheritable) to my
heires at large, of the house of Martinisme: requiring
them to vse it more wiselie, and in other cases
than I did.
                        
                            Item, al my foolerie I bequeath to my good
friend Lanam;His Foolerie. and his consort, of whom I first
had it: which though it bee now outworne and
stale,Lanam looke to your Legacie. and farre inferiour to his, yet to him it belongeth
of right, and may serue (perhappes) for yong
beginners, if it be newe varnisht.
                        
                            Item, my scolding and rayling, I bequeath to
my deare Sister,His scolding and rayling. Dame Law. and to her good
gossips, of the houshold of Martinisme, & to their
heires female for euer.
                        
                            Item, to my 
                              •
                           ealous brother Wig. I beq
                              ••
                           ath
the Vicarege of S. Pooles;
                           His Vicaredge of S Fooles. And for that I could neuer
abide nou residents, he shall bee resident thereon,
during his life; the Patronage thereof, alwaies
reserued to my two Sonnes. Prouided alwaie, that

                              •
                           one shall haue 
                              〈◊〉
                            but a Martinist;
                           A good prouiso. and he not to be

admitted by any Bishop, but by the lay Martinists
of the same Parish: wherein I will haue no difference
to be made, betwixt the veriest foole, and wisest
man; but all men shall haue their voyces indifferentlie;
because it is a matter that concerneth al,
and eueric one particulerlie, of that familie.
                        Item, I bequeath to my deare cosen P
                                 •
                              ag. my 
cradle, swadling cloutes,His Cradle. and cast linnen; for that I
heare, he is like to prooue a father of manie children,
whom I doubt not one day he will make all
Martinists.
                        
                        Item, I bequeath to Greenewood, Browne, and 
Barrow, my good friends, my parrock of ground,
lying on the North side of London,His house by London. and abutting
vppon three high waies, wherevpon standeth a
Cottage, built triangle wise, with the appurrenances;
onelie for the terme of their three liues; reseruing
the reuersion thereof, to my two sonnes,
and the heires of their bodies as before,Inheritance to the Martinists. and for
want thereof, to my heires at large, of the familie
of Martinists for euer.
                        Item, I bequeath to my lay brethren, my works 
of Machiuell, with my marginall notes, and scholies
therevpon;His workes of Machiuell. wishing them to peruse, and mark
them well, being the verie Thalmud, and Alcoran
of all our Martinisme.
                        
                        Item, I bequeath to all the friends and fauourers 
of that faction, for a gentle remembrance, a Ring;
wherein shall be engrauen,Rings for remembrance. on the inside; Nitimur
inuetitum: and on the outside, St
                                 ••
                              crum plena sunt

omnia: wherein I will haue Waldgrane the Printer,
and Cliffe the godlie Cobler, especiallie to bee
remembred.
                        
                            Item, I bequeath all my plots, and modells, that
I haue drawne,His plots and modells. of Churches, & Common weales,
(a matter of great importance) to the number of
twelue, for euerie moneth of the yeare one, both
for the one and the other, to our chiefe builders,
(you knowe their names) to dispose of at their
pleasure.
                        
                            Item, touching my Wardrop, I bequeath al my
apparell,His Wardrop. equallie to bee distributed betwixt my
two sonnes: prouided, that my eldest sonne shall
haue my best sute; as Coate, whood, Coxecombe,
and bable, and all the rest sutable thereunto.
                        
                            Last of all, I giue and bequeath my affections
to Bridewell;His Entralls. my senses to Bedlem; my conditions
to Newgate; my heart to the beastes; my bowells
to the birds; and my bodie at the discretion
of my ouerseers: that is, (I say) neither in Church,
Churchyard, nor Chappell of ease, nor any place
appoynted by order, for that purpose.
                        
                            The rest of all my goods, and Chattels, not before
bequeathed,His goods. especiallie my imperfect works,
and wast papers, I giue and bequeath to my two
Martins, whom ioyndy I make my exequutors,
and I appoynt my especiall good friends Prichard
and Penrie to bee mine ouerseers;His oue
                                 •
                              see
                                 •
                              . and to each of
them an Aduouson: To the former of small Wittam:
and to the other of little Brainford, now in the

possession of Pag. and Wig. for he hath a pluralitie;
reseruing the Patronages, and with the conditions
as aboue.
                        And for that I knowe the Ciuilians are not my
friends:The prouing of his Will. for in my foolerie I called them See-villaines,
(which was foolishlie done of me, for they
might see vs, as well as others) and that I shal hardlie
haue any thing proued at their hands; and my
will being a prerogatiue case, for that my doings
are dispersed ouer the whole land, will hardlie
passe with such expedition, as is conuenient: let
my exequutors performe the legacies, & let them
proue it, or disproue it, at their pleasure. For you
may liue to see the day, (if you handle your matters
wiselie) which day I hoped my selfe to see,
when all willes shall depend of your willes, and
come to be proued in your Consistorie.
                        
                           Witnesses P. T. B. E. M. F. G. K.
                              Witnesses.
                            Copia vera.
                     
                  
               
            
            This being done; it was not halfe an houre,Martins death. but
he began to faint: and turning about on his left
side, hee belked twise: and as my friend Pasquin
reporteth verie truelie, the third time he belked
out his breath.
            
               
The Phisitians,His Anatomie. for that they doubted of his disease,
though they knewe he wanted no imperfections,
would needes haue him cut vp, where they
found a wonderfull corrupt carcasse.
            His Heart,His Heart. great, yet hollowe; (as before manie
gessed) especiallie to the peace of the Church,
and quiet of the State.Lungs. His Lungs, huge and made
to prate. His Spleen large,Spleene. that made him so gamesome.
His Gall,Gall. wonderfullie ouerflowen with
choller, that made him so testie, & waiward withall.
His Stomacke,Stomacke. full of grosse and salt humors,
that procured him that same Caninum appetitum,
that he had, and vnquenchable desire, to deuoure
all. His Entrailes full of filth,Entrailes notwithstanding he
had vttered so much before (marie of late daies indeede,
as you heard, he voided nothing). I passe ouer
the rest, whereof there was not one good part,
but all disordered (as hee shewed himselfe aliue)
and cleane rotten.Tongue. I had forgotten his Tongue,
which was wonderfullie swolne in his mouth; I
thinke by reason of his blasphemie.
            But when they came to open the Head,Head. (a
straunge case) they found no crumme of braine
within it.
            Wherefore hauing bestowed his bowells in a
ditch, (for they might not carie them farther from
the place) and fild vp his hungrie bellie (that could
neuer be full,Spicing. while he was aliue) with coale dust;
for spice they would not bestowe, (his carrion being
not worth it) and sawe dust they could haue

none: They wrapt him in a blanket, (like a dogge
to bee canuasde) for that all others are lapped in
sheetes,Shrude. (and he loued euer to be singuler) and so
threwe him vnder boord.
            The next night after,His Buriall. (for the horrible stinke
thereof, because his bodie was so corrupt) and for
that he durst not in his life time bee seene by day,
being a night bird; they carried him foorth in the
darke; and by reason he died excommunicate, and
they might not therefore burie him in Christian
buriall, and his will was not to come there in anie
wise; they brought him vnawares to a dunghill,Mar. Graue.
taking it for a tumpe, since a Tombe might not
be had, and there cast him in.
            And so, if any man will knowe where Martin
lies; let him vnderstand, that he is endunged in the
field of Confusion
               
                  •
                enditched in the pit of Perdition:
and cast ouer with the dirt of Derision: and there
lieth he; and so I leaue him, with this Catastrophe.
               
                  Sic pereant comnes
                  Martini & Martinistae.
               
            
            And this is the very truth of Old Martins death,
which if the young Martins, or any Martinist of
them all denie; I cast him here my Mitten vpon
the quarrell.
         
         
            
            The true Copie of such Epitaphs
as were made by old Martins fu
               
                  •
               otites,
and others for him.
            
               YEllout thou earth, and ye two lights of heauen;
               Ye Graces three, and Elements foure on hie:
               Ye senses fiue, sixe song noates; Sciences seauen,
               Eight parts of speach, and Muses nine mourne by:
               Weepe our tenne Tribes, with sects tenne times eleu
                     •
                  n:
               Ring out thy Noone, (O twelue a Clocke) and 
                     •
                  rie.
               But chiefly waile our orders foure and twentie,
               Martin is dead, our Master deere and deintie.
               Grex Martinistarum.
            
            
               NOw Martin's dead, the tipe of all our hope:
               And that our building leanes, and lies aslope:
               If men might hang, when they haue lust thereto,
               I knowe for my 
                     〈◊〉
                  , what I would streight do
                     •
                  .
               ꝙ. Pen.
            
            
               ARt dead Old Martin? farewell then our schooles,
               
                  Martins thy sonnes, are but two paltrie fooles.
               ꝙ. Pri.
            
            
               A Dieu both naule and bristles, now for euer;
               The shoe and soale (ah woe is me) must seuer.
               Bewaile mine Aule, thy sharpest point is gone.
               My bristle's broke, and I am left alone.
               Farewell old shoes, thombe stall, and clouting lether,
               
                  Martin is done, and we vndone together.
               ꝙ. Cliffe the godlie Cobler.
            
            
               
               AWay with silke, for I will mourne in sack.
               
                  Martin is dead, our newe sect goes to wrack
               Come gossips mine, put finger in the eie;
               He made vs laugh, but now must make vs crie.
               ꝙ. Dame Law.
            
            
               MY hope once was my old shooes should be sticht,
               My thumbesygilt, that were before b
                     •
                  pitcht,
               Now Martins gon, and laid full deepe in ground;
               My gentries lost before it could be found.
               ꝙ. Newmanthe Cobler.
            
            
               Sundrie other Epitaphs his friends haue made
for him, but they runne secretlie amongst them, &
none may see them, but such as are of that famelie.
But these that folow are framed by some frends of
theirs that are yet vnknowne, but wish to be better
acquainted with them.
               YEE Martin beasts, bewaile this wofull ha
                     •
                  ;
               Both Martin Apes, and dronken Martins all;
               
                  Martin your mast, alas hath caught a clap,
               And Martinisme, with him, is like to fall.
               ꝙ. R. M.
            
            
               FArewell old Martin, and three Ms. with thee;
               
                  Mirth, Madnesse, Mischiefe, in the highest degree.
               ꝙ. R. C.
            
            
               THou didst reprooue me, for my doggs of late;
               Thy selfe being worse, than any Curre I keepe.
               My dogges bite none, but where they iustlie hate:
               Thou those, that neuer hurt thee, bitst most deeepe.
               
                  
But hadst thou liu'd, my doggs had hun
                     •
                  ed thee,
               Now thou art dead, all carr
                     •
                  on they doo flee.
               ꝙ. D. K.
            
            
               LAment you fooles, ye vices make your moan
                     •
                  ,
               Yee Ribaulds, railers, and yee lying lads:
               Yee Scismatiques, and Sectaries, each one:
               Yee Malcontents and 
                     •
                  ke ye mutinous swads:
               
               Yee Machiuelists, Athiests, and each mischieuous head:
               Bewaile, for Martin your great Captaine's dead.
               ꝙ. N. N.
            
            
               HA, he, tse, tse py, hy, see fortunes wheeles,
               So how, Mad Martin hath turnde vp his heeles.
               ꝙ. R. L.
            
            
               
                  London lament, the East, that stickes on sand:
               The West, that stands before the statelie hall:
               The North, the boure, thats bound with triple hand.
               The South, where some at Watring catch a fall,
               
                  Newgate, and Bedlem, Clinke, and Bridwell bray,
               And ye Crowes crie, for yee haue lost your praye.
               ꝙ. R. R.
            
            
               YOu saie, that Martin at the Groyne was mard;
               It was not so, as I for trueth haue hard.
               But whether so, or no, it is all one;
               A great good turne so bad a beast is gone.
               ꝙ. W. T.
            
            
               
                  MArtin the great, what? rayler, foole, or lier,
               Is dead. How? Dround, or burnt, or hangd w
                     ••
                   he?
               No, these are kept for his eld'st scuruie squire
               And yonger brat; as you may shortlie see,
               ꝙ. T. L.
            
            
               
               
                  MArtin denide that Christ went downe to hell:
               Yet he himselfe is theher now descended,
               Then did he more, than Christ (belike) could well:
               But all this doubt shall in this sort be ended:
               Christ did descend, and did returne thence too,
               Which he cannot, and therefore lesse can doo.
               S. I.
            
            
               The lamentation of the
Salt-peeter man.
               
                  MArtin I would, long since, thou hadst been dead,
               And thy two sonnes faire buried close by thee:
               Then had I not by thy faire words been led
               To this foule place, that now i
                     •
                   happened me:
               But were I out; ere shackles I would shake,
               Of all your bones gunpowder would I make.
            
            
               The Authors.
Epitaph.
               
                  HIc iacet, vt pinus,
                  Nec Caesar, nec Ninus,
                  Nec magnus God winus,
                  Nec Petrus, nec Linus,
                  Nec plus, nec minus,
                  Quam clandestinus,
                  Miser ille Martinus,
                  Videte singul
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  
                  O Vos Martinistae
                  Et Vos Brounistae,
                  Et Famililouistae,
                  Et Anabaptistae,
                  Et omnes sectistae,
                  Et Machiuelistae,
                  Et Atheistae,
                  Quorum dux fuit iste,
                  Lugete singuli.
               
               
                  At gens Anglorum,
                  Praesertim verorum,
                  Nec non, qui morum,
                  Estis bonorum,
                  Inimici horum,
                  Ut est decorum,
                  Per omne forum,
                  In soecula soeculorum,
                  Gaudete singuli.
               
               FINIS.
               Qd. MARPHOREVS.
            
         
         
            
            The conclusion to the two
young Martins.
            
               ANd now pretie youthes, that your
Fathers funerals are ended, we shal
haue some nugifriuolous leasure
to talke with you; which shall bee
doubt you not with speed conuenient.
For as there want not desperate
Dicks amongst you, to
write, and (if opportunity serued) no doubt to work
anything,Martin shall not want Antagonists. be it neuer so mischieuous: so are there
you shall well knowe it, some Sco
                     •
                  uolas that haue vowed
by all lawfull meanes to remoue, such proude and
pestilent Porsennaes, as you, and your mates are, from
the desperate seege of our walls. In the meane space,
that you may continue your fathers sweet memorie,
and good credit, amongst vs; play still the desperate,
and shame
                  •
               s Swadds as you haue begonn; for
you couch your Coddsheads; and your paper cannot
blush, nor your selues neither, if you durst shew your
faces, being past grace.
            Onely, one pretie grace you haue, (speciallie you
Sir Martin the More. K.) that if any man anger you
(as some did of late,Martins chiefe grace. and more doubt you not will a
little better) your Asses heeles, are vp streight, and
you winse,Martin learn
                     •
                   to climbe gibbe
                     ••
                  s. as if you had a swarme of Bees behinde
you, and you skip vp streight to the top of some gibbett;
where indeed you may be bold (being all tenements
belonging to your chiefe mansion house) and
in the name of another, you play the parte of your
owne proper person, which is (as your other brother
tels you) as if you should be taken by the Constable,
for cutting of a purse; you would by and by crie out,
and saie to him; O Sir your nose sitts not right on

your face, which, albeit, it be a pretie theeuish grace:
yet you vse that so like a foole to,Two foolish tricks of Martin. as it looseth the
grace, that (for want of 
                  〈◊〉
                grace) otherwise it
might 
                  〈◊〉
               
had For first 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Wi
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , when you
knowe not who bo
                  •
               d you, you strike him that first

                  〈◊〉
                your foolish head. You are so afraide of Sa
                  
                     •••
                  
               
that you 
                  〈◊〉
                (like a woodcock) 
                  •••
               ie thing
that gird
                  •
                you comes from thence, for that there
first began your bane.
            And then like a Noddie, because one saith that
your workes should passe the waie of all wast writings,
               The whip for the Ape. you
giue him his owne worde againe, and make him
Gr
                     ••
                  me of a close 
                  〈◊〉
               , which office if he had (but
he leaueth it to such cl
                  •
               anlie ma
                  •
               es as your nowne
good selfe) the fees I dare say for him, (Martin)
should bee yours. And because hee tells you of the
gallowes, that both you deserue, & cannot but befall
you: you come in with the fame againe; which
shewes you to be but a doltish dunce, and make vs a
speach fitting your owne selfe.
            But Sirra, see you learne your lesson perfectlie,
and haue it without booke ad vnguem,
               A f
                     •
                  iendly admonition to Martin Senior. when it may
stand you in steede, that when you come to your
climing, that is vp Newgate, vp Hurdle, vp Holborne,
vp Tiburne, vp cart:
               Martins climing. (as if you follow your rebellious
vaine, that shall bee proued, you are like shortlie to
doo, if you happen vppon your Salt-peter mans and
your two fugitiue printers good luck) and to take reall,
and actuall possession, not of the single gibbe
                  •
               ,
but of the triple trestle, your vndoubted inheritance,
that your father left you, which yee reserue (as reason
is) for your selfe, and your friends as your onelie
Prerogatiue,Martins Pr
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  ogatiue. you may pron
                  •
               unce it perfectlie, to
the edifying of your brethren, and make a better

end than you haue done a beginning.
            In the meane space wee haue pro
                  •
               ided you
steede of a single) a triple Epitaph,
               (in Martin Seniors Epitaph. to bee engrauen,
not on your graue (for you will neuer come to the
worship, to haue so much as a ditch, or a dunghill, as
your Father had to lye in) but in the three postes, of
your place Paramount, in worship of the Father,
and his two sonnes, which is as followeth.
            Who markes the scope whereto
            vile Martins words doo tend:
            Will saie a rope of right,
            must be at last his end.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Vpon the first
post.
                        HEre swinge
                              ••
                            he,
                        One of th
                              ••
                            hree,
                        Well knowne to be,
                        rebellious mates.
                        But this, le
                              •
                           d swad,
                        His match nere had,
                        No not his dad,
                        for foe to states.
                     
                     
                        
                        The second poste.
                        His heart, in mutinie,
                        His tongue in blasphemie,
                        His life in villanie,
                        was his desire,
                        By nature an Athiest
                        
                        By arte a Machiuelist,
                        
                        In summe a Sathanist,
                        
                        loe here his hire.
                     
                     
                        The third poste.
                        Ye birds of the Skie,
                        Both Crowe, and pie,
                        Come, and drawe nie.
                        behold a feast.
                        Tiburne your host,
                        On his triplepost,
                        Hath made a rost.
                        and kild a beast.
                     
                  
               
            
            And so (gentle Martin) much good doo it you:
you see your fare for this time, and you are hartelie welcome.
Take this in good parte, the next course shall be
prouided for your own
                  ••
               ooth, and glutt you better.
            Farwell Pasquin, and dispatch.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   