
      
         
            
            
            A Booke of the Arte and maner, howe to plant and graffe all ſortes of trees, howe to ſet ſtones, and ſowe Pepines to make wylde trees to graffe on, as alſo remedies and mediicnes. VVith diuers other newe practiſe, by one of the Abbey of Saint Vincent in Fraunce, practiſed with his owne handes, deuided into ſeauen Chapters, as hereafter more plainely ſhall appeare, With an addition in the ende of this booke, of certaine Dutch practiſes, ſet forth and Engliſhed, by Leonard Maſcall.
            
            
            
               In laudem inciſionis diſtichon,
               Heſperidum Campi quicquid Romanaque tellus,
               Fructificat nobis, inciſione datur.
            
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Henrie Denham, for Iohn Wight.
         
         
            
            The booke vnto the Reader.
            EChe wyght that willing is to knowe,
            The way to graffe and plant:
            May here finde plentie of that ſkill,
            That earſt hath bene but ſcant.
            To plant or graffe in other tymes,
            As well as in the ſpring:
            I teach by good experience,
            To doe an eaſie thing.
            The pleaſure of this ſkill is great,
            The profite is not ſmall:
            To ſuch men as will practiſe it,
            In things méere naturall.
            The poore man may with pleaſure finde,
            Some thing to helpe his méede,
            So may the riche man reape ſome fruite,
            Where earſt he had but wéede.
            The noble man that néedeth naught,
            May thereby haue at will:
            Such pleaſaunt fruit to ſerue his vſe,
            And giue eche man his fill.
            The common weale cannot but winne,
            Where eche man doth entende:
            By ſkill to make the good fruites mo,
            And yll fruites to amende.
            Weigh well my wordes, and thou ſhalt finde,
            All true that I doe tell:
            Mine Authour doth not write by geſſe,
            Practiſe made him excell.
            If thou wilt practiſe as he did,
            Thou mayſt finde out much more:
            He hath not ſound out all the truth,
            That nature hath in ſtore.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            To the right honorable and my very good Lorde, Syr Iohn Pawlet Knight, Lorde S. Iohn, Leonarde Maſcall wiſheth prosperous health, with continuall encreaſe of honour.
            
               RIght honorable, among all ſciences that may bee lightly obtayned, and among many goodly exerciſes and experiences for men, there is none (among the reaſt) more meete and requiſite, or that more doth refreſh the vital ſpirits of men, nor more engender admiration in the effectes of nature, or that is cauſe of greater recreation to the wearie and traueyled ſpirite of man, or more profitable to mans life, than is the ſkil of planting and graffing, the which not only we may ſee with our eyes, but alſo feele with our handes in the ſecret workes of nature: yea, nothing more diſcouereth vnto vs the great & incomprehenſible worke of god, that of one litle Pepin ſede, Nut or ſmall plant, may come the ſelfeſame herb or tree, & to bring forth infinite of the ſame fruit, which alſo doth ſhine and ſhew forth it ſelfe vnto vs, eſpecially in the ſpring time, by their diuerſitie of ſhootes, bloſſoms & buds, in diuers kindes of nature, by the goodneſſe and mightie power of the great Lorde and Creator towardes his people, in ſuch thinges as commeth forth of the naturall earth, to nouriſhe, to ſuſtayne and maintaine our lyues. What greater pleaſure can there be, than to ſmell the ſweete odour of herbes, trees, and fruites, and to beholde the goodly colour of the ſame, which in certaine tymes of the yeare commeth foorth of the wombe of their mother and nourſe, and ſo to vnderſtande the ſecrete operation in the ſame. And to be ſhort, of this labour (in our lyues) we do take part therof with great gaines and reuenues that come therby, where as through ydleneſſe there commeth none:

therefore to augment the ſame, it ſhall be good to appeaſe and mittigate all fond delightes and vaine pleaſures, with ſuch lyke vanities, and cleane put out and aboliſh the delightes of all vices. Wherefore the Poet ſayth: let vs prayſe the true labouring houre of the true labourer. Therevpon many great Lordes and noble perſonages, haue left their theatres, pleaſant ſtages, goodly paſtimes, forſaking and deſpiſing their pleaſures, not much regarding rich Diademes, and coſtly perfumes, but haue giuen themſelues to Planting and Graffing, and ſuch like. In ſuch ſort, that if we ſhould diligently ſearch, and recite all the diſcourſe of auncient Hiſtories, as of late dayes we ſhould finde, that the moſt noble perſonages through their vertue, hath ſhewed many goodlye examples, as in one Theatre a ſupreme degree honorable: nor haue had nothing more deare, more requiſite, or more greatly in cōmendation, than Planting & Graffing of fruit. Cyrus a great king of the Perſians (as witneſſe Xenophon,) did ſo much delite in the Art of planting & graffing, (which did ſhew a great prayſe and glorie vnto his perſonage,) that he had no greater deſire or pleaſure, than when he might occupy himſelfe in Planting & Graffing to garniſh the earth, to place and order thereon certaine number of trees. The Emperour Diocleſian, (as doth recite, Sextus Aurelius Victor,) of his owne good will without any conſtraynt, did leaue the ſcepter of his Empire for to remain continually in the fieldes. So much pleaſure did he take in planting of fruit, in making of Orchardes & Gardens, which he did make, garniſh, and finiſhe with his owne handes. The Senatours, Dictatours, and Conſuls of the Romaynes, among all other things haue commended Planting and Graffing to bee one of the moſt flouriſhing labours in this worlde for the common wealth, the which was celebrated and counted a great vertue:

yea, they did ſo much eſteeme it, that they did hang tables thereof in diuers places, neuer thinking the tyme more aptly ſpent, than in Plāting & Graffing, nothing more contenting themſelues, nothing more delighted in any other affayres for the common wealth, than in ſetting, ſowing or planting on the earth. How much we may prayſe of late dayes and commend our trauailers from other countreys, it is eaſie to be perceyued and knowne, but of Lords, Gentlemen, & Merchants, which haue had (as it doth appeare) a great regarde in theſe latter dayes, howe they might folow the example of others: Wherby it hath repleniſhed this our realme with diuers ſtraunge Plants, Herbes, and Trees, very good and neceſſarie for the common wealth, not heretofore commonly knowne. And beholde, aboue all labours (for the common wealth) we ought to giue a ſure and certaine iudgement, that Planting and Graffing is more highly to be commended and prayſed, than many other worthie and noble things in this worlde: for this Art hath not onely from tyme to tyme, beene put in vſe and practiſe of labour through kings and princes: but alſo it hath bene put in writing of many great and worthie perſonages, in diuers kinde of languages, as in Greke by Philometor, Hieron, Acheleus, Orpheus, Muſceus, Homer, Hoſiode, Conſtantine, Ceſar: and in Latin, by Verron, Caton, Columella, Paladius, Virgill, Amilius Macer, and in the Portingall tongue by king Attalus and Mago, (the which reciteth the Hiſtoryes) that after their death, the bookes of planting and graffing were brought to Rome, ſoone after the deſtruction of Carthage. Likewiſe howe many ſince haue written onely of zeale and loue for their countrey and common wealth, of the fruitfull arte of planting and graffing: yea of late dayes howe many worthie men by their learning haue written likewiſe thereof, ſhoulde

ſeeme that it hath come from their aunceſters, as the greateſt honour, through the noble inuention of the ſame. Lykewiſe I dare boldely affirme, not onely the learned haue written, but alſo haue bene practiſers and inuenters of the ſame, (as witneſſeth diuers hyſtories) in diuers and many ſecrete thing, wherein I dare boldly ſay, they haue not ſo learnedly, nor ſo exactly written, but they haue more exactly taught and left in writyng things ſo certaine, that their ſucceſſours may eaſily marke, obſerue, and keepe the ſame: for euery one hath written according to the nature of his countrey. The Greekes for Greece, the Barbarians for Barbarie, the Italians for Italy, the French men for Fraunce▪ &c. which writing without the order and practiſe, doth very ſmall profite for this our Realme of England, the which I can blame nothing more than the negligence of our nation, which hath had ſmall care heretofore in planting and graffing, in ſome places of this realme (as I haue knowne) where as good and well diſpoſed haue graffed, the euill and malicious perſon hath ſone after deſtroyed them againe: but if we would endeuor our ſelues thervnto (as other countreys doe,) we might floriſh, and haue many a ſtraunge kinde of fruit (which now we haue oftentimes the want thereof) that might greatly pleaſure and ſerue manye wayes both for the rich and poore, as well as in Grece, Barbarie, Italy, or Fraunce, if our nation were giuen ſo well that way as they are.
            Right honourable, for ſo much as I haue bene long in declaring of our predeceſſours, I will nowe leaue, (troubling your honour any further) and reſt from the other things accompliſhing my deſire, beſeching your Lordſhip to take this my ſimple traueile in good part, requeſting no other recompence for my paine herein, but wiſhing it might be put in a generall practiſe thorow

this realme, whereby in ſmall tyme it would grow vnto a great profite and commoditie both to the riche and poore, wherein I ſhould thinke my ſelfe not onely happie, but alſo to haue a iuſt tribute for my deſertes, and alſo this Realme might thereby receyue no ſmall benefite, with prayſe of other countreys, in folowing our predeceſſours in this arte of planting and graffing: ſome places of this Realme are greatly commended and prayſed among others, as Kent for the chiefeſt, which vertue (notwithſtanding) can not be cleane put out or forgoten, ſpecially, when ſuch as your honour ſhall ſeeme to fauour the ſame, and alſo to ſee the forwarde doyngs thereof, in ſuch groundes and Lordſhips as ye doe poſſeſſe, the which at this time hath onely mooued me to attempt vnto your honor this my ſimple trauaile, which is not the only dutie that I owe vnto your honour, but as a dewe deſert, not thinking my ſelfe halfe able to recompence your vertuous liberalitie, nor ſhewing otherwayes howe to recompence the ſame, hath boldned me at this time to commende this my ſimple and rude worke vnto your Lordſhip, not according vnto your eſtate and honour, the which had bene more mete & requiſite to haue had the finiſhing of ſome better worke. Therfore beſeching your honor to wey and accept this mine intent & good will herein, which thing ſo doing, I ſhall thinke my ſelfe not onely happie, but it ſhall encourage me the more hereafter to take in hande the like or better worke. Thus I beſeech the almightie God and creator, to encreaſe your proſperous honour, with long lyfe in health.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GEntle reader thou ſhalt vnderſtande, I haue taken out of diuerſe Authors this ſimple worke, into our Engliſhe tongue, praying thee for to accept it in good part: in ſo doyng thou ſhalt bolden me to trauail further therin: & thus ſhewing my good will in declaring of diuers wayes of planting and graffing, & how in the meeteſt times of the yeare, with ſhewing of diuers commodities and ſecretes herein, howe to ſet or plant with the roote, and without the roote. Howe to ſow or ſet Pepines or curnelles, with the ordering thereof. Alſo howe to clenſe your graffes and cions, howe to helpe barren and ſicke trees, howe to kill wormes and vermin, and to preſerue and keepe fruit: how to plant and proyne your Vines, and to gather and preſſe your grape: how to clenſe & moſſe your trees, how to make your Syder and Perry, howe to ſet, chooſe, order and kepe Hoppes, with many other ſecrete practiſes, which ſhall appeere in the table following, that euery perſon may eaſily perceyue in theſe our dayes more largely of the art of planting and graffing than heretofore hath bene ſhewed. Which thing is not an exerciſe only to the minde, but likewiſe a great profit many wayes, with maintenaunce of health vnto the bodie. Therefore ſpare not the bodie to ſhewe ſo great goodneſſe therevnto, & alſo to the common wealth. In theſe dayes (among the reſt) ye may ſee many, whiche be of the baſe and abiect ſort of

the common wealth, as thoſe which wil not ſtick to ſay. Fie on thee ſlaue, what thing is now counted more filthy in theſe days (amōg faire perſonages) than labooring of the earth which we muſt al liue by. Wel, theſe be dainty perſons: yet thervnto, what thing is more beautifull to the eye, more profitable to the purſe, or more healthful vnto the body? & herein to put away all nouriſhing of vice and idleneſſe, it is eaſie to recite infinite & many worthy Lordes and Gentlemen, which haue had a greate care to followe the example of others. Wherefore gentle Reader, let vs nowe leaue of from al wanton games and idle paſtimes, and be no more as children whiche ſeeke but their owne gaine and pleaſure, let vs therfore ſeeke one of vs for another in all good woorkes for the common wealth, whereby thoſe that doe come after vs may ſo enioye our workes and trauell herein, as we haue done of our predeceſſours, that therein God may be glorified, prayſed and honored in all our workes of planting and graffing: and we therefore maye be thankefull, from age to age, during this mortall lyfe. 
            Amen.
         
         
            
            The Table of all the principall thinges contayned in this booke, which ye ſhall hereafter finde by number & leafe.
            
               Of the ſeauen Chapters following.
            
            
               The firſt Chapter treateth of the ſetting of curnelles, of Apple trees, Plum trees, Peare trees, and Seruice trees.
               
                  1
                  
                     HOw to chooſe your Pepins at the firſt preſſing. 1
                     
                     How to vſe the earth to ſowe your Pepynes on. 2
                     
                     How to ſée vnto pultrye for marring your beddes, and How to wéede or clenſe your beddes or quarters. 2
                     
                     How to plucke vp the wylde cyons. 3
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The ſeconde Chapter treateth, how to ſet your wilde trees come of Pepynes, when they be firſt plucked vp. 3
                     
                     HOw to dung your wilde trées come of Pepines. 3
                     
                     How to cut the principall rootes in ſetting againe. 3
                     
                     How to ſet your trées in ranke being yung. 4
                     
                     How to make a ſpace from one ranke to another. 4
                     
                     How to water your plantes being drye. 4
                     
                     How in remoouing your trées, to plant them againe. 5
                     
                     The beſt time for to remooue. 5
                     
                     Of negligence and forgetfulneſſe. 5
                     
                     Not ſo good to graffe the Seruice trée, as to ſet him. 6
                     
                     Some trées without graffing haue good fruite, and other ſome being graffed, haue but yll fruite. 6
                     
                     For to augment and multiply your trées. 6
                     
                     The maner to chaunge the fruite of the Pepin trée. 7
                     
                     How to make good Cyder. 7
                     
                     To make an Orcharde in fewe yeares. 7
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The thirde Chapter is, of the ſetting of trees which come of Nuttes 8
                     
                     HOw to ſet trées that doe come of Nuttes, and the tyme to plant or ſet them. 8
                     
                     
                        For to ſet them in the ſpring time. 8
                     
                     Of the dung and déepe digging thereof. 9
                     
                     Of Nuttes and ſtones lyke the trées they come of. 9
                     
                     Of planting the ſayde Nuttes. 9
                     
                     Why fruite ſhall not haue ſo good ſauour. 8
                     
                     To ſet the Pine trée. 10. To ſet Cherry trées. 10
                     
                     Trées of Baſtarde and wylde Nuttes. 10
                     
                     To ſet Filbardes and Haſell wandes. 10
                     
                     To ſet Damſons and Plum trées. 10
                     
                     To graffe cyons of Plums, on the lyke. 11
                     
                     To ſet all ſortes of Cherry trées. 11
                     
                     How to order Plum trées, and Cherry trées. 11
                     
                     How to graffe Plum trées, and Cherry trées. 11
                     
                     How to proyne or cut trées. 12
                     
                     How to clenſe and dreſſe the rootes of trées. 12
                     
                     To helpe the ſtocke, being greater than the graffes. 13
                     
                     The Remedy when a bough is broken. 13
                     
                     How to enlarge the hole about the rootes. 14
                     
                     To ſet ſmall ſtaues to ſtay your cyons. 14
                     
                     What trées to proyne. 15
                     
                     Why the ſowre Cherrye dureth not ſo long as the great healme Cherry. 15
                     
                     To graffe one great Cherry with a nother. 16
                     
                     Of déepe ſetting or ſhallowe. 16
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶The fourth Chapter ſheweth how to ſet other trees, of great cyons prickt in the earth without rootes, wyth the proyning of leſſer Cyons.
                     TRées taking roote prickt of braunches. 16
                     
                     How to ſet them. 16
                     
                     How to binde them that be weake. 17
                     
                     How to digge the earth to ſet them in. 17
                     
                     Of Cyons without rootes. 18
                     
                     To plant the Figge trée. 18
                     
                     How to ſet Quinces. 18
                     
                     
                        The way to ſet Mulbery trees. 18. A Nutte therof. 19.
                     
                     The time to cut cyons. 19
                     
                     To ſet buſhe trée, as Gooſeberies and ſmall reyſons. 19
                     
                     Of ſetting Oziars. 19
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The fyft Chapter treateth of foure maner of graffings. 19
                     
                     OF diuers wayes of graffing. 20
                     
                     The firſt way of graffing all ſortes of trées. 20
                     
                     To graffe Apple trées. Peare trées, Quince trées, and Medler trées. 20
                     
                     The graffing of great Cherries. 20
                     
                     To graffe Medlers on other Medlers. 20
                     
                     Of diuers kinde of graffes on one trée. 21
                     
                     The graffing of the Figge trée. 21
                     
                     Of graffing the great Abricotes. 22
                     
                     Of graffing the Seruice trée. 22
                     
                     The ſetting of the Seruice trée. 22
                     
                     Of trées harde to graffe in the ſhielde. 22
                     
                     How to ſée to trées charged with fruite. 22
                     
                     Of trées for to chooſe your graffes on. 23
                     
                     The cions on the Eaſt part are beſt. 23
                     
                     To chooſe your trée for graffes. 23
                     
                     To kepe graffes a long time. 23
                     
                     To kepe graffes ere they budde. 23
                     
                     How ye ought to beginne to graffe. 24
                     
                     When is good graffing the wilde ſtockes. 24
                     
                     To marke if the trée be forwarde or not. 24
                     
                     When ye graffe, what to be furniſhed withall. 24
                     
                     Of graffes not proſpering the firſt yeare. 25
                     
                     For to graffe well & ſure. 25. How to trim your graffes. 25
                     
                     How to cut graffes, for Cherries and Plums. 26
                     
                     A note of your inciſion. 26
                     
                     For to take héede in graffing ye rayſe not the barke. 26
                     
                     How to cut your ſtocke. 27
                     
                     
                        If your wilde ſtocke be great or ſlender. 27
                     
                     Trées as great as ones arme. 27
                     
                     Of great trées as bigge as ones legge. 27
                     
                     The graffes being pinched in the ſtockes. 28
                     
                     How ye ought to cleaue your ſtockes. 28
                     
                     To graffe the braunches of great trées. 28
                     
                     How to cut great olde braunches. 28
                     
                     How to binde your graffes againſt windes. 28
                     
                     To ſet many graffes in one cleft. 29
                     
                     To ſaue your ſtocke before ye cleaue him. 29
                     
                     If the ſtocke cleaue to much, or the barke open. 29
                     
                     How graffes neuer lightly take. 29
                     
                     How to ſet graffes right in the ſtocke. 30
                     
                     Of ſetting in of the graffes. 30. A note of the ſame. 30
                     
                     How to draw forth the wedge. 30
                     
                     How to couer your cliftes on the heade. 31
                     
                     How ye ought to ſée well to the binding of your graffes. 31
                     
                     How ye ought to temper your clay. 31
                     
                     How to buſh your graffe heads. 31
                     
                     The ſeconde way to graffe hye braunches. 32
                     
                     The thirde maner of graffing, is betwixt the barke and the trée. 33
                     
                     Howe to dreſſe the heade, to place your graffes betwixt the barke and the trée. 33
                     
                     How to couer the heade of your ſtocke. 34
                     
                     The maner of graffing in the ſhielde. 34
                     
                     To graffe in Sommer, ſo long as the trées be leaued. 34
                     
                     Of bigge Cions are beſt to graffe. 34
                     
                     How to take of the ſhielde. 35
                     
                     How to know if your ſcutchion or ſhielde be good or bad. 35
                     
                     How to graffe on yoong trées. 36
                     
                     How to ſet or place your ſhielde. 36
                     
                     How to rayſe vp the barke, to ſet your ſhielde on. 36
                     
                     How to binde on your ſhielde. 37
                     
                     On a trée ye may graffe two or thrée ſhieldes. 37
                     
                     Of the time to vnbinde your ſhielde. 37
                     
                     
                        How to cut the braunckes, graft on the trées. 37
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The ſixt Chapter is of transplanting, or altering of trees. 38
                     
                     THe ſoner ye trāſplāt or ſet them it ſhal be the better. 38
                     
                     To plant or ſet towardes the ſowth. 39
                     
                     How to cutte the braunches before ye ſet. 39
                     
                     Apple trées commonly muſt be diſbraunched afore ye ſette them againe. 39
                     
                     All wilde ſtockes muſt be diſbraunched. 40
                     
                     What trées doe loue the Sunne, and what trées the olde ayre. 40
                     
                     Of many ſortes and maners of trées. 40
                     
                     How to plant or ſet trées at large. 41
                     
                     Howe ye ought to enlarge the holes, when ye plant your trées. 43
                     
                     Of dung and good earth for your trées. 43
                     
                     If wormes be in the earth at your rootes of trées. 44
                     
                     To digge well the earth about the rootes. 44
                     
                     The nature of places. 44
                     
                     Of good earth. 44
                     
                     With what ye ought to binde your trées. 45
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     The .vij. Chapter is of medicening and keeping the trees. when they are planted and ſet.
                     THe firſt counſell is, when your trées be but plantes (in drye weather) they muſt be watered. 45
                     
                     With what dung ye ought to dung your trées. 45
                     
                     When ye ought (in Sommer) to vncouer your trées. 46
                     
                     When to cut or proyne your trées. 46
                     
                     How to cut great braunches, and when. 46
                     
                     How to leaue your great braunches cut. 47
                     
                     Of the trées hauing great braunches: 47
                     
                     Of the barrenneſſe of trées, of cutting yll braunches and vncouering the rootes. 47
                     
                     
                        Of trées which ye muſt breake, or plucke vp the rootes. 48
                     
                     What doth make a good Nutte. 48
                     
                     Trées eaten & deſtroyed with cattell, to be graft againe. 48
                     
                     How wilde ſtockes ought not haſtily to be remooued. 49
                     
                     When to cut naughty cions from the heade. 49
                     
                     How ſometime to cut principall members. 49
                     
                     How to guide and gouerne the ſayde trées. 49
                     
                     A kinde of ſickeneſſe in trées. 50
                     
                     Trées which haue wormes in the barke. 50
                     
                     Of ſnayles, antes and wormes that marre trées. 50
                     
                     How to take thoſe ſtraunge créeping wormes. 51
                     
                     A note of yll ayres and weathers. 52
                     
                     To defende the Caterpiller. 53
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶ Here followeth the table of Graffing ſtraunge and ſubtile wayes in vſing of fruites and trees. 54
                     
                     TO graffe one vyne vpon another. 54
                     
                     To helpe a trée to long without fruite. 54
                     
                     To haue Peaches two monethes afore others. 55
                     
                     To haue Damſons vnto Alhallowtide. 55
                     
                     To make Medlers, Cheries and Peaches, in eating, to faſt lyke ſpyce. 55
                     
                     To make a Muſcadell taſte. 55
                     
                     To haue Apples & Peares to come without bloſſoming. 56
                     
                     To haue Apples and Cheſtnuttes rathe, and long on the frées to remayne. 56
                     
                     To haue good Cheries, vnto Alhallowtide. 56
                     
                     To haue rath Medlers two Monethes before others. 56
                     
                     To haue Peares timely. 56
                     
                     To haue Miſples and Medlers without ſtones. 57
                     
                     To haue other Peares betimes. 57
                     
                     To haue Mulberies rype very ſone, and dure long. 57
                     
                     To kéepe Peares a yeare. 57
                     
                     To haue fruite taſt halfe an Apple, and halfe a Peare. 57
                     
                     Tymes of graffing. 58
                     
                     To deſtroy Pyſmiers or Antes, about the trée. 58
                     
                     Another way for the ſame. 58
                     
                     
                        To haue Nuttes, Plummes, and Almondes, greater and fayrer than others. 59
                     
                     To make an Oke (or other trée) as gréene in Winter, as in Sommer. 59
                     
                     The time of planting without rootes, and with rootes. 59
                     
                     To kéepe fruite from the froſt. 59
                     
                     The choſen dayes to plant and graffe. 60
                     
                     To haue gréene roſes all the yeare. 60
                     
                     To kéepe Rayſons or Grapes good, a yeare long. 60
                     
                     To make fruite laxatiue from the trée. 60
                     
                     A note for all plantes and graffes. 61
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Here followeth the Table of certayne Dutch practiſes.62
                     
                     To graffe one Vine on an other. 62
                     
                     To helpe trées that doe not proſper. 72
                     
                     To graffe Apples, to laſt on the trée to Allhalowtide. 74
                     
                     To make Cherryes and Peaches ſmell lyke ſpyce. 74
                     
                     To graffe that an apple ſhalbe halfe ſwéete & halfe ſoure. 75
                     
                     To graffe the Roſe on the holly trée. 75
                     
                     Choſen dayes to graffe in, and to chooſe cyons. 60
                     
                     How to gather your cyons. 61
                     
                     Of wormes in the trées or fruite. 64
                     
                     The ſetting of ſtones, and the ordering thereof. 64
                     
                     How to gather Gumme of any trée. 65
                     
                     To ſet a hole Apple. 65. The ſetting of Almondes. 65
                     
                     The watering of Pepines. 66. To plant or ſet Vines. 66
                     
                     To ſet or plant the Cherry trée. 66
                     
                     To kéepe Cherries good, a yeare. 67
                     
                     Remedie againſt Piſmaires and Antes. 67
                     
                     The ſetting of Cheſtnutes. 68
                     
                     To make all ſtone fruite taſte, as ye ſhall deuiſe good. 68
                     
                     The graffing of the Medler or Miſple. 69
                     
                     The bearing of fruite of the Figge trée. 69
                     
                     The planting the Mulbery and Figge trée. 69
                     
                     
                        The trées that beare bitter fruite. 70
                     
                     To helpe barren trées. 70
                     
                     Another way for the ſame. 70
                     
                     To kéepe fruite after they be gathered. 71
                     
                     The Mulbery trée lyking his earth. 71
                     
                     Of Moſſe on your trées. 71
                     
                     To kéepe Nuttes long. 72
                     
                     To cut or proyne the Peache trée. 72
                     
                     To colour Peach ſtones. 73
                     
                     If Peach trées be troubled with wormes. 73
                     
                     To haue the Peache without ſtones. 73
                     
                     Another way for the ſame. 74
                     
                     The kéeping of Plums. 75
                     
                     The altering of Peares. 76
                     
                     The making of Cyder and Pirry. 76
                     
                     To helpe froſen Apples. 76
                     
                     To make Apples fall from the trée. 77
                     
                     To cherriſh Apple trées. 77
                     
                     To make an Apple grow in a glaſſe. 77
                     
                     To graffe many ſortes of Apples on one trée. 78
                     
                     To colour Apples, what colour ye liſt. 78
                     
                     To graffe, to haue Apples without core. 79
                     
                     The ordering of the Wyne and grape. 79
                     
                     To haue Grapes without ſtones. 83
                     
                     To make the Vyne to bring a grape to taſt lyke Clarret Wyne. 83
                     
                     The gathering of your grapes. 83
                     
                     To know if your Grape be rype or not. 84
                     
                     To prooue or taſte wyne. 84
                     
                     Of the ordering, ſetting, and planting of Hops 85
                     
                     To chooſe your Hop. 86
                     
                     Howe to ſowe the ſéedes. 86
                     
                     Of the ſetting of poles. 87
                     
                     Howe to proyne the Hoppe. 87
                     
                     How to gather your Hoppes. 87
                     
                     
                        What poles are beſt for your purpoſe. 88
                     
                     How to order and dreſſe your hilles. 88
                     
                     Of the beſt grounde for your Hoppe. 88
                     
                     A note of all the reaſt aboue ſayde. 89
                     
                     And howe to packe and kéepe your Hoppes. 89
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Prayſes be to God on hye,
               In all our vvorldly planting:
               And let vs thanke the Romaines alſo,
               For the Art of Graffing.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            An Exhortation to the Planter and Graffer.
            
               ALwayes before ye do intend to plant or graffe, it ſhal be meete to haue good experience in thinges meete for thys Arte, as in knowing the Natures of all trees and fruites, and the differences of Clymates, which be contrarie in euery land: alſo to vnderſtand the Eaſt and Weſt windes, with aſpectes and Starres, to the ende yee maye beginne nothinge that the winde or rayne may oppreſſe, that your labour be not loſt, and to marke alſo and conſider the diſpoſition of the elements that preſent yeare, for all yeares be not of lyke operation, nor yet after one ſorte, the Sommer and Winter doe not beare one face on the earth, nor the ſpring time alwayes rayny, or Autumne alwaies moyſt: of this none haue vnderſtanding, without a good and liuely marking ſpirit, fewe or none (without learning) may diſcerne of the varieties & qualities of the earth, & what he doth aſke or refuſe. Therefore it ſhall be good to haue vnderſtanding of the ground where ye do plant, either Orchard or gardē with fruite, firſt it behooueth to make a ſure defēce, to ye end, that not only rude perſons and children may be kept out, but all kinde of hurtfull cattell indomaging your plantes or trees, as Oxen, kyne, Calues, Horſe, Hogges & ſhepe, as the rubbing of Sheepe doth greatly burne the ſappe, and often doth kyll yong

trees and plantes, and where they are broken or bruſed with cattel, it is doubtful to grow after. It ſhal be good alſo, to ſet, plant or graffe trees all of lyke nature and ſtrength togither, that the great and hye trees, may not ouercome the lowe and weake, for when they be not lyke of heyght, they growe, nor rype not your fruit ſo wel at one time but the one before the other: that earth whiche is good for Vynes, is good alſo for other fruite. Ye muſt digge your holes a yeare before ye plant that the earth may be better ſeaſoned, mortifyed and waxe tender, both by rayne in Winter, and heate in Sommer, that therby your plants may take roote the ſooner, if ye will make your holes, and plant both in a yeare, at the leaſt, ye ought to make your holes two monethes before ye plant, and as ſoone as they be made, then it ſhal be good to burne of ſtrawe or ſuch lyke therin, to make your grounde warme: the further ye make them aſunder, the better your trees ſhall beare: make your holes lyke vnto a fornayce, that is, more ſtraight in the mouth than beneath, whereby the rootes may haue the more roome, and by ſtraightneſſe of the mouth, the leſſe raine or colde ſhal enter by in Winter, and alſo leſſe heate to the roote in Sōmer. Loke alſo that the earth ye put to the rootes, be neyther wet, nor layde in water: they doe commonly leaue a good ſpace betwixt euery tree, for the hanging bowes, for being nyghe togyther, yee cannot ſet rootes, nor ſowe nothing ſo well vnder your trees, nor they wyll not beare

fruite ſo wel: ſome loweth fourtie foote, ſome thirtie betweene euery tree: your plantes ought to be greater than the handle of a ſhouell, and the leſſer the better: ſee they be ſtraight, without knottes or knobbes, hauing a long ſtraight graine or barke, which ſhall the ſooner be apt to take graffes, and when ye ſet braunches or boughes of old trees, chooſe the yongeſt and ſtrayteſt braunche therof, and thoſe trees which haue borne yearely good fruite before, take of thoſe which be on the ſunny ſide, ſoner than thoſe that grow in the court or ſhadowe, and when ye take vppe or alter your plantes, ye ſhal note to what winds your plant is ſubiect, and ſo let them be ſette agayne, but thoſe which haue growne in dry groundes, let them be ſet in moyſt ground: your plantes ought to be cut of three foote long. If ye will ſette two or three plantes togither in a hole, ye muſt take heede the roote of one touche not one another, for then the one will periſhe and rot the other, or dye by wormes or other varmen, and when ye haue placed your plantes in the earth, it ſhall be good to ſtrike downe to the bottō of euery hole two ſhort ſtakes as great as your arme, on either ſide your hole one, & let thē appeare but a little aboue the earth that ye may (therby in Sommer) giue water vnto the rootes if neede be. Your yong plantes, and rooted trees are commonly ſet in Autumme, from the firſt vnto the .xv. of October, yet ſome opinion is, better after Alhollowtide vnto Chriſtmaſſe, than in the ſpring, bycauſe the earth wyll

dry to ſoone after, and alſo to ſet plantes wythout roote after Michaelmaſſe, that they may the better mollifie and gather roote againſt the ſpring, wherof ye ſhall finde hereafter more at large. Thus much haue I thought meete to declare vnto the Planter
                  •
                
               
                  •
               nd Graffers, whereby they may the better auoyde the occaſion and daungers of planting and graffing, which may come oftentymes through ignoraunce.
            1572.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Staffe with vice aboue, to ſet in what inſtrument yee lyſt, to clenſe your moſſe trees.  Graffing Cheſill  Avvinble byt. A Cheſill A ſ
                        •…
                     ſing knife. A proyning knife A Vine knyfe A graffing knyfe with each, a ring or butten to hang at their girdell. Cheſill heade. A great Knyfe A Hammer with a File & Percer. A Mallet. A Sawe.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The Arte of Planting and graffing.
            
               The firſt Chapter. ¶This chapter treateth of the ſetting of Curnels, yong Plum trees and Peare trees, of Damſons and Seruice trees.
               
                  FOr to make young trees of the Pepins, of Apples, Peares, Plummes & Seruice. Firſt ye muſt prepare & make a great bedde or quarter well repleniſhed, blend or mixt with good fat earth, and placed well in the Sunne, and to be well laboured & digged a good time before you do occupie it: and if ye can by any meanes, let it be digged very déepe the Winter before, in blending or mixing it well togither with good fat earth, or elſe to be mixed almoſt the halfe with good dong: and ſo let it rot and ripe togither with the earth. And ſée alwaies that plot be cleane vnto the preſſyng of Syder, that no wilde cions or plantes do ſpring or grow thereon. Then in the moneth of September, December, or thereabouts, take of the pepins or pomes of the ſaide fruite at the firſt preſſing out of your licour, before the Curnels be marred or bruſed: then take out of them, and rub a few at once in a cloth, and dry them betwixt your handes, and take ſo many therof as you ſhall thinke good: then make your bed ſquare, faire and plaine, and ſowe your ſéedes thereon, then take and couer them with a rake lightly, or with earth, not puttyng to muche earth vpon them. This done, deuide your beddes into quadrantes or ſquares of foure foote brode or thereabout, that when ye liſt ye may cleanſe them from the one ſide to the other, without treading thereon. Then ſhal ye couer your ſéedes or pepins with fine earth, ſo ſiftying all ouer them, that then they may take the déeper and ſurer roote, and

wyll kepe them the better in winter folowing, and if ye liſt ye may rake them a litle all ouer: ſo that ye raiſe not your Pepins aboue the earth.
               
                  Another way howe one may take the Pepins at the firſt comming of the licour or preſſing.
                  WHich is: ye ſhal choſe the greateſt and faireſt curnels or pepins, and take them forth at the firſt bruſing of your frute, thē drye them with a cloth, and kepe them all the winter vntill S. Andrewes tide: then a little after ſowe them in good earth, as thynne as ye do ſowe Peaſon, and then rake them ouer as the other.
               
               
                  How one ought to vſe his earth to ſowe Pepins without dunging.
                  BVT in this maner of doing (in the ſpring) it is not ſo great néede for to rayſe or digge the earth ſo déepe as that which is dunged in Winter: but to deuide your quarters, in couering your pepins not ſo much with earth as thoſe which be ſowne with good dung, but when ye haue ſowne them, a litle rake them all ouer.
               
               
                  How ye ought to take heede of pultrie for ſcraping of your beddes or quarters.
                  AS ſoone after as your Pepins be ſowne vpon your beddes or quarters, let this be done, one way or other, that is, take good héede that your hennes do not ſcrape your beddes or quarters, therfore ſticke them all ouer light and thinne with bowes, or thrones, and take good héede alſo to ſwine, and other cattell.
               
               
                  How to weede or cleanſe your beddes and quarters.
                  ANd when the Winter is paſt and gone, and that ye ſée your Pepins riſe and growe: ſo let them encreaſe the ſpace of one yere, but ſée to cleanſe wéedes, or other things which may hurt them, as ye ſhal ſée cauſe. And in the Sommer when it ſhal waxe dry, water them hardely in the euenings.
               
               
                  
                  How one ought to plucke vp the wilde cions.
                  AND when theſe wilde cions ſhall be great, as of the growth of one yere, ye muſt then plucke them vp all in the winter following, before they doe beginne to ſpring againe. Then ſhall ye ſet them and make of them a wylde Orcharde as followeth.
               
            
            
               The ſeconde Chapter treateth howe one ſhall ſet againe the ſmall wilde trees, which come of Pepins, when they be firſt pluckt vp.
               
                  FOr the baſtarde or little wilde trees incontinent aſſoone as they be pluckte vp, ye muſt haue of other good earth well trimmed and dunged & to be well in the Sunne, and wel prepared and dreſt, as it is ſayde in the other part before of the Pepins.
               
                  How to dung your baſtard or wilde young trees which come of Pepins.
                  ABout Aduent before Chriſtmas, ye muſt digge & dung well the place where as ye wyll ſet them, and make your ſquare of earth euen and plaine, ſo large as ye ſhall thinke good, then ſet your wilde trées ſo far one frō another as ye thinke mete to be graft, ſo that thei may be ſet in euē rankes and in good order, that when néede ſhall require, ye may remooue or renue any of them or any part thereof.
               
               
                  How ye ought in replanting or ſetting to cut of in the middes the principall great rootes.
                  IN what part ſo euer ye doe ſet any trées, ye muſt cut of the great maiſter roote, within a foote of the ſtocke, and all other bigge rootes, ſo that ye leaue a foote long thereof, and ſo let them be ſet, and make your rankes croſſe wyſe one from another halfe a foote, or thereabouts, and ye muſt alſo ſée that there be of good dung more déepe and lower than ye do ſet your trées, to comfort the ſayd rootes withall.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Howe ye ought to ſet your trees in ranke.
                  YE ſhal ſet your ſmall yong trées in rankes, half a large foote one from another: and let them be couered as ye do ſet them, with good fat earth all ouer the rootes.
               
               
                  ¶How to make the ſpace from one ranke to another.
                  YE ſhall leaue betwene your rankes, from one ranke to another, one foote, or there aboutes, ſo that ye maye paſſe betwéene euery ranke for to cleanſe them yf neede require, and alſo for to graffe any part or parcell thereof when time ſhalbe méete. But ye muſt note, in making thus your rankes, ye ſhall make ſo many allies as rankes. And if ye thinke it not good to make ſo many allies, then deuide thoſe into quarters of fiue foote broade or thereabouts, and make or ſet foure rankes (in eche quarter of the ſame) one foote from another, as ye vſe to ſet great Cabbage. And as ſoone after as ye haue ſet them in rankes and in good order as is aforeſaide, then ſhall ye cut of all the ſets euen by the grounde. But in thus doing ſée that ye do not plucke vp or looſe the erth which is about them: or if ye will, ye may cut them before ye do ſet them in rankes. If ye do ſo, ſée that ye ſet them in ſuch good order and euen with the erth, as is aforeſayde. And it ſhal ſuffice alſo to make your rankes as ye ſhal ſée cauſe. And loke that ye furniſh the earth al ouer with good dung, without mingling of it in the earth, nor yet to couer the ſayd plantes withal, but ſtrowed betwixt: and ye muſt alſo loke well to the cleanſing of wéedes, graſſe, or other ſuch things which will be a hurt to the growth of the plantes.
               
               
                  ¶How to water plantes when they waxe drie.
                  IT ſhall be good to water them when the time is drye: in the firſt yeare. Then when they haue put foorth of newe cions, leaue no more growing but that cion which is the principall and fayreſt, vpon euery ſtocke one: all the other cut of harde by the ſtocke: and euer as there do grow ſmall twigs about the ſtocke, ye ſhall (in the moneth of March &

Aprill) cut them al of hard by the ſtock. And if ye then ſtick by euery plant a prety wand, and ſo binde them with Willowe bark, brier, or oſiers, it ſhal profit them much in their growth. Then after fiue or ſixe yeares growth, when they be ſo bigge as your finger, or thereaboutes, ye may then remoue any of them whereas ye wil haue them grow and remaine.
               
               
                  ¶How one ought to remoue trees, and to plant them againe.
                  THe maner how ye ought to remoue trées, is ſhewed in the ſixt Chapter folowyng: then aboute two or thrée yeares after their remouing, ye ſhall graffe them, for then they wyll be the better rooted. As for the others which ye leaue ſtill in rankes, ye may alſo graffe them where as they ſtand, as ye ſhal ſee cauſe good. When ye haue plucked vp the faireſt to plant in other places (as is aforeſayde) alſo the maner howe to graffe them, is ſhewed in the fift Chapter folowing. But after they ſhall be ſo graft, in what place ſo euer it be, ye ſhall not remoue or ſet them in other places againe, vntil the graffes be wel cloſed vpon the head of the wilde ſtocke.
               
               
                  ¶VVhen the beſt time is to replant or remooue.
                  WHen the hed of the ſtock ſhall be all ouercloſed about the graffes, then ye may when ye wyll, tranſplant and remoue them (at a due time) where they ſhal continue. For with often remouing ye ſhal do them great hurt in their rootes, and be in daunger to make them die.
               
               
                  ¶Of negligence and forgetfulneſſe.
                  IF peraduenture ye forget (through negligence) and haue let ſmal cions two or thrée yeares grow about the rootes of your ſtockes vnplucked vp, then if ye haue ſo done, ye may well plucke them vp and ſet them in rankes, as the other of the pepins. But ye muſt ſet the ranks more larger, that they may be remoued without hurting of eche others

rootes: and cut of all the ſmall twigs aboue as néede ſhal require, though they be ſet or graffed. Order them alſo in all things as thoſe ſmall cions of a yeres growth.
               
               
                  It is not ſo conuenient to graffe the Seruice tree, as to ſet him.
                  WHere as ye ſhal ſee yong Seruice trées, it ſhalbe moſt profite in ſetting them, for if ye do graffe them, I beleue ye ſhall winne nothing thereby. The beſt is onely to plucke vp the yung baſtard trées when they are as great as a good walking ſtaffe: then proyne or cut of their branches and cary them to ſet whereas they may be no more remoued: and they ſhall profit more in ſetting than graffing.
               
               
                  Some trees without graffing bring foorth good fruite, and ſome other being graffed be better to make Syder of.
                  IT is here to be marked that though the Pepins be ſowen of the pomes of Peares and good Apples: yet ye ſhal finde that ſome of them doe loue the trée wherof they came: and thoſe be right, which haue alſo a ſmooth barke, and as faire as thoſe which be graffed: the which if ye plant or ſet them thus growing from the maſter roote without graffing, thei ſhal bring as good fruite, euen like vnto the Pepin wherof he firſt came. But there be other newe ſortes commonly good to eate, which be as good to make Syder of, as thoſe which ſhalbe graffed for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  When you liſt to augment and multiplie your trees.
                  AFter this ſort ye may multiplie them, being of diuers ſortes and diuerſities, as of Peares or Apples, or ſuch like. Notwithſtanding, whenſoeuer ſhall finde a good trée thus come of the Pepin, as is aforeſayd, ſo ſhal ye vſe him. But if ye will augment trées of themſelues, ye muſt take graffes, and ſo graffe them.
               
               
                  
                  Of the manor and chaunging of the fruite of the Pepin tree.
                  WHen ſo euer ye doe replant or chaunge your Pepin trées from place to place, in ſo remoouyng often the ſtocke, the frute therof ſhal alſo change: but the frute which doth come of graffing, doth alwayes kepe the forme & nature of the trée whereof he is taken: for as I haue ſayde, as often as the Pepin trées be remooued to a better grounde, the frute thereof ſhall be ſo much amended.
               
               
                  How one ought to make good Syder.
                  HEre is to be noted if ye will make good Syder, of what frute ſo euer it be, beyng Peares or Apples, but ſpecially of good Apples, and wilde frute, haue alwaies a regard vnto the riping thereof, ſo gathered drye, then put them in dry places, on bordes, in heapes, couered with drye ſtrawe, and whenſoeuer ye will make Syder thereof, chooſe out all thoſe which are blacke bruſed, and rotten apples, & throwe them away, then take and vſe the reſt for Syder: But here to giue you vnderſtandyng, do not as they do in the countrey of Mens, which doe put their frute gathered, into the middes of their garden, in the raine and miſelings, vpon the bare earth, whiche will make them to léeſe their force and vertue, and doth make them alſo withered and tough, and lyghtly a man ſhall neuer make good Syder that ſhall come to any purpoſe or good profite thereof.
               
               
                  To make an Orchard in fewe yeares.
                  SOme doe take yung ſtraight ſlippes, whiche doe growe from the rootes, or of the ſides of the Appletrées, about Michaelmaſſe, and doe ſo plant or ſet them (with Otes) in good grounde, where as they ſhall not be remoued, and ſo graffe (beyng well rooted) thereon. Other ſome doe take and ſet them in the ſpring time (after Chriſtmas) in lykewyſe, and do graffe thereon when they be well rooted: and both wayes do ſpring well.
                  
                     And this maner of way is counted to haue an Orchard the ſoneſt. But theſe trées will not endure paſt twentie or thirtie yeares.
               
            
            
               The thirde Chapter is of ſetting trees of Nuttes.
               
                  ¶How one ought to ſet trees which come of Nuttes.
                  
                     FOr to ſet trees which come of Nuttes: when ye haue eaten the fruite, loke that ye kepe the ſtones and curnels thereof, then let them be dried in the winde, without the vehemencie of the ſunne, ſo reſerue them in a boxe, and vſe them as before.
               
               
                  ¶Of the time when ye ought to plant or ſet them.
                  YE ſhall plant or ſet them in the beginning of Winter, or afore Michaelmaſſe, whereby they may the ſooner ſpring out of the earth. But this maner of ſettyng is daungerous: for the winter then commyng in, and they beyng yong and tender in commyng vp, the colde will kill them. Therefore it ſhall be beſt to ſtay and reſerue them til after Winter. And then before ye do ſet them, ye ſhal ſoke or ſtiepe them in milke, or in milke and water, ſo long tyll they do ſtinke therein: then ſhall ye dry them and ſet them in good earth in the chaunge or increaſe of the Moone, with the ſmall ende vpwarde, foure fingers déepe, then put ſome ſticke thereby, to marke the place.
               
               
                  For to ſet them in the Spring time.
                  IF ye will plant or ſet your Nuttes in the Spring time, where ye wil haue them ſtill to remaine and not to be remoued, the beſt and moſt eaſy way is, to ſet in euery ſuch place (as ye thinke good) thrée or foure Nuts nigh togither, and when they do al ſpring vp, leaue none ſtanding but the faireſt.
               
               
                  
                  Of the donging and deepe digging thereof.
                  ALſo where as ye ſhall thinke good, ye may plante or ſet all your nuttes in one ſquare or quarter togithers, in good earth and donged in ſuche place and tyme, as they vſe to plant. But ſée that it be well donged, and alſo digged good and déepe, and to be well meddled with good dong throughout, then ſet your nuttes thrée fingers déepe in the earth, and halfe a foote one from another: ye ſhall water them often in the Sommer, when there is dry weather, and ſée to wéede them, and digge it as ye ſhall ſée néede.
               
               
                  Of nuttes and ſtones like to the trees they came of.
                  IT is here to be noted, that certayne kindes of nuttes, and curnelles which doe loue the trées, wherof the fruite is like vnto the trée they came of, when they be planted in good grounde, and ſet well in the ſunne, which be: the walnutte, cheſtnuttes, all kinde of peches, figges, almondes, and abrycotes, all theſe do loue the trées they came of.
               
               
                  Of the planting the ſayde nuttes in good earth and in the Sunne.
                  AL the ſayde trées do bring as good frute of the ſayde Nuttes, if they be well planted, and ſet in good earth, and well in the Sunne, as the frute and trées they firſt came of.
               
               
                  Why frute ſhall not haue ſo good ſauour.
                  FOr if ye plant good nuttes, good peaches, or figges in a garden full of ſhadowe, the which hath afore loued the Sunne, as the vine doth, for lacke thereof, their frute ſhall not haue ſo good ſauour, although it be all of one frute: and likewiſe ſo it is with all other fruite and trées, for the goodneſſe of the earth, and the faire Sunne, doth preſerue them much.
               
               
                  
                  ¶To ſet the pine tree.
                  FOR to ſet the Pyne trée, ye muſt ſet or plante them of Nuttes, in Marche, or about the ſhewte of the ſappe, not lightly after, ye muſt alſo ſet them where they may not be remooued after, in holes well digged, and well dunged not to be tranſplanted or remooued againe, for very hardly they will ſhewte foorth cions, being remooued, ſpecially if ye hurt the maiſter roote thereof.
               
               
                  ¶For to ſet Cherry trees.
                  FOr to ſet ſowre Cheries which doe grow commonly in Gardens, ye ſhall vnderſtande they may well growe of ſtones, but better it ſhall be to take of the ſmall cions which doe come from the great rootes: then plant them, and ſooner ſhall they grow than the ſtones, and thoſe cions muſt be ſet when they are ſmall, yong and tender: as of two, or thrée yeares groth, for when they are great, they profite not ſo well: and when ye ſet them, ye muſt ſée to cut of all the bowes.
               
               
                  ¶Trees of baſtard and wilde Nuttes.
                  THere be other ſortes of Nuttes, although they be well ſet in good grounde, and alſo in the ſunne, yet wyll they not bring halfe ſo good fruite as the other, nor commonly lyke vnto thoſe nuttes they came of, but to be a baſtarde wilde ſowre fruite, which is the Fylbert, ſmall Nuts, of Plums, of Cheries, & the great Abricots: therfore if ye will haue them good fruite, ye muſt ſet them in maner and forme following.
               
               
                  ¶How to ſet Filberdes or Haſell trees.
                  FOr to ſet Filberdes or Haſels, and to haue them good, take the ſmall wandes that growe out from the roote of the Filbard or haſell trée, (with ſhort beary twigges) and ſet them, and they ſhall bring as good fruite as the trée they came off: it ſhall not be néedefull to proyne, or cut of the branches therof when ye ſet them, if they be not great but thoſe that ye doe ſet, let them be but of two or thrée yeares growth, and if ye ſhal ſée thoſe cions which ye haue

planted, not to be fayre and good, or doe growe and proſper not well, then (in the ſpring time) cut them of harde by the roote, that other ſmall cyons may growe therof.
               
               
                  ¶To ſet Damſons or Plum trees.
                  IN ſetting damſons or plum trées, which fruit ye would haue lyke to the trées they came off: if the ſayde trées be not graft before, ye ſhall take onely the cyons that growe from the roote (of the olde ſtock) which groweth wyth ſmall twigges, and plant or ſet them: and their fruite ſhalbe like vnto the trées they were taken off.
               
               
                  ¶To take plum graffes, and to graffe them on other plum trees.
                  ANd if your Plum trées be graft already, and haue the lyke fruite that you deſire, ye may take your graffes therof, and graffe them on your Plum trées, and the fruite that ſhall come thereof, ſhalbe as good as the fruite of the cion which is taken from the roote, bycauſe they are much of like effect.
               
               
                  ¶To ſet all ſortes of Cheries.
                  TO ſet all ſortes of great Cheries, and others: ye muſt haue the graffes of the ſame trées, and graffe them on other Cherrye trées, although they be of a ſower fruite, and when they are ſo graft, they wil be as good as the frute of the trée whereof the graffe was taken: for the ſtones are good, but to ſet to make wilde cyons, or plantes, to graffe on.
               
               
                  ¶The maner how one may order both plum trees, and cherry trees.
                  FOR ſo much as theſe are two kinde of trées, that is, to vnderſtande, the Cherry, and the Plum trée, for when they be ſo grafte, their rootes be not ſo good, nor ſo frée as the branches aboue, wherfore the cions that do come fro the rootes, ſhall not make ſo good and franke trées of. It is therefore to be vnderſtoode, how the maner and ſort is to make franke trées, that may put forth good cions in time to come, which is: when they be great and good, then if ye will

take thoſe cions or yong ſpringes from the rootes, ye may make good trées thereof, and then it ſhal not néede to graffe them any more after: but to augment one by the other, as ye do the cions from the roote of the nutte, as is aforeſayde, and ye ſhall do as followeth.
               
               
                  How to graffe Plum trees and Cherry trees.
                  YE may well graffe Plum trées, & great Cherry trées, in ſuch good order as ye liſt to haue them, and as hereafter ſhall be declared in the fifth Chapter followyng, for theſe woulde be graffed while they are yong and ſmall, and alſo graft in the grounde, for thereby one maye dreſſe and trim them the better, and put but one graffe in eche ſtocke of the ſame. Cleaue not the heart, but a little on the one ſide, nor yet déepe, or long open.
               
               
                  How ye muſt proyne, or cut your trees.
                  FOr when your graffes be well taken on the ſtocke, and that the graffes do put foorth faire and long, about one yeres growth, ye muſt proyne, or cut the braunche of commonly in winter, (when they proyne their vines) a foote lower, to make them ſpred the better: then ſhall ye meddle all thorowe with good fat earth, the which will drawe the better to the place which ye haue ſo proyned or cut.
               
               
                  The conuenienteſt way to clenſe and proyne, or dreſſe the rootes of trees.
                  ANd for the better clenſing and proyning trées beneth, is thus: ye ſhall take away all the wéedes, and graſſe about the rootes, then ſhall ye digge them ſo rounde about, as ye woulde ſéeme to plucke them vp, and ſhal make them halfe bare, then ſhall ye enlarge the earth about the rootes, and where as ye ſhall ſée them grow faire and long, place or couche them in the ſayde hole and earth againe, then ſhall ye put the cut ende of the trée where he is graft: ſomewhat more lower than his rootes were, whereby his

cions ſo graft, ſhall ſpring ſo much the better.
               
               
                  When the ſtocke is greater than the graffes.
                  WHen as the trée waxeth or ſwelleth greater beneath the graffing, than aboue: then ſhal ye cleue the rootes beneath, and wreath them round and ſo couer them again. But ſée ye breake no roote thereof, ſo wil he come to perfection. But moſt men doe vſe this way: if the ſtocke waxe greater than the graffes, they do ſlyt downe the barke of the graffes aboue, in two or thrée partes, or as they ſhall ſée cauſe thereof, and ſo likewiſe, if the graffes waxe greater aboue than the ſtocke, ye ſhall ſlitte downe the ſtocke accordingly, with the edge of a ſharpe knife. This may well be done at any time in Marche, April and Maye, in the creſce of the Moone, and not lightly after.
               
               
                  The remedie when any bough or member of a tree is broken.
                  IF ye ſhal chaunce to haue boughes or members of trées broken, the beſt remedy ſhall be, to place thoſe bowes or members right ſone againe, (then ſhall ye comfort the rootes with good newe earth) and bynde faſt thoſe broken bowes or members, both aboue and beneath, & ſo let them remayne vnto another yeare, till they may cloſe and put forth of newe cions.
               
               
                  ¶When a member or bough is not broken, how ro proyne them.
                  WHere as yée ſhall ſée vnder or aboue ſuperfluous Bowes: ye may cut or proyne off, (as ye ſhall ſée cauſe) all ſuch bowes harde by the trée, at a due tyme, in the winter folowing: But leaue all ye principall branches, and whereas any are broken, let them be cut off beneath, or elſe by the grownd, and caſt them away: thus muſt ye do yearely, or as ye ſhall ſée cauſe, if ye will kéepe your trées well and fayre.
               
               
                  
                  How one ought to enlarge the hole about the tree rootes.
                  IN proyning your trées if there be many rootes, ye muſt enlarge them in the hole, and ſo to wreath them as is aforeſayde, and to vſe them without breaking, then couer them againe with good fat earth, which ye ſhall mingle in the ſayde hole, and it ſhall be beſt to be digged all ouer a little before, and ſée that no branche or roote be left vncouered, and when ye haue thus dreſſed your trées, if anye roote ſhall put forth or ſpring hereafter out of the ſayde holes, in growing, ye may ſo proine them as ye ſhal ſée cauſe, in letting them ſo remaine two or thrée yeares after, vnto ſuch time as the ſayde graffes be ſprong vp and well branched.
               
               
                  How to ſet ſmall ſtaues by to ſtrengthen your cyons.
                  TO auoyde daunger, ye ſhall ſette or pricke ſmall ſtaues about your cions, for feare of breaking, and then after thrée or foure yeares, when they be 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     raunched: yée maye then ſet or plant them in good earth, (at the beginning of winter) but ſée that ye cut of all their ſmal branches hard by the ſtocke, then ye may plant them where ye think good, ſo as they may remayne.
               
               
                  In taking vp trees note.
                  YE may well leaue the maiſter roote in the hole (when ye digge him vp) if the remooued place be good for hym cutte of the maiſter rootes by the ſtubbe, but pare not of all the ſmall rootes, and ſo plante him, and he ſhall profyte more thus, than others with all their maiſter rootes. When as trées be great, they muſt be diſbranched or bowes cut of, before they be ſet againe, or elſe they will hardly proſper. If the trées be great, hauing great braunches or bowes, when ye ſhall digge them vp ye muſt diſbranch them afore ye ſet them againe, for when trées ſhalbe thus proined they

ſhall bring great Cyons from their rootes, which ſhall be franke and good to replant, or ſet in other places, and ſhall haue alſo good braunches and rootes, ſo that after it ſhal not néede to graffe them any more, but ſhall continue one after another to be frée and good.
               
               
                  ¶How to couche the rootes when they are proyned.
                  IN ſetting your trées agayne, if ye will dreſſe the rootes of ſuch as ye haue proyned, or cut of the branches before, ye ſhall leaue all ſuch ſmall rootes, which growe on the great roote, and ye ſhall ſo place thoſe rootes in replanting againe not déepe in the earth, ſo that they maye ſoone growe, and put forth cions: which being well vſed, ye may haue fruite ſo good as the other afore mencioned, being of thrée or foure yeares growth, as afore is declared.
               
               
                  ¶What trees to proyne.
                  THis way of proyning is more harder for the greate Cherry (called Healmier) than for the plum trée. Alſo it is verye requiſite and méete for thoſe cyons or trées which be graft on the wilde ſowre Cherry trée, to be proynned alſo, for diuers and ſundry cauſes.
               
               
                  ¶Why the ſowre cherry dureth not ſo long as the healmier or great cherry.
                  THe wilde and ſowre cherry, of his owne nature wil not ſo long time endure, (as the great healme cherry,) neyther can haue ſufficient ſappe to nouriſh the graffes, as the great healme cherry which is graft, therfore when ye haue proyned the braunches beneath, and the rootes alſo, ſo that ye leaue rootes ſufficient to nouriſhe the trée, then ſet him. If ye cut not of the vnder rootes, the trée will profite more eaſier, and alſo lighter to be knowne when they put forth cyons, from the roote of the ſame, the which ye may take hereafter.
               
               
                  
                  To graffe one great Cherie vpon another.
                  YE muſt haue reſpect vnto the healme Cherrie, which is gratf on the wilde goynire (which is another kinde of grate Cherrie) & whether you do proyne them or not it is not materiall: for they dure a long time. But ye muſt ſée to take away the cions that doe growe from the roote of the wilde goynire, or wilde Plum trée: bicauſe they are of nature wilde, and doe draw the ſap from the ſayde trée.
               
               
                  ¶Of deepe ſetting or ſhalow,
                  TO ſet your ſtockes or trées ſomewhat déeper on the hye groundes than in the valleyes, bycauſe the ſunne (in Sommer) ſhall not dry the roote: and in the low grounde more ſhallow, bycauſe the water in winter ſhal not dround or annoy the rootes. Some doe marke the ſtocke in taking it vp, and ſo to ſet him againe the ſame way, bicauſe he wil not alter his nature: ſo likewiſe the graffes in graffing.
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter doth ſhewe howe to ſet other trees which come of wilde cyons prickked in the earth without rootes: and alſo of proyning the meaner cyons.
               
                  Trees taking roote prickt of braunches.
                  
                     THere be certayne which take roote, being pricked of braunches proyned of other trées, which be, the Mulberrie, the Fig trée, the Quince trée, the Seruice trée, the Pomegranade trée, the Apple trée, the Damſon trée and diuers ſortes of other Plum trées, as the Plum trée of Paradiſe. &c.
               
               
                  ¶How one ought to ſet them.
                  FOr to ſet theſe ſortes of trées, ye muſt cut off the cions, twigges or boughes, betwixt Alhallowtide and chriſtmaſſe, not lightly after. Ye ſhal chooſe them which be as

great as a little ſtaffe or more, and looke whereas ye can finde them fayre, ſmooth, and ſtraight, and full of ſap wythall, growing of yong trées, as of the age of thrée or foure yeares growth or there abouts, and looke that ye take them ſo from the trée with a brode chyſell, that ye breake not, or loſe any part of the barke thereof, more than halfe a foote beneath, neyther of one ſide or other: then proyne or cut of the braunches, and pricke them one foote deepe in the earth, well digged and ordered before.
               
               
                  How to binde them that be weake.
                  THoſe plantes which be ſlender, ye muſt proyne or cut of the branches, then binde them to ſome ſtake or ſuch like to be ſet in good earth and well medled with good dung, and alſo to be well and déepely digged, and to be ſet in a moyſt place, or elſe to be well watered in Sommer.
               
               
                  How one ought to digge the earth for to ſet them in.
                  AND when that yet woulde ſet them in the earth, yée muſt firſt prepare to digge it, and dung it well thorow out, a large foote déepe in the earth. And whē as ye will ſet them euery one in his place made (before) with a crowe of yron, and for to make them take roote the better, ye ſhall put with your plantes, of watered otes, or barely, and ſo yée ſhall let them growe the ſpace of thrée or foure yeares, or when they ſhall be well branched, then ye may remoue thē and if ye breake of the old ſtubby roote and ſet them lower, they wil laſt a long time the more. If ſome of thoſe plantes do chaunce to put forth cions from the roote, and being ſo rooted, ye muſt plucke them vp though they be tender, and ſet them in other places.
               
               
                  
                  Of Cions without rootes.
                  IF that the ſayde plantes haue of Cyons without rootes, but which come from the trée roote beneath, then cut them not off till they be of two or thrée yeares growth, by that tyme, they wyll gather of rootes to be replanted in other places.
               
               
                  To plant the Figge tree.
                  THe ſayde plantes taken of figge trées graffed, bée the beſt: ye may likewiſe take other ſortes of figge trées, and graffe one vpon the other, for lyke as vpon the wylde trées doe come the Pepins, euen ſo the figge, but not ſo ſoone to proſper and growe.
               
               
                  How to ſet Quinces.
                  LYkewiſe the nature of Quinces is to ſpring, if they be pricked (as aforeſayde) in the earth, but ſometimes I haue graffed with great difficultie (ſaith mine author) vpon a whyte throne, and it hath taken, and borne fruite to looke on, fayre, but in taſt more weaker than the other.
               
               
                  The way to ſet Mulberies.
                  THere is alſo another waye to ſet Mulberies as followeth, which is, if ye do cut in winter certayne great Mulberye bowes, or ſtockes, aſunder in the bodye (wyth a ſawe) in troncheous a foote long or more, then yée ſhall make a great furrowe in good earth, well and déepe, ſo that ye may couer wel againe your troncheons, in ſetting them an ende halfe a foote one from another, then couer them againe, that the earth may be aboue thoſe endes, thrée or foure fingers high, ſo let them remayne, and water them (in Sommer) if néede be ſometimes, and clenſe them from all hurtfull wéedes and rootes.
               
               
                  
                  Note of the ſame.
                  THat then within a ſpace of tyme after, the ſayde troncheons will put forth Cyons, the which when they bée ſomewhat ſprigged, hauing two or thrée ſmall twigges, then yée maye tranſplant or remooue them where they liſt: but leaue your troncheons ſtyll in the earth, for yée wyll put forth many mo cions, the which, if they ſhall haue ſcanty of roote, then dung your troncheons within, wyth good earth, and likewyſe aboue alſo, and they ſhall doe well.
               
               
                  The time meete to cut cions.
                  YE ſhall vnderſtande that all trées the which commonly doe put foorth cyons, if ye cut them in winter, they will put forth and ſpring more aboundantlye, for then they be all good to ſet or plant.
               
               
                  To ſet buſh trees, as Gooſe bearies, or ſmall Reyſons,
                  THere be many other kindes of Buſhe trées, which wil grow of cions pricked in the grounde, as the Gooſe berye trée, the ſmall Rayſon trée, the Barbery trée, the Blackthrone trée, theſe with many others, to be planted in winter, wil grow without rootes: ye muſt alſo proyne them and they will take well ynough, ſo likewiſe ye may pricke (in Marche) of Oziars in moyſt groundes, and they wyll grow, and ſerue to many purpoſes for your garden.
               
            
            
               The fift Chapter treateth of foure maner of Graffings.
               
                  IT is to be vnderſtoode that there be many wayes of graffinges, wherof I haue here onely put foure ſortes, the which hée good, both ſure and well prooued, and eaſy to doe, the which ye may vſe well in two partes of the yeare & more, for I haue (ſayth he) graffed in our houſe, in euery moneth, except October & nouember, & they

haue taken well which I haue (ſaith he) in the winter begun to graffe, and in the Sommer graft in the ſcutchine or ſhielde according to the time, forward or ſlow: for certaine trées, ſpeciallye yong fayre cions haue ynough or more of their ſappe vnto mid Auguſt, than others ſome had at midſommer before.
               
                  The firſt way to graffe all ſortes of trees.
                  ANd firſt of all it is to be noted, that all ſortes of franke trées, as alſo wilde trées of nature, may be graft wyth graffes, and in the ſcutchin, and both doe wel take, but ſpecially thoſe trées which be of like nature: therefore it is better ſo to graffe, howbeit, they may well grow and take of other ſortes of trées, but certayne trées be not ſo good, nor will proſper ſo well in the ende.
               
               
                  How to graffe Apple trees, Peare trees, Quince trees, and Medler trees.
                  THey graffe the Peare graffe, on other Peare ſtockes, & Apple, vpon apple ſtocke, crabbe or wilding ſtocke, the Quince and Medler, vpon the white throne, but moſt commonly they vſe to graffe one apple vpon another, and both Peares and Quinces, they graffe on Hawthrone and crab ſtocke. Another kinde of fruite called in Frenche Saulſay, they vſed to graffe on ye willow ſtocke, the maner therof is hard to do, which I haue not ſéene, therefore I will let paſſe at this preſent.
               
               
                  The graffing of great Cherries.
                  THey graffe the great Cherry, called in French Heaulmiers, vpon the crabbe ſtocke, and another long Cherry called Guyniers vpon the wilde or ſower Cherry trée, and likewiſe one Cherry vpon another.
               
               
                  To graffe Medlers.
                  THe Miſple or Medlar, they maye be graffed on other Medlers, or on whyte throne: the Quince is graffed

on the white or blacke throne, and they do proſper well. I haue graffed (ſayde hée) the Quince vpon a wilde Peare ſtocke, and it hath taken and borne fruite well and good, but they will not long endure. I beleeue (ſayth he) it was bycauſe that the graffe was not able ynough to draw the ſap from ye Peare ſtocke: ſome graffe the Medler on ye quince, to be great. And it is to be noted although the ſtocke, & the graffe be of contrarie natures, yet notwithſtanding neyther the graffe nor ſcutchin, ſhall take any parte of the nature of the wilde ſtocke, ſo graffed, though it be Peare, Apple, or Quince, which is contrarye againſt many whiche haue written, that if ye graffe the Medler vpon the quince trée, they ſhall ve without ſtones, whiche is abuſion and mockery. For I haue (ſayth he) proued the contrarie my ſelfe.
               
               
                  Of diuers kindes of Graffes.
                  IT is very true that one may ſet a trée which ſhal beare diuers ſorts of fruit at once, if he be graffed with diuers kinde of graffes, as the black, whyte, and gréene cherry togithers, and alſo Apples of other trées, as Apples and Peares togithers, and in the ſcutchion (ye maye graffe) likewyſe of dyuers bindes alſo, as on Peares, Abricotes, and Plums togither, and of others alſo.
               
               
                  Of the Graffing the Figge.
                  YE may graffe the figge trée vpon the peache trée or abricote, but leaue a branche on the ſtocke, & that muſt bée accordinge for the ſpace of yeares, for the one ſhall change ſooner than the other. All trées aboue ſayde, do take very well, being graffed one with the other, and I haue not knowne or found of any others, howbeit (ſaith he) I haue curiouſly ſought & prooued, bicauſe they ſay one may graffe on colewoortes, or on Elmes, the which I thinke are but ieſtes.
               
               
                  
                  Of the great Abricotes.
                  THe great Abricote they graffe in Sommer in the ſcutchion or ſhielde, in the ſap or barke of the leſſer Abricote, and be graffed on Peache trées, Figge trées, and principally on Damſon or Plum trées, for there they wyll proſper the better.
               
               
                  Of the Seruice tree.
                  OF the Seruice trée, they ſay and write, that they may hardly be graft on other Seruice trées, eyther on apple trées, Peare, or Quince trées, and I beléeue this to be very harde to doe, for I haue tried (ſaith he) and they woulde not prooue.
               
               
                  The ſetting of Seruices.
                  THerefore it is much better to ſet them of curnels, as it is aforeſayde, as alſo in the ſeconde Chapter of the planting of cions, or other great trées, which muſt be cut in winter, as ſuch as ſhalbe moſt méete for that purpoſe
               
               
                  Trees which be very harde to be graffed in the ſhielde or ſtutchion.
                  ALl other maner of trées aforeſayde, doe take verye well to be graffed wyth Cyons, and alſo in the ſhielde, except Abricotes on Peches, Almondes, Percigniers, the Peache trée, doe take hardlye to be graffed, but in the ſhielde, in Sommer, as ſhal be more largely hereafter declared. As for the Almonde, Percigniers and Peaches, ye may better ſet them of curnels and Nuttes, whereby they ſhall the ſoner come to perfection to be graffed.
               
               
                  How a man ought to conſider thoſe trees, which be commonly charged with fruite.
                  YE ſhall vnderſtand, that in the beginning of graffing, ye muſt conſider what ſortes of trées doe moſt charge the ſtocke with braunche and fruite, or that doe loue the countrey or grounde whereas you intende to plant or graffe them: for better it were to haue abundance of fruit than to haue very fewe or none good.
               
               
                  
                  Of trees where on to chooſe your graffes.
                  OF ſuche trées as ye will gather your graffes to graffe with, ye muſt take them at the endes of the principall braunches, which be alſo faire and greateſt of ſap, hauing two or thrée fingers length of the olde wood, with the newe, and thoſe cions which haue of eyes ſomewhat nigh togither, are the beſt, for thoſe which be long or farre one from another, be not ſo good for to bring fruite.
               
               
                  Thoſe Cions towarde the Eaſt are beſt.
                  YE ſhall vnderſtande, that thoſe cions which doe growe on the eaſt, or Orient part of the trée, are beſt: ye muſt not lightlye gather of the euill and ſlender graffes, which growe in the middes of the trées, nor any graffes which doe growe within on the braunches, or that doe ſpringe from the ſtocke of the trée, nor yet graffes which be on verye olde trées, for thereby ye ſhall not lightly profite to any purpoſe.
               
               
                  To chooſe your tree for graffes.
                  AND when the trées, where as you intende to gather your graffes, be ſmall and yung, as of fyue or ſixe yeares growth, do not take of the higheſt graffe there of, nor the greateſt, except it be of a ſmall trée of two or thrée yeares, the which commonly hath to much of top or wood, otherwyſe not, for ye ſhall but marre your graffing.
               
               
                  How to keepe graffes along time.
                  YE may kéepe graffes a long time good, as from all hallowtyde (ſo that the leaues be fallen) vnto the time of graffing, if that they be well couered in the earth halfe a foote déepe therein, and ſo that none of them doe appeare without the earth.
               
               
                  How to keepe graffes before they are budded.
                  YE ſhall not gather them except ye haue great néede, vntill Chriſtmas or there abouts, and put them not in the

grounde, nigh any walles, for feare of Moles, Mice, and water marring the place and graffes. It ſhall bée good to kéepe graffes in the earth before they begin to bud, when that ye will graffe betwixt the barke and the tree, and when the trées begin to enter into their ſappe.
               
               
                  How one ought to beginne to graffe.
                  YE may well begin to graffe (in cleauing the ſtocke) at Chriſtmaſſe, or before, according to the coldeneſſe of ye time, and principally the Healme or greate Cherrye, Peares, Wardens, or forwarde fruite of Apples: and for Medlers it is good to tarry vntill the ende of Ianuarie and Februarie, vntyll March, or vntyll ſuch time as ye ſhall ſée the trées beginne to bud or ſpring.
               
               
                  When it is good graffing the wilde ſtockes.
                  IN the ſpring time it is good graffing of Wilde ſtockes, (which be great) betwixt the barke and the trée, ſuch ſtockes as be of a latewarde Spring, and kept in the earth before. The Damſon or Plum tarieth longeſt to be graft: for they do not ſhewe or put forth ſap ſo ſone as the others.
               
               
                  Marke if the tree be forwarde or not.
                  YE ought to conſider alwayes whether the trée be forwarde or not, or to be graffed ſoone or latewarde, and to giue him alſo a graffe of the lyke haſte or ſlowneſſe. Euen ſo ye muſt marke the time, whether it be ſlow or forwarde.
               
               
                  When one will graffe, what neceſſaries he ought to be furniſhed withall.
                  WHenſoeuer ye go to graffing, ſée ye be firſt furniſhed with graffes, clay and Moſſe, clothes, or barkes of Sallowe to binde the graffes, or clouen briers, or ſmall Oſiers to binde likewiſe withall. Alſo ye muſt haue a ſmall Sawe, and a ſharpe knife, to cleaue and to cut graffes with all. But it were much better if ye ſhoulde cut your graffes

with a great penknyfe, or ſome other like ſharpe knife, hauing alſo a ſmall wedge of harde wood, or of yron, with a hoked knyfe, and alſo a ſmall mallet. And your wilde ſtockes muſt be well rooted before ye do graffe them: and be not ſo quicke to deceyue your ſalues, as thoſe which doe graffe and plant all at one time, yet they ſhall not profite ſo well, for where the wild ſtock hath not ſubſtance in him ſelfe, much leſſe to giue vnto the other graffes, for when a man thinkes ſome times, to forwarde him ſelfe, he doth hynder hym ſelfe.
               
               
                  ¶Of graffes not proſpering the firſt yere.
                  YE ſhall vnderſtand, that very hardly your graffes ſhal proſper after if they doe not profite or proſper well in the firſt yeare, for when ſo euer (in the firſt yeare) they profite well, it were better to graffe then ſomewhat lower than to let them ſo remaine and growe.
               
               
                  ¶For to graffe well and ſounde.
                  ANd for the beſt vnderſtanding of graffing in the cleft, ye ſhal firſt cut away all the ſmall cions about the body of the ſtocke beneath, and before ye begin to cleaue your ſtocke, dreſſe and cut your graffes ſomewhat thicke and ready, then cleaue your ſtocke, and as the cleft is ſmal or great if néede be, pare it ſmoth within, then cut your inciſion of your graffes accordingly, & ſet them in the cleftes as euen, and as cloſe as ye can poſſible.
               
               
                  ¶How to trim your graffes.
                  YE may graffe your graffes full as long as two or thrée truntchions or cut graffes, which ye may lykewyſe graffe withall very well, and be as good as thoſe which doe come of olde wood, and oftentimes better, as to graffe a bough, for often it ſo happeneth, a man ſhall finde of oylettes or eyes harde by the olde ſlender wood, yet better it were to cut them of with the olde wood, and choſe a better

and fayre place, at ſome other eye in the ſame graffe, and to make your inciſion therevnder, as aforeſayde, and cut your graffes in making the inciſion on the one ſide narrows, and on the other ſide brode, as the inner ſide thinne, and the outſide thicke, bicauſe the outſide (of your graffe) muſt ioyne within the cleft, with the ſappe or barke of the wilde ſtocke, and it ſhall ſo be ſet in: ſee alſo that ye cut it ſmooth as your cleftes are in the ſtock, in ioyning at euery place both euen and cloſe, and eſpecially the ioyntes or corners of the graffes on the heads of the ſtocke, which muſt be well and cleane pared before, and then ſet faſt thereon.
               
               
                  How to cut graffes for Cherries and Plummes.
                  IT is not much requiſite in the healme Cherrie, for to ioyne the graffes (in the ſtocke) wholy throughout, as it is in others, or to cut the graffes of great Cheries, damſons or plums, ſo thin and playne as ye may other graffes, for theſe ſort haue a more greater ſap or pithe within, the which ye muſt alwayes take héede in cutting it to nygh on the one ſide, or on the other, but at the ende thereof chiefly, to be thinne cut and flat.
               
               
                  Note alſo.
                  ANd yet if the ſayde inciſion be more ſtrayter and cloſer on the one ſide than on the other ſide, pare it where it is moſt méete, and where it is to ſtraite, open it with a wedge of yron, and put in a wedge of the ſame woode aboue in the cleft, and thus may ye moderate your graffes, as ye ſhall ſée cauſe.
               
               
                  Howe in graffing to take heede that the barke doe not ryſe.
                  IN all kinde of cutting your graffes, take héede to the barke of your graffes, that it doe not ryſe (from the wood) on no ſide thereof, and ſpecially on the outſide, therefore ye ſhall leaue it more thycker than the inner ſyde: alſo ye muſt take héede when as the ſtockes doe

wreath in cleauing, that ye may ioyne the graffe therein accordingly: the beſt remedie therfore is, to cut it ſmooth within, that the graffe may ioyne the better, ye ſhall alſo, vnto the moſt greateſt ſtockes, chooſe for them the moſt greateſt graffes.
               
               
                  ¶How to cut your ſtocke▪
                  
                  HOwe much the more your ſtocke is thinne and ſlender, ſo much more ye ought to cut him lower, and if your ſtocke be as great as your finger, or thereabouts, ye may cut him a fote, or halfe a foote from the earth and digge hym about and doong him with goates doong, to helpe him withall, and graffe him but with one graffe or Cion.
               
               
                  ¶If the wilde ſtocke be great and ſlender.
                  IF your wilde ſtocke be great, or as big as a good ſtaffe ye ſhall cut him rounde of, a foote or thereaboutes aboue the earth, then ſet in two good graffes in the head or cleft thereof.
               
               
                  ¶Trees as great as ones arme.
                  ANd when your ſtocke is as great as your arme, yée ſhall ſawe him cleane of rounde, three or foure foote, or thereaboutes, from the earth, for to defende him, and ſet in the heade three graffes, two in th
                        •…
                      left, and one betwixt the barke and the trée, on that ſide which ye may haue moſt ſpace.
               
               
                  ¶Great trees as bigge as your legge.
                  IF the ſtocke be as bigge as your legge, or thereaboutes, ye ſhall ſaw him fayre and cleane off, foure or fyue foote hie from the earth, and cleaue him a croſſe (if ye will) and ſet in foure graffes in the cleftes thereof, or elſe one cleft onely, and ſet two graffes in both the ſides thereof, and other two graffes, betwixt the barke and the trée.
               
               
                  
                  ¶When the graffes be pinched wyth the ſtocke.
                  YE muſt for the better vnderſtanding, marke to graffe betwixt the barke and the trée, for when the ſap is full in the wood of wilde ſtockes being great, then they do commonly pinche or wring the graffes to ſore, if ye do not put a ſmall wedge of gréene wood in the clift thereof, to helpe them withall againſt ſuch daunger.
               
               
                  ¶Howe ye ought to cleaue your ſtockes.
                  WHen ſo euer ye ſhall cleaue your wilde ſtockes, take héede that ye cleaue them not in the middes of the harte or pithe: but a litle on the one ſide, which ſide ye ſhall thinke good.
               
               
                  ¶Howe to graffe the braunche of great trees.
                  WHen ſo euer ye woulde graffe great trées, as great as your thigh, or greater, it were much better to graffe onely the braunches thereof, than the ſtocke or body for the ſtocke will rotte, before the graffes ſhall couer the heade.
               
               
                  ¶Howe to cut brauches olde and great.
                  BVt if the braunches be to rude, and without order (the beſt ſhall be) to cut them all off, & within thrée or foure yeares after they will bring fayre newe Cions againe and then it ſhall beſt to graffe them, and cut of all the ſuperfluous and ill braunches thereof.
               
               
                  ¶How ye ought to byride your graffes throughout for feare of wyndes.
                  ANd when your graffes ſhalbe growne, ye muſt binde them, for feare of ſhaking of the wynde, and if the trée be free and good of him ſelfe, let the Cions growe ſtill, and ye may graffe any part or branche ye will, in the cleft, or betwixt the barke and the trée, eyther in the ſcutchion,

and if your barke be fayre and loſe.
               
               
                  ¶To ſet many graffes in one cleft.
                  WHen ye will put many graffes in one cleft, ſée that one inciſion (of your graffe) be as large as the other, not to be put into the cleft ſo ſlightly and raſhely, and that one ſide thereof be not more open than the other, and that theſe graffes be all of one length: it ſhall ſuffice alſo, if they haue thrée eyes, on cache graffe without the ioynt thereof.
               
               
                  ¶Howe to ſawe your ſtocke, before ye leaue hym.
                  IN ſawing your ſtocke, ſée that ye teare not the barke about the heade thereof, then cleaue his heade with a long ſharpe knife, or ſuch like, and knocke your wedge in the intos thereof, (then pare him on the heade rounde about) and knocke your wedge in ſo déepe till it open méete for your graffes, but not to wide, then holding in one hande your graffe, and in the other hande your ſtocke, ſet your graffe in cloſe, barke to barke, and let your wedge be great aboue at the heade, that ye may knocke him out fayre and eaſily againe.
               
               
                  ¶If the ſtocke cleaue to much or the barke do open.
                  IF the ſtocke do cleaue to much, or open the barke with the woode to low, then ſoftly open your ſtocke with your wedge, and ſée if your inciſion of your graffe be all méete and iuſte, according to the cleft, if not, make it vntill it be méete, or elſe ſaw him off lower.
               
               
                  ¶How graffes neuer lightly take.
                  ABoue all thinges ye muſt conſider the méeting of the two ſappes, betwixt the graffe and the wylde ſtocke, which muſt be ſet iuſt one with another, for ye ſhall vnderſtande,

if they do not ioyne, and the one delight with the other, beyng euen ſet, they ſhall neuer take togither, for there is nothing onely to ioyne their increaſe, but the ſap, recounting the one againſt the other.
               
               
                  ¶How to ſet the graffes right in the cleft.
                  WHen the barke of the ſtocke is more thicker than the graffe, ye muſt take good héede of the ſetting in of the graffe in the cleft, to the ende that his ſap may ioyne right with the ſap of the ſtocke, on the inſide, and ye ought lykewiſe to conſider of the ſap of the ſtocke, if he do ſurmount the graffes on the outſides of the cleft to much or not.
               
               
                  ¶Of ſetting in the graffes.
                  ALſo yée muſt take good héede, that the graffes he well and cleane ſet in, and ioyne cloſe vpon the head of the ſtocke: lykewiſe that the inciſion which is ſet in the cleft, doe ioyne very well within on both ſides, not to ioyne ſo euen, but ſometimes it may doe ſeruice, when as the graffes doe drawe to much from the ſtocke, or the ſtocke alſo on the graffes doe put forth.
               
               
                  ¶Note alſo.
                  ANd therefore when the ſtocke is rightly clouen, there is no daunger in cutting the inciſion of the graffe, but a little ſtraight rebated, to the ende thereof, that the ſappe may ioyne one with the other, the better & cloſer togither.
               
               
                  ¶How ye ought to drawe out your wedge.
                  WHen your graffes ſhall be well ioyned within the ſtock, draw your wedge fayre & ſoftly forth, for feare of diſplacing your graffes, ye may leaue within the cleft a ſmall wedge of ſuch gréene wood, as is aforeſayde, and ye ſhall cut it of cloſe by the head of your ſtocke, and ſo couer it with a barke as followeth.
               
               
                  
                  ¶To couer your cleftes on the heade.
                  WHen your wedge is drawne forth, put a gréene pill of thicke barke of willow, crabbe, or apple, vpon your cleftes of the ſtocke, that nothing may fall betweene: then couer all about the cleftes on the ſtocke head two fingers thicke with good clay, or nie about that thickeneſſe, that no winde nor rayne may enter. Then couer it rounde with good moſſe, and then wreth it ouer with clothes, or pilles of Willow, Bryar, of Oziars, or ſuch like, then binde them faſte, and ſticke certayne long prickes on the graffes heade amongs your cyons, to defende them from the Crowes, Iayes, or ſuch like.
               
               
                  ¶How ye ought to ſee to the bynding of your graftes.
                  BVT alwayes take good héede to the binding of your heds, that they waxe ſlacke, or ſhagge, neyther on the one ſide or other, but remaine faſt vpon the clay, which clay remaynes faſt (likewiſe on the ſtocke head) vnder the binding thereof, wherefore, the ſayde clay muſt be moderated in ſuch ſort as followeth.
               
               
                  ¶How ye ought to temper your clay.
                  THe beſt way is therefore, to trie your claye betwixt your handes, for ſtones and ſuch like, and ſo to temper it as ye ſhall thinke good, if ſo it require of moyſtneſſe or dryneſſe, and to temper it with the heare of Beaſtes, for when it dryeth, it holdeth not (otherwiſe) ſo well on the ſtocke, or if ye kneade of moſſe therewith, or mingle haye thinne therewith: ſome do iudge, that the moſſe doth make the trées moſſie. But I thinke (ſayth he) that commeth of the diſpoſition of places.
               
               
                  ¶To buſhe your graffe heades.
                  WHen ye ſhal binde or wrappe your graffe heads with bande, take ſmall thornes, and binde them within, for to defend your graffes, from Kites, or Crowes, or other daunger of other foules, or pricke of ſharpe white ſtickes thereon.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The ſecond way to graffe hie braunches on trees.
                  THe ſeconde maner to graffe, is ſtraunge ynough to many: this kinde of graffing is on the toppes of branches of trées, which thing to make them grow lightly, is not ſoone obtayned: whereſoeuer they be graffed, they do onely require a fayre yong wood, a great Cion or twig, growing hyeſt in the trée toppe, which cions ye ſhall chooſe to graffe on, of many ſortes of frutes if ye wil or as ye ſhal thinke good, which order followeth.
                  TAke graffes of other ſortes of trées which yée woulde graffe in the top thereof, then mount to the toppe of the trée which ye woulde graffe, and cut of the toppes of all ſuch braunches or as many as ye woulde graffe on, and if they be greater than the graffes, which ye would graffe, ye ſhall cut and graffe them lower, as ye doe the ſmall wilde ſtocke aforeſayde. But if the cions that you cut, be as great as your graffe that you graffe on, ye ſhall cut them lower betwixt the olde wood and the newe, or a little more higher, or lower: then cleaue a little and chooſe your graffes in the like ſorte which ye woulde plant, whereof ye ſhall make the inciſion ſhort, with the barke on both ſides lyke, and as thicke on the one ſide as the other, and ſet ſo iuſt in the cleft, that the barke maye be euen and cloſe, as well aboue as beneath, on the one ſide as the other, and ſo bynde him as is aforeſayde. It ſhall ſuffice that euery graffe haue one oylet, or eye, or two at the moſt, without the ioynt, for to leaue them to long if ſhall not be good, and ye muſt dreſſe it with clay and moſſe, and binde it as is aforeſayde. And likewiſe ye may graffe theſe as ye do the little wild ſtocks which ſhould be as great as your graffes and to graffe them as ye do thoſe with ſappe lyke on both ſides, but then ye muſt graffe them in the earth, as thrée fingers off, or there abouts.
               
               
                  
                  The thirde maner of graffing, is of graffes which may be ſet betwixt the barke and the tree.
                  To graffe betwixt the barke and the tree.
                  THis maner of graffing is good when trées doe begin to enter into their ſappe, which is, about the ende of Februarie, vnto the ende of Aprill, and ſpecially on great wilde ſtockes which be harde to cleaue, ye may ſet in foure or fiue graffes in the head thereof, which graffes ought to be gathered afore, and kept cloſe in the earth till then, for by that time aforeſayde, ye ſhall ſcantly finde a trée but that he doth put foorth or budde, as the Apple called Capendu, or ſuch like. Ye muſt therefore ſawe theſe wilde ſtockes more charily, and more higher, ſo they be great, and then cut the graffes which ye woulde ſet togither, ſo as you would ſette them vpon the wilde ſtocke that is cleft, as is afore rehearſed. And the inciſion of your graffes muſt not be ſo long nor ſo thicke, and the barke a little at the ende thereof muſt be taken away, and made in maner as a launcet of yron, and as thicke on the one ſide as the other.
               
               
                  Howe to dreſſe the heade, to place the graffes betwixt the barke and the tree.
                  ANd when your graffes be ready cut, then ſhal ye clenſe the head of your ſtock, and pare it with a ſharpe knife, round about the barke therof, to the ende your graffes may ioyne the better thereon, then by and by take a ſharpe penknife, or other ſharpe poynted knife, and thruſt it down betwixt the barke and the ſtocke, ſo long as the inciſion of your graffes be, then put your graffes ſoftly downe therein to the hard ioynt, and ſée that it doe ſit cloſe vpon the ſtocke heade.
               
               
                  
                  Howe to couer the heade of your ſtocke.
                  WHen as ye haue ſet in your graffes, ye muſt then couer it well about, with good tough clay and moſſe, as is ſayde of the others, and then ye muſt incontinent enuyron or compaſſe your head, with ſmal thorny buſhes, & bind them faſt thereon all about, for feare of great byrdes, and lykewiſe the wynde.
               
               
                  Of the maner and graffing in the ſhielde or ſcutchion.
                  THe fourth maner to graffe, whiche is the laſt, is to graffe in the ſcutchion, in the ſap, in Sommer, from about the ende of the moneth of Maye, vntill Auguſt, when as trées be yet ſtrong in ſap & leaues, for otherwayes it can not be done, the beſt time is in Iune and Iuly, ſo it is ſome yeares when the time is very drie, that ſome trées doe holde their ſappe very long, therefore ye muſt farie fill it returne.
               
               
                  For to graffe in Sommer ſo long as the trees be full leaued.
                  FOr to beginne this maner of graffing well, ye muſt in ſommer when the trées be almoſt full of ſap, and when they haue ſprong forth of new ſhewtes being ſomewhat hardened, then ſhall ye take a braunch thereof in the top of the trée, the which ye will haue graffed, & chooſe the higheſt, and the principalleſt braunches, without cutting it from the old wood, & chooſe therof, the principalleſt oylet or eie, or budding place, of eche braunche one, with which oylet or eye, ye ſhall begin to graffe, as followeth.
               
               
                  The big Cions are beſt to graffe.
                  PRincipally ye muſt vnderſtād that the ſmalleſt & naughty oylettes or buddes of the ſayde cions, be not ſo good to graffe, therefore chooſe the greateſt and beſt ye can find,

firſt cut of the leafe hard by the oylet, then ye ſhall trench or cut (the length of a barly corne) beneath the oylet round about the barke, harde to the wood, and ſo likewiſe aboue: then with a ſharpe point of a knife, ſlyt it downe halfe an yuche beſide the oylet or budde, and with the pointe of a ſharpe knyfe ſoftly raiſe the ſayd ſhield or ſcutchion, round about, with the oylet in the middeſt, and all the ſap belonging there vnto.
               
               
                  ¶How to take of the ſhield fro the wood.
                  ANd for the better rayſing the ſaide ſhielde or ſcutchion from the wood, after that ye haue cut him round about, and then ſlit him downe, without cutting anye part of the wood within, ye muſt then rayſe the ſide next you that is ſlit, and then take the ſame ſhielde betwixt your finger and thumbe, and plucke or raiſe it ſoftly of, without breaking or brooſing anye part thereof, and in the opening or plucking it of, holde it (with your fynger) harde to the wood, to the ende the ſap of the oylet, may remaine in the ſhielde, for if it go of (in plucking it) from the barkes, and ſticke to the wood, your ſcutchion is nothing worth.
               
               
                  ¶To knowe your ſcutchion or ſhielde, when he is good or badde.
                  ANd for the more eaſier vnderſtanding, if it be good or badde, when it is taken from the wood, looke within the ſayde ſhielde, and if ye ſhall ſée it cracke, or open within, then it is of no value, for the chiefe ſap doth yet remaine behinde with the wood, which ſhould be in the ſhield, & therfore ye muſt chooſe and cut another ſhielde, which muſt be good and ſounde, as aforeſayde, and when your ſcutchion ſhall be well taken of from the wood, then holde it drye, by the oylet or eye, betwixt your lippes, vntill ye haue cut and taken of the barke from the other cion or braunch, and ſet hym in that place, and looke that ye do not fowle or wet it in your mouth.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Of yong trees to graffe on.
                  BVt ye muſt graffe on ſuch trées, as be from the bigneſſe of your little finger, vnto as great as your arme, hauing their barke thin and ſlender, for great trées commonly haue their barke hard & thick, which ye can not wel graffe this waye, except they haue ſome braunches with a thin ſmooth barke, méete for this way to be done.
               
               
                  ¶How to ſet or place your ſhielde,
                  YE muſt quickly cut of rounde the barke of the trée that ye will graffe on, a little more longer than the ſhielde that ye ſet on, bicauſe it maye ioyne the ſooner & eaſier, but take héede that in cutting of the barke, ye cut not the wood within.
               
               
                  ¶Note alſo.
                  AFter the inciſion once done, ye muſt then couer both the ſides or ends well & ſoftly withall, with a little bone or horne, made in maner like a thin ſkinne, which ye ſhall laye it all ouer the ioyntes or cloſings of the ſayde ſhielde, ſomewhat longer and larger, but take héede for hurting or cruſhing the barke thereof.
               
               
                  ¶How to lift vp the ba
                        •
                     ke, and to ſet your ſhielde on.
                  THis done, take your ſhield or ſcutchion, by the oylet or eye that he hath, and open him fayre and ſoftly by the two ſides, and put them ſtraight waye on the other trée, where as the barke is taken of, and ioyne him cloſe barke to barke thereon, then plain it ſoftly aboue and at both the endes with the thinne bone, and that they ioyne aboue and beneath barke to barke, ſo that he maye féede well the braunch of that trée.
               
               
                  
                  ¶How to binde on your ſhield.
                  THis done, ye muſt haue a wreath of good hemp, to bind the ſaid ſhield on in his place: the maner to hinde it is this, ye ſhal make a wreath of hempe togither as great as a Gooſe quill, or there aboutes, or according to the bigneſſe or ſmalneſſe of your trée: then take your hempe in the midſt, that the one halfe may ſerue for the vpper halfe of ye ſhield, in winding and croſſing (with the hempe) the ſaide ſhield, on the braunche of the trée, but ſée that he binde it not to ſtraite, for it ſhal let him frō taking or ſpringing, and likewiſe their ſap can not eaſily come or paſſe from the one to the other: and ſée alſo that wet come not to your ſhield, nor likewiſe the hempe that ye binde it withall. Ye ſhal begin to binde your ſcutchion firſt behinde in the middes of your ſhielde, in comming ſtill lower and lower, & ſo recouer vnder the oylet, and tayle of your ſhielde, binding it nie togithers, without couering of the ſaide oylet, then ye ſhal returne againe vpward, in binding it backward to the midſt where ye began. Then take the other part of the hempe, and binde ſo likewiſe the vpper part of your ſhield, and increaſe your hempe as ye ſhall neede, and ſo returne againe backward, and ye ſhall binde it ſo, till the fruites or cliftes be couered (both aboue and beneath) with your ſayde hempe, except the oylet and his tayle, the which ye muſt not couer, for that tayle will ſhed apart, if the ſhielde doe take.
               
               
                  ¶On one tree ye may graffe or put two or three ſhieldes.
                  YE may verie well if ye wil, on euery trée graffe two or thrée ſhieldes, but ſée that one be not right againſt another, nor yet of the one ſide of the trée, let your ſhieldes ſo remaine bounde on the trées, one Moneth or more after they be graffed, and the greater the trée is, the longer to remaine, and the ſmaller the leſſer time.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The time to vnbinde your ſhielde.
                  ANd then after one moneth or ſixe wéekes paſt, ye muſt vnbinde the ſhielde, or at the leaſt, cut the hempe behynde of the trée, and let it ſo remaine vnto the Winter next following, and then about the moneth of March, or Aprill if ye will, or when ye ſhall ſée the ſap of the ſhielde put forth, then cut the braunch aboue the ſhielde thrée fingers all about all of.
               
               
                  ¶Howe to cut and gouerne the braunches graffed on the trees.
                  THen in the next yeare after that the cions ſhal be well ſtrengthened, and when they do begin to ſpring, then ſhall ye cut them all harde of by the ſhielde aboue, for if ye had cut them ſo nigh in the firſt yere, when they began firſt to ſpring or budde, it ſhoulde greatly hinder them againſt their increaſe of growing: alſo when thoſe cions ſhall put forth of faire wood, ye muſt binde and ſtaye them in the mids, faire and gently with ſmall wandes, or ſuch like, that the winde or weather hurt them not. And after this maner of graffing, is practiſed in the ſhield or ſutchiō, which way ye may eaſily graffe the white roſe on the red, and likewiſe ye may haue roſes of diuers colours & ſortes vpon one braunch or roote: this I thought ſufficient and méete to declare, of this kinde of graffing at this preſent.
               
            
            
               The .vj. Chapter is of tranſplanting or altering of trees.
               
                  ¶The ſooner ye tranſplant or ſet them, it ſhall be the better.
                  
                     YEe ought to tranſplant or ſette your trées, from Alhalowtide vnto Marche, and the ſooner the better, for as ſoone as the leaues are falne from the trées, they be méete for to be planted, if it be not in a verie colde

or moyſt place, the which then it were beſt for to tarry vnto Ianuary, or February: to plant in the froſt is not good.
               
               
                  To plant or ſet towardes the South, or Sunny place, is beſt.
                  AFore ye do pluck vp your trées for to plant them, if ye will marke the ſouthſide, of ech trée, that when ye ſhall replant them, ye may ſet them againe as they ſtood before, which is the beſt way as ſome doe ſay. Alſo if ye kéepe them a certaine tyme, after they be taken out of the earth, before ye replant them again, they wil rather recouer there in the earth, ſo they be not wette with raine, nor otherwiſe, for that ſhall be more contrary to them than the great heate or drought.
               
               
                  Howe to cut the braunches of trees before they be ſet.
                  Whenſoeuer ye ſhall ſet or replant your trées, firſt ye muſt cut of the boughes, & ſpecially thoſe which are great braunches, in ſuch ſort that ye ſhall leaue the ſmall twigs or ſprigs on the ſtockes of your braunch, which muſt be but a ſhaftment long or ſomewhat more or leſſe, according as the trée ſhall require which ye doe ſet.
               
               
                  Apple trees commonly muſt be disbraunched before they be replanted or ſet.
                  ANd chiefly the Apple trées beyng graffed or not graffed, doe require to be diſbraunched before they be ſette againe, for they ſhall proſper thereby, much the better: the other ſortes of trées may well paſſe vnbraunched, if they haue not to great or large braunches: and therefore, it ſhal be good to tranſplant or ſet, as ſoone after as the graffes are cloſed on the head of the wilde ſtocke, as for ſmall trées which haue but one cion or twigge, it néedes not to cut them aboue, when they be replanted or remooued.
               
               
                  
                  All wylde ſtockes muſt be disbraunched, when they are replanted or ſet.
                  ALl wilde trées or ſtockes which ye thinke for to graffe on, ye muſt firſt cut of all their braunches before ye ſet them againe, alſo it ſhall be good, alwayes to take héede in replanting your trées, that ye doe ſet them againe, in as good or better earth, than they were in before, and ſo euery trée according as his nature doth require.
               
               
                  What trees loue the fayre Sunne and what trees the colde ayre.
                  COmmonly the moſt part of trées doe loue the Sunne at noone, and yet the South winde (or vent d'aual) is very contrary againſt their nature, and ſpecially the Almond trée, the Abricote, the mulbery trée, the Figge trée, and the pomgranade trée: certaine other trees there be whiche loue colde ayre, as theſe: the Cheſtnut trée, the wylde and eager Cherry trée, the Quince trée, and the Damſon or Plum trée: the Walnutte looueth colde ayre, and a ſtony white grounde: Peare trées loue not greatly plaine places, they proſper well ynough in places cloſed with walles or high hedges, and ſpecially the Peare called bon Creſtien.
                  
               
               
                  Of many ſortes and maners of trees, following their nature.
                  THe Damſon or Plum trée, doth loue a colde fat earth, and clay withall, the (healme) great Cherry, doth loue to be ſet or planted vpon clay. The Pine trée, loueth light earth, ſtony and ſandy. The Medlar commeth well ynough in all kinde of groundes, and doth not hinder his fruit to be in the ſhadowe and moyſt places. Haſell nut trées, loue the place to be cold, leane, moyſt and ſandy. Ye ſhall vnderſtand that euery kinde of fruitefull trée, doth loue, and is more fruitfull in one place, than another, as according vnto their

nature, neuertheleſſe we ought to nouriſhe them (all that we may) in the place where we ſet them in, taking them fro the place and grounds they were in. And ye muſt alſo conſider when one doth plant them, of the great and largeſt kinde of trées, that euerye kinde of trée may proſper and growe, and it is to be conſidered alſo, if the trées haue commonly growne afore ſo large in that grounde or not, for in good earth, the trées maye well proſper and growe, hauing a good ſpace one from another, more than if the ground were leane and naught.
               
               
                  ¶How to plant or ſet trees at large.
                  IN this thing ye ſhall conſider, ye muſt giue a competent ſpace, from one trée to another, when as ye make the holes to ſet them in, not to nie, nor yt one trée touch ſo another. For a good trée planted or ſet well at large, it profiteth oftentimes more of fruite, than thrée or foure trées, ſet to nighe togithers. The moſt greateſt and largeſt trées commonly are Walnuttes, and Cheſtnuttes, if ye plant them ſeuerally in ranke, as they doe commonly grow vpon high waies, beſide hedges in fieldes, they muſt be ſet .xxxv. foote a ſunder, one from another, or there aboutes, but if ye will plant many ranks in one place togithers, ye muſt ſet them the ſpace of .xlv. foote, one from another, or thereaboutes, and ſo farre ye muſt ſet your ranks one from another. For the Peare trées and Apple trées, and other ſortes of trées which may be ſet of this largeneſſe one from ye other, if ye doe plant onely in rankes by hedges in the fields, or otherwiſe, it ſhal be ſufficient of .xx. foote one from another. But if ye wil ſet two ranks vpon the ſides of your great alleyes in gardens, which be of ten or twelue foote broad, it ſhal be then beſt to giue them more ſpace, the one from the other in ech ranke, as about .xxv. foote: alſo ye muſt not ſet your trées right one againſt the other, but entermedling or betwéene euery ſpace, as they may beſt grow at large, that if

néede be, ye may plant of other ſmaller trées betwéene, but ſée that ye ſet them not to thick. If ye liſt for to ſet or plant all your trées of one bigneſſe, as of yong trées like rods, being Peare trées, or Apple trées, they muſt be ſet a good ſpace one from another, as of .xxv. or .xxx. foote in ſquare, as to ſay, from one ranke to another. For to plant or ſette of ſmaller trées, as Plum trées, & Apple trées, of the like bigneſſe, it ſhall be ſufficient for them .xiiij. or .xv. foote ſpace, in Quarters. But if ye wyll plant or ſet two rankes in your alleyes in gardens, ye muſt deuiſe for to proportion it after the largeneſſe of your ſaide alleyes. For to plant or ſette eager or ſowre Cherry trées, this ſpace ſhall be ſufficient ynough ye one from the other, that is, of x. or .xij. foote, and therefore if ye make of great or large alleyes in your garden, as of ten foote wide or there abouts, they ſhal come wel to paſſe, and ſhal be ſufficient to plant your trées, of .ix. or .x. foote ſpace? and for the other leſſer ſorts of trées, as of Quince trées, Figge trées, Nut trées and ſuch like, which be not commonly planted, but in one ranke togithers.
               
               
                  Ordering your trees.
                  WHen that ye plant or ſet ranks, of euery kind of trées togithers, ye ſhall ſet or plant the moſt ſmalleſt towards the ſunne, & the greateſt in the ſhade, that they may not annoy or hurt the ſmall, nor the ſmall the great. Alſo whenſoeuer ye wil plant or ſet of Peare trées, & Plum trées (in any place) the one with another, better it were to ſet the Plum trées next the ſunne, for the Peares wil dure better in the ſhade. Alſo ye muſt vnderſtande, when he ſet or plant many ranks of trées togithers, ye muſt haue more ſpace betwixt your rankes and trées, (then when ye ſet but one ranke) that they may haue rome ſufficient on euerye ſide: ye ſhal alſo ſcarcely ſet or plant Peare trées, or Apple trées, or other great trées, vpō dead, or moſſie barrē ground vnſtirred, for they increſe (theron) to no purpoſe. But other

leſſer trées very well may growe, as Plum trées and ſuch like: nowe when all the ſayd things aboue be conſidered, ye ſhall make your holes, according to the ſpace that ſhal he required of euery trée that ye ſhall plant or ſette, and alſo the place méete for the ſame ſo much as ye may conuenient, ye ſhall make your holes large ynough, for ye muſt ſuppoſe that the trée ye do ſet, hath not the halfe of his rootes he ſhall haue hereafter, therefore ye muſt helpe him and giue hym of good fat earth, (or dung) all about the rootes when as ye plant him. And if any of the ſame rootes be to long, and bruyſed or hurt, ye ſhall cut them cleane of, a ſlope wyſe, ſo that the vpper ſide (of eache roote) ſo cut, may be longeſt in ſetting, and for the ſmall rootes which come foorth all about thereof, ye may not cut them of as the great rootes.
               
               
                  Howe ye ought to enlarge the holes for your trees, when ye plant them.
                  WHen as ye ſette the trées in the holes, ye muſt then enlarge the rootes, in placing them, and ſée that they take all downewards, without turning any rootes the ende vpwarde, and ye muſt not plant or ſet them to déepe in the earth, but as ye ſhall ſée cauſe. It ſhall be ſufficient for them to be planted or ſet (halfe a foote, or there aboutes) in the earth, ſo that the earth be aboue all the rootes halfe a foote or more, if the place be not very burning and ſtonie.
               
               
                  Of dung and good earth, for your plantes and trees.
                  ANd when as ye woulde replant or ſet, ye muſt haue of good fatte earth or dung, well medled with a part of the ſame earth where as yée tooke your Plantes out of, wyth all the vpper creſtes of the earth, as thick as ye can haue it: the ſayde earth which ye ſhall put about the rootes, muſt not

be put to nigh the rootes, for doubt of the dung being layd to nigh, which will put the ſayde rootes in a heate, but let it be well medled with the other earth, and well tempered in the holes, and the ſmalleſt and ſlendreſt cions that turnes vp among thoſe rootes, ye may plant therewith very well.
               
               
                  If ye haue wormes amongeſt the earth of your rootes.
                  IF there be wormes in the fat earth or dung, that ye put about your rootes, ye muſt meddle it well alſo, with the dung of oxen or kyne, or fleckt ſope aſhes about the roote, whiche will make the Wormes to die, for otherwyſe, they will hurt greatly the rootes.
               
               
                  To digge well the earth about the tree rootes.
                  ALſo ye muſt digge well the earth, principally all round ouer the rootes, and more oftner, if they be drie, than if they be wet: ye muſt not plant or ſet trées when it rayneth, nor the earth to be very moyſt about the rootes. The trées that be planted or ſet in valleyes, commonly proſper well by drought, and when it rayneth, they that be on the hilles are better by watring with drops, than others, but if the place or grounde be moyſt of nature, ye muſt not plant or ſet your trées ſo déepe thereon.
               
               
                  The nature of places.
                  ON high and drie places, ye muſt plant or ſet your trées a little more déeper, than in the valleys, & ye muſt not fill the holes in high places, ſo full as the other, to the ende that the raine may better moyſten them.
               
               
                  Of good earth.
                  YE ſhal vnderſtand that of good earth, cōmonly commeth good fruite, but in certaine places (if that they might

be ſuffered to growe) they would ſeaſon the trée the better. Otherwiſe they ſhall not come to proofe, nor yet haue a good taſte.
               
               
                  With what ye ought to binde your trees.
                  WHenſoeuer your trées ſhalbe replanted or ſet, ye muſt knocke in (by the roote) a ſtake, and binde your trées thereto for feare of the winde: and when they do ſpring, ye ſhall dreſſe them and binde them with bandes that may not breake, which handes may be of ſtrong ſoft hearbe, as Bulruſhes or ſuch like, or of olde linnen clowtes, if the other be not ſtrong ynough, or elſe ye may bind them with Oziars, or ſuch like, but for feare of fretting or hurting your trées.
               
            
            
               The ſeuenth Chapter is of medecining and keeping the trees when they are planted.
               
                  The firſt councell is, when your trees be but plantes (in drie weather) they muſt be watred.
                  THE yong trées which be newly planted, muſt ſometymes (in Sūmer) be watred when the time waxeth drie, at the leaſt the firſt yeare after they be planted or ſet. But as for other greater trées which are wel taken & rooted a good time, ye muſt dig them al ouer the rootes after Alhallowtide, & vncouer them foure or fiue foote compaſſe about the roote or trée: and let them ſo lie vncouered vntill the latter ende of Winter. And if ye do then meddle about eache trée of good fat earth or dung, to heate and comfort the earth withall, it ſhall be good.
               
               
                  With what dung ye ought to dung your trees.
                  ANd principally vnto moſſie trées, dung them with hogs dung medled with other earth of the ſame ground, and the dung of Oxen to be next about the rootes, and ye ſhall alſo abate the moſſe of the trées, with a great knife of wood, or ſuch like, ſo that ye hurt not the barke thereof.
               
               
                  
                  When ye ought to vncouer your trees in Sommer.
                  IN the tyme of Sommer, when the earth is ſcantly halfe moyſt, it ſhall be good to digge at the foote of the trées, al about on the roote, ſuch as haue not béene vncouered in the Winter before, and to meddle it with good fat earth: and ſo fill it againe, and they ſhall doe well.
               
               
                  when ye ought to cut or proyne your trees.
                  ANd if there be in your trées certain branches of ſuperfluous wood that ye will cut of, tary vntill the time of the entring in of the ſappe, that is, when they begin to bud, as in March and Aprill: then cut of as ye ſhal ſée cauſe, all ſuch ſuperfluous braunches hard by the trée, that therby the other braunches may proſper the better, for then they ſhall ſooner cloſe their ſappe vpon the cut places than in the Winter, which ſhould not do ſo well to cut them, as certain do teach which haue not good experience. But for ſo much as in this time the trées be entring into the ſap, as is aforeſayde. Take héede therefore in cutting then of your great braunches haſtily, that through their great waight, they do not cleaue or ſeperate the barke from the trée in any part thereof.
               
               
                  Howe to cut your great braunches, and when.
                  ANd for the better remedie: Firſt you ſhall cut the ſame great braunches halfe a foote from the trée, and after to ſawe the reſt cleane of hard by the body of the trée, then with a brode Chiſell cut all cleane and ſmooth vpon ye place, then couer it with Oxe dung. Ye may alſo cut them well in Winter, ſo that ye leaue the trunke or braunch ſomewhat longer, ſo as ye may dreſſe and cut them againe in March and Aprill, as is before mentioned.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Howe ye ought to leaue theſe greae braunches cut.
                  OTher thinges here are to be ſhewed of certaine great and old trées only, which in cutting the great braunches thereof truncheon wiſe, doe renewe againe, as Wallnuts, Mulbery trée, Plum trées, Cherry trées with others, which ye muſt diſbraunch the bowes thereof euen after Alhallowtide, or as ſoone as their leaues be falne of, and likewiſe before they begin to enter into ſap.
               
               
                  ¶Of trees hauing great braunches:
                  THe ſayde great braunches, when ye ſhall diſbraunche them, ye ſhall ſo cut them of in ſuche truncheons, of length on the trée, that the one maye be longer than the other, that when the cions be growne good and long thereon, ye may graffe on them againe as ye ſhall ſée cauſe, according as euery arme ſhall require.
               
               
                  ¶Of barrenneſſe of trees, the time of cutting yll braunches, and of vncouering the rootes.
                  SOmetimes a man hath certaine olde trées, which be almoſt ſpent, as of the Peare trées and Plum trées, and other great trées, the which beare ſcant of fruite, but when as ye ſhall ſée ſome braunches well charged therewith, then ye ought to cut of all the other yll braunches and bowes, to the ende that thoſe that remaine may haue the more ſap to nouriſhe their fruite, as alſo to vncouer their rootes after Alhallowtide, and to cleaue the moſt greateſt rootes therof (a foote from the tronke) and put into the ſayde cleftes, a thin ſlate of hard ſtone, there let it remaine, to the ende that the humour of the trée, may enter out thereby, and at the ende of Winter ye ſhall couer him againe with as good and fat earth as ye can get, and let the ſtone alone.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Trees the which ye muſt help or pluck vp the rootes.
                  AL ſortes of trées which ſpring cions from the rootes, as Plum trées, all kinde of Cherry trées and ſmall Nutte trées, ye muſt helpe in plucking their Cions from the rootes in Winter, aſſone as conueniently ye can, after the leafe is fallen. For they do greatly pluck down & weaken the ſaid trées, in drawing to them the ſubſtance of the earth
               
               
                  ¶What doth make a good Nutte.
                  BVt chiefly to plant theſe Cions, the beſt waye is to let them growe and be nouriſhed two or thrée yeares from the roote, and then to tranſplant them or ſet them in the Winter, as is aforeſaid. The Cions which be taken from the foote of the Haſel trées, make good Nuttes, and to be of much ſtrength & vertue, when they are not ſuffred to grow to long from the roote or foote aforeſaide.
               
               
                  ¶Trees eaten wyth beaſtes, muſt be graffed agayne.
                  WHen certaine graffes being well in ſappe, of thrée or foure yeres or thereabouts, be broken or greatly endomaged with beaſtes which haue broken therof, it ſhal little profite to leaue thoſe graffes ſo, but it were better to cut them and to graffe them higher or lower than they were before. For the graffes ſhall take as wel vpon the new as olde Cion being graffed, as on the wilde ſtock: but it ſhall not ſo ſoone cloſe, as vpon the wilde ſtock head.
               
               
                  How your wylde ſtocke ought not haſtily to be remoued.
                  IN the beginning when ye haue graffed your graffes on the wilde ſtock, do not then haſtily pluck vp thoſe Cions or wilde ſtockes ſo graffed, vntill ye ſhall ſee the graffes put forth a new ſhewte, the which remayning ſtil, ye may graffe thereon againe, ſo that your graffes in haſty remoouing may chaunce to die.
               
               
                  
                  ¶when ye cut of the naughtie Cions from the wood.
                  WHen your graffes on the ſtockes, ſhall put foorth of newe wood, or a newe ſhewte, as of two or thrée foot
                        •
                      long, and if they put foorth alſo of other ſmall ſuperfluous cions (about the ſayd members or braunches that ye would nouriſhe) cut of all ſuch yll cions, harde by the heade, in the ſame yeare they are graffed in, but not ſo long as the wood is in ſappe, till the winter after.
               
               
                  ¶Howe ſometimes to cut the principall members.
                  ALſo it is good to cut ſome of the principall members or braunches in the firſt yeare if they haue to many, and then agayne within two or thrée yeares after when they ſhal be well ſprong vp, & the graffes well cloſed on the head of the ſtock: ye may trim and dreſſe them againe, in taking away the ſuperfluous braunches if any there remaine, for it is ſufficient ynough to nouriſhe a yong trée, to leaue him one principall member on the heade, ſo that he may be one of thoſe that hath ben graffed on the trée before, yea and the trée ſhall be fayrer and better in the ende, than if he had two or thrée braunches or precidens at the foote. But if the trée haue ben graffed with many great cions, thē ye muſt leaue him more largely, according as ye ſhall ſée cauſe or néede, to recouer the cleftes on the head of the ſayde graffe or ſtocke.
               
               
                  ¶Howe to guide and gouerne the ſayde trees.
                  WHen that your trées doe begin to ſpringe, ye muſt order & ſée to them well the ſpace of thrée or foure yeres, or more, vntil they be well and ſtrongly growne, in helping them aboue in cutting the ſmall twigges, and ſuperfluous wood, vntill they be ſo hie without braunches as a man, or more if it may be, and then ſée to them well, in placing the

principal branches if néede be, with forkes or wandes prickt right and well about them at the foote, and to proyne them ſo that one braunch doe not approche to nigh the other, nor yet frette the one the other, when as they doe enlarge and growe, & ye muſt alſo cut of certaine braunches in the trée, where as they are to thicke.
               
               
                  A kinde of ſickneſſe in trees.
                  WHen certaine trées are ſicke of the Gall, whiche is a kinde of ſickneſſe that doth eate the barke, therefore ye muſt cut it, & takes out all the ſame infection with a cheſil, or ſuch like thing. This muſt be done at the ende of winter, then put on that infected place of oxe dung, or hogges dung, and binde it faſt thereon with clowtes, and wrappe it with oziars, ſo let it remaine a long time, till it ſhal recouer againe.
               
               
                  Trees which haue wormes in the barke▪
                  
                  OF trées which haue Wormes within 
                        〈◊〉
                      barkes is, where as ye ſhall ſee a ſwelling or ryſing therein, therfore ye muſt cut or cleane the ſaid barke vnto the wood, to the ende the h
                        •
                     m or may alſo vntill: out thereat, and with a little hooke ye muſt: plucke or draw out the ſayd wormes, withall the rotten wood that ye can ſée, then ſhall ye put vpon the ſayd place, a playſter made of Oxe dung, or of Hogs dung mo
                        •••…
                      and beaten with Sage, and a little of, vnfleckt lime, then let it be all well blende togither, and wrap it on a cloth, and bind it faſt and cloſe theron ſo long as it will hold. The lies of wine ſhed or poured vpon the rootes of trées (the which he ſomewhat ſicke through the coldneſſe of the earth) which lyes doth them much good.
               
               
                  Snayles, Antes and wormes doth marre trees.
                  ALſo ye muſt take héede of all maner of yong trées▪ and ſpecially of thoſe graffes, the which many wormes and

flyes doe endomage and hurte in the time of Sommer, thoſe are the ſnailes, the piſmiars, or antes, the field ſnaile which hurteth alſo all other ſortes of trées that be great, principally in the time yt the Cuckowe doth ſing, & betwixt Apryll, and Midſomer, while they be tender. There be little beaſtes calles Sowes, which haue many legs: and ſome be of them graye, ſome blacke, and ſome hath a long ſharpe ſnowte, which be verie noyſome, & great hurters of yong graffes, and other yong trées alſo, for they cut of in eating the tender toppes (of the yong cions) as longe as ones ſynger.
               
               
                  ¶Howe ye ought to take the ſayde wormes.
                  FOr to take them well, ye muſt take héede and watch in the heate of the daye (your yong trées) and where yée ſhall ſée any, put your hand ſoftly vnderneath, without ſhaking the trée, for they will ſodainely fall, when one thinkes to take them: therefore as ſoone as you can (that they flie not away nor fall) take him (quickly on the cion) with your other hande.
               
               
                  ¶To keepe antes from yong trees.
                  FOr to kéepe the yong trées from ſnayles and Antes▪ it ſhal be good to take aſhes and to mingle vnſſeckt lyme, beaten in powder therewith, then lay it all about the roote of the trée, and when it raineth, they ſhall be beaten downe into the aſhes and die: but ye muſt renewe your aſhes after euerie raine from time to time: alſo to kéepe them moyſt, ye muſt put certaine ſmall veſſels full of water, at the foote of your ſaide trées, and alſo the lyes of wine, to be ſpreade on the grounde there all aboutes. For the beſt deſtroying of the ſmall ſnayles on trées, ye muſt take good héede in the ſpring time; before the trées be leaued, then if ye ſhall ſée as it were ſmall weartes, knobbes or braunches on the trées, the ſame will be ſnayles.

Prouide to take them away faire and ſoftly, before they be full cloſed, and take héede that ye hurt not the wood or barke of the ſayd trée, as little as ye can, then burne thoſe braunches on the earth, or al to tread them vnder your féete, and then if any doe remayne or renewe, looke in the heat of the day, and if ye can ſée any, which will commonly be on the cleftes or forkes of the braunches, and alſo vpon the braunches lying like toftes or troupes togyther, then wrap your handes all ouer with olde clothes, (and bind of leaues beneath them & aboue them,) and with your two hands rub them down therin, and ſtrait way fire it, if ye do not quickly with diligence, they will fall, and if they fall to the earth, ye can not lightly kill them, but they will renewe agayne, theſe kinde of wormes are noyſome flyes which he verye ſtraunge, therefore take héede that they doe not caſt a certaine redneſſe on your face and body, for where as there be many of them, they be daungerous: it is ſtraunge to tell of theſe kinde of wormes, if ye come vnder or among the trées, where as be many, they will caſt your face & hands, (your couered body, as your neck, breſt and armes) full of ſmall ſpottes, ſome red, ſome black, ſome blewiſhe, which wil ſo tingle and trouble you like netles, ſometimes for a daye, or a daye and a night after: they be moſt on Plum trées, and Apple trées, nighe vnto moyſt places, and yll ayres yet neuertheleſſe, by the grace of God there is no daunger (that I vnderſtande) to be taken by them. Ye ſhall vnderſtande that if it be in the euening, or in the morning, when it rayneth, they will remayne about the graffing place of the trée, therefore it will be harde to finde them, bicauſe they are ſo ſmall. Moreouer, it ſuch braunches do remayne in the vpper part of the bowes or trée, ye ſhall bynde of drye ſtrawe about the bowes all vnder, then wyth a wiſpe on a poles ende, ſet fyre on all, and burne them.
               
               
                  
                  ¶A note in ſpring tyme of Fumigations.
                  HEere is to be vnderſtande and noted, that in the ſpring time onely when trées doe beginne to put forth leafes and bloſſomes, ye muſt then alwayes take héede vnto them, for to defend them from the froſt, (if there come any, with fumigations or ſmokes made on the wind ſide of your Orchards, or vnder your trées) with ſtraw, hey, dry chaffe, dry Oxe dung, of ſaw duſt dried in an ouen, of tanners oze dryed likewiſe, of Galbanum, of olde ſhooes, thatche of houſes, of haire and ſuch like, one of theſe to be blende with another: al theſe be good againſt the froſt in the ſpring time, and ſpecially good againſt the eaſt winde, which bréedeth (as ſome ſaye) the Caterpiller worme.
               
               
                  To defend the Caterpiller.
                  AND ſome doe defend their trées from the Caterpiller when the bloſſoming time is drie (if there be no froſt) by caſting of water, or ſalt water, euerie ſecond or thirde day vpon their trées, (with inſtrumentes for the ſame, as with ſquirtes of wood or braſſe or ſuch like) for in kéeping of them 
                        〈◊〉
                     , the Caterpiller can not bréede theron: this experience haue I knowne prooued of late to be good. For to conclude, he that will ſet or plant trées, muſt not paſſe for any paines, but haue a pleaſure and delight therein, in remembring the great profite that commeth therby: againſt ſcarceneſſe of corne, fruit is good ſtay for the poore, and often it hath bene ſéene one aker of orchard ground worth foure akers of wheate grounde.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
                Here foloweth a little treatiſe howe one may graffe and plant, ſubtill or artificially, and to make many things in Gardins very ſtraunge.
            FOr to graffe a ſubtill way, take one oylet or eye of a graffe, ſlyt it round, aboue and beneath, and then behind downe right, then wreath him of, and ſet him vpon another cion, as great as he is, then dreſſe him as is aforeſaide, and he ſhall growe and heare.
            
               ¶To graffe one Vyne vpon another.
               FOr to graffe one Vine vpon another, ye ſhal cleaue him as ye do other trées, and then put the vine graffe in the clift, then ſtop him cloſe and well with waxe, and ſo binde him and he ſhall growe.
            
            
               ¶If a tree be to long without fruite.
               YE ſhall vncouer his roote and make a hole with a piercer or ſmall awger, in the greateſt roote he hath, without pearcing thorowe the roote, then put in a pinne (in the ſayde hole) of dry wood, (as oke or aſhe) and ſo let it remaine in the ſayde hole, and ſtop it cloſe againe with waxe and then caſt earth and couer him againe, and he ſhall beare the ſame yeare.
            
            
               
               For to haue Peaches two monethes before other.
               TAke your cyons of a Peache trée that doth ſoone bloſſome in the ſpring time, and graffe them vpon a frank Mulbery trée, and he ſhall bring of Peaches two monethes before others.
            
            
               To haue Damſons or other Plums, vnto Alhallowtide.
               FOr to haue Damſons all the Sommer long vnto Alhallowtide, and of many other kinde of ſortes likewiſe; ye ſhall graffe them vpon ye Gooſebery trée, vpon the franke Mulbery trée, and vpon the Cherry trée, and they ſhall endure on the trées till Alhallowtyde.
            
            
               To make Medlars, Cherryes and Peaches in eatyng to taſte lyke ſpyce.
               FOr to make Medlars, Cherries and Peaches to taſte in the eating pleaſant like ſpice, the which ye may alſo kepe vnto the newe come againe, ye ſhall graffe them vpon the frank Mulbery trée, as I haue afore declared and in the graffing, ye ſhall wette them in honie, and put a little of the powder of ſome good ſpices, as the powder of cloues, of Cinamon or Gynger.
            
            
               To make a Muſcadell taſte.
               FOr to make a Muſcadell taſte, take a gouge or cheſill of yron, (and cut your ſap rounde about) then put in your gouge or cheſill vnder your ſap on your cion, and rayſe thrée eies or oylettes rounde about, and ſo take of fayre and ſoftly your barke round about, and when he is ſo taken of, doe annoynt it all ouer within the barke, with powder of cloues, or nutmegs, then ſet it on againe, and ſtop it cloſe with waxe rounde about, that no water may enter in, and within thrice hearing, they ſhall bring a fayre Muſcadell reyſon, which ye may after both graffe and plant, and they ſhall be all after a Muſcadell fruite: ſome ſlyttes the barke downe, and ſo put in of ſpice.
            
            
               
               ¶To ſet Apples and Peares, to come without bloſſoming.
               FOr to make Apples, and Peares, & other ſortes of fruit to come without bloſſoming, that is, ye ſhall graffe them (as ye doe other kinde of fruite) vpon the figge trée.
            
            
               ¶To haue Apples and Cheſtnutes rathe, and alſo long on the trees.
               FOr to haue Apples called (in french) de blanc Durell, or de Yroael, & of Cheſtnuts very rathe, and long (as vnto Alhollowtide) on the trées: and to make ſuch fruit alſo to endure, the ſpace of .ij. yeres, ye ſhall graffe them on a latewarde fruit, as pome Richard, or vpon a peare trée, or apple trée of Dāgoiſſe.
               
            
            
               ¶To haue good Cherries on the trees, at Alhallontide.
               TO haue Cherries on many trées, good for to eate vnto Alhallontide, ye ſhall graffe thē vpon a frank Mulbery trée, & likewiſe to graffe them vpon a willow, or ſallow trée, and they ſhall endure vnto Alhallontide, on the trées.
            
            
               To haue rath Medlars two Monethes before others.
               FOr to haue Medlars two monthes ſooner than others: and that the one ſhall be better farre than the other, ye ſhall graffe them vppon a Gooſeberry trée, and alſo a franke Mulbery trée, and before ye doe graffe them, ye ſhall wet them in Honnie, and then graffe them.
            
            
               For to haue rathe or timely Peares.
               FOr to haue a rathe Peare ye which is in Fraunce, as the Peare Cailonet, and the peare Haſtinean. For to haue them rath or ſoone, ye ſhall graffe them on the Pine trée: And for to haue them late, ye ſhall graffe them on the peare called in Fraunce Dangoiſſe, or on other like hard peares.
            
            
               
               To haue Miſples or Medlers without ſtones.
               FOr to haue Medlers without ſtones, the which ſhal taſt ſwete as hony, ye ſhal graffe them as the other, vpon an Eglentine or ſwéete Brier trée, & ye ſhall wet the grafs (before ye graffe them) in hony.
            
            
               To haue Peares bytimes.
               FOr to haue the peare of Anguiſſe, or Permain, or Satigle, (which be of certaine places ſo called) a moneth or two, before others, the which ſhall endure, and be good vnto the newe come againe, ye ſhall graffe them vppon a Quince trée, and likewiſe vpon the franke Mulbery trée.
            
            
               To haue ripe or franke Mulberyes very ſone and late.
               FOr to haue franck or ripe Mulberies very ſoone, ye ſhall graffe them vpon a rath Peare trée, and vpon the Gofebery trée, and to haue very late and to endure vnto Alhallowtide, ye ſhall graffe them vpon the Medler trée.
            
            
               To keepe Peares a yeare.
               HOw for to kéepe Peares a yeare: ye ſhall take of fine ſalt very dry, and put thereof with your peares into a barrell, in ſuch ſort that one Peare doe not touch another, ſo fill the barrell if ye liſt, then ſtoppe it, and let it be ſet in ſome dry place, that the ſalt do not waxe moyſt, thus ye may kéepe them long and good.
            
            
               To haue your fruite taſte halfe apples, halfe peares.
               IF ye wil haue your fruite taſt halfe a peare and halfe an Apple, ye ſhall in the ſpring take graffes, the one a peare, and the other an Apple, ye ſhall cleaue or pare them in the graffing ioynte or place, and ioyne halfe the Peare cion, &

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
ſtrawe, and if the time of winter be colde and very harde, then put of haye aboue them on your ſtraw, and take it awaye when as a fayre time commeth: and thus ye ſhall keepe your fruite fayre and good.
            
            
               The dayes to Plant and Graffe.
               ALſo (as ſome ſay) from the firſt day of the newe mone, vnto the .xiij. day thereof, is good for to plant, or graffe, or ſowe, and for great néede, ſome doe take vnto the .xvii. or .xviii. day thereof, and not after, neither graffe, nor ſowe, but as is afore mencioned, a day or two dayes afore the chaunge, the beſt ſignes are, Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorne.
            
            
               Te haue greene Roſes all the yeare.
               FOr to haue gréene Roſes, ye ſhal (as ſome ſay) take your roſe buds, in the ſpring time, and then graffe them vpon the holly ſtocke, and they ſhall be gréene all the yeare.
            
            
               To keepe Reyſins or Grapes good a yeare.
               FOr to kéepe Rayſins or grapes good all a whole yeare, ye ſhal take of fine dry ſande, and then lay your reyſins or grapes therein, and it ſhall kéepe them good a whole yeare, ſome kéepe them in a cloſe glaſſe from the ayre.
            
            
               To make fruite laxatiue from the tree.
               FOR to make any fruite laxatiue from the trée, what fruite ſoeuer it be, make a hole in the ſtocke, or in the Mayſter roote of the trée, (wyth a great pearcer ſloope wiſe) not thorow, but vnto the pythe, or ſomewhat further, then fill the ſaide hole with the ioyce of elder, of Centori, of Seney, or of Turbich, or ſuch like laxatiues, thē fill the ſayd hole therwith, of which of them ye will, or elſe ye may take

thrée of them togithers, and fill the ſaid hole therewith, and then ſtoppe the ſayde hole cloſe with ſoft waxe, then claye it thereon, and put moſſe very well ouer all, ſo that nothing may iſſue or fall out, and all the fruite of the ſayde trée ſhall be from thencefoorth laxatiue.
            
            
               A note for all Graffers and Planters.
               ALſo whenſoeuer ye ſhall plant or graffe, it ſhalbe méete and good for you to ſaye as foloweth. In the name of God the Father, the Sonne and the holy Ghoſt, Amen. Increaſe and multiplye, and repleniſhe the earth: and ſaye the Lordes prayer, then ſay: Lord God heare my prayer, and let this my deſire of thée be hearde. The holy ſpirite of God which hath created all things for man, and hath giuen them for our comfort, in thy name O Lorde we ſet, plant, & graffe, deſiring that by thy mighty power they maye encreaſe, and multiplye vppon the earth, in bearing plenty of fruite, to the profite and comfort of all thy faithfull people, thorow Chriſte or Lorde. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
                ¶Here followe certayne wayes of planting and graffing, with other neceſſaries herein meete to be knowne, tranſlated out of Dutch by L. M.
            
               ¶To graffe one Vine on another.
               
                  YOu that wyll graffe one Vine vpon another, ye ſhall (in Ianuary) cleaue the head of the Vine, as ye doe other ſtockes, and then put in your Vine graffe or cyon, but firſt ye muſt pare him thinne, ere ye ſet him in the head, then clay and moſſe him as the other.
            
            
               ¶Choſen dayes to graffe in, and to chooſe your cions.
               ALſo when ſo euer that ye wyll graffe, the beſt choſen tymes is on the laſt day before the chaunge, and alſo in the chaunge, & on the ſeconde daye after the chaunge, if ye graffe (as ſome ſay) on the thirde, fourth & fift day after the

chaunge, it wil be ſo many yeres ere thoſe trées bring forth fruit. Which thing ye may beleue if ye will, but I will not. For ſome do holde opinion, that it is good graffing from the chaunge vnto the .xviij. day thereof, which I think to be good in all the increaſe of the Moone, but the ſooner the better.
            
            
               ¶To gather your cions.
               ALſo ſuch cions or graffs which ye do get on other trées the yong trées of thrée or foure yeares, or .v. or .vj. yeares are beſt to haue graffs. Take them of no vnder bowes, but in the top vpon the Eaſt ſide, if ye can, and of the fayreſt and greateſt. Ye ſhall cut them .ij. inches long of the olde wood, beneth the ioynt. And whenſoeuer ye will graffe, cut or pare your graffes taperwiſe from the ioynt two ynches or more of length, which ye ſhall ſette into the ſtocke: and before ye ſet it in, ye ſhall open your ſtocke wyth a wedge of yron, or harde wood, fayre and ſoftly: then if the ſides of your clefts be ragged, ye ſhall pare them with the poynt of a ſharpe knife on both ſides within and aboue, then ſet in your graffes cloſe on the out ſides and alſo aboue: but let your ſtocke be as little while open as ye can, and when your graffes be well ſet in, plucke forth your wedge: and if your ſtocke doe pinch your graffes much, then ye muſt put in a wedge of the ſame woodde for to helpe your graffes: Then ye ſhall lay a thicke barke or pill ouer the cleft from the one graft to the other, to kéepe out the claye and rayne, and ſo clay them two fingers thicke rounde aboute the cliffes, and then lay on Moſſe, but Wooll is better next to your clay, or elſe to temper your clay with Wooll or haire, for it ſhall make it byde cloſer and alſo ſtronger on the ſtocke heade. Some take Wooll next the clay and wrappeth it all ouer with linnen clowtes: for the Wooll béeing once moyſte, will kéepe the clay ſo a long tyme. And other ſome doe take Woollen clowtes that haue béene layd in the iuyce of Wormewood, or ſuch lyke bitter thing, to kéepe créeping Wormes from comming, vnder to the Graffes.

If ye graffe in winter put your clay vppermoſt, for ſōmer your moſſe. For in Winter the moſſe is warme, and your clay will not cleaue. In Sommer your claye is colde, and your moſſe kepes him from cleauing or chapping. To bind them, take of willow pilles, of clouen briers, of Oziers, or ſuch like. To gather your graffe
                     •
                   on the Eaſt part of the trée is counted beſt: if ye gather them belowe on the vnder boughes, they will grow flaggie and ſpreading abrode: if ye take them in the top of the trée, they will grow vpright. Yet ſome do gather their cions or graffes on the ſides of ye trées and ſo graffe them againe on the like ſides of the ſtocks, the which is of ſome men not counted ſo good for fruite. It is not good to graffe a great ſtocke, for they will be long ere they couer the heade thereof.
            
            
               Of wormes in trees or fruite.
               IF ye haue any trées eaten with worms, or do bring wormy fruite, ye ſhal vſe to waſh al his body and great braū
                  ches with two partes of Kowpiſſe, and one parte of Vineger, or elſe if ye can get no Vineger, with Kowpiſſe alone, tempered with common aſhes: then waſh your trées therwith before the Spring, and in the Spring, or in Sommer. Annis ſeedes ſowne about the trée rootes, driue away wormes, and the fruite ſhall be the ſwéeter,
            
            
               The ſetting of Stones, and ordering thereof.
               AS for Almonde trées, Peach trées, Cherry trées, Plum trées, or others, ye ſhal thus plant or ſet them. Lay firſt the Stones in water thrée dayes and foure nightes, vntyll they ſinke therin: then take them betwixt your finger and your thumbe, with the ſmall ende vpwarde, and ſo ſet them two fingers déepe in good earth. And when ye haue ſo done, ye ſhal rake them al ouer and ſo couer them: and when they begin to grow or ſpring, kéepe them from wéedes, and they ſhal proſper the better, ſpecially in the firſt yere. And within

two or thrée yeares after, ye may ſette or remooue them where ye liſt, thē if ye do remoue them againe after that, ye muſt proyne of all his twigges as ye ſhall ſée cauſe, nigh the ſtocke: thus ye may do of all kind of trées, but ſpecially thoſe which haue the great ſap, as the Mulbery, or Figge trée, or ſuch like.
            
            
               To gather Gumme of any tree,
               IF ye liſt to haue the Gumme of the Almond trée, ye ſhall ſtrike a great nayle into the trée, a good way, and ſo lette him reſt, and the Gumme (of the trée) ſhall iſſue thereat: thus doe men gather Gumme of all ſortes of trées, yea the common Gumme that men doe vſe and occupie.
            
            
               To ſet a whole Apple.
               ALſo ſome ſay, that if ye ſette a whole Apple foure fingers in the earth, all the Pepines or curnelles in the ſame Apple, wil grow vp togithers in one whole ſtock or cion, and al thoſe Aples ſhalbe much fayrer and greater than others: but ye muſt take héede, how ye doe ſet thoſe Apples which doe come in a leape yeare, for in a leape yeare (as ſome doe ſay) the curnelles or Pepines are turned contrary, for if ye ſhould ſo ſet, as commonly a man doth, ye ſhall ſette them contrary.
            
            
               Of ſetting the Almonde.
               ALmondes doe come forth and growe commonly well, if they be ſet without the ſhell or huſke, in good earth, or in rotten hogges dung: if ye lay Almondes, one day in vineger, then ſhall they (as ſome ſay,) be very good to plant, or lay him in milke and water vntill he do ſinke, it ſhall be the better to ſette, or any other nut.
            
            
               
               Of Pepines watered.
               THe Pepines and curnels of thoſe trées which haue a thicke or rough barke, if ye laye them thrée daies in water, or elſe vntill they ſincke therein, they ſhall be the better, then ſet them, or ſowe them, as is afore mentioned, and then remooue them, when they be well rooted, of thrée or foure yeares growth, and they ſhall haue a thin barke.
            
            
               To plant or ſet Vines.
               IF ye plant or ſet Vines, in the firſt or ſecond yeare they wil bring no fruit, but in the thirde yere they wil beare, if they be well kept, ye ſhall cut them in Ianuarie, & ſet them ſoone after they be cut from the Vine, and ye ſhal ſet two togither, the one with the olde wood, & the other without, and ſo let them grow in plucking away al wéedes from about them, and when ye ſhall remoue them in the ſecond or thirde yere, being well rooted, ye ſhal ſet them wel a foote déepe (in good fat earth) with good dung, as of one foote déepe or there abouts, & kéepe them cleane from wéedes, for then they will proſper the better, and in ſommer when ye Grape is knytte, then ye ſhall breake of his top or braunch, at one or two ioyntes after the grape, and ſo the grape ſhalbe the greater, and in the Winter when ye cut them, ye ſhall not leaue paſt two or thrée leaders on eche braunche, on ſome braunche but one leader, which muſt be cut betwixt two ioyntes, and ye ſhall leaue the yong vine to be the leader, alſo ye ſhall leaue therof thrée or foure ioyntes at al times, if a yong cion do come forth of the old braunch or ſide therof, if ye doe cut him, ye ſhal cut him hard by the old branch, and if ye wil haue him to bring the grape next yere, ye ſhal leaue two or thrée ioynts therof, for the yong cion alwaies bringeth the grape: ye may at all times, ſo that the grape be once taken and knitte, euer as the ſuperfluous cions doe

growe, ye may breake them of at a ioynt, or hardly by the olde braunch, and the grapes will be the greater: thus ye maye order your Vine all the Sommer long without any hurte.
            
            
               To ſet or plant the Cherry.
               CHerry trées, and all the trées of ſtone fruit, woulde be planted or ſette of cions, in colde groundes and places of good earth, and lykewiſe in highe or hilly places, dry and well in the ſhade: if ye doe remooue, ye ought to remooue them in Nouember and Ianuary, if ye ſhall ſée your Cherry trée waxe rotten, then ſhall ye make a hole in the mids of the body two foote aboue the ground, with a digge pearcer, that the humor maye paſſe forth thereby, then afore the ſpring, ſhutte him vp againe with a pinne of the ſame trée: thus ye may doe vnto all other ſortes of trées when they beginne to rotte, and is alſo good for them which beare ſcant of fruit or none.
            
            
               To keepe Cherries good a yeare.
               FOr to kéepe Cherries good a yeare, ye ſhall cut of the ſtalkes, and then laie them in a well leaded pot, and fill the ſayde potte therewith, then put vnto them of good thinne hony, and fill the ſaide pot therewith, then ſtoppe it with clay that no aire enter in, then ſet it in ſome fayre Seder, and put of ſande vnder, and all about it, and couer the potte well withall, ſo let it ſtande or remaine: thus ye may kéepe them a yeare, as freſhe as though they came fro the trée, and after this ſort ye maye kéepe peares, or other fruite.
            
            
               Againſt Piſmiars.
               IF ye haue cherry trées laded or troubled with Piſmiars or Antes, ye ſhall rub the body of the trée, and all about

the roote with the iuyce of Purſlayne, mingled halfe with vineger. Some doe vſe to annoynt the trée beneath al about the body, with tarre and birde lyme, with wooll oyle boyled togither, and annoynt the trée beneath therewith, and doe laye of chalke ſtones all about the trée roote, ſome ſaye it is good therefore.
            
            
               The ſetting of Cheſtnuttes.
               THe Cheſtnutte trée, men doe vſe to plant like vnto the Figge trée. They may be both planted and graffed wel, they waxe well in freſhe and fatte earth, for in ſande they like not: if ye will ſet the curnels, ye ſhal lay them in water vntill they doe ſinck, and thoſe that do ſinck to the bottome of the water, be beſt to ſet, which ye ſhall ſet in the Moneth of Nouember & December, foure fyngers déepe, a foote one from another, for when they be in theſe two Moneths ſet or planted, they ſhall endure long, and beare alſo good fruite, yet ſome there be that plant or ſet them firſt in dung, like beanes, which will be ſwéeter than the other ſort, but thoſe which be ſet in the two moneths aforeſayde, ſhall firſt beare their fruite: men maye prooue which is beſt, experience doth teach. This is another way to prooue and knowe, which Cheffnuts be beſt to plant or ſet, that is: ye ſhall take a quantitie of Nuttes, then laye them in ſande the ſpace of .xxx. daies, then take and waſhe them in water fayre and cleane, and throwe them into water againe, and thoſe which doe ſinke to the bottome, are good to plant or ſet, and the other that ſwim are naught: thus may ye doe with all other curnels or nuttes.
            
            
               To haue all ſtone fruit taſt, as ye ſhall thinke good.
               IF ye wil haue al ſtone fruit taſt as ye ſhal fanſie, or think good, ye ſhall firſt lay your ſtones to ſoke in ſuch licor or moyſture, as ye will haue the fruit taſte of, and then ſette them: as for the Date trée (as ſome ſay) he bringeth no fruite except he be a hundred yeares olde, & the Date ſtone

muſt ſoke one moneth in the water before he be ſette, then ſhall ye ſet him with the ſmall ende vpwarde, in good fat earth, in hote ſandy ground foure fingers déepe, and when the bowes do beginne to ſpring, then ſhall ye euerie night ſprinkle them wyth raine water, (or other if ye haue none) ſo long till they be come forth and growne.
            
            
               Of graffing the Medlar and Miſple.
               FOr to graffe the Medlar or Miſple: men doe vſe to graffe them on the white Hathorne trée, they wil prooue well, but yet ſmal and ſowre fruit: to graffe one Medlar vpon another is the better, ſome men do graffe firſt the wilding cion, vpon the Medlar ſtock, and ſo when he is well taken and growne, then they graffe thereon the Medlar againe, the which doth make them more ſwéete, verye great and fayre.
            
            
               Of the Figge tree.
               THe Figge trée in ſome country, bereth his fruit foure times a yere, the black figges are the beſt, being dried in the ſunne, and then laid in a veſſell in beddes one by another, and then ſprinckled or ſtrawed all ouer, euery laye with fine meale, then ſtop it vp, and ſo it is ſent out of the land. If the Figge trée will not beare, ye ſhal digge him all about, and vnder the rootes in February, and take out then all his earth, and put vnto him the dung of a priuie, for that he liketh beſt: ye maye mingle with it of other fat earth, as Pigeons dung mingled with Oyle and Peper ſtampt, which ſhall forwarde him much to noynte his rootes therewith: ye ſhall not plant the Figge trée in colde times, he loueth hote, ſtony, or grauely ground, and to be planted in Autumne is beſt.
            
            
               Of the Mulbery tree.
               IF ye wil plant the Mulbery trée, the Figge trée or others which bring no ſéede, ye ſhall cut a twigge or braunche (from the trée roote) of a yeres growth, with the old wood or barke, about a cubite long, which ye ſhall plant or ſet all in

the earth, ſaue a ſhaftment long of it, and ſo let it grow, in watering it as ye ſhall ſee néede. This muſt be done before the leaues begin to ſpring, but take héede that ye cut not the ende or top aboue, for then it ſhall wyther and dry.
            
            
               Of trees that beare bitter fruite.
               OF all ſuch trées as beare bitter fruite, to make them bring ſwéeter, ye ſhal vncouer all the rootes in Ianuarie,) and take out all that earth, then put vnto them of Hogges dung great plentie, and then after put vnto them of other good earth, and ſo couer them therewithall well againe, and their fruit ſhall haue a ſwéeter taſte: thus men may doe with other trées which bring bitter fruit.
            
            
               To helpe barren trees.
               HEre is another waye to helpe barren trées, that they may bring fruit: if ye ſee your trée not beare ſcantly in thrée or foure yeares good plentie, ye ſhall bore an hole with an auger or pearcer, in the greateſt place of the body, (within a yarde of the grounde) but not thorow, but vnto or paſt the hart, ye ſhall bore him a ſlope: then take hony and water mingled togither a night before, then put the ſayde hony and water into the hole, and fill it therewith, then ſtop it cloſe with a ſhorte pinne, made of the ſame trée, not ſtriken into farre, for pearcing the licor.
            
            
               Another way.
               IN the beginning of Winter ye ſhall digge thoſe trées round about the rootes, and let them ſo reſt a daye and a night, and then put vnto them of good earth, mingled well with good ſtore of watered otes, or with watred barley or wheate, layde next vnto the rootes, then fill it with other good earth, and he ſhall boare fruit, euen as the boring of a hole in the mayſter roote, and ſtrike in a pinne, and ſo fill him againe, ſhall helpe him to beare, as afore declared.
            
            
               
               To keepe your fruit.
               ALl fruite may be the better kept, if ye lay them in drye places, in drye ſtrawe or hey, but hey rypeth to ſore, or in a barley mowe not touching one the other, or in chaffe, and in veſſels of Iuniper, or Sypers wood, ye may ſo kéepe them well in dry ſalt or hony, & vpon bordes where as fyre is nighe all the Winter, alſo hanging nie fyre in the Winter, in nettes of yarne.
            
            
               The Mulbery tree.
               THe Mulbery trée is planted or ſette by the Figge trée, his fruit is firſt ſowre & then ſwéete, he liketh neyther dewe nor rayne, for they hurt him, ye is well pleaſed with fowle earth or dung, his braunches wil wax dry within euery ſixe yeares, then muſt he cut them of, as for other trées: they ought to be proyned euery yeare as ye ſhall ſée cauſe, and they will be the better, and to plant him from mid February, to mid March is beſt.
            
            
               Of Moſſe on the tree.
               OF the Moſſe on your trées, ye muſt not let it to long be vnclenſed, ye muſt rub it of with a grate of wood, or a rough heare, or ſuch like, in Winter when they be moyſt or wet, for then it will of the ſooner, for moſſe doth take away the ſtrength and ſubſtance of the fruit, & makes the trées barren at length: when ye ſée your trées begin to wax moſſy, ye muſt in the winter vncouer their rootes, and put vnder them good earth, this ſhall helpe them and kéepe them long without moſſe: for the earth not ſtirred aboue the roote, is one cauſe of moſſyneſſe, and alſo the barrenneſſe of the grounde whereon he ſtandeth, and your moſſe doth ſucker in winter, flyes and other vermin, and ſo doth therein hide them in Sommer, which is occaſion of eating the bloſſomes and tender cions thereof.
            
            
               
               To keepe Nuttes long.
               FOr to kéepe nuts long, ye ſhal dry them and couer them in dry ſande, and put them in a drie bladder, or in a fatte made of Walnut trée, and put of dry Iuie beries therin, and they ſhall be much ſwéeter. To keepe Nuttes gréene a yeare, and alſo freſhe: ye ſhall put them into a pot with hony, and they ſhall continue freſh a yeare, and the ſayd hony will be gentle and good for many medicines. To kepe Walnuts freſh and gréene in the time of ſtrayning of Veriuice, ye ſhall take of that pommis, & put therof in the bottome of a barrell, then lay your Walnuts all ouer, then pōmis ouer them, and ſo Walnuts againe, and then of the pommis, as ye ſhall ſée cauſe to fill your veſſell. Then ſtoppe him cloſe as ye do a barrel, and ſet him in your Seller or other place, and it ſhall kéepe your nuts freſh and gréene a yeare. Some vſe to fill an earthen pot with ſmall Nuttes, and then put to them dry ſande, and couer them with a lid of earth or ſtone, & then they clay it, ſetting the mouth of the pot downward, two foote within the earth, in their Garden or other place, & ſo they will kéepe very moyſt and ſwéete vntill new come.
            
            
               To cut the Peache tree.
               THe Peache trée is of this nature, if he be cut (as ſome ſay) gréene, it will wither and drie. Therefore if ye cut any ſmall braunch, cut it harde by the body: the withered twigges euer as they wither, muſt be cut of hard by the great braunch or body thereof, for then they doe proſper the better. If a Peach trée doe not like, ye ſhall put to his rootes, the Lées of Wine mingled with water, and alſo waſh his rootes therwith, and likewiſe the braunches, then couer him againe with good earth mingled with his owne leaues, for thoſe he lyketh beſt. Ye may graffe Peach vpon Peach, vpon Haſill, or Aſhe, or vpon Cherrie trée, or ye may graffe the Almonde vpon the Peach trée. And to haue great Peaches, ye muſt take Cowes milke, and put good earth therto, then all to ſtrike the body of the trée therwith both vpwarde

and downewarde, or elſe open the roote all bare thrée dayes and thrée nightes, then take goates mylke, and waſh all the rootes therewith, and then couer them againe: this muſt be done when they begin to bloſſome, & ſo ſhall he bring great Peaches.
            
            
               To colour Peach ſtones.
               TO colour Peache ſtones, that all the fruire therof ſhal haue the like colour hereafter, that is: ye ſhall lay or ſet Peache ſtones in the earth ſeuen dayes or more, vntill ye ſhall ſée the ſtones beginne to open, then take the ſtones and the curnelles ſoftly foorth thereof, and what colour ye wil, colour the curnel therewith, and put them into the ſhel againe, then binde it faſt togither and ſette it in the earth, with the ſmall ende vpwarde, and ſo let him growe, and all the peaches which ſhall come of the ſame fruite (graffed or vngraffed) wil be of the ſame colour. The peach trée ought to be planted in Autumne, before the colde do come, for he cannot abyde the colde.
            
            
               If Peache trees be troubled with wormes.
               ALſo if any peache trée be troubled with wormes, ye ſhal take two partes of Cowe piſſe, with one parte of vyneger, then ſhall ye ſprinkle the tree all ouer therewyth, and waſh his rootes and braunches alſo, and it wyll kill the wormes, this may ye doe vnto al other trées, which be troubled with wormes.
            
            
               To haue the Peach without ſtones.
               FOR to make the Peache grow without ſtones, ye ſhall take a Peache trée newly planted, then ſet a Willowe harde by, which ye ſhall bore a hole thorow, then put the Peache trée thorowe the ſayde hole, and ſo cloſe him on both ſides therof, ſappe to ſappe, and let hym ſo grow one yeare,

then the next yeare ye ſhall cutte of the Peache ſtocke, and let the Willow féede him, and cutte of the vpper part of the Willowe alſo thrée fingers hye: and the next Winter ſawe him of nigh the Peache, ſo that the Willowe ſhall féede but the Peache only: and this way ye may haue peaches without ſtones.
            
            
               Another way for the ſame.
               YE ſhall take the graffes of Peaches, and graffe them vpon the Willowe ſtocke, and ſo ſhall your Peaches be lykewiſe without ſtones.
            
            
               If trees doe not proſper.
               IF that ye ſée that your trées do not waxe nor proſper, take and open the rootes in the beginning of Ianuary or afore, and in the biggeſt roote therof, make a hole with an anger, to the pithe or more, then ſtrike therein a pinne of Oke and ſo ſtop it againe cloſe, and let it be well waxt all about the pinne, then couer him againe with good earth, and he ſhall doe well▪ ſome doe vſe to cleaue the róote.
            
            
               How to graffe Apples to laſt on the tree till Alhallowtyde.
               HOwe ye maye haue many ſortes of Apples vpon your trées vntill Alhallowtide, that is, ye ſhall graffe your Apples vpon the Mulbery trée, & vpon the Cherry trée.
            
            
               To make Cherries and Peaches ſmell, and taſte like ſpyce.
               HOw to make that Cherries and Peaches ſhal be pleaſaunt, and ſhall ſmell and taſt like ſpice, & that ye may kéepe them well, till the new doe come againe, ye ſhall graffe them on the Mulbery trée, as is aforeſayde: but firſt ye ſhall ſoake them in hony and water, wherin ye ſhall put of the pouder of Cloues, ginger and Cinamon.
            
            
               
               To graffe an Apple which ſhall be halfe ſweete, and halfe ſowre.
               TO graffe that your Apples ſhalbe the one halfe ſwéete, & the other halfe ſoure: ye ſhall take two cyons, the one ſwéete and the other ſoure, ſome doe put the one cyon thorowe the other, and ſo graffes them betwéene the barke and the trée: and ſome againe doe pare both the cyons fynelye, and ſo ſettes them ioyning into the ſtocke, incloſing ſappe to ſappe, on both the outſides of the graffes, vnto the out ſides of the ſtocke, and ſo ſettes them into the heade as the other: and they ſhal bring fruite, the one halfe ſwéete, and the other halfe ſowre.
            
            
               To graffe a Roſe on the Holly.
               FOr to graffe the Holly, that his leaues ſhal kéepe al the yeare grene, ſome do take & cleaue the Holly, & ſo grafs in a white or redde Roſe budde, and then puttes clay & moſſe to him, & lets him growe, & ſome do put the roſe bud into a flyt of the barke, & ſo putteth clay and Moſſe, & binds hym feately therein, and lettes him growe, and he ſhall carrie his leaue all the yeare.
            
            
               Of keeping of Plums.
               OF Plums there be many ſortes, as Damſons, which be all blacke, and counted the beſt: All maner of other Plums a man maye kéepe well a yeare, if they be gathered rype, & then dryed, and put into veſſels of glaſſe: if ye cannot dry them wel in ye ſunne, ye ſhal dry them on hurdels of Oziars made like Lettis windowes, in a hot Ouen after bread is drawne forth, and ſo reſerue them. If a plum trée lyke not, open his roote, & powre in all aboute the dregs of Wine, mixt with water, and ſo couer him well agayne, or powre on them ſtale vrin or olde piſſe of olde men, mixt with two partes of water, and ſo couer him as before.
            
            
               
               Of altering of Peares, or ſtony fruite.
               II a Peare do taſt harde, or grauelly about the core, lyke ſmall ſtones, ye ſhall vncouer his roote (in the Winter, or afore the ſpring) and take out all the earth thereof, & picke out all the ſtones, as cleane from the earth as ye can about his roote, then fift that earth, or elſe take of other good fat earth without ſtones, and fil al his rootes againe therwith, and he ſhall bring a ſoft and gentle Peare to eate, but ye muſt ſee well to the watering of him often.
            
            
               The making of Cyder and Pyrry.
               OF Apples and Peares, men do make Cyder and Pirrie, & bycauſe the vſe therof in moſt places is knowne, I wyll here let paſſe to ſpeake anye further thereof, but this (in the preſſing your Cyder) I will counſell you to kéepe cleane your veſſels, and the places whereas your fruit doth lye, and ſpecially after it is bruſed or broken, for then they drawe fylthy ayre vnto them, and if it be nygh, the Cyder ſhall be infected therewith, and alſo beare the faſte after the infection therof: therfore as ſoone as you can, tunne it into cleane and ſwéete veſſels, as into veſſels of whyte wine or of ſacke, or clarette and ſuch like, for theſe ſhall kéepe your Cyder the better and the ſtronger, along time after: ye may hang a ſmal bag of linnen, by a thred downe into the lower part of your veſſell, wyth pouder of Cloues, Mace, Cynamon, Ginger and ſuch lyke, which wyll make your Cyder to haue a pleaſant taſte.
            
            
               To helpe froſen Apples.
               OF Apples that be froſen in the colde and extréeme winter. The remedy to haue the Iſe out of them, is this. Ye ſhal lay them firſt in colde water a while, & then lay them before the fire, or other heate, and they ſhal come to themſelues againe.
            
            
               
               To make Apples fall from the tree.
               IF ye put of fiery coles vnder an Apple trée, and then caſt of the power of brimſtone therein, and the fume thereof aſcend vp, and touch any Apple that is wet, that Apple ſhall fall incontinent.
            
            
               To water trees in Sommer, if they waxe dry about the roote.
               WHereas Apple trées be ſette in drye drownde and not déepe in the grounde, in Sommer if they want moyſture, ye ſhal take of white ſtrawe, or other, and euery euening (or as ye ſhal ſée cauſe) caſt theron water al about, and it will kéepe the trées moyſt from time to time.
            
            
               To cherriſh Apple trees.
               IF ye vſe to throw (in Winter) al about your Apple trées on the rootes therof, the vrine of olde men, or of ſtale piſſe long kept, they ſhall bring fruite much better, which is good for the Vine alſo, or if ye do ſprinckle or annoynt your Appte trée rootes with the Gall of a Bull, they ſhall beare the better.
            
            
               To make an Apple growe in a Glaſſe.
               TO make an Apple growe within a glaſſe, take a glaſſe what faſhion ye liſt, and put your Apple therein when he is but ſmall, and binde him faſt to the Glaſſe, and the Glaſſe alſo to the trée, and let him growe, thus ye may haue Apples of diuers proportions, according to the faſhion of your glaſſe, thus may ye make of Coucombers, Gourdes, or Pomecitrons, the like faſhion.
            
            
               
               
                  
               
               THeſe thrée braunches & figure of graffing in the ſhielde in Sommer is, the firſt braunch ſheweth how the barke is taken off, the middle place ſheweth, how it is ſette to, and the laſt braunche, ſheweth howe to binde him on, in ſauing the oylet or eye from bruſing.
            
            
               To graffe many ſortes of Apples on one tree.
               YE may graffe on one Apple trée at once, many kinde of Apples, as on euery braunch a contrarie fruite, as is afore declared, and of peares the like: but ſée as nighe as ye can, that all your cions be of like ſpringing, for elſe the one will out growe and ſhaddow the other.
            
            
               To colour Apples.
               TO haue colowred Apples, with what colour ye ſhall thinke good, ye ſhall bore ſlope a hole with an anger, in the biggeſt parte of the bodye of the trée, vnto the myddes therof, or there abouts, & then looke what colour ye wil haue

them of, firſt ye ſhall take water, & mingle your colour therwith, then ſtop it vp againe, with a ſhort pinne made of the ſame wood or tree, then waxe it rounde about: ye may mingle with the ſayde colour what ſpice ye liſt, to make them taſt thereafter, thus may ye chaūge the colour & taſt of any Apple: your colours may be of Saffron, tourne ſoule, braſel ſaunders, or other what ye ſhal ſée good. This muſt be done before the ſpring do come: ſome doe ſay, if ye graffe on the Oliue ſtocke, or on the Alder ſtocke, they wil bring red Apples: alſo they ſay, to graffe to haue fruite without core, ye ſhall graffe in both the endes of your Cyon into the ſtocke, & when they be faſt growne to the ſtock, ye ſhal cut it in the mids, & let the ſmaller end grow vpward: or elſe take a cion & graffe the ſmal ende of the ſtock downwarde, & ſo ſhall ye haue your apple trée on S. Lamberts day, (which is the .xvij of September) they ſhal neuer waſt, conſume, nor wax dry, which I doubt.
            
            
               The ſetting of Vyne plantes.
               
                  
               
               THeſe figures doe ſhewe how ye ought to plant and ſette your Vines, in two & two togither, the one to haue aparte of the olde trée, and the other maye be all of the laſt cyon: but when ye plant him with a part of the olde trée he ſhal commonly take roote the ſooner than the new cion: ye muſt wéede them euery moneth, and let not the earth be too cloſe aboue their rootes at the firſt, but nowe and then loſe it with a ſpade as ye ſhall ſée a rayne paſt, for then they ſhal enlarge, and put forth better. Further herein ye ſhal vnder ſtande after.
            
            
               
               How to proyne or cut a Vyne in Winter.
               
                  
               
               THis figure ſheweth, how all Vynes ſhould be proined and cutte, in a conuenient time after Chriſtmas, that when ye cut them, ye ſhall leaue his braunches very thynne, as ye ſée by this fygure: ye ſhal neuer leaue aboue two, or thrée leaders at the heade of any principall braunch ye muſt alſo cut them of in the mydſt betwéene the knots of the yung cions, for thoſe be the leaders which will bring the grape, the reſt & order ye ſhall vnderſtand as foloweth.
            
            
               Of the Vyne and Grape.
               SOmewhat I intende to ſpeake of the ordering of the Vine & grape, to plant or ſet the Vyne: the plants or ſets which be gathered from the vine (& ſo planted) are beſt, they muſt not be olde gathered, nor lie long vnplanted after they be cutte, for then they wyll ſone gather corruption, and when ye do gather your plantes, ye muſt take héede to

cut & chooſe thē, whereas ye may with ye yong cion, a ioynt of the old wood with the new, for ye old wood wil ſoner. take roote than the new, & better to grow than if it were al yong cion, ye ſhal leaue the old wood to ye yong cion, a foote or half a foote, or a ſhaftment long, the yong cion ye ſhall cut the length of three quarters of a yarde or there abouts, and ye ſhall chooſe of thoſe yong cions that be thickeſt ioynted, or nigh ioynts togithers, and when ye ſhal plant or ſet them, looke that your grounde be well digged in the Winter before, then in Ianuary ye may both cut and plant, but cut not in the froſt, for that is daunger of al kind of trées, or ye may plant in the beginning of February, and when ye do plant, ye ſhall take two of thoſe plantes, & ſet or lay them togither, a foote déepe in the earth, for two plants ſet togither wil not ſo ſone faile, as one alone, and lay them a foote long wiſe in the earth, ſo that there may be aboue the earth thrée or foure ioyntes, ye may plant a yong cion with the olde, ſo that he be thicke or nigh ioynted, for then he is the better to roote, & alſo to bring fruite: then when ye haue ſet or layd them in the earth, then couer them wel therwith, in treading it faſt downe vnto the plants, but let the ends of your cions or plantes be turned vpright, aboue the earth thrée or foure ioyntes, if there ſhall be more when they be ſet, ye ſhall cut them of, and ye ſhall cut them alwaies in the middes, betwéene the two ioyntes, and then let them ſo grow, and ſée that ye wéede them alwaies cleane, and once a moneth looſe the earth rounde about them, and they ſhall prooue the better: if it be very dry and hote in the Sommer after, ye may water them, in making a hole with a crow of yron to the roote, & there ye ſhal poure in water, in the euening. As for the proyning of them is, when the grape is taken and cluſtered, then ye maye breake the next ioynt or two after the grape, of al ſuch ſuperfluous cions as ye ſhal ſée cauſe, which wil cauſe the grape to waxe bigger: ye may alſo breake awaye all ſuche ſuperfluous buddes or ſlender braunches, which commeth about the roote, or on the vnder

braunches, which ye thinke will haue no grape, and when ye proyne or cut them in Winter following, ye ſhall not cut the yong cion nigh the olde, by thrée or foure ioynts, ye ſhall not cut them like oziars, to leaue a ſort of heads togither on one braunch, which doth kil your vine, ye ſhal leaue but one head, or two at the moſt, of the yong cions, vppon the olde braunch, and to cut thoſe yong cions thrée or foure knottes or ioynts of, for the yong cion doth carry the grape alwayes, and when ye leaue vpon a great braunch manye cions, they can not be wel nouriſhed, & after ye haue ſo cut them in Winter, ye ſhal bind them with cziars, in placing thoſe yong braunches as ye ſhall ſée cauſe, and in the ſpring tyme, when the braunches are tender, ye ſhall binde them ſo, that the ſtormie tempeſt or winde do not hurt them, and to binde them withall, the beſt is, great ſoft ruſhes, and when the grape is cluſtered, then ye may breake of all ſuch braunches as is afore declared, vpon one old braunch thrée or foure heads be ynough, for the more heads your braunch hath, the worſe your grape ſhalbe nouriſhed, & when ye cut of any braunch, cut him of hard by or nigh the old braunch, if your Vine ware olde, the beſt remedie is: if there grow any yong cion about the r
                     •…
                  te, ye ſhal in the Winter, cut of the old Vine hard by the ground, or as nigh as ye can, and lot the yong Vine lead, and he wil continue a long time, if ye couer and fill the place about the roote with good earth agayne. There is alſo vpon or by euery cluſter of grapes, a ſmall cion like a pigges tayle, turning about, which doth take away the ſappe from the grape, if ye pinche it of hard by the ſtalke of your grape, your fruite ſhalbe the greater: if your Vine waxe to ranke and thicke of braunches, ye ſhall digge the roote in Winter, and open the earth, and fill it vp againe with ſande and aſhes blend togither, & where as a Vine is vnfruitfull and doth not beare, ye ſhall bore a hole (with an anger) vnto the hart or pith, in the bodye or thickeſt part therof, then put in the ſaid hole a ſmall ſtone, but fill not the hole cloſe therewith, but ſo that the ſickneſſe

of the Vine may paſſe therby. Thē lay al about the roote of good earth mingled with good dung, and ſo ſhal he not be vnfruitful, but beare wel euer after: or alſo, to caſt of old mens vrine or piſſe, all about the roote of the barren vine, and if he were halfe leſ
                     •
                   or marde, he ſhould grow againe & waxe fruitfull as before: this is to be done in Winter.
            
            
               To haue grapes without ſtones.
               FOr to haue grapes without ſtones, ye ſhall take yong plantes or braunches, and ſhall ſet or plant the toppe or ſmall ende downewarde in the earth, and ſo ye may ſet two of them togithers for fayling, as I haue afore declared of the others, and thoſe braunches ſhall bring grapes without ſtones.
            
            
               To make your Vine to bring a grape to taſte like Claret.
               TO make your Vine to haue a grape to taſt like claret wine, and pleaſaunt withall, ye ſhall bore a hole in the ſtocke vnto the heart, or pith therof, then ſhall ye make a lectuary with the pouder of Cloues, of Cinamon, mingled with a little fountayne or running water, and fill the ſayde hole therewith, and ſtop it faſt and cloſe with waxe, and ſo binde if faſt theron with a linnen cloth, & thoſe grapes ſhall taſte lyke claret wine.
            
            
               Of gathering your grapes.
               AL grapes that men do cut before they are thorow ripe, the wine ſhal not be natural, nor yet ſhall long endure good, but if ye will cut or gather grapes to haue them good, and to haue good wine thereof, ye ſhall cut them in the full, or ſoone after the full of the moone, when ſhe is in Cancer, in Leo, in Scorpio, and in Aquarius, the moone being in the waine, and vnder the earth.
            
            
               
               To knowe if your Grape be ripe ynough.
               FOr to know if your grapes be rype ynough or not, which ye ſhall not onely know in the taſte, but in ſight and taſt togither, as in taſte if they be ſwéete and full in eating, and in ſight if the ſtones will ſoone fall out being chafed or bruiſed, which is the beſt knowledge, and alſo whether they be white or blewe, it is all one matter: the good grape is he which commeth out all watry, or thoſe which be al clammy as byrdlyme: by theſe ſignes ſhall ye knowe when to cutte, being thorow rype or not, and whereas you doe preſſe your Wine, ye muſt make your place ſwéete and cleane, & your veſſels within to be clean alſo, and ſée that they haue ſtrong heddes, and thoſe perſons which doe preſſe the grape, muſt looke their handes, féete and bodie be cleane waſhed, when as they go to preſſing the grape, & that no woman be there hauing there termes: and alſo ye ſhal eate of no Cheboles, Scalions, Onyons, or Garlike, Annyſéedes, or ſuch like, for all ſtrong ſauours your Wine will drawe the infection thereof, and aſſoone as your grape is cutte and gathered, ye ſhall preſſe your Wine after aſſoone as ye may, which will make your Wine to be more pleaſant and ſtronger, for the grapes which taryeth long vnpreſt, maketh the Wine to be ſmal and yll, ye muſt ſée that your veſſels be new fayre and ſwéete within, and to be waſhed with ſwéete water and then well dryed againe, and to perfume them with Maſticke and ſuch ſwete vapour, & if your veſſell chaunce not to be ſwete, then ſhall ye pitche him on the ſides, which pitche will take away all euill and ſuch ſtinking ſauor therein.
            
            
               To prooue or taſte Wine.
               ANd when ſoeuer ye will prooue or taſte any Wyne, the beſte tyme is, earely in the morning, and take

wyth you thrée or foure ſoppes of bread, then dippe one after another into the wyne, for therein ye ſhall finde (if there be any) ſharpe taſte of the wyne. Thus I leaue (at this preſent) to ſpeake any further here of the Vine and grape. If this my ſimple labour be taken in good part (gentle reader) it ſhall the more hereafter encourage me to ſet foorth another booke more at large, touching the arte of planting and graffing, with other things neceſſary to be knowne.
            
            
               Here followeth the beſt tymes howe to order, or choſe, and to ſet or plant Hoppes.
               
               IN this figure ye ſhall vnderſtand the placing and making of the Hoppe hilles, by euery Sipher ouer his heade: the firſt place is ſhewed but one pole ſet in the middes, and the Hoppe beneath, the ſeconde ſheweth howe ſome doth chap downe a ſpade in the mids of the hill, and therein layes his Hoppe rootes. The thirde place is ſhewed, howe other ſome do ſet out one pole in the middes, and the Hoppe rootes at holes put in rounde about. The fourth place ſheweth howe ſome choppes in a ſpade croſſe in the top, and there layes in his rootes. The fift place ſheweth how ſome do ſet foure poles therein, and puttes the Hoppe round about the hill. The ſixt place ſheweth that ſome vſe to make croſſe holes in the ſides, and there laies in the Hoppe rootes. Thus many practiſes haue ben proued good, prouided alwais that your hilles be of good fatte earth, ſpecially in the mids downe vnto the

bottome. This I thought ſufficient to ſhewe by this figure the diuerſitie in ſetting, whereof the laying of the Hoppe is counted the ſureſt way.
               THe beſt and common ſetting tyme of Hoppes, is from mid Nouember, to mid February, then muſt ye digge and clenſe the ground of wéedes, and mixe it well with good molde and fat earth. Then deuide your hilles a yarde one from another orderly, in making them a yard aſunder, and two foote and a halfe broade in the bottome, and when that ye plant them, ye ſhall lay in euery Hill thrée or foure rootes, ſome doe in ſetting of them lay them croſſewyſe in the mids of the hill, and ſo couers them againe, ſome ſettes the rootes in foure partes of the hill, otherſome doe make holes rounde about the hilles, and puttes of the rootes therein, and ſo couers them againe light with earth: of one ſhort roote in a yeare ye may haue many plants, to ſet and lay as ye ſhall ſée it good, and it ſhall be ſufficient for euery plant, to haue two knottes within the grounde, and one without, ſome doe chappe a ſpade croſſe in the hill, and layes in croſſe the Hoppe, and ſo couers it.
            
            
               To chooſe your Hoppe.
               YE ſhal chooſe your roots beſt for your Hop, in the Sommer before ye ſhall plant thē, for then ye ſhall ſée which beares the Hop, for ſome there is that brings none, but that which beares, chooſe for your plants, and ſet of thoſe in your hilles, for ſo ſhall ye not be deceyued, and they ſhall proſper well.
            
            
               To ſow the ſeedes.
               SOme doe holde, that ye may ſowe among other ſéedes, the ſéedes of Hoppes, and ſo will encreaſe and be good to ſette, or elſe to make beddes and ſowe them alone, wherby they may increaſe to be ſet, and when they be ſtrong, ye may remoue and ſet them in your hilles, and plant them as the other before mentioned.
            
            
               
               ¶The ſetting your poles.
               THe beſt time is in Aprill, or when your rootes be ſprong halfe a yarde long or more, then by euery plant or Hop, in your Hilles, ye ſhall ſet vp a pole of .xiij. or .xiiij. foote long, or there aboutes as cauſe ſhall require, ſome doe vſe to ſette but foure poles in euery hill, which is thought ſufficient, and when ye ſhall ſet them, ſée that ye ſette them ſo faſt that great windes doe not caſt them downe.
            
            
               ¶How to proyne the tree.
               YE ſhal marke when the Hoppe doth bloſſome, and knit in the top, which ſhall be perceyued to be the Hop, then take and cut vp all the reſt growing there aboutes, (not hauing Hop thereon) hard by the earth, that al thoſe which carrie the Hop, might be the better nouriſhed: thus ſhall ye doe in Sommer, as ye ſhal ſée them encreaſe and grow, vntill the time of gathering.
            
            
               ¶To gather the Hop.
               AT ſuch time afore Michelmas as ye ſhall ſée your Hop waxe browne, or ſomewhat yellowe, then he is beſt to be gathered in a drye daye, in cutting your Hop by the ground, then pluck vp your pole therewith for ſhaking of your Hop, ſo carrie them into ſome drie houſe, and when ye haue ſo pluckt them, ye ſhall lay them on borded loftes, or on hurdels of clothes, that the winde may dry them, and the ayre, but not in the ſunne, for the ſame will take away the ſtrength therof, nor with fyre, for that will do likewiſe, and ye ſhal dayly toſſe and turne them til they be dry: to try them when they are dry, hold them in your hand a ſpace, & if they cleaue togither when ye open your hande, they are not then drie: but if they ſhatter a ſunder in opening your hand, then ye may be ſure they are dry ynough. If not, lette them remaine, and vſe ye them as is before ſayde.

Ye ſhal vnderſtand the drineſſe of them is to preſerue them and long to laſt, but if néede be, ye may occupie them well vndryed, with leſſe portion to ſowe.
            
            
               ¶What Poles are beſt.
               YE ſhal prepare your Poles of ſuch wood as is light and ſtyffe, and which will not bowe with euery winde, the beſt and méeteſt time to get them is in Winter when the ſappe is gone downe, and as ſoone as ye haue taken of your Hop, lay your Poles in ſundry places vntill the next ſpring, whereby they may endure the longer.
            
            
               ¶How to order and dreſſe your hylles.
               AFter the firſt yeare is paſt, your Hop being increaſed to more plentie of rootes in your hilles, ye ſhall after Michelmaſſe euery yeare, open your hilles and caſt downe the tops vnto the rootes, vncouering them, and cut awaye all the ſuperfluous rootes, ſome doth plucke awaye all the rootes that ſpreades abroad without the hilles, then opens the hils and puts of good newe earth vnto them, and ſo couers them againe, which ſhall kéepe them from the froſt, & alſo make the grounde fatte, ſo ſhall ye let them remayne vnto the ſpring of the yere, in February or March, then againe if ye ſhall ſée anye ſuperfluous rootes ye maye take them awaye, and cup them vp, and your Hop ſhall be the better, then againe caſt vp the earth about your hils, and clenſing them from all wéedes and other rootes, which will take away their ſtrength, if the herbs remaine, ſo let them reſt till your Poles may be ſet therein.
            
            
               ¶Of grounde beſt for your Hop.
               THe Hop delighteth and loueth a good and reaſonable fatte grounde, not verye lowe, nor yet to moyſt, for I haue ſéene thē prooue wel in Flaunders, in dry ſandy

fieldes, the Hoppe hilles being of good fat earth, ye may (as ſome ſay for great néede, make your Hoppe growe and beare on any kinde of rockie grounde, ſo that your hilles be great and fatte earth, but the lower grounde commonlye proueth beſt, ſo that it ſtande well and hotte in the Sunne.
            
            
               A note of the reaſt aboueſayde.
               YE ſhall marke and vnderſtande, all this order aboue ſaid, is to haue many hoppes and good, with a few rootes and plantes placed in a ſmall plotte of ground. Ye ſhall vnderſtande, the wilde hoppe that growth in the hedges, is as good to occupye as the other, to ſet or plant in any other place, but loke ye take not the barren hoppe to plant, ſome hoppe will be barren for want of good earth, & lacke of dreſſing, which ye ſhall perceyue (as I haue tolde you) in the Sommer before, that when they ſhoulde beare they wylbe barren, which is for want of good fatte earth, or an vnkinde yeare, or lacke of wéeding and good ordering. Therefore ſuch as are minded to beſtow labour on the grounde, may haue as good hoppe growing in this countrey, as is in other countries: but if ye will not go to the coſt, to make hoppe yardes, ye may with a light charge haue hoppes growe in your hedge rowes, to ſerue as well as the other, and ſhalbe as good for the quantitie as the other in all reſpects: ye may (for lacke of grounde) plant hoppe rootes in hedge rowes, when ye doe quicke ſette vp poles by them when time ſhal require in the ſpring, and to beſtowe euery winter after the gathering your hoppe, on euery hill heade, a ſhouel full of dung to comfort the earth, for thē will they beare ye more plentie of hoppe the next yeare following: to conclude, you that haue groundes maye well practiſe in all thinges afore mencioned, and ſpecially to haue hoppe in this ordering, for your ſelues and others, alſo ye ſhall giue encouragement for other to followe hereafter. I haue hearde by credyble perſons, which haue knowne a hundreth hilles, (which is

a ſmall plat of grounde, to beare thrée hundreth pounde of Hoppe, ſo that the commodity is much, & the gaynes great: and one pound of our Hoppe dryed and ordered, will go as farre as two pounde of the beſt Hoppe that commeth from beyond ſeas. Thus much I thought méete and neceſſarie to write, of the ordering and planting of Hoppe.
            
            
               ¶Howe to packe your Hoppes,
               WHen your Hoppes be well toſſed and turned on boorded floores, and well dryed (as I haue afore ſhewed) ye ſhall put them into great ſackes according to the quantitie of your Hoppes, and let them be troden downe hard togither, which will kéepe their ſtrength longer, and ſo yée may reſerue them, and take at your pleaſure. Some doe vſe, (which haue but ſmall ſtore) to treade them into drie fattes, and ſo reſerue them for their vſe, which is counted the better way and the leſſe portion doth ſerue, and will longer kéepe their vertue and ſtrength.
               
                  Wiſhing long life and proſperous health,
                  To all furtherers of this common wealth.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Here foloweth a neceſſary table (by Alphabete) to finde out quickly all ſeuerall particulars in thys booke afore mentioned, by the numbers in this table, ſeeking the lyke number on the pagine or leafe.
            
               
                  A
                  ABricotes graffed. 22
                  Antes or Piſmiars on trées. 51
                  Antes on yong trées. 51
                  Antes or Piſmiars about trées 58
                  Antes or Piſmiars on Cherry trées. 67
                  An Apple to be ſet whole in the earth. 67
                  Apple trées graffed. 20.
                  Altering of harde Peares. 76
                  Altering or tranſplanting. 38
                  Apple trées diſbraunched. 40
                  Apples without bloſſoming. 56
                  Apples to be had rathe or late. 56
                  Almondes to be greater than other. 59
                  Almondes ſet of the curnell. 37
                  Apples to remayne long on the trée. 74
                  Apples which are frozen to helpe. 76
                  Apple trées to be cheriſhed. 77
                  Apples to be made fall from the trée. 77
                  Apple trées to be ſet, not to conſume. 79
                  Apples to growe of dyuers faſhions. 79
                  Apples cions to graffe dyuers ſortes on a trée. 78
                  Apples to be coloured. 
               
            
            
               
                  B
                  Barenneſſe of trées and braunches cut. 47
                  Barenneſſe of trées to helpe. 70
                  Beaſtes brooſing on trées or graffes. 48
                  Binding of trées being weake. 27
                  Binding of graffes againſt windes. 28
                  Binding of graffes. 31
                  Binding of trées, and with what. 45
                  
                     Boughes broken to remedie. 13
                  Buſhes or ſmall trées to be ſet. 19
                  Braunches to be ſet in the earth. 16
                  Braunches another away. 16
                  Braunches olde howe to be ſet. 28
                  Braunches to be ſet and gouerned on trées. 38
                  Braunches to be cut before they be ſet. 39
                  Broken braunches to cut of. 13
                  Buſhing of graffe heads. 31
               
            
            
               
                  C
                  Caterpillers on trées. 
53
                  Chaunging the fruite of curnels. 
7
                  Cheſtnuttes to be ſet. 
68
                  Cole worte harde to be graffed. 
23
                  Cheſtnuttes in ranke. 
41
                  Cheſtnuttes to haue rathe and late. 
56
                  Cherry trées to be ſet. 
10
                  Cherry trées ſet. 
11
                  Cherry trées graffed. 
12
                  Cherries with the difference. 
15
                  Cherries to be graffed one vpon another. 
16
                  Cherries graffed to be great. 
20
                  Cherries graffed and how to be cut. 
26
                  Cherries to taſte like ſpice. 
35
                  Cherries to haue long on the trées. 
56
                  Cherries to plant or ſet. 
67
                  Cherries to be kept in good ayre. 
67
                  Chooſing your graffes or cions. 
23
                  Cleauing your ſtockes. 
28
                  Cleauing your ſtockes of Cherries and Plum trées. 
18
                  Cherry how to be tempered. 
31
                  Couering your cliftes, on the head. 
31
                  Curnelles watered. 
66
                  Curnelles to be ſet. 
2
                  Curnelles taken out of the preſſing of fruite. 
2
                  Cutting of principall members. 
49
                  
                     Cutting of principall rootes. 
3
                  Cutting of great rootes. 
43
                  Cutting of cions with the tyme. 
19
                  Cutting the heades of your ſtocke. 
27
                  Cutting, proying and when. 
46
                  Cutting great braunches. 
46
                  Cutting of braunches in replanting. 
14
               
            
            
               
                  D
                  Damſon trées to be ſet. 
11
                  Damſons to laſt long on the trées. 
35
                  Dayes on the Moone to graffe on. 
58
                  Dayes beſt to plant or graffe. 
60
                  Date trée ſet of a ſtone. 
68
                  Defending your trées from Snayles. 
51
                  Déepe ſetting or ſhallowe. 
16
                  Déepe digging and donging. 
17
                  Differences of Cherries. 
15
                  Donging your trées of Pepines. 
3
                  Dong and good earth for trées. 
43
                  Diuers kind of graffes. 
21
                  Digging the earth for ſlips. 
17
                  Digging the rootes all about. 
44
                  Diſbraunching al wild ſtocks, before they are replāted. 
40
                  Drawing forth of your wedge. 
30
               
            
            
               
                  E
                  Earth with the vſe thereof. 
2
                  Earth to be made good. 
44
                  Earth good for trées. 
43
                  Earth to be digged for ſlippes. 
17
                  Elmes harde to be graffed. 
21
                  Emettes or Antes. 
58
               
            
            
               
                  F
                  Fenſing your graffe heades. 
31
                  Filbardes to be ſet. 
10
                  Figge trée graffed. 
21
                  Figge trées to come forwarde. 
69
                  Figge trées to be planted. 
18
                  
                     Forwarde trées to be marked. 
14
                  Foure wayes of graffing. 
19
                  Furniſhers to be had. 
24
                  Fruite charging the trée. 
22
                  Fruit to haue the taſt of halfe an Apple, & halfe a Peare. 
57
                  Fruite howe to kéepe from the froſt. 
59
                  Fruit to be made laxatiue. 
60
                  Fruit to taſt as ye ſhall ſéeme good. 
68
                  Fruit to be kept long. 
71
                  Fumigations in the ſpring time. 
53
               
            
            
               
                  G
                  Graffing all ſortes of trées. 
20
                  Graffes of Plumtrées to graffe with. 
11
                  Graffing of Plums and Cherries. 
11
                  Graffing foure wayes. 
19
                  Graffing of Seruice, or ſette. 
6
                  Graffes of diuers kindes. 
21
                  Graffing the Figge trée. 
21
                  Graffing all ſortes of trées. 
20
                  Graffes to be kept long. 
23
                  Graffing how to beginne. 
24
                  Graffing wilde ſtockes. 
24
                  Graffing things to graffe with. 
24
                  Graffes not proſpering. 
25
                  Graffing well and ſounde. 
25
                  Graffes how to be ordered. 
25
                  Graffing howe to take héede of the barke. 
26
                  Graffes pinched in the ſtocke. 
28
                  Graffing the braunch or great trée. 
28
                  Graffing many cions on one head. 
29
                  Graffes which doe lightly take. 
29
                  Graffes to be right ſette in the head. 
30
                  Graffing the ſecond way of braunches. 
32
                  Graffing the third maner, betwixt the barke and the trée. 
33
                  Graffing in the ſhielde. 
34
                  Graffing in the Sommer. 
34
                  
                     Graffing with great big cions 
34
                  Graffing on yong trées. 
36
                  Graffing thrée or foure heades on a trée. 
37
                  Graffing artificially or ſubtilly. 
54
                  Graffing one Vine on another. 
54
                  Graffing times, and when. 
58
                  Graffing one Vine with another. 
60
                  Graffes howe to be gathered. 
61
                  Graffing without core. 
70
                  Grapes without ſtones. 
83
                  Grapes to taſte lyke claret. 
83
                  Grapes when to be gathered. 
83
                  Grapes to know when they are rype. 
84
                  Great Nuttes or Plums, ſette of curnels. 
59
                  Great Cherryes to be graft. 
20
                  Great braunches howe to be cutte. 
47
                  Gouerning of trées cutte. 
49
                  Ground beſt for hoppes. 
88
                  Gumme to be gathered on trées. 
65
               
            
            
               
                  H
                  Haſell Nuttes to be ſet. 
10
                  Heddes of graffes to be couered. 
34
                  Heddes of graffes to be dreſt. 
33
                  Howe to graffe the ſhield. 
35
                  Howe to ſet trées at large. 
41
                  Helping of trées. 
48
                  Helping of moſſy trées. 
45
                  Holes for the rootes enlarged. 
43
                  Howe to remooue trées. 
5
                  Howe to leaue great braunches cutte. 
47
                  Howe to take wormes on trées. 
51
                  Hoppes howe to plant. 
85
                  Hoppes howe to be choſen. 
86
                  Hoppes ſéedes to be ſowne. 
86
                  Hoppes to be proyned or wéeded. 
87
                  Hoppes when to be gathered. 
87
                  Hoppe hilles how to be dreſt. 
88
                  
                     Hoppe grounde the beſt. 
88
                  Hoppes how to be packte beſt. 
90
               
            
            
               
                  K
                  Keping graffes long. 
23
                  Kéeping Antes from trées. 
51
                  Kéeping yong trées from Snayles. 
51
                  Kéeping yong trées in the Spring. 
53
                  Kanker or worme in the barke. 
50
               
            
            
               
                  M
                  Making Syder. 
6
                  Making Orchardes in fewe yeares. 
7
                  Marking the ſtocke in taking it vp. 
16
                  Medlers graft. 
20
                  Medlars bow to be graft to waxe great. 
69
                  Medlars againe to be graft. 
20
                  Medlars or other fruit taſting like ſpice. 
55
                  Medlars ſooner two monethes than others. 
56
                  Medlars without ſtones. 
57
                  Medicining of trées. 
45
                  Medlars, principall tymes to cutte. 
49
                  Many trées following their naturall earthes. 
40
                  Moſſe on trées. 
71
                  Moſſe taken from trées. 
45
                  Mulbery trée to be ſette. 
18
                  Mulbery trée to come rath or late. 
57
                  Mulbery trée. 
69
                  Mulbery to be planted. 
71
                  Muſcadell taſte in Grapes. 
55
                  Multiply or augment trées. 
6
               
            
            
               
                  N
                  Nature of the graffes. 
21
                  Nature of places. 
44
                  Negligence of the planter. 
5
                  Nuttes graft. 
59
                  Nutte in graffing. 
26
                  Nuttes and what doth make them good. 
48
                  Nuttes to be kept long and gréene. 
72
                  Nuttes how to be ſet. 
8
                  
                     Nuttes and ſtones which be lyke the trées. 
9
                  Noynting the trées beneath. 
68
               
            
            
               
                  O
                  Orchardes making in fewe yeares. 
7
                  Ordering your trées in rankes. 
42
                  Ordering Plum trées and Cherry trées. 
11
               
            
            
               
                  P
                  Packing of Hops. 
89.
                  Paynes taking in planting. 
53
                  Peches rathe or timely. 
55
                  Peche trées how to be cut. 
72
                  Peches how to be coloured. 
73
                  Peche trées with wormes. 
73.
                  Peches without ſtones. 
73
                  Peares to be altered. 
76
                  Peares to come rathe. 
56
                  Peares to kéepe a yeare. 
57
                  Pepins to be watered. 
66
                  Pepins taken from the preſſe. 
2
                  Pyne trée to be ſet. 
10
                  Pinching of the graffes. 
28
                  Piſmiars or Antes. 
67
                  Piſmiars to be deſtroyed. Another. 
58
                  Planting in valleyes. 
44
                  Planting trées at large. 
41
                  Planting without the roote, and alſo with the roote. 
59
                  Planting of the Vyne. 
66
                  Planting Nuttes. 
9
                  Placing the ſhielde on the trée. 
36
                  Plums to be graffed. 
59
                  Plums how to be kept. 
75.
                  Plum trées if the like not. 
75
                  Plum trées to be ſet. 
11
                  Plum graffes to be cut. 
26
                  Plums taſting like ſpice. 
55
                  Poles for Hoppes. 
87
                  Poles which are beſt. 
                  Prayer in graffing and plant
                        •••…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Profite that come by 
                        〈◊…〉
                     
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Proyning or cutting 
                        〈◊…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Proyning what trées. 
15
                  Proyning Cyons. 
16
                  Proyning of trees and when. 
46
                  Proyning of hoppes. 
87
                  Pultrie to take héede of. 
2
               
            
            
               
                  Q
                  Quyne Apple howe to be graffed. 
58
                  Quinces for to plant. 
18
                  Quinces to be graffed. 
20
                  Quince againe to be graffed. 
21
               
            
            
               
                  R
                  Rayſons of grapes to kéepe a yeare. 
60
                  Rankes to be ſet. 
41
                  Remedy againſt broken bowes. 
13
                  Remoouing or replanting trées. 
3
                  Replanting in the méeteſt times. 
5
                  Rootes to be clenſed. 
12
                  Rootes to be cut. 
43
                  Rootes rebated in replanting. 
15
                  Rootes to be vncouered. 
47
                  Rootes vncouered. 
46
               
            
            
               
                  S
                  Seruices graffed or ſet. 
6
                  Seruice trées. 
22.
                  Seruice trée ſet. 
22
                  Sauing the ſtocke before yée graffe. 
26
                  Setting trées in ranke. 
4
                  Setting of Nuttes. 
8
                  Setting of Filbardes, or haſell Nuttes. 
10
                  Setting toward the South or ſunnie place. 
39
                  Setting plums or Damſon trées. 
13
                  Setting all ſortes of Cherries. 
11
                  Setting of buſhe trées. 
19
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      how to be bounde. 
36
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      taken of, to know if he be good or 
                        〈…〉
                      
35
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
76
                  
                     Syder making. 
7.
                  Sickneſſe in trées. 
50
                  Syons when to be gathered. 
61
                  Syons pluckte vp. 
3.
                  Syons without rootes. 
18
                  Syons which are beſt. 
23.
                  Slender ſtockes or trées. 
27
                  Small trées of curnelles. 
3.
                  Snayles on trées. 
51
                  Sowing of pepynes or curnels. 
2
                  Space from ranke to ranke. 
4
                  Staues to ſtaye your cions. 
14
                  Stocke heddes to be well cutte. 
27
                  Stocke heds clouen to much, or the barke head do teare. 
29
                  Stockes not haſtily to be remooued. 
48
                  Stones of fruite to be ſette. 
64
                  Swelling of the ſtocke or graffe. 
13
               
            
            
               
                  T
                  Taking héede in graffing. 
26
                  Taking vp of trées. 
14
                  Taking of ye ſhield from the bark, & to ſet him on again. 
36
                  Tymes beſt to graffe in. 
60
                  Tymes and manner of graffing foure wayes. 
19
                  Tymes to cut Cions. 
19
                  Times to ſette Nutte trées. 
8
                  Tymes when to vncouer the ſhield. 
38
                  To kepe yeares a yeare. 
57
                  Tranſplanting after Michelmaſſe. 
39
                  Trées graffed or vngrafte, to make Sider. 
6
                  Trées of wilde Nuttes. 
10.
                  Trées to be taken vp, 
14
                  Trées of great cions prickte in the earth, without roots 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées harde to be graft, with ſhielde or ſcutchion. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées charged with fruite. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées to chaunge cions or graffes on. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées to chooſe to graffe on. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées to marke, which be forwarde. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées as bygge as your legge. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées hauing great brauncheſſe. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées hurt or eaten with beaſtes. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  Trées beyng long without frute. 

                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Trées which do not proſper. 
74
                  Trées with wormes or fruite. 
64
                  Trées bearing bitter fruite. 
70
               
            
            
               
                  V
                  Vines how to plant. 
66.
                  Vine or grape. 
80
                  Vſe of earth in ſowing your curnelles. 
2
                  Vncouering of the trée rootes. 
45
               
            
            
               
                  W
                  Walnuttes ſet. 
9.
                  Walnuttes howe to be kept. 
72
                  Walnutts trées what they loue beſt. 
40
                  Watering trées againſt the Caterpiller. 
53
                  Watering trées or plantes. 
4.
                  Watering of trées. 
45
                  Wéeding your beddes or grounde. 
2
                  Wedges in graffing, how to be ſoftely drawne foorth. 
30
                  What trées loueth fayre ſunne; & what loue colde ayre. 
40
                  What dong to dong your trées. 
45.
                  When to proyne. 
46
                  When to vncouer your trées. 
46
                  Why frute ſauor or taſt not well. 
9
                  Wylde trées plucked vp. 
3
                  Wylde ſtockes remooued. 
48
                  Wyne howe to prooue or taſt. 
84
                  Wormes among rootes. 
44.
                  Wormes in the barke. 

                        •
                     5
                  Wormes that do eate in trées. 
51
                  Wormes of a ſtraunge nature, and how to take them. 
50
                  Wormes in trées of fruite. 
64
                  Wormes in the peache trée. 
7
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   