
      
         
            
            
               
A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF THE whole occurrences in the Queenes voyage from her departure from Florence, vntil her arriuall at the Citie of Marſeilles, together with the Triumphs there made at her entrie: whereto is adioyned her receiuing and entrie into Lyons.
            
            HEREVNTO IS ANnexed, the firſt Sauoyan: WHEREIN Is ſet forth the right of the conqueſt of Sauoy by the French, and the importance of holding it.
            All faithfully tranſlated out of French, by E. A.
            
            Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be ſold at his ſhop at the Royall Exchange.
            
            1601.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
A TRVE DISCOVRSE of the whole occurrences in the Queenes voyage from her departure from Flo
               rence, vntill her arriuall at the Citie of Marſeilles, together with the triumphs there made at her entrie: whereto is adioyned her receiuing and entrie into Lions.
            
               All faythfully tranſlated out of French by E. A.
            
            
               MY Lord, according to the promiſe which you enforced of me at my departure from Paris, namely, that I ſhould repaire to his maieſtie, and vpon receit of his command, to haſten with all diligence to Marſeilles, where I haue ſpent my time in expectation of the ſo long deſired arriuall of the Queene: I doe now write vnto you theſe preſents, infull diſcharge of my ſaid promiſe: wherby you ſhall vnderſtand, that vpon the thirteenth day of October, the Queene departed from the Citie of Florence, towards France, and arriued at Liuorne the ſeuenteenth day following, where ſhe embarked in the generall Galley of the Lord the great Duke, where ſhe was attended with fiue of the Popes Galleyes, fiue of the Galleyes of Malta, and ſixe of the ſayd Lord Dukes: in all ſeuenteene Galleyes. Her firſt harbor was at Eſpetie, where the Embaſſadours of the ſtate of Genes came to ſalute her, with tender of their Galleyes on the behalfe of the ſayde

ſtate, for the which ſhee returned them great thankes. From that harbour ſhee arriued at Fin, where through tempeſt and ſoule weather, ſhee was forced to ſoiourne nine dayes full: but ordinarily lay in her Galley. From Fin ſhee tooke harbour at Sauonne: the next day at Antibe: thence at Saint Maryes: then at Treport: next at Tollon, where ſhee tooke land, and ſtayed two dayes: and from Tollon ſhee arriued at Marſeilles, the third of this moneth of Nouember, betweene fiue and ſixe of the clocke at night, and landed vpon a great bridge, purpoſely erected on the Kay ouer againſt the lodging prepared for her: vpon the which bridge wayted on the left hand the Lord Cardinalles Ioyeuſe, Gondy, Giury, and Sourdy, the Archbiſhops of Arles and Aix, the Biſhops of Marſeilles, Tolon, and Paris. The Lordes Duke of Guyſe, the Conſtable and the Chanceler, aſsiſted with the Councellors of his Maieſties Councell. On the right hand ſtood the Ladie Dutcheſſe of Nemours and Guyſe, and Madamoyſelle her daughter; the Lady of Vantadour, the Lady Chanceler, the Marqueſſe of Guyercbeuille, and other Ladies.
            At the entrie vnto the ſayde bridge, the foure Conſuls of the ſaid Citie of Marſeilles, in long ſcarlet gownes, holding in their handes a Canapie of ruſſet violet, vpon a ground of ſiluer, vpon their knees preſented her Maieſtie, with two keyes of gold faſtened vpon a chaine: which keyes her ſayd Maieſtie immediatly deliuered to the Lord of Luſſā, Captain of her guard: the Conſulsryſed and withdrawne ſome three or foure ſteppes backe, the ſayd Lord Cardinalles did their obeyſance and receiued her: then the Lords of Guyſe, the Conſtable, and Chanceler. After them came the Ducheſſe of Nemours, and ſaluted the Queen, then the Lady of Guyſe, and Madamoyſelle her daughter, and ſo conſequently all the other Ladies.
            This done, her ſayde Maieſtie returned vnder her Canapie: before whom marched the ſayde Lord of Guyſe, Conſtable,

and Chaunceler, ledde by the ſayde Lord Cardinalles of Ioyeuſe and Gonay: then followed the Lady great Ducheſſe of Florence, ledde by the Lord Cardinall of Giury: then the Ladie Ducheſle of Mantua, ledde by the Cardinall of Sourdy: after theſe marched the Ladies Ducheſſes of Nemours and Guyſe, with her daughter: the Ladies of Vantadour, Chanceler, and others, according to their degrees: and ſo aſcending a great ſtayre that was purpoſely made, they came to the doore of a great chamber prepared for that purpoſe, for the ſayde Lady Queene, and ſo to the preſence, where many Ladyes wayted for her.
            This done, ſhee entred her chamber, followed by the ſaid Ladies, the great Ducheſſe, the Ducheſſes of Mantua, Nemours, and Guyſe, and the yong Lady of Guyſe, with the other Ladyes, who all made but ſhort ſtay, but returned to their lodgings, ſo as there remained with her none but the Princeſſes and Ladyes that had accompanied her in her iourneyes. The Lordes likewiſe that had accompanied her, did depart, namely `Don Iouan, Don Virginio, and Don Antonio, who alſo had aſsiſted her in all her ſayde voyages: neyther am I able to expreſſe the magnificent diſcent out of the ſayde Galleyes, each taking place according to their degrees, enriched with all kindes of honour, as well in regard of the multitude of the Nobilitie, as for the ſumptuouſneſſe of the furniture of the ſayde Gallyes, eſpecially of the Queenes, which was vnder the conduct of the Lord Marc. Anthonio Colicat. Therein were two hundred knights, that bare the croſſe of Florence. The Galley-ſlaues were magnifically apparrelled. In them of Malta, vnder the conduct of Don Peter Mendoza, a hundred and fiftie Knights, and ſo in the reſt: ſo that in the whole, it is accounted ſhee had for her conduct at the leaſt ſeuen thouſand men, all at the Kings pay and expences.
            
               
The next day, the fourth of this moneth, all the Ladyes came to helpe vp the Queene, whom they brought to the Chappell purpoſely prepared neere to the great Chamber, where ſhee had the Maſſe celebrated, at what time the Princes, Princeſſes, Lords, and Ladyes, had their Gentlemen, Pages, and ſeruants as proudly apparrelled as may be: nothing but cloth of gold, embrodery and ſpangles.
         
         
            
            A DISCOVRSE OF THE RECEIVING AND TRIVMPHS vpon the Queenes entrie into the Citie of Lyons.
            Tranſlated out of French.
            
               MY Lord, this bringer comming to Paris, I haue accompanied with theſe preſents, as wiſhing in what I might, to make ſhew of the friendſhip which continually I haue vowed vnto you, and in regard thereof to participate vnto you the pleaſures whereof my ſelfe was an eye-witneſſe in this towne, where, through Gods grace, hearing of the expected, and long wiſhed approach of the Queene of France, I was forced vpon a deſire, as well to behold the magnificence thereof, as to write vnto you of the whole proceedings, to intermit whatſoeuer any other affayres.
            The Queene therefore vpon Saturday laſt towards the twy-light, arriuing in the ſuburbs called La Guillotier, ſtanding at the end of Roſne bridge, was lodged at the Crowne, a verie large lodging, and of great receipt.
            The next day being Sunday, ſhee returned two leagues backe to a Caſtle, called La Moth, where ſhee dined, whither alſo the inhabitants of Lyons came to ſee her. After dinner the Burgeſſes troopes iſſued out of the towne, and marched to the ſayd Caſtle to meete her, being in number ſome three or foure thouſand gallant and very choyſe ſouldiers. Their chiefe captaines were all attyred alike, euerie man his mandilion of blacke veluet, his white ſatten doublet, his netherſtocks

of white ſilke, his gaſcognes and buskins of black veluet, all garded with gold parchment lace. Their Lieutenants all in violet veluet, garded likewiſe with gold parchment lace. The Captaine Ancients all in ruſſet veluet, layd alſo with gold lace, and Beuere hats of the like colour, with feathers, garniſhed with Agate ſtones, ſet in gold ouall wiſe. The Coronell marched before them excellently well appoynted, and mounted vpon a mightie courſer, barded and garded with gold lace, himſelfe apparrelled in blacke veluet, all couered with gold parchment lace.
            Then followed the ſouldiours, one third part pikes, another third part Muſqueters, and another third part harquebuziers: the muſqueters their caſſocks of greene veluet, with the bandoliers of the ſame, and white doublets, all layd with ſiluer lace. The harquebuziers for the moſt part white doublets, and caſſocks of violet cloth. The pike men white doublets, with caſſocks of blacke ruſſet cloth, all well lay de with lace, and hattes all ſeathers of one colour, and armed in white armour.
            Then came forth the towne watch, armed at all aſſayes. Next the Serieants on horſebacke, and the Lawyers. Then the Gouernours of the towne, the Steward, and Sheriffes, accompanied with thirtie Burgeſſes, all attyred in violet veluet and foot-cloathes. After them the Italian nation.
            The ſtreetes were hanged with tapiſtrie, from Roſne gate, to the church of Saint Iohn, which was alſo hanged, and the ſayd ſtreetes grauelled all the way that the French Queene ſhould come.
            Firſt entred the troopes that went foorth to meete the Queene in verie good order: then the Burgeſſes and nations: then the Gouernours of the towne: after them the French and Italian Nobilitie mixed. Next the Queenes baſtard brother, accompanied with the chiefeſt of the Nobilitie, and with them tenne pages, apparrelled in cloth of gold.

After all followed the Queene, who entred the citie in an open lictier, about foure of the clocke in the after noone: her lictier all layde with gold parchmentlace. At her entrie into the towne gate, ſhe was receiued vnder a canopie of cloth of gold, borne by foure of the chiefe Burgeſſes of the towne, vnder the which the ſayde Lady Queene paſſed along the towne, attired in cloth of gold, ſet with an infinite number of Diamonds, and ſtones that gaue ſuch a reuerberation, as to the beholders ſeemed a number of ſunnes: yet was all this nothing, in regard of her own moſt excellent beauty, whereat all men did much maruaile: and withall, the voyce of the people ſo ſounded forth their bleſsings and prayers, crying, God ſaue the Queene, that the verie mountaines about returned an eccho. Her Pages marched before her, with two that guided the lictier, apparelled in cornation cloth of gold, accompanied and followed with Princes, Lords, Cardinals, Biſhops, Gentlemen, Princeſſes, and Ladies, as well French as foreyn, ſo many, that if I ſhould vndertake to deſcribe the whole, it would take a quier of Paper. Thus was ſhe brought to the church of Saint Iohn.
            
            Thus much in breefe haue I written vnto you, of our Ladie the French Queenes entrie into our citie of Lyons, whom I beſeech God to preſerue for vs, and ſhortly to ſend her ſome iſſue, which is the thing that with my heart I doe moſt deſire. From Lyons this fourth of December.
            1600.
         
         
            
               
               
                  
THE FIRST SAVOYAN.
               WHEREIN Is ſet forth the right of the conqueſt of Sauoy by the French, and the importance of holding it.
               Imprinted at London for Cuthbert Burby: And are to be ſold at his ſhop adioyning to the Royall Exchange.
               
               1601.
            
            
               
               
               The firſt Sauoyan.
               Wherein is ſet forth the right of the conqueſt of Sauoy by the French, and the importance of holding it.
               
                  ALbeit my manifold woundes receiued in the ſeruice of our good Kings, Charles & his two ſucceſſors, haue chayned me to my bed, and in manner extinguiſhed all hope of recouerie of my health, conſidering my age: yet can I not chuſe (ſith it will be no better) but ſerue my king and countrey with all that is left mee, namely my ſpeech. In as much therefore, as I can not deliuer any thing ſo faire & conuenient, as that excellent ſubiect which I haue vndertaken, euen the equitie and benefite of the conqueſt and preſernation of Sauoy: I will without farther preface, aduow that the King hath ſufficiently made demonſtration to the whole world, how vnwilling hee was to proceede by force of armes, in that he ſtood onely vpon his Marquizate: For as well might hee haue called an account of ſixe times greater duties: euen ſuch duties as were neither vncertaine nor doubtfull, but moſt euident, and iuſtified by authenticall titles reſerued among the treaſurie of the charters of France, whereof the moſt part are ſufficiently knowne by the hiſtories of theſe three latter ages, albeit wee ſeeke no farther for them.
               Firſt, the Earles of Sauoy haue without any colour or pretence, ſeyzed vpon Nice and Villefranch, members of the true, and ancient bodie of the Countie of Prouince, whereof the Earles of Prouince haue euermore beene acknowledged

to be Lordes: as Queene Iane, daughter to Robert king of Sicile, and Earle of Prouence: who enioyed the fame in the yeare 1380. and with all other her goods gaue them to Lewes the firſt Duke of Angeou: who, as alſo after him Queene Marie, in the name of Lewes the ſecond Duke of Aniou, did peaceablie enioy them as Earles of Prouence. Howbeit, during the great warres betweene the houſes of Aniou and Arragon for Naples, the Duke of Sauoy, without any title or pretence, but onely of ſeemlineſſe, ſeyzed vpon the territories of Nice and Villefranch. Albeit conſequently the French Kings, as heyres generall to the Earles of Prouence, are the vndoubted Lords of both theſe places.
               Secondly, the houſe of Sauoy hath forcibly & by violence ſeyzed vpon the countrey of Piemont, an other part of the ancient bodie and patrimonie of Prouence: For aduow of the truth hereof, in the yeare 1306. was the principalitie of Piedmont vnited to the County of Prouence, and the Earles thereof peaceably enioyed the ſame, vntill the yeare 1363. at what time Queene Iane was defeated of it.
               Thirdly, they haue alſo encroched vpon a great part of the Countie of Aſt, which appertaineth to the houſe of Orleance, as being giuē in dowry to Valentine▪
                   As alſo they haue ſeyzed vpō the homage of Fouſigny, which depēdeth vpō 
                  Dauphine.
               
               Fourthly, in dutie they are to obey the contradictory ſentence giuen the 10 of Iune, 1390▪ in the parliament of Paris, where they proceeded, & by all meanes defended themſelues: for by that decree the K. Dauphin was pronounced ſoueraigne Lord of the Marquizat of Saluces. And in execution of this decree, the Duke of Sauoy is to yeeld vp a great deale of land appertaining to the ſaid Marquizate, together with the fruites of the ſame. Theſe lands are called Barges, Caours, Pancalier, Ennee, Villeneufue de Solier, Morel, Murel, Carignan Monaſterol, Carde, Vigon, Villefranche Cauallimours, Raconis, Moullebrune, Carail, Someriue, Camaraigne, Caualerlyon, Polongnieres, Cazalgras, Fortpas, Faule, Malazan, Villefalet, & Buſque.
               
               Fiftly and laſtly, Philip the ſeuenth, Duke of Sauoy, had two wiues. The firſt, Margaret of Burbon, who brought

him ſixtie thouſand crownes. By the contract of this marriage, the children that ſhould be borne to thē, ſhould ſucceed each other in the whole, and vnto them (as in aduance) is giuen the Countie of Bauge and Caſtelwick of Bourg in Breſſe. Of this marriage iſſued a ſonne called Philibert, and Loyſe that was mother to King Francis the firſt. By the ſecond wife hee had two ſonnes. Philibert ſucceeded his Father, and dyed without iſſue, leauing his ſiſter his heyre generall, as well by courſe of the common law, which preferreth the conioyned on both ſides, as by the expreſſe clauſe of the contract of marriage. True it is, that in thoſe lands that preferre the male child, our Lady Regent pretended no part: but in al her mothers goods, in that which was giuen in aduaunce, and in all the moueables and goods, ſhee was her brothers vndoubted and ſole heyre.
               In the yeere 1534. King Francis the firſt ſent diuers times ſundrie great perſonages to Charles the ninth, Duke of Sauoy, his Lady Mothers halfe brother, to demaund his rights. But this Duke, preuented by the paſsions of his wife, and lingring in hope of a certaine exchange moſt daungerous for vs, not onely denied to doe him reaſon in theſe ſo euident and palpable rights, but alſo reſolued to debarre the Kings paſſage, as he was on his iourney, to be reuenged vpon Sforce, Duke of Millan, for the moſt villanous act that euer was committed, namely, the beheading of the Lord Merueilles, Ambaſſadour of France.
               
               Hereupon did the King denounce warre to the Duke of Sauoy, who wrongfully detained his rights: and according to law of Nations, which giueth to the ſtrongeſt in true and full proprietie, the goods of him that hath denied him his right: his Maieſtie in the yeere 1536. conquered Sauoy, Breſſe, and Piedmont, which he reſerued twentie three yeres: And very preſumptuous he had been, that durſt haue mooued this great King to abandon this principall rampier or

bulwarke of the Gaules, for the cuſtodie whereof, wee neede not to croſſe the ſeas, or trauaile through forrain Countries, but may come to it by firme footing. Thus are great empires cymented and eſtabliſhed.
               But ſuch was the calamitie of France, that in the yeere 1559. wee made a treatie, whereby wee rendered 198. places, where the King held his garriſons, as the Marſhall Monluc doth teſtifie, who tearmeth it the vnfortunate and accurſed peace, ſaying, that ſince the ſame, wee haue neuer beene free from misfortunes. Alſo that our Ciuill wars haue waſted more valiant Captaines in ſeuen yeeres, then any forraine warres in ſeuentie. Yet ſpake he not this vpon any good will that hee bare to thoſe, with whome wee were at warres: for they neuer had a ſorer enemie, or any that dealt more rudely with them. But the Flower de Luce was painted in his heart, and hee moſt vehemently did affect any thing, that might tend to the greatneſſe and glorie of this crowne. In this regard he could not without griefe ſpeake of ſo vnprofitable a reſtitution, whereto our miſhap had forced vs, with a whole ſequence of all ſorts of miſeries, in that ſo many warlike people (as he termeth them) could not otherwiſe employ themſelues, then in moſt furious cutting each others throates. Neuertheleſſe we did not at that time ſo farre giue way to the ſtorme, that toſſed and turmoyled this Realme, but that wee retayned fiue of the principall and ſtrongeſt townes of Piedmont, as pledges for the reaſon that ſhould be done vs in our rights, namely Thurin, Quiers, Chiuas, Pinerol, Villeneufue d' Aſt, wherein we are alſo to note, that our treatie of peace in 1559. in expreſſe words imported, that the King ſhould holde Thurin, Chiuas, and Villeneufue d' Aſt, with all their confines, territories, commaunds, iuriſdictions, and other appurtenances: and as for Quiers and Pinerol, the king ſhould hold thē with ſuch confines & territories, as he ſhould find to be neceſſarie for the ſuſtenance and defence

of the fayd places.
               Now at the ſame time dyed King Henry the ſecond, leauing king Frauncis verie young, which occaſion the Duke of Sauoy would not ouerſlip: For being ſtill at Paris, fourteene dayes after the fathers death, he obtained the ſonnes letters patents (neuer verified as the treaty of peace was) wherein the confines of theſe fiue townes were reſtrained to a Piedmont myle, which was as much as to abridge vs of the fiue ſixt partes at the leaſt of all that was left vs, as if it had not beene enough that we had yeelded vp ſo many places, vnleſſe wee were alſo ſo ſtraightened in the remainder of our ſhipwrack.
               All which notwithſtanding, I would to God things had yet ſo remained: But in the yeare 62. during our firſt ciuill warres, they that had alreadie found opportunitie ſo to ſhorten the territories, ſeeing the realme in trouble, and King Charles but twelue yeares old, gaue the aduenture, & reſtored into this Dukes hands, Thurin, Quiers, Chinas, & Villeneufue d' Aſt. Ten battelles would not haue wreſted from vs ſuch places, which had coſt Fraunce ſo much gold and bloud.
               Not long before, they had in fit time made away Marſhall Briſſac, who would rather haue caſt himſelfe headlong from the rockes, then in the kings nonage haue giuen vp townes of ſuch importance to the crowne, the value whereof hee was better acquainted withall, then any man aliue. His ſucceſſor in this gouernment (yet accounted one of the fayreſt, in regard of the great importance thereof) forgat no remonſtrance: and in deed he ſatiſfied all men but himſelfe: for thrice did he refuſe the execution of ſo wonderfull hurtfull an acte, vſing moſt vehement and liuely remonſtrances and proteſtations, crauing an aſſemblie of the Eſtates, or at the leaſt conſidering the Kings minoritie, the verification of the Parliament of Peeres, ſitting at Paris.
               Had they had any hope to obtaine this promulgation, it

had not beene denyed him, eſpecially conſidering that it would haue ſtoode for a diſcharge to all others: But they knew very wel, that ſuch a parliament, conſiſting of ſo many great perſonages, practiſed in all ſorts of affayres, who alſo by the reading of hyſtories were acquainted with the truth of our rights mentioned in the beginning, would neuer by their decree haue authorized an acte ſo preiudiciall to the eſtate. In this regard, not daring to exhibite ſuch letters to the Parliament of Fraunce, they grew to ſuch grieuous and ſtrange threates againſt this Gouernour, that at the laſt hee gaue way: howbeit with ſuch and ſo violent griefe, that it ſtucke by him to his end, and brought him to his graue, enforcing him ſundrie times to crie out, that he was accurſed, that he ought to haue dyed in Thurin, vnleſſe his maſter after declaration of his maioritie, had of his owne abſolute authoritie reuoked him: alſo that peraduenture his Maieſtie finding what a faire flower they ſought to plucke from his crowne, and what a griefe and loſſe the ſame might for euer remaine, both to him and his ſucceſſors, would haue altered his purpoſe, and beene of another mind.
               Thus we ſee how in 62. theſe foure places were loſt onely for Sauillan, and 33000. Franckes, for a moneths pay for the Souldiours, which was no doubt a proper change. All the Artillerie was drawen to Carmaegnolle, which by this meanes was as well ſtored as all the reſt of the Realme: and in this wiſe was the aſſurance and pledge of all our rights reduced to two holds, Pinerall, one of the fiue, and Sauillan, which was but little worth: yet was not the Duke of Sauoy thus content: for the pledge, howſoeuer ſmall, did ſtill remember vs of our rights, which he labored to raſe out of our minds▪ & therfore at the late kings returne (whō God pardon) out of Poland, paſsing through Sauoy, the ſame were begged in recompence of a collation: and the Prince, whoſe onely error reſted in his too great goodneſſe, granted them:

whereupon the late Duke euer after acknowledged himſelfe greatly bound vnto him, and good reaſon. His ſonne an ambitious Prince, as any bred in Europe theſe fiue hundred yeeres, who in imagination hath ſwallowed the whole Monarchie of all Chriſtendome, grounded vpon the deceaſe of his neereſt allies without iſſue, which his ſorcerers and Magicians doe promiſe him, together with the deceaſe of his Maieſtie, which God in his mercie forbid, ſeeing the late King in 88. excluded out ofhis chiefe Citie, accompting him vndone, and contemning the Salicke lawe, immediatly perſwaded himſelfe that he had moſt apparant right to this crowne: or that at the leaſt hee would carrie away one of the beſt partes of the broken ſhippe, and that the Rhoſne ſhould ſtreame vnder his banners. And to bee the firſt at the bootie, and to beginne with thoſe places that are allotted to the Kings eldeſt ſonne, as a pledge of his future ſucceſſion, in the face of the eſtates aſſembled at Bloys, during a moſt ſecure peace, hee inuaded the Marquizate of Saluces, by the ſurprize of Carmagnole, and the beating of Rauell.
               
               Were the loſſe of ſuch fortreſſes, the ſole remainder of the French name beyond the Mounts, verie great, yet was the loſſe of the Artillerie no whit inferior thereto: for there were laide vp the Canons, which vnder the banners of the Flower de Luce had made the proudeſt rauelins of warlicke Italie to ſtoop. At the beginning of this vſurpation he ſought ſundrie pretences, and ſent his Ambaſſadors expreſſely to the King, to aſſure him of reſtitution of the whole into his hands. But immediately he diſgraced his Maieſties officers, & of his Ducall authority eſtabliſhed others: he pulled down & brake the Flower de Luces, & rayſed the armes of Sauoy: he furniſhed his towns with part of our Artillery, & at the ſame inſtant, to acquaint al the world with the trophees of his victorie, he forgeth a proud coyne, whereupon he ſtampeth a

Centaure, treading vnder his feete a crowne reuerſed, with this deuiſe, Opportune.
               
               All ſuch as are acquainted with Hiſtories, can teſtifie, that ſince the eſtabliſhment of this great Monarchie, the moſt auncient in the world, it neuer brooked ſuch an outrage: for if iniuries are much the more aggrauated by the conſideration of his weakneſſe from whom they doe proceede, what greater ſhame, what greater reproach to the chiefe Crowne in Chriſtendome, to the moſt ſacred King in the world, the Prince ouer a Nationa, euen borne to Mars his occupation, the ſubduers of Aſia and Affrica: at the report of whoſe name, euen the fierceſt Nations that euer had dominion vpon the earth, haue trembled, then to ſee his forts and ſtore-houſe beyond the mounts, carryed away by a pettie Duke of Sauoy?
               
               Surely no true Frenchman can ſpeake of this inſolent brauado, without griefe and extreme anguiſh. All words are too baſe for ſuch an indignitie, to ſay that this great & mightie kingdome ſhould beare this reproach and blemiſh in her forehead for the ſpace of a dozen yeres, and that it hath reſted onely vpon this vnthankfull perſon, that hee neuer felt the puniſhment for ſuch an outrage, done to the maieſtie and glorie of the French name.
               But it was not Gods will, who hath hardened his heart, that he might receiue the reward of ſuch treaſon, accompanied with the moſt notable ingratitude that was euer heard of, and with a thouſand cruelties that haue inſued the ſame. For not content with this inuaſion, he hath ſince practiſed all the cruelties that hee could deuiſe againſt all ſuch ſorts of Frenchmen, as hee hath found reſolute in the defence of the liberties of their Countries, with the price of their bloud, or that preferred death before bondage. Prouence & Dauphine, which he aſſumed to revnite to the Crowne of Sauoy, as his predeceſſors haue done Piedmont, Aſt, Nice, Villefranche,
                  
and many other places to vs appertainiug, doe yet groane vnder the anguiſh of ſuch wounds, as his cruell tyrannie hath inflicted vpon them: yea ſuch, ſo great and intolerable, that euen they that had opened him the gates, were forced to driue him out again, whereſoeuer their ſtrength would ſerue.
               Afterward ſeeing this Realme quiet vnder one of the mighteſt and moſt excellent Princes that euer ſwayed this glorious Scepter, a Prince growne vp among the allarmes, the nurſe-child of legions, and in all poynts requiſit in a moſt perfect Captaine, moſt accompliſhed, and withall a mightie King; he was not ſo ſlender witted, but that he well perceiued how very difficult it was for him, any long time to hold this Marquizate by force, eſpecially conſidering, that by the treatie euerie man was to reenter into like eſtate, as hee enioyed before the warres, at the leaſt, within one yeere: beſides, that his Holynes had ſufficiently giuen to vnderſtand, that before all things it was requiſite, fully to reſtore him, that in the time of peace had perforce beene robbed.
               Finding himſelfe therefore in theſe perplexities, with the Kings permiſſion, whom he had aſſured euery way to content, he came to Paris, where he was receiued with al cheerefulneſſe and honour that himſelfe could deſire: after long and often treaties, hee finally in the month of February promiſed within the firſt of lune, to yeeld vp the Marquizate in like ſtate as he tooke it, or the exchange thereof agreed vpon betweene his Maieſtie and him: and this was ſolemnely ſigned, as well by the one as by the other. Afterward being returned into Piedmont, hee was ſo farre from certifying the King that his mind was changed, that contrariwiſe from day to day hee entertained him with goodly promiſes of faithfull performance of all that he had promiſed. So that as ordinarily ſuch men as had rather incurre a thouſand deaths, then break their word, do imagine al others to be like themſelues, eſpecially where they haue to doe with Princes, whoſe greatneſſe

and honour ſhining as well during their liues, as after their deceaſe, conſiſteth in the exact obſeruation of their fayth, the Queene of men, the ſunſhine of this world, and the ornament of all vertues: his Maieſtie accounted the reſtitution of his Marquizate, as ſure as if the Lord of Paſſage, a Gentleman without reproch, whom hee had choſen to bee Gouernour, had alreadie beene entred with his garriſon appoynted to that effect. But the Prince of Piedmonts purpoſes had a farre other drift: he ſought onely to win moneths, weekes, and dayes, that ſo the winter comming on, might debarre the King from any enterpriſe for that yeere, which was alreadie well ſpent, aſſuring himſelfe, that before the Spring he would ſet ſo many matters on broach, & ftir ſuch coles, that they ſhould haue other matters inough to thinke vpon, rather then the Marquizate of Saluces, withal conioyning his extreme confidence that hee repoſed in his Witches, Sorcerers, & prickers of waxen Images. But God had otherwiſe appoynted: for after forbearance of feuenty daies aboue couenant, withall that this Prince had declared, that hee would not performe or accompliſh that which his Ambaſſadors and paſtors had aduiſed: the King, whoſe wiſdome was correſpondent to his bountie, finding himſelfe thus vnworthily intreated in the execution of this accord, that had beene made by his predeceſſor, in the inuaſion of his inheritance, did finally reſolue by force of armes to reuenge ſo many wrongs offred to this Crowne & withall, to let all the world, where the fame of his conqueſts and victories ſhould be bruted, to vnderſtand, that it was neither want of power in his Kingdome, neither feare of danger that forced him to like of the ſayd accord, in liew of ſixe times as large an inheritance, by this vnthankfull wretch detained from him: but rather for that hee was moſt religiouſly bent to obſerue the peace of Veruins, which ſince the Prince of Piedmont had on his part broken, & withal, ſhrunke from his promiſe ſo ſolemnely

ſigned: as alſo that God, the great Iudge of both good and badde meanings, who giueth victorie to the righteous quarrell, hath ſo proſpered our armes, that with his help and a little patience, we may ſoone compaſſe this ſo important a conqueſt of Sauoy and Breſſe: ſhall we then poſsibly find any of our owne Nation, ſo careleſſe of the glory and ſafetie of their Countrey, as againe to deſire the preſence of the moſt mortall and paſsionate enemie that wee haue in this world, on this ſide the Alpes, on this ſide the Bulwarck of the Gaules, and euen in our bowels?
               Nature, ſayd our elders (and in that word we comprehend the power of God) hath limited the great Empires with deepe ſeas, with high mountains, with mightie and ſwift riuers, perpetuall and vnchangeable bounds, farre more ſure then any made by mans hand, which muſt alwayes bee repaired. The true bounds of the Gaules Eaſt-ward, are the Alpes: what more profitable, and withall, more honourable, can any man imagine, then by ſo iuſt a warre, and ſo acknowledged throughout Chriſtendome, to driue all forraine Dominion ouer the Mounts, and to take ſuch order, that albeit all Tranſalpine Gaules fayle vs, yet ſo much as is on this ſide, may conſpire the preſeruation of the glorie and greatneſſe of the Flower de Luce?
               Hereupon eſpecially let vs likewiſe conſider the diuers accidents that may befall this great bodie, and remember that when the enemies armies muſt needes climbe theſe high Mountaines, and crane vp their Canons, a verie ſmall reſiſtance will mightily trouble them: and contrariwiſe, that the eſtate wherein wee liued before this happie conqueſt, Dauphine and Prouence lay open to all inuaſions.
               If they that liued in former ages had not regarded our ſafetie, as wee are alſo to take order for our poſteritie, the fire would dayly haue flamed in Angoulmois,
                  
in Anieow, and in many other parts of this Realme, If our former Kings had had no meaning to liue among vs (as they doe) through the glorie of their great and ſtately conqueſts, or that they would haue ſurrendred the inheritance of ſuch as durſt preſume to trie their forces, and what a French armie, fighting in the view of their Prince, is able to doe: vndoubtedly wee ſhould now haue neither ſeas nor mountaines to bounder this Kingdome.
               Neither is there any perſon ſo vnexperienced in worldly affaires, as not to know, that the Pyrenian limits are not vnto vs of greater vſe and commoditie then the Alpes: for from them we ſtand in danger of the aſſault of one onely Nation, which ſince the creation of the world, could neuer alone ſo fight with the French, but that the honour hath reſted with vs. Contrariwiſe, by the Alpes wee lie open to all the moſt fierce, proude, and moſt capable of extending their Dominion, had the Ottomans proſecuted their progreſſe through Italy, as well as they caught ſure footing by the taking of Ottranto, which could not be wreſted from them vnder eighteene moneths ſiege, after his deceaſe that conquered it, euen thoſe againſt whom we are now to make warres, muſt haue beene the chiefe bulwarke of our fortreſſe to keepe it: ſuch men are they to ſupport ſuch cloudes of innumerable men.
               Let vs not imagine theſe conſiderations to be ſcar-crowes, as things vnpoſſible, which I would to God they were, for we muſt confeſſe, that it is not halfe ſo farre from Mont Senis to Zigeth, or into Eſclauonia, as from thence to Conſtantinople, which Mahomet tooke but in the yeere 1453. Hereby let vs conſider, in how ſhort a time they may come vpon vs, or vpon our children, to whoſe good we are to referre all our labours: God of his mercie keepe vs from this miſerie: yet muſt we thinke vpon all, and that in time, holding the Alpes as we doe, and vnited to the Switzers in a ſure league, the

greateſt power in the world is not able to force vs in a groūd of ſuch aduantage.
               And this may ſtoppe the mouthes of ſome that obiect vnto vs the power of Turks, to make vs giue ouer, whereas contrariwiſe, that is the chiefe matter that ſhould the rather mooue vs to the ſafe cuſtodie of our principall rampier. Here vnto we may adde, that whileſt we loſt Naples, Milan, and Flanders, we did not conſider the Turkes great ſucceſſe in the meane time. When the Duke of Sauoy euen of late inuaded the Marquizate, and bent all his forces to vſurpe Pronence and Dauphine, no man regarded whether the Infidels proſpered or not: but now that our affayres are at a better ſtay, & the caſe altered, by and by they crie out, The Turke, Beware the Turke: by theſe policies incroching vpon vs, when wee haue the worſe, and lingering and lulling vs aſleepe, when our fortune ſmileth vpon vs: they haue made vs loſe almoſt as much as wee haue left. Thus doe they dandle vs like children: but let vs no longer brooke this entertainment; rather let vs keepe this naturall and incomparable rampier, that ſhall on that ſide warrant and ſecure vs from all ſorts of enemies.
               The remainder of this great Realme is bounded with the Eaſt and Weſt Seas, except toward Germany, where our Germaine, francke and valiant brethren, men deuoyde of all malice, or purpoſe to enterpriſe, doe inhabite: vnited with them, we ſhall at all times ſo fiercely, and with ſuch courage defend our ſelues, that all the world conſpiring our ruine, ſhall not be able to beare vs: we neuer fayled them of helpe in their neede, and therefore with great reaſon did they account vs as an arch pillar of their libertie, againſt all that would aſſault them. Neither haue we euer holden any great warres againſt them, except by the policies and inſtigation of others more politike, and leſſe valiant then our ſelues, who ſundrie times haue fleſhed vs each againſt other,

to the end to weaken both parts, as our Hiſtories doe teſtifie: but now our eyes are open, and theſe policies diſcouered and blowen vp: and I doe certainely beleeue, that France and Germany were neuer greater friends then at this day: ſo as we may ſay, that God hath deliuered into our hands, that which we ought moſt feruently to defire, namely this great bulwarke againſt all inuaſion: and wee may truely ſay, that this ſo important a matter, was our greateſt want for the accompliſhment of this fortreſſe.
               God likewiſe with the eyes of his mercie hath looked vpon theſe poore Sauoyans, that ſpeake our language, and are our true fellow Countrey men, borne for the moſt part vnder the lawfull Empire of our Kings, Francis the firſt, and Henry the ſecond, who at this day do feare nothing ſo much, as to returns vnder the proud dominion of the Piedmontaine, whom they hate as much, as they honour and loue the moſt excellent vertues of their true King, at whoſe knees they proſtrate themſelues, that they may not be miſerably abandoned, ſith God hath vouchſafed, that he that held them ſo ſhort, hath ſhrunk from his word, from whence may proceede the beginning of their libertie. Should wee returne it into his hands, we may well thinke how theſe poore people that were noted to bee ſo ready to open their gates to his Maieſtie, ſhall bee tormented: beſides that, in ſo doing wee ſhal neuer find any people willing to acknowledge our king, but by extreme force: for by that example euery man ſhall ſee, that in vs there is no hold, who make no difficultie to thruſt out thoſe to the crueltie of our enemie, that haue yeelded themſ elues into his Maieſties armes, to liue and die his moſt humb le ſubiects, to whoſe preſeruation by the law of Nations hee is no leſſe bound, then they to obey his commandements in all fidelitie.
               It is likewiſe a matter of great import for the Kings ſeruice, with all ſpeede to roote out of the mindes of his ſubiects

in Sauoy, al doubt of paſsing away a Prouince of ſuch importance: for ſo ſhall you ſoone ſee them the more bold and reſolute to ſerue his Maieſtie in all ſorts. But ſome there are, and peraduenture euen among our ſelues, who with their coldneſſe, and ſome ſpeeches that ſlip them, doe driue this poore people into deſpaire, as imagining that we doe alreadie deliuer them bound into the hands of the Piedmontaine. Well doe I ſuppoſe, that the procurers of this miſchiefe, do it not maliciouſly: but ſome there are both fearefull and too miſtruſtfull, yet muſt they bee gently admoniſhed, to alter their countenance and ſpeech, and for their more aſſurance, to caſt their eyes vpon the valour and good fortune of their great King, and of this mightie Empire, as alſo vpon the ingratitude and trecherie of our enemie, and the iuſtice of this conqueſt.
               As in truth, if among all Nations repryſals be holden for a inft title of Lordſhip, when one of the two Soueraignes is vnwilling to make reſtitution of things violently vſurped: If the equitie of lawfull warre, bee another title throughout the world aduowed for iuſt, whereupon the greateſt Monarches are alſo grounded: what man, conſidering the enterpriſes of the Houſe of Sauoy againſt that of France, and the Kings long patience before he would enter into warres, but muſt confeſle his conqueſt to be ſo iuſt, that his Maieſtie hath as good right to Sauoy, as to Paris it ſelfe? Likewiſe, if the Prince of Piedmont by his policies and mediators, ſhould now rob vs of the fruits of our labors, and our good fortune, what mā aliue would feare hereafter to inuade vs, or to falſifie his faith or word, with ful reſolution in all extremitie to follow his victorie (if hee could obtaine it) when he ſhall bee ſure, being ouercome, alwayes to recouer himſelfe through the helpe of ſome great mediatour (whereof France, to her great hurt, was neuer deſtitute) as our Annales doe teſtifie, which haue beene written principally to admoniſh

niſh vs to ſhunne the like ouerſights?
               By the ſame Hiſtories doe we learne, that the Monarch that pardoneth his ſubiects, doth ſeldome repent it: for they be his children, euen ſuch as returning to their duties, do many times indeuour by notable ſeruice to make ſatisfaction for their former defaults, and finding the diſcommodities and incredible hindrances that they incurre by the loſſe of their Princesfauour, they vow, and bind themſelues for euer to his ſeruice, and vtterly roote out all other conceits or cogitations out of their mindes. But it is farre otherwiſe with the Soueraigne, who can neuer forget the griefe of being ouercome or an incredible deſire of reuenge, and continuall care to recouer the wants in his eſtate, eyther to enter into new leagues, and practiſes to atchieue the victorie in his courſe, whereby the world may be informed as well of his reuenge, as of his misfortune. The more hee is bound to you, the leſſe will he remember you: ſuch remembrance will lie ouer-heauie and intolerable vpon his mind: he wil, if he can, take you at aduantage, ſeeke by ſome new quarrel to be freed from ſuch a wonderfull and exceſsiue fauor. What muſt we then do? euen take from our enemie all meanes to hurt vs, though he would. And this may we now eaſily doe, if we leaue him nothing on this ſide the Alpes, and ſo croſſe all his drifts for Lyons, where he ſhall get ſmall good, by planting whole families of his ſubiects at his owne coſt, to bee as it were ſecret colonyes, when al is gone on this ſide the Mounts. Without Dourlans, Amyens had neuer beenetaken: Saint Denys in the end carried away Paris: and had we not giuen vp Thurin, Carmagnole had neuer beene loſt.
               How mightily doe we thinke, ſhall the Citie of Lyons, one of the eyes of France, yea, euen of Europe, the ordinarie ſeate of ſundrie Romane Emperours, and a place ofthe greateſt trafficke in the world, which yet at this day giueth law to all other places, increaſe hereafter in wealth, and multitude of Citizens,

being couered with Breſſe and Sauoy, whereas before ſhee ſeemed rather a Frontier towne, then a Citie of the Realme? as alſo in regard of the multitudes that ſtill arriued there from all parts, and the vſuall paſſage of great armies neere to her confines, ſhe was alwayes in danger to be ſurprized, to the great loſſe and incredible ruine of the whole eſtate? Euen this poynt is a matter of great weight, and worthie manifold conſideration: for it is no ſmall matter to ſtop forraine armies, without denouncing of warre, from making the mow at ſuch a Citie as Lyons, one of the ſtrongeſt in Chriſtendome, and ofmoſt difficult recouery, if it ſhould be loſt: wee cannot bee too iealous of ſuch places, neither too curious to keep away all ſorts of Courtiers. This propoſition doe I hold, and there of referre my ſelfe to all Captaynes, namely, that Lyons remaining a Frontier town, is one of the eaſieſt to be ſurprized, in regard of the great trafficke, and multitude of ſtrangers there ſciourning, & dayly arriuing out of all parts without ſuſpition: which if you ween to hinder, yee vndoe the towne: It ſhall no longer bee Lyons, it muſt haue great libertie: but ſtanding at this day ſo farre within the Frontiers, there is no more feare of it then of Paris. I do alſo hold this ſecond propoſition, that Lyons continuing a Frontier towne, is, except Bourdeaux & Marſeilles, the moſt difficult towne in this land to be recouered, if it ſhould be once loſt. Would not ſuch and ſo great a blow, deſerue the concluſion of the exchange propounded in the yeere of our Lord God 1 5 3 4. ſo neceſſarie an exchange for the paſſage of the armies into the Low Countries? What know wee what is alreadie determined betweene ſo neere kinſmen? If this ſhould come to paſſe, and this mightie towne be obſtinately defended with the whole forces of ſuch a neighbour, into what a miſerable eſtate ſhould we be reduced? What ſhould become of Prouence and Dauphine? Into what a ſtraight ſhould foure or fiue other great Prouinces be brought? Had any man told vs twentie yeeres agoe, that a handfull of people

ſhould haue ſurprized Amiens, wee would not haue beleeued him, and indeede there was leſſe likelihood: for it was not ſo begarded with forraine families as Lyons. It maketh mee to deſpaire, to ſee men be ſuch cowards, and ſometimes purpoſely to amplifie the forces of our aduerſaries, and yet when afterward we come to propound theſe great conſiderations, they make but a mocke of it: for indeed they care not greatly. For my part I feare no open forces. Our Fathers haue ſeene in Prouence 50000. at the leaſt at once, and whole cloudes of men in Champagne and Picardy: this neuer hurt them, it made them not ſo much as afraide, ſo long as the Realme was in itſelfe at peace, as now it is. What ſhould I then feare? euen practiſes, policies, and ſurprizes of our Frontier Townes, ſuch as Lyons ſhould bee, if wee ſhould render Sauoy: vnleſſe we ſhould think that we ſhould be loth to break the peace for Lyons, ſith wee would not breake it for Carmagnole. I thinke indeede that on the behalfe, or by his commaund that ſhould ſend his armies along our frontiers, wee ſhould not feare to incurre ſuch a ſtorme (for wee muſt ſtill thinke, that great Princes do make ſome account of their fayth and honour) yet might there bee ſome Generall of the armie that would gladly be ſpoken of, but neuer looke for the anſwere that Sextus Pompeyus made, ſaying, Thou ſhouldſt not haue told me of it. The moſt that wee ſhall get, he ſhall be diſauowed: then muſt he fortifie himſelfe. Hereupon the warres are kindled, but the ſmarting loſſe is ours, which if it once grow old, they will forget to doe vs right, vnleſſe at the howre of death in diſcharge of conſcience: but if yee looke for the execution of the will, yee muſt ſeeke your Iudges at Pampelune.
               
               It is therfore a great aduantage, to be out of this continuall feare of Lyons: for vndoubtedly, they with whom we are at this time ſo threatned, are more craftie, more cloſe and ſecret then wee, and their drifts haue a further fetch. In the

field with open force, wee ſhall alwayes beate them well inough: had neither Germaines nor Engliſh-men ſet in footing, they would neuer haue had the faces ſo much as to looke vpon vs: three hundred French horſes will alwayes beate a thouſand of theirs. And as for foot-men, ours are of more force, dexteritie, and contempt of death, but leſſe diſcipline. It lieth in our ſelues to remedie the laſt, the reſt proceed from nature, who hath giuen vs theſe aduantages, which wee muſt not loſe. We can keepe them when wee liſt: witneſſe the Ocean, which euen this yeere hath ſeene our French aduentures, who cannot poſſibly be retained, vnleſſe we ſhould chaine vp all our youth. For what can we tell who ſhall eſcape? they be no troopes or garriſons licenſed at pleaſure, ſo might there be fraud: but they be ſtragglers, comming ſome from one place, ſome from another, the whole Nation being ſo borne to the warres, that they muſt ſeeke it where it is, or make it among themſelues. The Ocean, I ſay, hath ſeene of theſe mad fooles, that haue beaten the flower and choyſe of the beſt & oldeſt Captains & ſouldiers, whom we hold in ſuch eſteeme. Go ye therfore and report in thoſe countries, that the French foote-men are nothing worth.
               But who ſhall make it as gallant, as firme, and withall, bring it into as good diſcipline as it was at Ceriſoles, if this our great King cannot compaſſe it? Is hee of leſſe abilitie then his vnckle, who was but a moſt faithfull and moſt profitable ſeruant vnto him that ſwayed the Scepter and crowne which hee hath ſucceeded? Eight yeeres had we held Sauoy and Piedmont, when the Lord of Anguien, vnder the command of King Francis, wonne that glorious day, where our foot-mē with the puſh of the pike, moſt furiouſly ouerthrew all thoſe old triumphant bands of two parts of the world, albeit they were a third part more then wee, and ſo well armed, that we wonne from them eight thouſand corcelets.

The ſtorie telleth vs, without the Conqueſt of Sauoy, Fraunce had miſſed of that great and ſtately triumph, as wanting wherewith to haue fed the armie one day. Had this commodious a conqueſt been atchieued before the yeere of our Lord God one thouſand fiue hundred twentie and foure, King Frauncis, who ſhould haue found himſelfe vpon the Marches of his eſtate, neere to all ſuccour, treaſure, and refreſhing, had not fallen into that calamitie that hath ſtucke by vs euer ſince.
               Very high had he bin mounted, if the Lord of Anguyen had not caught him by the throate, that ſhould haue wiſhed him to ſpeake to his Lord the King to yeelde vp Sauoy: ſo long is it ſince this fatal & valiant race of the Bourbons was promiſed to reſtore the eminency and perfect glory of the Flowre de Luce.
               The ten firſt yeeres of his raigne were ſpent in his eſtabliſhment, that was hindered by thoſe that alwayes feared the greatneſſe of this eſtate. At his entrie into his ſecond tenne yeeres, God hath vouchſafed to adde vnto his Empire the higheſt mountaines in the world, thereby to lift vp this Prince, and to place him in the view of the whole worlde, as the Grandchilde of his beloued King Lewis the fifth.
               What men be theſe then, that ſeeking to plucke him from his type of glory, would fetch him ſixe dayes iourneyes backe againe, and in one moment defeate him of that great eminent and ſhining fame, which ſhineth euen into the Eaſt, atchieued in fiue & twenty yeres, through his ſo wonderfull proweſſe and famous victories, ſtill following his good fortune, and proceeding ſtill forward, without ſtumbling or retyre?
               Is it poſsible for this mighty Prince, who was able to conquere his Kingdome with the ſwordes point, now for euer to defraude his memory of the glorie of this increaſe, thatis of ſuch importance to his Crowne? In regarde of our ſelues

now liuing, whatſoeuer his Maieſtie doe ordaine, or whatſoeuer he do, our perfect obedience, yea I will ſay more, our loue and feruent affection ſhall neuer quaile: But what will the poſteritie ſay, when they ſhall heare of ſo happie a conqueſt, and find the inconuenience of the not keeping of the ſame ſuch inconueniences as will happen either firſt or laſt, and thoſe very ſharp? Let vs not flatter our ſelues: It is hard to take away the ſobs, the ſighs & bitter complaints from thoſe that feele the ſmart. Why haue they not ſpokē? why haue they not written of the reſtitution of 1559? and yet in truth wee were forced thereto by an extreme miſhap: beſides that almoſt all Europe was conſpired againſt vs. But who forceth vs now? what colour? what retence ſhall our hiſtorie find? what excuſe ſhall ve make to our nephewes, for giuing away ſuch an aduantage? Surely I ſee none: all things do ſmile vpon vs, and for one that fretteth at our conqueſt, foure are glad of it though they ſay nothing. Such there are that will intreat his Maieſtie, and exhort him to let go his hold, yea & make orations vnto him for the ſame, that in heart would be ſorie to bee beleeued.
               Here will ſome man aske, whether we muſt alwayes continue the warres.
               Whome I wil aunſwere, that France hath many times beene driuen to peace, without the recouery of Naples, Millan, or the ſoueraigntie of Flanders. Why muſt we then of neceſſitie, for the making of peace, reſtore that which we haue ſo lawfully conquered, ſith wee haue ſo often beene forced to agree without recouerie of our owne? Is it becauſe Fraunce is weaker then Piedmont, or that we are ſuch dolts, as to thinke all things lawfull for others, and nothing for our ſelues?
               Let our enemie beg peace if he liſt, as well as hee drew on and proſecuted the warre: but it may pleaſe his Maieſtie to call to mind, that it is were requiſite that proſperitie ſhould

recompence aduerſitie: alſo that he that ſo playeth that hee may alwayes loſe and neuer winne, will be ſoone vndone.
               True it is, that they reply that ſo we ſhal draw on a greater warre againſt vs. But hereto we may find a double anſwere: Firſt, that it is vnlikely, that they that haue ſo longed after peace, a matter to them as neceſſarie as profitable to vs, would now breake it, eſpecially vpon ſo bad and baſe a title as is the Prince of Piedmonts. The ſecond anſwer is this, that ſith our cauſe is good, they that we are threatned withall, will neuer enter warre againſt vs, vnleſſe they haue before reſolued vpon it for other cauſes, and motiues farther fetcht: and in that caſe it is far better for vs to keep our aduantage, then to loſe it, and be ſorie for it when it is too late. Withal, that this ground ſtanding faſt, that our enterpriſe is iuſt, and conſequently the conqueſt thereof proceeding: If we be ſo timerous as for a threat cowardly to forgoe that which wee haue ſo lawfully and happily atchieued, then farewell all: there is no more Frenchman, no more Gaule in the world. For how can any man imagine, that this valiant natiō, in former times an actor in all the greateſt warres in the world: a nation that hath ſought them from one end of the earth to another: that hath taken the imperiall Citie of Conſtantinople, and forced the mightieſt cities in the Eaſt and South: that feared nothing but the falling of the skie, as aſſured to ouercome all that ſhould withſtand, ſhould at this day bee ſo degenerate and ſo quailed, as for a Rodomontade or Spaniſh brag, to abandon that which ſo iuſtly to vs doth appertaine? that is to ſay, ſhould ſhew themſelues ſo fearefull and ſuch cowards, that through the default of his ſubiects hearts, aforetime the terrour of all nations, ſo great a King ſhould not bee able to keepe his owne conqueſts? But in deed wee are farre from thoſe termes. For albeit our lamentable warres haue greatly diminiſhed vs, yet ſhall our experience, valour and courage recompence the want of our number: beſides that,

our head ſhall alwaies be counted for twentie thouſand: hee is the great Lion that guideth the leſſer to the battell: his ſoldiers are not counted by their number, but by their valour: yet if need be, and that this Empire muſt ſtirre vp her ſtumps in earneſt, we ſhall couer their largeſt fields with ſoldiers, & make the earth to tremble vnder the feet of our horſes: wee ſhall drie vp the riuers, and of theſe old French armies bring forth a hundred or two hundred thouſand warriors, as gallant and couragious as euer were their anceſtors: euen ſuch as will go to the field with as good courages as others come thence. Let no man therefore thinke to terrifie vs with ſuch threates. We ſeeke peace with euerie one but this vngrateful perſon, yet feare we not the warre. If any be reſolued to ſet vpon vs, we were fooles to ſhrinke backe: wee muſt pleade for all, we muſt defend all, or rather march halfe the way to meet with any that would ioyne with this preſumptuous perſon, who in liew of humble reuerence to the Maieſtie of ſo great a neighbour kingdome, as nature and wiſedome doe teach, and all the world do put in practiſe, hath ſhewed himſelfe ſo preſumptuous and deſperate raſh, as to ſeeke to ouerrun a great Lyon, who at one ſole lift is able to ſqueaze him aſunder. But theſe be vaine conceits, for there is no prince in the world willing to rayſe warre againſt vs, vpon ſo bad a quarrell as is the Prince of Piedmonts. Well may euery one intermeddle to agree vs, and we will giue them the hearing: For in the midſt of our weapons we ſeeke for peace, yet in any wiſe let vs remember two things: Firſt, that wee brooke no delay whileſt our wind bloweth faire: as our Kings Lewes the 12. Francis the 1. and Henry the 2. alwayes did. Our hiſtories do make mention, and our ouerſights are noted, but when it is too late. It is not ynough to be valiant in the field: the chiefe point is to be wiſe & circumſpect in counſell. And in that regard did Homer neuer commend any valiant Captaine for his courage, vnleſſe withall it were accompanied

with wiſedome, witneſſe his ſpeech of Agamemnon: In armes valiant, and in counſell diſcreete. So wiſe was Hercules, that his valour was the leaſt part of his glorie. This wiſedome & this excellent counſell, ſo far as it concernes the ſoueraigne, conſiſteth not onely in the well pitching of a field; in the furious aſſault of a great citie by the weaker; or in chooſing the field: but the chiefeſt skill is in the knowledge how to vſe the victorie and his forces, and cutting off his enemie from all means to take heart again: as alſo in the forecaſt how to ſtop his eares againſt the faire words of certaine intermeddlers, that ſeeke no more but to hinder the courſe of ſuch proſperitie as they do ſuſpects that ſo he haue no cauſe to repent that he beleeued them, and through this beliefe limited his good fortune and conqueſts, and ſo loſt the occaſion of aſſuring his frontiers. It concerneth no leſſe, and ſo let vs remember.
               Secondly, we muſt beware of ouerbuying our quiet. Darius ſent to offer Alexander part of his Empire: but this great Prince, the true image and perfect patterne of all generoſity, alſo of curteſie, ſo long as the ſame was not preiudiciall to his eſtate, anſwered in one word: Behold where thou findeſt me: I haue alreadie paſſed more then he offereth: we muſt ſpeake either of atonemēt, or fight for that that is left him: for all that is behind me, is paſt compromiſe. And he ſaid truth, for a great Captain neuer returneth backe: he that forſaketh it, is vnworthie the proſperitie that God ſendeth him: yet had Alexander to do with ſo mightie an enemie, as ſoone after met him with a million of men: albeit when he made that braue anſwere, he was not ignorant what forces this mightie Emperour of Perſia might haue, yet could he not be terrified, becauſe he was Alexāder. But had hee exchaunged the hope of his victorie with the agreement offered, both bodie and fame had beene ſhut vp in one ſelfe tombe, whereas now contrariwiſe while the world laſteth, he ſhal ſtill liue as freſh & famous as when hee dyed. And in truth wee muſt confeſſe either puſillanimitie, or extreme

weakenes in thoſe that yeeld vp that which they haue lawfully conquered. But we are (thanks be to God) farre ynough from both. For as for feare, it neuer came neere our Kings heart: for had he had neuer ſo ſmall a ſpice thereof, he had long ſince bin ouerthrowne, and his eſtate couered vp in darkenes. Rather may we ſay, that ſo many valiant actes and ſo many trophees, whereby he ſhineth as a faire Sunne ouer the face of the earth, do but burgeon forth conceits of higher enterpriſes againſt all that dare giue him good cauſe, as hauing the hope of things to come, ſtill fighting in his fancie with the glory of things paſſed.
               As for force, it cōſiſteth eſpecially in money & mē: concerning the firſt, the K. treaſures well husbanded, as they are wil go farther thē men ween for: forren war doth ſomewhat helpe to maintaine it ſelfe. True it is, that it is now high time to begin (ſith to our great detriment, we did it not ſooner) I ſay to begin yeerly to ſpare 3. millions of gold, which we do wretchedly conſume in ſilkes which wee neede not, whereas our neighbours cannot forbeare ſo many of our commodities neceſſary for mans life, which to vs are in ſtead of mines of gold and ſiluer. This done, wee ſhall growe into abundance of wealth: for as the Philoſopher ſaith, Nature is neuer no loſer: becauſe that that which commeth forth of one place, reentreth into another: euen ſo the expences of this Realme do ſtand vs in nothing. The 3. millions, which we ſo miſerably for lacke of forecaſt, or rather for want of wit, doe yeerely waſte vpon wormes worke, through the enchanting ſpeeches of ſuch as reape the beneſite thereof, doe more empoueriſh this eſtate in 6. moneths, then 6. yeres of forren war. Powder, Cannon thot, and moſt part of our weapons are made in the land, & ſo coſt vs little to ſpeake of. The ſouldiers pay returneth to the hands of the K. receyuers, to whō the cōmons that haue earned it with their labor & cūning, do returne for their taxes. Any man that liſt to deale with vs, ſhall haue

more neede of forraine ſouldiours then wee, and all things reckoned, muſt ſpend more duckets then we teſtornes, and ſo ſee the bottom of his purſe ſooner then wee. Were wee to be aſſaulted by ſuch as had a hundred millions ready gathered, the danger were the greater: but if wee haue any diſcommoditie, they that we are threatned with, are in neceſsitie, and in farre leſſe credite then wee, as being long ſince with all their partakers, drawen drie, through their incredible expences continued theſe 34. yeeres, which their laſt miſhap muſt force them to redouble, or to loſe all. Were we throughly acquainted with their bullion, we ſhould find that they are rather to ſtand in feare of vs, then we of them; alſo that he that threatneth moſt, is in moſt feare. As for multitude of men, the conceiued opinion that the King at this time would haue no more, together with the collection of the fruits of a fruitfull yeere, and the beginning of winter, detained a number in their houſes. But if his Maieſtie ſhould earneſtly call for aſsiſtance, and giue out that he would find meanes to diſcerne the houſe-birds from the true Gentlemen, whoſe ſeruice he would haue truely recorded, to be monthly ſent to his Parliaments and Chambers of accounts, that thither hee might hereafter haue recourſe; wee ſhould ſoone ſee our armies increaſe, with an incredible number of Gentlemen, who would be loth in themſelues or their poſteritie, to beare ſo ſhamefull a badge, as is the abandoning of their King and Countrey in time of neede, eſpecially, in ſo iuſt and honourable a warre, whereto from all parts both great and ſmall haue recourſe.
               No man can complaine of ſuch remembrances, as do conſecrate to the poſteritie, the names and valour of thoſe, that as the true children of their gallant anceſtors, haue haſted to the place, whither the preſence of their King, and glory of their Countrey hath called them. Hee that would bee an vnprofitable ſeruant to his Prince, and yet miſliketh that he

ſhould be knowne, ſeeketh to confound labour with idleneſſe, valour with cowardize, and the forſaker of his countrie with the true Gentleman, that alwayes conſidereth in what regard his anceſtors had their lands giuen them, with freedome from ſuch charges as other Citizens doe beare. To be briefe, he indeuoureth to make a mixture of all vice, with the rareſt vertues: yea, ſo dangerous a mixture, that the greateſt obſeruers of antiquitie, whoſe principles wee haue to our coſt tryed to bee moſt true, doe agree, that when ſuch confuſions take place, in whatſoeuer forme of gouernment, the ſame are an infallible token, that that eſtate is extreme ſicke: yet if it be in a Monarchy, the cure is both readie and certaine. For the Prince may ſpeedily reeſtabliſh vertue in her eminencie, and ſo open the deformitie and ſhame of her contrarie, that for one of his ſubiects that continue in this filth, hee ſhall find tenne thouſand haſting to that glorie, wherwith it may pleaſe the ſoueraigne to note the affection, courage, and trauailes of his faithfull ſeruants: neither ſhall we want men, yea, as braue men as euer the earth bare. But in any wiſe, ridde me from theſe men that depend vpon our enemies wages, whoſe onely care reſteth in daily writing from the army, that peace is concluded, that is to ſay, that no man muſt come. My ſelfe doe know, that this policie hath within theſe two moneths detained a hundred Gentlemen within tenne league about the houſe of my abode: yet haue we one rule in Monarchie vndoubtedly true, namely, that it is in the King onely to thinke vpon peace, when he thinks it profitable for his eſtate, and in the ſubiects no farther to trouble themſelues, but to keepe their hands nimble, and their ſwords ſharp, according to the ſaying of Aemilius, and to vſe no communication but of weapons, of horſes, and of warre, after it is once proclaimed. This is it that maketh a Prince to bee feared, yea, this is it that maketh him condiſcend vnto profitable peace, when he findeth that the heate

of his ſubiects, boyling in a burning deſire to fight, muſt bee reſtrained.
               Let vs peruſe our Hiſtories, and we ſhal find, that this great Monarchy was founded, augmented, and preſerued, not by luke-warme and effeminate humours, but by valour and generoſitie, by entring into ferraine warres, not for threates, but for benefite and aduantage. Ciuill and inteſtine warres haue ſundrie times, and twice within theſe two hundred yeres, brought it to the poynt of deſtruction, other warres neuer ſhooke it: but contrariwiſe, haue euer beene holden as an exerciſe of our principall profeſsion, and as the ſubſtance and theatre of our glory. For as Lycurgus referred all his lawes to the warre: and as the Romanes made their vaunts, that they were not acquainted with any other arts or occupations, but left thē all to their ſubiects, as vnworthie themſelues, ſo our anceſtors, inured to the natures of this war-like Nation, did vtterly reiect from all ſucceſsion to the crowne, that ſexe which they thought vnfit to leade the French-men to the warres, and withall, eſtabliſhed the foundation of this Empire, vpon the force of armes, and the perfection of militarie knowledge, the moſt generous of all, and moſt noble, as well in the cauſe as in the end.
               Through the excellencie of this Art, the Romanes ouercame the multitude of the Cymbrians, the force and craft of the Affricans, the wiſedome and policie of the Grecians, and the riches and power of Aſia.
               But when they went about to alter their braue and valorous principles, and in liew of Iron to vſe gold, flatterie for commaundement, treaties for battailes, and compoſition in ſteade of victories and triumphs▪ the reſplendent Maieſtie of this mightie Empire withered, the fame thereof vaniſhed, the ſubiects feare changed into contempt, and the reuerence of the Neighbours into denſion. And it was with all men, as with the Nations, which

beforetime trembled at the viewe of the Romane Magiſtrates: but when they ſaw themſelues renting and diſmembring their Empire, they alſo ſet vpon them, and aſſaulted thē euen in their Capitoll, which they haue ſo often and ſo miſerably ſacked and razed, that now there remaineth no more but the ſole tombe and cinders thereof.
               Let vs beware that wee fall not in the like fault, and that we alter not our old principles, both bold, couragious, and in a word, right French, into their contraryes; and withall, let vs remember, that ſo ſoone as we, like women, ſhall beginne to quaile at the threate of ſome great warre, wee ſhall ſee our ſelues enuironed round about, euerie man will ouer-runne vs, one will plucke at the one ſide, another at the other, and wee ſhall bee the contempt and ſcorne of the children of thoſe that could not, without trembling, heare any ſpeech of our fore-fathers.
               Yet doe I not ſay, that we ſhould preferre a continuall warre before a wiſhed peace, which through Gods goodnes, and the valour and wiſedome of our great King, wee doe at this day enioy with all men, except this vngratefull perſon, that hath infringed his promiſe and fayth: but rather to confirme our firſt propoſition, namely, That being iuſtly grounded in this warre, and the Conqueſt being both iuſt, lawfull, and moſt profitable to our eſtate, neither threate, nor any other conſideration, ſhould make vs to giue ouer that which we hold, or to ſteppe one foote backe againe.
               
               If wee can firme our ſelues in theſe principles repleniſhed with equitie, glorie, and honour, and bee reſolued couragiouſly to ſet vpon any that would intrude into ſo wrongfull warre againſt vs, wee ſhould euen againſt the whole world, releeue the auncient glorie of this mightie Empire, yea, wee ſhould giue them to vnderſtand, that it is not good meddling with France in her afflictions: alſo that either firſt or laſt, God, who fauoureth her as the chiefe crowne

of thoſe that are baptized in his name, will enable her to bee quit with her enemies. To be briefe, that ſhe knoweth how to liue in peace with thoſe that account of her amitie and alliance, and to treade downe all ſuch as will attempt againſt her glorie and honour.
               Thus haue we finiſhed this diſcourſe, and yet the principall is behind, that is, moſt feruently to pray vnto the heauenly goodneſſe, ſo to vouchſafe to touch the heart of our King, that he will courteouſly heare, and at length yeeld to a moſt humble petition, which our iuſt feare of extreme perill hath wreſted, not out of my heart and penne onely, but out of the hearts and mouthes of all his ſubiects.
               
                  The Petition.
                  
                     SIr, your ſelf are as wel acquainted with al worldly affaires, I wil not ſay as any Prince, but as any man in Europe▪ how is it then poſsible, that you ſhould not conceiue the principall drifts of your enemies▪ If you pleaſe attentiuely to cōſider, you ſhal vndoubtedly find, that their great hope is built vpon your tombe, whom they ſee ſo extreme aduenturous, that euery houre, yea, euery momēt, they hearken afterthat deſired newes, euē the type of all their vowes. Cut them off, Sir, from this hope, by a moderation worthie your glory already atchieued, worthie the Imperiall throne whereto God hath exalted you, and worthie the extreme neceſsitie that all your France, and all your confederates haue of the preſeruation of your life. So ſhall your Maieſtie immediatly ſee the weapons droppe out of your enemies hands, all their deuices confounded, and their drifts diſperſed. Indeed, Sir, we are to confeſſe, that hitherto this great contempt of danger was neceſſarie for the reeſtabliſhment of your eſtate, which was ſo ſicke, as vſuall remedies could neuer haue recouered it. It was requiſite to aduenture farther, then ſtood

with any diſcourſe of militarie reaſon, to execute before deliberation, and with extraordinarie and more then humane confidence to plunge your ſelfe among many dangers, yea euen the dangers of death, But God enuironed you with his Angels: for it was no raſhnes, but perfect valiancie. But now ſir, that he hath graced you with the reſtitution of your kingdome, quiet and in peace: alſo that your Maieſtie haue the aſſiſtance of ſo many great Princes, and excellent Captains, (almoſt all trained vp at your owne hand) and of theſe, braue Frēch horſmē, ſo famous & ſo feared throughout the world, followed with the great ſquadrons of thundring legions, repleniſhed with yong and gallāt nobilitie, who burne with an incredible deſire to ioyne & ouerthrow your enemies in a pitched field, in caſe they dare ſtād you, or proudly to aſſault ſome ſtrong fortreſſe. Seeing your ſelfe alſo entred into ſuch and ſo mightie alliances as neuer any king your predeceſſor was the like: Is it not time, ſir, that the ſame affection to your ſubiects that caried you into all theſe hazards, ſhould now make you to reſerue your ſelfe to ſuch as are worthie of your Maieſtie? If a king, ſaid Theophraſtus, muſt needes die in the warres, let him die like a king: that is to ſay, in ſome fierce and bloodie battell, enuironed with all the gallant, noble & braue men of his eſtate: let him be drowned in ſome maine ſea of his enemies bloud, mixed with the bloud of his owne ſoldiers, and neuer be ſlaine as ſome meane Captaine at the ſiege of ſome towne, or in ſome skirmiſh: For ſo ſhould his glorie and triumphes bee ſo farre from increaſe, that they ſhould euen wither and decay: witneſſe that great & couragious Captaine, that thought himſelfe greatly diſgraced, in that a quarrel ſhot out of Samos, light neere him: wherewith had he beene ſlaine, his armie through his default had ſtood as a bodie without a head at the enemies mercy, to the reproach and ruine of his countrey.
                  But as the excellent Archimedes, by planting his engines,

threw more darts & ſhot at the Romanes, then all the reſt of the Siracuſans together: euen ſo your Maieſtie, beeing the ſoule infuſed into the veynes, ſinewes, & arteries of this great body, and proud preparation for warres, and kindling the courages of all his Captaines and ſouldiers, doth alone make all hands to walke, all Cannons to rore, and all the ſwords of his armie to cut. Aſſure your ſelfe therfore, Sir, that if you wil vouchſafe to yeeld to the feruent ſupplications & teares of all your ſubiects, that proſtrate themſelues at your feet, onely to obtaine this ſole requeſt, as the fulneſſe of their felicitie, and ſo take from them this extreme feare and incomparable terror, which onely doth freeze the bloud of all your ſouldiours; you ſhall reuiue their courages, and maruailouſly cheere vp their forces, as knowing, that ſo long as your perſon are in ſafetie from ſo many Cannons leueled at your heart, the affayres of your Fraunce, euen of your warlike Fraunce, will proſper and grow from better to better: and contrariwiſe, your enemies that cannot ſtand and beare vp thēſelues but vpon this cowardly & curſed hope, ſeeing themſelues fallen from the ſame, ſhall find their deſtruction, and that they are in worſe eſtate, then if they had loſt tenne battailes. Doing this, Sir, you ſhall ſurmount your ſelfe, which is the moſt difficult, gallant, and glorious victorie of all other, and withall, by this great poynt of diſcretion, crowne all your triumphs and trophees, whoſe glorie and fame ſhall neuer be limited, but with the bounds of the earth, and all eternitie; and beſides, Sir, you ſhall reſerue your anoynted 
                        〈…〉
                      to infinite Garlands of great victories, yet due to your good fortune, which it hath pleaſed God to giue you, for a faithful companion to your Heroycall and excellent vertue.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   