
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧The copie of a letter
written by one in London
to his frend concernyng
the credit of the late published
detection of the doynges of
the Ladie Marie of Scotland▪
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               MAny are the practises
of Papistes and
other false and hollow
harted subiectes,
& wonder it is what
they dare do & say,
as if they had the Maiestie of our
Prince in contempt or did still beare
them selues bold vpon the successe of
some mightie treason, the bottome
whereof hath not yet bene throughly
searched. Of late hath bene published
out of Scotland, a treatise detectyng
the foule doynges of some that haue
ben daungerous to our noble Quene,
by which detection is induced a very
excellent comparison for all Englishmen
to iudge whether it be good to
chaunge Quéenes or no, and therwith
a necessary enforcement to euery honest
man to pray hartely for the long
continuaunce of our good mother to
rule ouer vs, that our posteritie may
not sée her place left empty for a perilous
stepedame. Some caryed with
Popishe affection that regardeth neither
naturall Prince nor contrey, and
puffed with the dropsey of a trayterous

humor, labour what they can to
discredit the same detectiō as vntrue.
Some of them, whyle they lyke good
sincere men forsoth, would fayne seme
very indifferent iudges, say they will
credit nothyng till they heare both
parties, not remembryng that in the
same one booke are both parties to be
heard the one in the former parte,
both in the declaration and oration
of euidence: the other in the latter
part, in the parties owne contractes,
songes, letters, iudiciall procedynges
protestations, examinations and confessions.
Some other more open fellowes,
say flatly that all is false, the
booke hath no credit, the authour is
vnknowne, obscure, the matter counterfaite,
and all is nothyng. If any
such rumors come to your eare, first
I thinke verely in truth you may be
bold to say to the partie Et tu ex illis
es, thou art also one of them. And
for the matter I haue thought good to
enforme you of so much as I know
for profe of the same treatise to be of
credite, wherwith you may aunswere
and stoppe the mouthes of such rumor

spreaders.
            The booke if selfe, with the oration
of euidence, is written in Latine
by a learned man of Scotland M.
George Buchanan, one priuie to the
procedynges of the Lordes of the
Kynges secret Counsell there, well
able to vnderstand and disclose the
truth, hauyng easie accesse also to all
the recordes of that cōtrey that might
helpe hym. Besides that the booke
was written by hym, not as of hym
selfe, nor in hys owne name, but accordyng
to the instructions to hym
geuen by common conference of the
Lordes of the priuie Counsel of Scotland,
by him onely for hys learnyng
penned, but by them the mater ministred,
the booke ouerséen & allowed,
and exhibited by them as mater that
they haue offred and do continue in
offeryng to stand to and iustifie before
our soueraigne Ladie or her highnesses
Commissioners in that behalfe
apointed. And what profe they haue
made of it already, when they were
here for that purpose, and the sayd authour
of the sayd booke one among

them, when both parties or their sufficient
procurators were here present
indifferently to be heard, and so were
heard in déede, all good subiectes may
easely gather by our sayd soueraigne
Ladyes procedyng sins the sayd hearyng
of the cause: who no dout would
neuer haue so stayed her request, but
rather would haue added enforcement
by ministring of aide to the Lady Marie
of Scotlād, for her restitution, (the
presidēt & honor of Princes, & her Maiesties
own former exāple of sinceritie
vsed in defence of the Scottish Quéene
her selfe in Scotland against France,
and her maintenance of the French
Kinges honor and libertie against the
hye attemptes of some his Popish subiectes,
considered) nor would haue lyued
in such good amitie with the yong
kyng of Scotland, the Regentes, & the
true Lordes mainteiners of that side,
if these haynous offenses alleged on
that part had not ben prouable, or if
the yong Kyng had ben an vsurper, or
hys Regentes and other Lordes of
that faction traytors, as they must
haue ben if all be false that is obiected

agaynst the sayd Ladie Marie. I recite
not what subscriptions & assentes
haue ben to confirme the booke and the
maters in it conteined, Byside that I
do you to wyte that one written copie
thereof in Latine was now vpon hys
late apprehension found in one of the
Duke of Norfolkes mens houses, and
thether sent by his commaundement
a litle before his apprehension to be secretlie
kept there, with diuers other
pamphelets and writynges. Whiche
thyng not onely addeth credit to this
booke that it was not counterfait, but
also geueth shrewed suspicions that
the Duke could not so well lyke the
woman beyng such a woman, as for
her persons sake to venture the ouerthrow
of such a florishyng state wherin
he stode before, but that some other
greater thyng it might be that he lyked,
the gredynesse whereof myght
temper his abhorryng of so foule conditions
& of so great a danger to hym
selfe to be sent after his predecessours.
The Byshop of Rosse lykewise doth
both knowe that the Duke had this
booke, and can tell how the Duke

came by it.
            The other mater of the contractes,
letters, songes &c. haue, among other,
these proues. Liuely witnesses of great
honor and credit can tell that the very
casket there described was here in
England shewed, the letters & other
monumentes opened and exhibited,
and so much as is there sayd to haue
ben written or subscribed by the sayd
Ladie Marie, the Erle Bothwell, or
other, hath béen by testimonies and
othes of men of honor & credit of that
contrey, testified and auowed in presence
of persones of most honorable
state and authoritie to haue ben written
& subscribed as is there alleged, &
so deliuered without rasure, diminution,
addition, falsifieng or alteration
in any point. And a number there
be in England, of very good and worshypfull
callyng byside the Commissioners
thereto apoynted, that haue
séene the originals them selues of the
same handes whoes this booke doth
say them to be. Whiche thinges haue
been heard and vnderstoode by these
that can tell, and those whoes truth

in reportyng is aboue all exception.
            Wherefore sithe the Scottishemen
haue, for satisfaction of vs their
good neyghbours, among whom the
sayd Ladie Marie remayneth to the
perill of both Princes as the Scottishmen
say, published these maters, to
the intent that the impudencie of the
sayd Ladie Maries fautors in denyeng
those truthes may not seduce English
subiectes to the vnderminyng of
the estate, honor, and noble procedyng
of our most gracious soueraigne, and
diuertyng of affections to vndue places,
and to the great perill of both
Realmes, which the aduersaries call
beneficiall vnityng, but is in déede
most maleficiall confoundyng, intended
to ioyne the Realmes in other persones,
excluding the person of our sayd
soueraigne Lady: Let vs receiue this
admonishment thankefully, and gather
the frute thereof to the stablishment
of our loyaltie to our owne
Quéene, agaynst whom the fauorers
of the other side haue banded them selues
in hostilitie and treason.
            This I haue thought good to write

to you for your satisfaction in knowledge
of the case, whom I know alreadie
sufficiently satisfied in good and
dutifull affection. God disclose these
hollow hartes, or rather God graunt
her Maiestie, and those that be in authoritie
vnder her, an earnest will to
sée them, for they will disclose them
selues fast enough. And God send her
Maiestie so to remoue the groundes of
her perill, that not onely we which
by open thrustyng our selues agaynst
her enemyes haue set vp our rest vpon
our Quéene Elizabeth, and shall neuer
be admitted to fauour on the other
side, but also all wise and honest
mē may know that it shalbe safe to be
true, & daungerous to be false. Otherwise
the mischief is euident. For men
in nature and in policie will seke for
their own safeties, which if they may
not finde in truth, it is a great auauncement
of falsehode. God long preserue
our good & gracious Quene Elizabeth,
and make her enemyes know
that there is sure peril in treason, and
her true subiectes bold to sticke to her
without dread of any reuenge or displeasure▪
So fare ye well.
            
               
FOr further proofe that the sayd letters
written by the said Ladie Marie
& mentioned in the sayde booke are
not counterfait but her owne, I haue
herewith also sent you the most autentike
testimonie of the three estates of
Scotland assembled in parliamēt. The
copie of which acte you shall receiue
word for worde as it was enacted in
Scotlād in Decēber 1567. & remaineth
publikely in print, sauyng that I haue
for your more easy vnderstāding changed
ye Scotish orthography, which I
would to God had been done for Englishmēs
better satisfaction in Maister
George Buchnans boke. Howbeit the
same is not so hard but that after ye readyng
of two leaues a man may easily
enough grow acquainted with it, and
doutlesse the knowledge & mounumētes
therin cōtained are wel worth so small
a trauell to vnderstand them.
            
               The Scottishe act of Parliament.
               Touching the retention of our
soueraine Lordes mothers persone.
               ITem touching the article propounded
by the Earles, Lordes, & other
Noble men, who tooke armes at
Carbarie hill, vpon the xv. day of
Iune last bypast, & touching their conuenynges

of before, and of the cause of
the apprehension of the Quéene mother
to our soueraigne Lord: And whether
the sayd Noble men, and others
which tooke armes of before her sayd
apprehension, and which ioyned with
them, & assisted them at that tyme, or
any wayes sence, haue done the dutie
of Noble men, good, & true subiectes of
this realme, & no wayes offended, nor
transgressed the lawes in that effect,
or any thyng dependyng therupon, either
preceding, or following the same.
               Our soueraigne Lord, with aduise
of my Lord Regēt, and thrée estates, &
whole body of this present Parliamēt,
hath found, declared, & concluded, & by
this present Act findeth, declareth, and
concludeth, that the cause & occasion of
the conuētions, & messages of the sayd
Earles, Lordes, Noble men, Barons,
& others faythfull & true subiectes, and
consequently, their takyng of armes, &
comming to the fieldes with open and
displayed baners, & the cause & occasiō
of the taking of the sayd Quéenes person,
vpon the sayd xv. day of Iune last
bypast, & holdyng, & deteinyng of the
same within the houses & Fortalice of

Lochleum, continually, sence presently,
& in all tyme cōmyng, & generally
all other things inuēted, spoken, written,
or done by them, or any of them
to that effect, sence the x. day of Febr.
last bypast, vpon the which day, ye late
Henry Kyng, then the sayd Quéenes
lawfull husbād, & our soueraigne Lord
the Kynges dearest father, was treasonablie,
shamefully, & horriblie murthered,
vnto the day & date of this present
Act, & in all tymes to come, touchyng
the sayd Quéene, and deteinyng of her
person: That the cause & all things dependyng
thereon, or that any wayes
may perteine therto, ye intermissiō, or
disponyng vpō her propertie, casualities,
or whatsoeuer thyng perteyning,
or that any wayes might perteyne to
her, was in the sayd Quéenes own default,
in so far as by diuers her priuie
letters written wholly with her
own hād, and sent by her to Iames
somtyme Earle of Bothwell, chief
executor of the sayd horrible murther,
aswell before the committing
therof, as therafter, and by her vngodly,
& dishonorable procedyng
to a pretēded mariage with him, sodainly,
                  
                  & vnprouisedly therafter, it
is most certain, yt she was priuie, airt,
& part, of the actual deuise, & dede
of the foresaid murther, of the king
her lawfull husbād, & father to our
soueraigne Lord, cōmitted by the
said Iames, somtime Earle of Bothwell,
his complices, and partakers.
And therfore iustly deserueth what soeuer
hath ben done to her in any time
bygone, or that shalbe vsed towardes
her, for the sayd cause in time cōming,
which shalbe vsed by aduise of the Nobilitie,
in respect, that our sayd Soueraigne
Lordes mother, with the sayd
Iames, sometime Earle of Bothwell,
yeid about by indirect and coloured
meanes, to colour, and hold backe the
knowlege of the truth of the committers
of the sayd crime. Yet all men in
their hartes were fully perswaded, of
the authors & deuisers of that mischieuous,
and vnworthie fact, awaityng
while God should moue the hartes of
some to enter in the quarell, for reuengyng
of the same. And in the meane
time, a great part of the Nobilitie, vpō
iust feare to be hādled, & demeaned in
semblable maner, as ye Kyng had ben

of before: perceiuyng also ye Quéene so
thrall, & so blindly affectionate to
the priuate appetite of that tyrāne,
& that both he, & she had cōspired
together such horrible crueltie, being
therwt all garnished with a cōpanie
of vngodly, & vitious persōs, ready
to accomplish all their vnlawful commaundementes,
of whō he had a sufficiēt
nōber, continually a waytyng vpō
him, for the same effect, all noble & vertuous
men abhorryng their tyrannie,
& companie, but chiefly suspecting, that
they, who had so treasonablie put
downe, & distroyed the Father, should
make the innocent Prince, his onely
sonne, & the principall, & almost onely
comfort, sent by God to this afflicted
natiō, to tast of the same cup (as the
many inuēted purposes to passe where
he was, & also where the noble men
were in) by their open confession gaue
sufficiēt warnyng & declaratiō, where
through the sayd Earles, Lordes, Barons,
& others faythful, & true subiectes
taking armes, or other wayes whatsoeuer
ioynyng, and assisting in the sayd
action, & in ye sayd conuētions, displaying
baners, & commyng to the fieldes,

takyng & reteinyng of ye Quéenes person,
aswell in tymes bypast, as hereafter,
& all others that haue therafter, or
shall in any time cōming adioyne to
them, and all things done by them or
any of them, touching that cause, and
all other things depending thereon, or
that any wayes may appertaine therto,
the intromission, or disponing vpō
her propertie, or casualties, or whatsoeuer
other thinges perteining, or any
wayes might apperteine to her, was
in default of her selfe, and the sayde
Iames sometime Earle of Bothwell,
& by the horrible and cruel murther
of our sayd soueraigne Lordes late
dearest Father, conspired, deuised,
committed, counseled, and coloured
by them, & not cōdignely punisht
according to the Lawes. &c.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               This Act with the rest is thus subscribed in
the Scottish booke. Extractū de libro actorū
Parlamenti per me lacobum Makgill de
Rankelour nether Clericum rotulorum
Registri ac consilij S. D. N. Regis sub meis
signo & subscriptione manualibus. Iacobus
Mak gill. And is imprinted at Edinburgh
by Robert Lekpreuik Printer to the kings
maiestie the vi. day of Aprill, in the yeare
of God. 1568.
            
            
         
      
   