
      
         
            
            
            THE SYCKE Mans Salue.
            VVherin the faithfull christians may learne both how to be haue them selues paciently and thankefully, in the tyme of sickenes, and also vertuously to dispose their temporall goodes, and finally to prepare them selues gladly and godly to die: Made and newly recognised by Maister Tho. Becon. 1561.
            
               Math. 11.
               ¶Come vnto me all ye that are sicke and diseased, and I will comfort you.
            
            CVM PRIVILEGIO per Septennium.
         
         
            
            
               
                  THOMAS BECONVS SACROSĀCTAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSOR.
               
            
            Ora expressa vides, viuos imitantia vultus.
            Quod potuit calamo pictor & arte vides.
            mentis quā nullus potuit tibi reddere pictor.
            Effigiem scriptis, praebuit ipse suis.
         
         
            
            ¶The Names of all suche bookes, as Thomas Becon, hath hetherto made and set forth.
            
               i.
               The Newes out of Heauen.
               ii.
               The Christmas Bancket.
               iii.
               The Potation for Lent.
               iiii.
               The Pathway vnto Prayer.
               v.
               The Cathechisme.
               vi.
               The Nosegaye.
               vii.
               The Pollecie of Warre.
               viii.
               The Boke of Matrimonie.
               ix.
               Dauids Harpe.
               x.
               The New years gift.
               xi.
               The Inuectiue against swering
               xii.
               The Gouernaunce of Uertue.
               xiii.
               The Dialogue of Christes birth
               xiiii.
               The Inuectiue against whordō
               
               xv.
               The Solace of the Soule.
               xvi.
               The Iewell of Ioye.
               xvii.
               The Castell of Comfort.
               xviii.
               The Fortresse of the faithfull.
               xix.
               The Flower of godly prayers.
               xx
               The Principles of christen religion
               xxi.
               The True vse of fasting
               xxii.
               The Pomaunder of prayer.
               xxiii.
               The Christen knight.
               xxiiii.
               The Sickmans Salue.
               xxv.
               The Reliques of Rome.
            
         
         
            
            ¶TO THE RIGHT worshipful Maister Basil Felding Esquier, Thomas Becon wysheth the fauour of God, continual health and prosperous felicitie.
            
               CHrist our Lorde and Sauiour, cōsidering what and how great carnall securitie and fleshly quietnes reigneth in mortall men of all ages,Colos. iii. yea, and that in them, that professe godlynesse, that is to saye: Christians, whiche by their professiō ar dead vnto the world, and haue their lyfe hydden with Christ in God, in somuche that they being occupied about worldlye and transitory thinges, which sone perish and come to naught, do vtterly neglecte the thinges that appertaine vnto the saluation of their soules: in many places of his holy Gospell admonisheth vs to watche and to make prouision for our latter ende, least we be found vnready whā we shall be called out of the worlde. In the Gospell of blessed Mathewe he hath these

words:Math. xxiiii▪
                watch, for you know not what hour the Lord will come. Of this be ye sure, that if the good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come he would surely watche, and not suffer his house to be broken vp. Therfore be ye also ready. For in suche houre as ye thinke not, wil the sonne of man come. In S. Markes Gospell also he sayth. Watch, for ye know not whē the maister of the house wil come,Mark. xiii at euen or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing or in the dauning, least if he come sodenly, he finde you sleping. And that I say vnto you, I say vnto all. Watch▪ Yea take hede, watche and pray, for ye know not when the time is. Again in the Reuelation of blessed Iohn he sayth. Behold I come as a thiefe.Apoca. xvi. Blessed is he that watcheth and kepeth his garmentes, that he walke not naked, and men see his fylthines.Apoca. xxii. Item, Behold I come shortly, and my rewarde is with me, to geue euery man according as his dedes shall be.i. Thes. v▪
                The holy Apostle S. Paule lykewyse exhorteth vs, that we sleepe not as other doo, but that we watche & be sober, nether that we fall into fleshly

quietnes, promysing our selues long lyfe, healthe and reste in this worlde, least soden destruction fall vpon vs.
            For the day of the Lorde (sayth he) shall come euen as the thief in the night. Certes our mortall estate declareth euidētly, that we be so bound vnto death, that we are not certen of our lyfe not one houre. Out of hand may death oppres vs, for any certentie that we haue of the contrary. What thing is your lyfe, sayth S. Iames?Iacob. iiii. It is a vapour that appeareth for lyttle tyme, and then vanisheth away.Iob. ix. My dayes, saith Iob, are more swift then a runner, yea they are passed awaye as the shyppes that bee good vnder sayle, and as the Egle that flyeth vnto the pray. Agayne he saith: Man that is borne of woman, hath but short tyme to lyue, and is ful of mysery. He commeth vp and is cut downe lyke a floure.Iob. xiiii. He flyeth as it were a shadow and neuer continueth in one state. The Prophet also sayth:Esay. xl. All fleshe is grasse, and all the glory thereof is as the floure of the field. The grasse is withered, the flower falleth away: Euen so is the people as grasse, when the breathe of the

Lord bloweth vpon them. Thus sewe the misery, vanitie and shortnes of our mortall life painted out before our eies and that these thynges are true, dayly experience proueth. Notwithstandinge such is our blindnes, fondnes and madnes that we vtterly forget the vncertentie of this our wretched and short lyfe and promyse our selues the florishyng yeares of Nestor,Gene. v. or the long lyfe of Methuselah. We may right well be lykened to that vngodly richman, of whom we rede in the Gospel of Luke,Luke. xii▪
                whiche made prouision for a great nomber of yeares, promising him selfe long to liue vpon the face of the earth, & forgetting him selfe to be mortall and bound vnto death. But when he thought least of death and was moste busily occupied in getting and gatheringe together the goodes of ye world, God sayd vnto him: thou foole, this night wil they fetch away thy soul again frō thee. Then whose shal those thinges be, which thou hast prouided?Psal. xxxix. The Psalmograph saythe: He heapeth tresure vpon treasure, and yet knoweth he not for whome he gathereth it. After this sort do we behaue

our selues at this day. We moyle and turmoyll our selues in studiyng & deuising how we may come by the giftes of glassy fortune. We refuse no paynes, no laboures to become ritche and welthy in worldly goodes. Yea so blynded are our heartes, that the nerer we approche vnto the end of our life, ye more studious, carefull & diligent are we to get the substaunce of this worlde. We remember not this saying of the holy Apostle.i. Tim. vi. Godlines is great rytches, if a man bee content with that he hath. For we brought nothing into ye world neither may we cary any thinge out. But when we haue fode and raiment,Psal. xxxix. let vs therwith be content. The holy scripturs calleth vs straungers and Pilgrims in this worlde,i. Pet. ii. & declareth that we haue here no continuyng city,Heb. xiii. but we seke one to come. Notwithstanding as though ther were none other life after this, or els as though we should for euer here remaine and neuer departe, we trauaile about ye getting of worldly substaunce.Iere. viii. Al, as the Prophet saith, euen from the lowest vnto the hiest set their myndes on filthy lucre.Esay. lvi. They are

shameles dogges, that bee neuer satisfied. Hereto agreeth the saying of the Apostle,Philip. ii. all seke their owne auauntage and not that, whiche shuld set forth the glory of Iesus Christ. And as in couetousnes, so lykewyse in all other abhominable sinnes do we moste wickedlye walke. And all thinges come to passe, because we remember not the shortnesse of this lyfe and forget our latter end. This considered the wiseman right well, when he saith: Whatsoeuer thou takest in hand, remember thy end, and thou shalt neuer do amisse,Eccle. vii. Deut. xxxi
                     •
                  
                Moses also saith, O that men would ones be wyse and vnderstande, and make prouision for their latter end. There is not a strō
               ger bit to brydle our carnall affectes, nor a better scholemaister to keepe vs in an order then the remembraunce of our latter end, then to remember that we shall not alway here remaine, yt we ar but straungers and pylgrims in this world, that we shall leaue behynde vs, whatsoeuer worldly substaūce we haue here, ether painfully gotten or carefully kept, that we shal die the death, that we shal appeare before the iudgement seat

of Christ and receaue accordinge to the workes whiche we haue doone in this lyfe, either euerlasting glory or perpetuall payne. But these thinges seeke we not to remember, but rather to forget, and therfore fall we into all kynde of vngodlynes and dissolution of lyfe. And when the tyme cōmeth, that God visiteth vs with sickenes or otherwyse plageth vs for our euill behauour, then doo we not prepare our selues vnto the crosse, as we ought submitting our selues to the good pleasure of God, and beyng contented paciently and thanckfully to receaue what so euer is layde vpon vs at the appoyntment of God, but we rather murmur and grudge against God, and with vnwillyng hartes suffer that louing visitation of God, almoste wishinge that there were no God to plage and punishe vs, but that we myght here liue continually and go forth to sinne frely & without punishement. And when death approcheth, & no remedy can be found against ye violence therof, then doo the vngodly & wicked liuers beholding the miserable face of their conscience, which presenteth vnto

them nothing but sin, ye wrath of God hel fyre, & euerlasting damnation, begin to despaire & strayght yeld them selues to the pleasure of Sathan to bee for euer and euer tormēted in that lake that burneth with fire & brimston,Apoca. xxi. thē selues their soules and consciences consenting and assentinge thereunto. For what other end can be loked for of a wicked & vngodly lyfe? Is it to be thought, that he whiche thorow sinne hath serued the deuill all the tyme of his lyfe, can at his latter end loke for the enheritaunce of euerlasting glory, wherewith God rewardeth thē ye painfully labour to serue him in holynes and righteousnes al the dayes of their lyfe?i. Cor. ix. S. Paul saith. So run, that ye may obtayn, that is to say, so trayne your lyfe in all Godlynes and vertue to the vttermost of your power whyle ye lyue in this worlde, yt after ye haue finished your course here, ye may enioy ye glorious reward of eternal life. A corruptible crowne is not obtained without great pains taking, & shall we loke for an euerlasting crown by leding an vngodly and wanton lyfe?ii. Tim. ii. No man is crowned, sayth the apostle, except he

fighteth lawfully. In this world therfore, wherein our life is nothing but a knighthod or warfar,Iob. vii. must we lawfully, valeantly & mightely fight & striue against our ennemies ye deuill, the world & the flesh, and by feruent and diligent prayer vnto God so triumphe ouer thē thorow the help of our graund captain Christ, yt we may haue a glorious spoill of our ennemies, & garnishe our selues with al kind of victorious & roial robes I meane, all good workes & godly vertues. Wher such a life is led, there must a good end be, and euerlasting life may with a fre conscience and assured hope be loked for. And to bring this to passe. Who laboureth not to the vttermoste of his power, namely if he be of God, & loketh for a better and more blessed lyfe after this? How we shuld fight against our aduersaries and leade a good life in this world I haue declared aboundantly heretofore in many of my bokes. In this treatise, whiche I haue nowe in hand, entitled (The Sickemans Salue) my mynd is to shew vnto the faithfull christians, how they ought to make prouision for their latter end, that they may

depart in the faythe of Christ, and be of the nūber of those of whome it is written. Blessed are the dead, whiche die in the Lord.Apoca. xiiii. Psal. cxvi Again. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his sainctes. For what shuld it profit a man to wyn all the worlde,Mat. xvi. if at the last he loseth his soule? Therefore in this my worke I haue declared first of all,The contentes of this boke. how the faithfull christians ought to behaue them selues paciently and thankefully in the tyme of syckenesse.
            Secondly, howe they should vertuously dispose their temporall goodes.
            Thirdly, after what manner they ought to prepare them selues gladly & Godly to die.
            Finally I haue enterlased many cō
               fortable exhortations vnto the sycke, and diuers godly & necessary prayers, some to be sayd of them that are sicke, & some of other for suche as are diseased.
            This treatise, after that I had finished it, calling to remembraunce howe greatly I am bound to your right worshipfull Maistership, considering also your most harty zeale and feruent affection toward the true and Christen religion

(all superstition and papistry layd asyde) I thought it my bounden dutie to sende vnto you as a testimonie of my good wyll and thankefull hart toward you, moste entirely desiryng you to accept and take in good part this my lyttle gift, although much more base then it may seme in any part worthy to recompence the least poynt of your vnfayned frendship dyuers wayes heretofore declared vnto me.
            God preserue your right worshypfull Maistershyp, with the moste vertuous Gentlewoman your wyfe, and all your godly chyldren in continuall health and prosperous felicitie. Amen.
         
         
            
            A PLENTIFVL table conteyning all the principal matters of this worke for the spedier finding of the same.
            
               
                  A
                  ADā cause why we all perished.
                  300
                  Amos ye Prophet killed.
                  317
                  Admonishions, profiteth.
                  226
                  Against the fear of death remedies
                  313
                  Against the stinges of death.
                  316
               
            
            
               
                  B
                  Bankettinge, chyldren ought to beware.
                  212
                  Baptisme.
                  418
                  Belefe, what it is.
                  444
                  Belefe in hart.
                  418
                  Body committed vnto the earth.
                  136
                  Bodies shal rise immortall.
                  137
                  Bodies of the faithfull, ought not to be vylye handled.
                  173
                  Brasen Serpent.
                  76
                  Burialles.
                  173
               
            
            
               
                  C
                  Call continually on the Lorde.
                  45
                  Cayin repented, but lacked faith.
                  378
                  Chaunge lead for syl. uer.
                  323
                  Cherefull geuer.
                  40
                  Children fearing God. he will not leaue them comfortles.
                  270
                  Children ought to beware of il cōpany.
                  208
                  Childrē must beware of swearing.
                  209
                  Children must loue and help their mothers
                  211
                  Christ author of our saluation.
                  154
                  Christ prayed for an habitation for vs.
                  159
                  Christ our phisitiō.
                  385
                  Christ hath reconciled vs.
                  391
                  Christ a sauiour for al ages.
                  394
                  Christ saueth vs frely.
                  406
                  To Christ al thinges 
                        •
                     e subiect.
                  234
                  Christes woundes
                  
                  
                     Christes wordes healeth our woundes.
                  414
                  Christes alter was the crosse.
                  422
                  Christ ouercame Sathā for vs.
                  337
                  Christ the head corner stone.
                  353
                  Christe fulfilled the lawe for vs.
                  367
                  Christ put away ye cause of hatred.
                  369
                  Christ hath put out the handwriting.
                  idem
                  Christ hath payde oure debt.
                  570
                  Christe the Lorde of all faithfull.
                  232
                  Christ the anointed.
                  233
                  Christ our Lord.
                  234
                  Christes humanite.
                  236
                  Christ a sacrifice for sinnes.
                  242
                  Christes death hath conquered Sathan.
                  249
                  Christes going down to hell.
                  idem
                  Christes resurrectiō.
                  250
                  Christes assention.
                  251
                  Christ a sufficient mediatour.
                  253
                  Christ the mighty Samson.
                  254
                  Christ geueth giftes vnto men.
                  256
                  Christ ascended to prepare a place for vs.
                  257
                  Christe taken vp in a cloude.
                  258
                  Christ comming to iudgement.
                  259
                  Christ wrought all thinges in his humanitie for vs.
                  260
                  Christes bloud washeth cleane our sinnes.
                  88
                  Christ the true Samaritaine.
                  103
                  Christ a louing Phisition.
                  105
                  Christ submitted his will.
                  121
                  Christ forgeueth both the faulte and payne.
                  284
                  Christes churche lynked together.
                  269
                  Christ gaue him selfe for his churche.
                  282
                  Christ disciple, who?
                  23
                  Christiā, why he feareth not death.
                  287
                  Christiās ought to helpe scholers.
                  144
                  Churche or Congregation.
                  268
                  Communion
                  172
                  
                     Complaint of the wycked.
                  58
                  Comfort to them that calleth vpon God.
                  29
                  Crosse of tribulatiō.
                  17
                  Conscience quiet, how?
                  101
                  Comfortable calling of synners.
                  388
                  Conscience at rest.
                  128
                  Confession of synnes vnto God.
                  375
                  Correctiō in this world
                  54
               
            
            
               
                  D
                  Daniel preserued by prryer.
                  111
                  Dauid reioysed not in him selfe.
                  50
                  Dauid mourned and fasted for his sonne.
                  162
                  Death, gate to euerlasting lyfe.
                  304
                  Death a chaungyng to a better lyfe.
                  308
                  Death a passage.
                  158
                  Death of the righteous.
                  67
                  Debters forgeuen.
                  143
                  Debtes.
                  12.14
                  Departed ar not lost.
                  157
                  Desire of prayer.
                  426
                  Doctrine of Papistes after this lyfe.
                  194
                  Doubting faith obteyneth no promise.
                  439
                  Dutie of good seruaūts
                  225
               
            
            
               
                  E
                  Eldest sonne.
                  138.139
                  Esay sawne in sonder.
                  327
                  Ezechias 
                        ••
                     ued .xv. yere more.
                  110
                  Exhortation to the sick
                  46.449
                  Executours charge
                  169
                  Examples of olde wemen,
                  219
               
            
            
               
                  F
                  Fallen on slepe,
                  157
                  Fatherles childrē what they ought to do,
                  215 216, 207
                  Faith,
                  416, 334
                  Faith and prayer, sure armours,
                  344
                  Faith in the sure promyses of God,
                  377
                  Faith maketh vs the sonnes of God,
                  380
                  Faith the rote of all vertues,
                  idem.
                  Fayth rycher then all treasures,
                  380
                  Faith yt is vnshakē
                  
                  443
                  
                     Faithfull shal haue possession in the kingdome▪
                  
                  179.
                  Faithfull rewarded and vnfaithfull.
                  180.
                  Faithful belefe neuer dieth.
                  89.
                  Flesh lusteth againste the spirite.
                  15.
                  Fyry Serpent.
                  335.
               
            
            
               
                  G
                  God loueth where he chastiseth.
                  14.
                  God woundeth and maketh whole.
                  21.
                  God maketh a way out in temptacion.
                  21.27
                  God a louing father.
                  27
                  God helpeth in al nedes
                  82.30.
                  God trieth his, how.
                  30
                  God wrought wonderfully for Ioseph.
                  31.
                  God gaue quietnes vnto Dauid after his stormes.
                  32.
                  God restoreth vs after his tempta
                        •
                     ion.
                  33.
                  God neuer forsaketh his.
                  38.
                  God present to our sicknes.
                  46
                  God suffereth the wyc. ked to florish.
                  58.
                  God not present, where the crosse is absent.
                  61
                  God taketh not his mercy from his.
                  70
                  God, whē he repenteth?
                  71
                  God poureth out his blessing, when we sease to synne.
                  72
                  God turneth his wrath
                  76
                  God why he punisheth.
                  74
                  God hath no pleasure in the death of a syn.
                  94
                  God commaundeth to call to him in our trouble.
                  108
                  God hath respect to the poore.
                  109
                  God heareth harty prayers.
                  idem.
                  God suffereth vs not to be tempted aboue oure strength.
                  idem.
                  God present in trouble.
                  11
                        •
                     .
                  God neuer forsaketh thē that trust in him.
                  114
                  Goodes of the syck how to be disposed before death.
                  123.133
                  
                     God tēdreth our soules health,
                  117
                  god forgeueth frely,
                  126
                  G
                        •
                     d heareth the prayer of the humble.
                  129
                  Go
                        •
                      a father, a husband vnto the faithful wydowe,
                  202.138
                  God forgeueth both the faut and paine,
                  176
                  God the father,
                  227
                  God doeth what his plesure is,
                  228
                  God maker of heauen & earth.
                  idem,
                  God the sonne,
                  231
                  God the holy ghost,
                  261
                  God the holy ghost quicneth al thinges,
                  idem
                  God the holy ghost maketh vs newe vessels
                  idem,
                  God the holy ghost, tea
                     
                        •
                     heth all ye faithful.
                  261
                  God the father, God the sonne, God the Holye Ghost.
                  263
                  Gods wrath terrible to conscience.
                  330
                  Gods worde driueth away Sathan.
                  342
                  Gods word heleth.
                  344
                  God casteth downe and setteth vp,
                  351
                  God bringeth oute of trouble.
                  358
                  God apointeth no tyme of helpe.
                  393
                  God a father of mercies
                  401
                  God delighteth in compassion,
                  285
                  Gold and Siluer.
                  323
               
            
            
               
                  H
                  Harte stony,
                  375
                  Harte circumcised,
                  95
                  Harken vnto God,
                  409
                  Hearīg gods word.
                  423
                  Heathen haue no hope,
                  161
                  Heathē wyshed eternal ioye.
                  idem.
                  Holy men tempted,
                  95.
                  Houshold of God.
                  97
               
            
            
               
                  I
                  Iames slayne with the sworde,
                  idem
                  Iohn baptist beheaded,
                  318
                  Iob a faithfull souldiour,
                  37
                  Iob in him selfe same but synne.
                  52
                  Ieremy stoned▪
                  
                  317
                  Ioy commeth after heauynes,
                  
                     73, 28
                  Ioye when our brethrē departe in the faithe▪
                  
                  152, 161, 154
                  Ioies vnspekeable,
                  200
                  Ioie in heauen when a synner repenteth,
                  104
                  Iudas repented but had no faith,
                  378
                  Iewes murmuring.
                  75
                  Iewes repented,
                  idem
                  Iewes beleue the immortalitie of, &c.
                  307
               
            
            
               
                  K
                  Kingdome of God mete for who?
                  24
                  Knowing one an other after this lyfe.
                  326
               
            
            
               
                  L
                  Labour and not loitour
                  396
                  Labour to winne Crist
                  411
                  Lawe maketh no man perfect.
                  126
                  law an heuy burthē,
                  363
                  Lazarus gods frēd,
                  20
                  Lordes comminge vnknowen▪
                  
                  4
                  Lyfe frayle and transytory,
                  2
                  Lyfe vncertayne,
                  3
                  Liue wel & die wel.
                  42
                  Lyfe ended our Ioy begynne.
                  196
                  Ly
                        •
                     e foloweth death,
                  7
               
            
            
               
                  M
                  Man hath but a shorte tyme,
                  1
                  Man hartye, howe?
                  5
                  Man blest whome God punisheth,
                  21
                  Man not pure in the sight of God.
                  48
                  Man an whole lompe of synne,
                  49
                  Manasses an Idolater
                  77
                  Manrsses bounde with chaynes,
                  79
                  Manasses repēteth,
                  80
                  Manasses prayer,
                  25
                  Manasses his sinnes in numerable,
                  399
                  Martirs by diuers waies put to death.
                  319
                  Maria magdalene a greuous synner.
                  387
                  Mariage forbidē ought not to be,
                  203
                  Maidens that be goely, ought to be preferred before ryches.
                  2
                        •
                     3
                  Maids ought to bewar
                        •
                      of naughty packs,
                  217
                  Mens willes ought to

geue place,
                  118
                  Men kdowen by theyr workes,
                  190
                  men ar tried faithful,
                  26
                  Mercye vnto the poore deliuereth from synne,
                  213
                  Ministers.
                  150
                  Monthmyndes,
                  178
                  mothers ought to bring vp theyr children in ye feare of God.
                  205
                  mothers a care for their chyldren.
                  139
                  Mourning gowns.
                  151
               
            
            
               N
               
                  The Name of Iesus, howe all knees bowe therto.
                  1
                        •
                     1
               
            
            
               O
               
                  One oblation of Christe hath made vs pericte.
                  177
               
            
            
               P
               
                  Papistes, ennemies to ye crosse of Christ.
                  176
                  Papistes alledge scriptures.
                  429
                  Papistes a kingdome of lyes.
                  430
                  Papistes woulde haue vs doubte in our saluation.
                  34
                  Papysticall scholinge.
                  440
                  Peter repented and beleued.
                  378
                  Predestination▪
                  
                  415
                  People holpē here.
                  148
                  People desyrous to haue knowledge.
                  149
                  Plages ceaseth.
                  81
                  Pleasure not the waye to heauen.
                  23
                  Pleasures of the wycked.
                  57
                  Praiers ought to be made fo, whome?
                  149
                  Praier for the syck.
                  116 131.150.295.341.451
                  Prayer theffect
                  138
                  Promyses of God comforteth.
                  354
                  Psalmes of thancks for them taat be departed.
                  162
                  Publican humbled him selfe.
                  387
                  Punished in this world why?
                  55
                  Purgatory rakers
                  146
               
            
            
               R
               
                  Remedies agaynste thuught taking.
                  320 224
                  Against desperatiō.
                  229
                  
                     Against temptations of Sathan.
                  331
                  Agaynst the lawes curse.
                  361
                  Agaynst synne.
                  372
                  Agaynst want of merites▪
                  
                  403
                  Repētaunce,
                  415.374.
                  It obteineth mercy
                  399
                  It commeth by preaching.
                  150
                  Reward of synne.
                  57
                  Resurrection of the body.
                  287.257
                  Riche gloton.
                  19
                  Riotous sonne repenteth.
                  91
               
            
            
               S
               
                  Satan tempted diuers and many wayes.
                  360
                  Satan moste busiest at our laste ende.
                  332
                  Sathan ouercome by prayer,
                  339
                  Schollerslare to be holpen.
                  143
                  Scriptures calleth vs to repentaunce,
                  190
                  Seace frō labours.
                  152
                  Seke the Lorde whyle he may be found.
                  185
                  Seruaunts ought not to be forgotten that serue well.
                  221
                  Seruauntes,
                  141
                  Sermons to be preached.
                  148
                  Sickmans wyll,
                  135
                  Sicke man taketh his leue,
                  292
                  Sycke ought to geue thancks to God
                  43
                  Scripture sheweth vs the great mercies of God,
                  84
                  Sycke in sinne what to do?
                  105
                  Sicke visited, a godlye deed,
                  8
                  Sycke what to be learned.
                  9
                  Sycke comforted, how
                  idem,
                  Sycke sone disquieted.
                  294
                  Syck exhorted willingly to dye.
                  198
                  Sickmans exhortation vnto his wyfe,
                  200
                  Sickmans, exhortation to his children,
                  206
                  Syckmans exhortation to his sonne,
                  210
                  Syckmās exhortatiō to his daughters.
                  217
                  Sickmans exhortation

to his seruaunts.
                  220
                  Syckmans fayth,
                  227
                  Si
                        •
                     nnes a messenger of death,
                  131
                  Sicknes irksome to mā
                  
                  10
                  Sycknes taketh away ioye.
                  13
                  Sycknes, no token of Gods anger,
                  20
                  Synnes forgeuen.
                  283
                  Synnes forgeuen for Christes sake,
                  286
                  Syngyng,
                  171
                  Slepe not in death,
                  345
                  Soule yelded into the handes of God
                  136
                  Steuē stoned to death.
                  138
               
            
            
               T
               
                  Thersians mourn whē theyr childrē are borne
                  165
                  The thefe found mercy
                  100
                  They that cry in trouble are holpen.
                  113
                  Things happen for the best, to the pacient,
                  36
                  Toby euer feared God.
                  39
                  Toby full of good workes.
                  idem,
                  Toby an example to vs
                  40
                  Toby content to suffer the plague.
                  41
                  Trouble bryngeth vnderstandidg,
                  72
                  Tromperies for to fede theyr bellyes,
                  178
                  Trust in Christes promyses and thou shalt not dye,
                  147
                  Trust of the life to come
                  168
                  The tree as it falleth fo it lyeth,
                  191
               
            
            
               W
               
                  Water of lyfe,
                  481
                  Wemen wept for christ
                  169
                  Wyfe of the sycke.
                  137
                  A wyfe discrete is the gyft of God.
                  214
                  Wycked lyfe to the riotous sonne,
                  91
                  Wycked sonne repēteth
                  idem,
                  Wicked sonne cōfesseth his faultes,
                  92
                  Wicked sonne furgeuen
                  93
                  Wicked people receyue payne
                  290
                  wicked a terrible end
                  56
                  
                     Wicked seruauntes rewarded, how?
                  186
                  Wydowes howe they ought to mary,
                  204
                  Wounded man spoyled.
                  101
                  Worldly frendship slippery,
                  325
                  Worldlinges lyue all in pleasure,
                  18.24
                  Worldly ioye,
                  25
                  Workers in the vyneyarde,
                  359
                  Worke whyle it is day,
                  186.187
               
            
            
               Y
               
                  Riotous myndes,
                  175
                  Youth ought to beware of whordome,
                  213
                  Youth muste take hede how they mary.
                  idem,
                  Yong wemen ought to be obedient to theyr husbandes,
                  218
                  Yong wemē shold bring vp theyr chyldren in norture,
                  idem
                  Yong women ought to be no gudders▪
                  
                  291
                  Yong women comly apareled.
                  idem.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶THE SICK MANS SALVE.
            
               Philemō. Eusebius. Theophilus. Christopher. & Epaphroditus the sick man, talke together.
            
               Philemon.
               
                  OH, ful truli is it said of the holy man Iob, that noble myrroure of perfecte pacience: Man that is borne of a woman,
                     Iob. 14. hathe but a short tyme to liue, and yet in the time that he liueth, he is replenished with many miseries. He cometh vp, and withereth awaye agayne lyke a floure: He flieth as it were a shadow, and neuer continueth in one state▪ It is not yet two daies since I sawe my neighbour Epaphroditus, as me thoughte, well and 
                     •
                  usty, yea and in perfecte healthe, and beholde he sent vnto me euen

now his seruant Onesimus, that I should come vnto him, with all expedition all other businesses set a part, If I euer entend to se him a liue? oh good god, what a world is this? Ah moste louing Christe, what a sodeine chaunge is this? Oure life is not withoute a cause compared of the holy Apostle. S. Iames to a vapoure,Iames. iiii. whiche appereth for a little time, and then vanisheth away. Who wyl trust a life so fraile, so transitory, so bond vnto mortalitie? Who can iustlye perswade him selfe to liue manye yeres in this worlde, seing that in it so sodenly helthe is turned into sicknes, valeaunce into imbecillitie, strēgth into weakenes, ioy into sadnes, comforte into desperation, lyfe into deathe? The ryche man perswaded him selfe that he should liue long in this world,Luke. xii. as blessed Luke declareth in his holy

Gospell, when he said, considering the greate aboundaunce of his reuenewes that came yerely in: what shall I doo? because I haue no rome wher to bestow my frutes? This will I do: I wil destroy my barnes, and build greater, & therin will I gather all my goods, that are growen vnto me, and I wil say vnto my soule: soule thou hast much goodes laid vp in store for many yeares, take thine ease, eate drink, be mery. But god saide vnto him: thou foole, this nighte will they fetche away thy soule again from the. Thē whose shall those thinges be, which thou hast prouided? The continuance of our lyfe is not certeine so much as one houre, neither is any man 
                     •
                  able to say, I shall liue til to mo
                  
                     •
                  ow. For albeit nothinge is more 
                     •
                  erten then death: yet is nothinge 
                     •
                  ore vncertayne than the houre

of death. It shall therfore become all christen men that tender theyr owne healthe, diligently to mark and cōtinually to remember this frendly admonition and louinge watchword of our Lord and Sauioure Christ Iesu,
                     Mat. 24. watch, (saith he) for you know not what houre youre Lord will come. Of this be ye sure, that yf the good man of the house knew what houre he thief wolde come, he wolde surely watch and not suffer his house to be broken vp. Therfore be ye also ready, for in suche an houre as ye thinke not, will the sonne of man come.
                     Mark. 13. Again he saieth. Watch, for ye knowe not when the master of the house will come, whether at euen: or at midnighte, whether a
                     •
                   the cocke crowing: or in the dawning, least yf he come sodenly, h
                     •
                   finde you sleping. And that I sa
                     •
                   vnto you, I say vnto all. Watche
                     •
                  
                  
Also in an other place he saythe:
                     Apoc. 16. beholde. I come as a theif. Happy is he that watcheth, and kepeth his garments, least he walke naked and men see his filthines. Ah Lord God, not yet two daies past whole and strong, and now sycke and weake? O the vnstedfastnes of mans life. Whō wold not thys prouoke to watch and to considre his latter ende? as the godly man Moses admonisheth,
                     Dout. 32. saying: Ah wold God men wold be wise and vnderstande and make prouision for their latter ende. So shuld nether sicknes nor death be soden vnto them, so shuld all dissolucion of life be reiected, and godlines of cō
                  uersacion embraced, as the wyse man saythe: In all thy workes remember the latter ende, and thou shalt neuer sinne.
                     Eccl. 7. I desire muche to visit my neighboure Epaphroditus occording to his hartye request,

and to comfort him in these his paines, & to instruct him how he ought both paciently & thankfully beare this crosse of sicknes, which God hath laid on him, but I wishe greatly to haue the company of mine olde familiars and approued frends, Eusebius, Theophile, and Christopher. I sente my sonne Theodore and Rachell my Doughter for them, I muche maruell of their long tariaunce. But beholde where they come. Neighbors and frendes welcom,
            
            
               Euse
               We reioyce to se you in helth thanking you most hartely for the louing kindnes, which heretofore many times you haue shewed vnto vs. But wherfore I pray you haue you sent for vs.
            
            
               Phile.
               Haue ye not heard, howe our neighbour Epaphroditus is greuously vexed with sicknes?
            
            
               
                  Theophi
                        •
                     punc;
               
               Is ou
                     •
                   neighbor Epaphroditus sicke?
            
            
               
               Phi.
               He is sick, and that very sore.
            
            
               Christo▪
               
               Sory am I to heare this
            
            
               Philemon.
               We are in the Lordes hande as the claye in the potters,Iere. xviii. to doo with vs what so euer his good pleasure is. Therfore let vs not beare heueli this work of God in our neighbor, least we seme to striue against his godly will, seeing we vse dayly to pray.Math. vi. Thy wil be don in earthe as it is in heauē, hauing also an example of our sauior Christ whiche praid vnto his heauenly father on this manner. Not as I will, but as thou wilt, o father.Math. xxvi.
               
            
            
               Euse.
               How long hath oure neighboure Epaphroditus bene sick?
            
            
               Phi.
               Not yet two daies.
            
            
               The.
               I mucch maruel of this his soden sicknes.
            
            
               Philemon.
               It is no maruell at all, seing sicknes foloweth health, and deathe, life, as the shadow accompanieth the body Ye know neighbors how charitable

a deede it is to visite the sicke, and to comforte the diseased. It is one of those works, whiche being don in the faithe of Christe shall be rewarded at the last day in the face of the whole worlde with then heritance of the heauenly kingdom as ye may see in the gospel of blessed Mathew, I was sicke, and ye visited me,
                     Mat. 25. saithe oure Sauioure Christe. The wise man also saith: Let not them that wepe be withoute comforte,
                     Eccle. 7. but mourne with suche as mourne. Let it not greue thee to viset the sicke, for that shall make the to be beloued.
            
            
               Christop.
               This saying differeth not muche from the saying of S. Paule. Reioyce with them that reioyce,
                     Rom. 12 and wepe with them that wepe. Be of like affection one to another.
            
            
               Phile
               Let vs therfore go and visit our sicke neighboure Epaphroditus, and comforte him with the

heauenly consolacion of the holy scriptures, that he may beare this his sicknes bothe the more paciētly and thankfully. For to this end did I send for you, that we should go together vnto him, and to confort him.
            
            
               Theo.
               We were to much vnkinde and vnworthy the name of a Christian, yea of a man, yf we shuld disdayne to accompany you goyng aboute so godly a matter,
            
            
               Phile.
               Well,
                     Eccl. 7 then let vs go. For as the preacher saith: It is better to go into an house of mourning thē into an house of banketinge for there all menne be admonished of their latter end, and the liuing cō
                  sidereth what afterward shall becom of them, I pray the Lord our God, that we may find him at our comming, in his whole mind and perfect memory.
            
            
               Eusebi.
               I beseche the Lorde our God also, that his paines be not so outragious, that

when we come, he haue no minde to heare what shalbe saide vnto him, so shall our labour be loste.
            
            
               Christop.
               Gods will be don in all thinges.
            
            
               Phile.
               We will do oure duty, let God wurke his pleasure. Now are we at the house, I wyll be so bold neighboures as to leade you the way,
            
            
               Theoph.
               I pray you go sir, we will folow you.
            
            
               Epa.
               the sicke man.Iere. xx. Oh, cursed be the day, wherin I was borne, vnhappy be the day, wherin my mother brought me forthe. Cursed be the man that broughte my father the tydinges to make him glad, saying: Thou hast gotten a sonne. Let it happen vnto that man, as to the Cities which the Lord turned vp side downe. Let him heare crying in the morning,Gene. xix. and at none daye lamentable howling. Why sluest thou not me as soone as I came oute of my mothers wombe? O

that my mother had ben my graue her selfe, that the birth might not haue come out but remained styll in her, Wherfore came I forth out of my mothers wombe? to haue experience of laboure and sorow? Ah how sicke am I, my strengthe is gone, my sight faileth me, my tounge flottereth in my mouthe, my handes tremble and shake for paine, I can not hold vp my head for weakenes. If I attempte either to stand or to goo, my legges fall downe vnder me. No parte of my body doth her right office, my memory is paste. My sences fayle me. What so euer I tast, is vnplesant vnto me. What other thynge am I, thē a dead corps, brething? For my skin vpon me is tourned to blacke,Iob. xxx. and my bones are dried vp with heate. Yea miserably am I tormented, and altogether wery of my lyfe. What can be plesant

vnto me but present deathe? Ah wo worth the time that euer I was borne, O yt som hill might fall downe and ouerwhelme me, that I might shortly be rid out of this pain.
            
            
               Philemon.
               O Lord God good neighbores, these be wordes proceding rather from a desperat harte, then from a pacient minde. But why do I cease to go in? The father of mercies and God of all consolacion be presente with vs.
            
            
               Theo.
               Amē.
            
            
               Phile.
               Peace be vnto this house, and to so many as loue the Lord Iesus vnfainedly.
            
            
               Epa.
               O mother,
                     Iere 15. alas that euer thou did dest beare me. Alas, why died I not in the birthe? Why did I not perish, assone as I came out of my mothers wombe?
            
            
               Philem.
               Neighboure Epaphroditus,
                     Iob. 3. God geue you a pacient hart, a quyet & contented minde. According to youre request, I am com vnto you with

certaine of my neighbours, being very desirous to see you, and notwithstandinge not a little sory to beholde you in this case, not that you are visited of God with sicknes: but that you so impacientlye take thys louing visitatiō of god, whiche chaunceth vnto you, not for your hurt and destruction: but for your commodity and saluatyon.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               Welcome, welcome, neighbors all. Oh how sicke am I? Oh that the end of my life wer at hande.
                     Iob. 10. It greueth my soule to liue. All ioy is gone with me.
               This sicknes hathe vtterly marred me.
            
            
               Phi.
               Say not so neighbor Epaphroditus, yea rather think, that this youre sicknes is the louing visitacion of God and bringeth (although to the body wekenes and trouble,) yet to the soule valeaunce and consolation.
            
            
               Epa.
               Gods louing visitation?
            
            
               Philem.
               
                  Yea neighbor Gods louing visitation. For so ar we taught by the worde of God.Apoca. iii. God himself saith, as many as I loue, I rebuke and chasten. The wise man also saith. My sonne despise not the chastening of the Lorde,Pro. iii. neither fainte when thou arte rebuked of him, For whom the Lorde loueth, hym he chasteneth, and yet delyteth in him as a father in his owne sōne. What sonne is he, saith. S. Paul. whom the father chastneth not?Heb. xii. If ye be not vnder correction (wherof all are partakers) than are ye bastardes and not sonnes.
            
            
               Epa.
               Ther is no father that so hādleth his sonne, as I am handled. Oh what a chaunge is this, yea and that within two daies? For from gladnes to sadnes, from pleasure to sorow from healthe to sicknes, from quietnes to trouble, from strength to feblenes, yea in a maner

from life to death am I sodenly fallen. O miserable wretch that I am.
            
            
               Phile
               No maner chastising for the presente time semeth to be ioyous but greuous,Hebr. xii. as the Apostle sayth, neuertheles afterward it bringeth the quiet frute of rightuousnes vnto them, whiche are exercised therby. Blessed is the mā saith saincte Iames,Iam. i. that suffreth temptation, for when he is tried, he shal receyue the crowne of life, whiche the Lorde hathe promised to them that loue hym.
            
            
               Epa.
               Me thoughte I was in case good ynoughe, before I was oppressed with this sicknes. For thē I liued pleasauntlye, but now I lye here weping and mourning, and full of sorow and care.
            
            
               Phile.
               Thys is the iudgement of the flesh whiche 
                     •
                  uer lusteth against the spirit.Gala. v. Against suche careles fleshli liuers, 
                     •
                  eare what our Sauiour Christ

saith.
                     Luke. 6. Wo be vnto you that are rich, for you haue your consolacyon. Wo be vnto you that are full, for ye shal hōger. Wo be vnto you that now laugh, for ye shall wayle and wepe. Heare what he saythe on the contrary part.
                     Mat. 5. Blessed are they that mourne: for they shal receiue comfort. And also in a nother place he saithe.
                     Iohn. 16. Uerely, Uerely I say vnto you: ye shal wepe and lamēt, but contrariwise the worlde shall reioyce. Ye shall sorow: but your sorow shalbe turned to ioye. The blessed Apostle saith also.2. Titu. 2. If we be dead with Christe, we shall also liue with him. If we suffer with him, we shal also reigne with him.
            
            
               Christo.
               Brother Epaphroditus, the way to enter into glory is the Cros. For by that way did oure elder brother Chryste enter into the kingdome of his father.
                     Luke. 24. And the blessed Apostle saythe:

By many tribulacions muste we enter into the kingdome of God.Act. xiiii.
               
            
            
               Epaphro.
               What meane you by the crosse.What the Crosse is.
               
            
            
               Chri.
               Temporall affliction as penury, honger, euil report vndeserued, persecution, enprisonment, los of Goodes, sicknes, and whatsoeuer mortifieth the olde man.
            
            
               Epaphro,
               I can not easly be parswaded, that these things are sent of God to suche as he loueth: but rather to suche as he hateth.
            
            
               Christoph.
               Not so neighbor Epaphroditus. For the righteous and godly tast more of the cros in this worlde, then the wicked and vngodly. Abel, Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Dauid, Helias, Zachari, Ieremie, Miche, Iob, Toby, Ihon Baptist, Stephē, Paule, Iames Peter, with many other whiche wer the
                     •
                  chosen people and frends of God, wer not fre from the cros, in so muche that many of them

were moste cruelly put to deathe where as the wicked worldlings liued all in pleasure, and had all thinges according to their hartes lust.
            
            
               Eusebius.
               This is also proued true by the saying of oure sauiour Christ:Ihon. xvi i Ti mo iii ye shall wepe and lament, saith he, but contrariwise ye world shall reioyce. And the Apostle, saieth, all that will lyue Godly in Christe Iesu: shall suffer persecution. Hither pertaineth the saying of.i. Pete, iiii. S. Peter. The time is come that iudgement must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at vs: what shal the ende of them be, whiche beleue not the Gospell of God? And if the rightous scarsely be saued: where shall the vngodly and the sinner appere? Wherfore let them that are troubled according to the will of God, commit their soules to him with well doing, as vnto a faithfull creatour.
            
            
               
               Phi.
               This thing cā by no meanes better be perceiued,Luke. xvi then by considering the history, whiche blessed Luke telleth in his Gospell of the vnmerciful riche man and of pore Lazarus. The riche gloton was Gods enemy and an aduersary to all good mē, vnkind, churlish, and vnmerciful, and yet how plesantly, and wealthely liued he all his life time? We do not rede, that he tasted any thing at all of the cros, but that he was riche, welthy, galantly apparelled, fared daintely euery day, and liued in all kind of pleasures according to his hartes lust, and yet thende of him was euerlastyng damnation, that thys saying of our sauior Christ might be founde true.Luke. vi Wo be vnto you that are riche: for you haue youre consolation. Wo be vnto you that are ful: for ye shal hōger. Wo be vnto you that now laugh: for ye shal

waile and wepe. Contrariwise, Lazarus being Gods frende (and dearly beloued of God) was pla
                     •
                  ged with pouerty, honger, thirst, colde, nakednes, sores, sicknes, & diuers mortal diseases, which neuer departed from him so long as he liued: and notwithstandinge bothe paciently and thanckfullye did he beare this his Crosse,Eccle. xi. euen vnto the deathe, being perswaded that prosperitie & aduersitie, life, and deathe, pouerty, & wealth, are of God, and therfore immediatly after his departure oute of thys world, he was receiued into euerlasting glorye. This history brother Epaphroditus declareth euidentely, that sicknes or trouble sent of God vnto the godly, is not a token of Gods wrath and heauy displeasure, but rather a sure argumente and manifest signe of his good will, loue and fauour towarde

vs. Blessed is he, saithe the Psalmograph,Psal. xciiii. whome thou (O Lord) nourterest. Again, he saith: it is highly for my wealth,Psal. cxix. that thou (O Lord) hast corrected me, that I may learne thine ordinances. Hereto agreeth the saying of S. Paul. When we are iudged of the Lord we are chastened,i. Cor. xi. that we shuld not be damned with the worlde. In the history of Iob it is also written,Io
                        •
                     . v. blessed is the man whom God punisheth: therefore refuse not thou the chastening of the almighty. For though he maketh a woūd, he geueth a plaster, though he smite, his hand maketh hole again. God is faithfull, saith the Apostle,i. Cor. x. whiche wil not suffer you to bee tempted aboue youre strength, but shall in the mids of the temptacion make away, that 
                     •
                  e may be able to beare it.ii. Cor. i. For he 
                     •
                  s the father of mercies, and God

of all consolacion, whiche comforteth vs in all our trouble, whiche knoweth also howe to deliuer the godly out of temtation.ii. Peter. ii All these textes borowed out of the holy scriptures with many other, do euidently declare, that the crosse is laid vpon the godly at Gods appoyntment, and that not for their hurt and destruction, but for their health and saluation. For though our outward man perish:i. Cor. iiii yet thinward man is renued day by day. For our trouble,Esay. 
                        •
                     ii whiche is short & light prepareth an exceading and an eternall waight of glory vnto vs, while we loke not on ye things which are sene, but on the things whiche are not sene. For ye things whiche are seene, are temporall, but thinges whiche are not seene are eternall.
            
            
               Theo.
               Our elder br
                     ••
                  ther Christ, which neuer commi
                     •
                   sinne,i▪ Peter. ii & in whom no guile nor de
                     •
                  ceat

was found, entred not into glory but by the crosse, as thapostle saith: We se that Iesus for the suffring of his death was crowned with glory and honor.heb. ii. Therfore may not we loke to possesse the enheritance of the heauenly kingdom by liuing all in pleasure health, ioy, and worldly felicitie: but rather by suffring the crosse yt is laid vpon vs at gods appoyntment both paciently and thankefullie. For the disciple is not aboue the master,math. x nor the seruant aboue his Lord. It is inough for the disciple yt he be as his master is, and that the seruaunt be as his Lord.Lu. xiiii Whosoeuer beareth not his crosse and commeth after me (saith our sauiour Christe) he can not be my disciple,Apoca. vii
               
            
            
               Chri.
               In the reuelacion of blessed Iohn we rede that they whiche were araied with longe white garmentes and are continually

in the presence of the seat of God, and serue him day & night in his temple, came out of greate tribulation.
            
            
               Philem.
               It is truthe. For suche are moste mete for the kingdom of God, nether can the voluptuous worldlinges be partakers of the heauenly enheritāce, whiche in this worlde taste of no crosse, but liue in all pleasure after the desires of the fleshe. It is not possible that a man may liue here pleasauntly with the worlde, and afterward reigne gloriously with Christe, for the frendshippe of the world,Iacob. iiii. is enmitie with God. Whosoeuer wil be a frend of the world, is made the enemy of God. For what felowship hath righteousnes with vnrighteousnes? Or what cōpany hath light wt darcknes. Or what cōcord hath Christ with Beliall?ii. Cor. vi. Either what part hath he yt beleueth with an infidel?

worldly ioy & eternall felicity can not agre together. Therfore whosoeuer is fre frō the crosse in this world, he hath no part in the kingdom of Christ & of God. So that you neighbor Epaphroditus haue a great occasion to thancke the Lorde our God, that it hath pleased him to remēber you with this his louinge visitation, and through this sickenesse to declare his good & fatherly wyll towarde you. For by laying this crosse vpon you, he proueth you, whether you be constant in your faith and profession or not, and whether you will pacientlie and thanckefullie b
                     •
                  are this his worcking in you, whiche is vnto your euerlasting saluation or not. And after this maner doth God handle all suche as he receiueth vnto glory, as the wyseman saith:Eccle. ii. What soeuer hapneth vnto thee, receiue it, suffer in

heauiues, and be pacient in thy trouble.Eccle. iii. For like as gold & siluer are tried in the fire: euen so are acceptable men in the fornace of aduersitie. Again he saith: the ouen proueth the potters vessel,Eccle. xxvii. so doth temptation of trouble, trie righteous men. Liste wyse said Raphael the Archaungell vnto Toby:
                     
                        •
                     ob. xii. Because thou wast accepted and beloued of God, it was necessary yt temptacion shuld try thee. And as Moses saide vnto the children of Israel:
                     
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     t. xiii. the lord your God proueth you, to wete whether ye loue the Lord your God withall your hart and with al your soule. S. Peter also saith:i. Pet. i. ye are nowe for a season in heauines thorow manifold temtacions, that ye triall of your fath being muche more precious than gold that perisheth, & yet is tried by fire, might be founde vnto the prayse, glory and honoure at the

appearing of Iesus Christ.
            
            
               Epah.
               This comforteth well my weake mind to here of you out of ye word of God neighbor Philemon, that this sicknesse, which I now suffer is the louing visitation of God, and a token of Gods good wyll toward me, again, that the faithfull and frends of God are in this world subiect to the Crosse more than the vnfaithfull and enemies of God,
            
            
               Phile.
               I am hartely glad to hear you so say. And doubt you not, but that this your gentle God and louyng father, wyll turne this your sorowe vnto your great comfort.i. Cor. x. For he is a faithful God, whiche will not suffer you to bee tempted aboue your strength, but shall in the mids of the temtation make a way, that ye may be hable to beare it, as the Psalmographe sayth:Psal. xxx. His wrath endureth but the twinkling of an eie,

and in his pleasure is life. Heauines may endure for a night, but ioy commeth in the morning.
               Thou (O Lord) hast tourned my heauines in to ioy: thou hast put of my sackcloth, and girded me with gladnes. Againe he saieth: Thou O God,Psalm. lxvi. hast proued vs, thou also hast tried vs like as siluer is tried. Thou broughtest vs into the snare, and laidst trouble vpō our loynes, thou suffredst mē to ride ouer our heads. We went thorowe fire and water, and thou broughtest vs out into a welthy place,Psalm. lxxi. Item: O what great troubles & aduersities hast thou shewed me? and yet didst thou turne & refresh me, yea and broghtest me from the depe of the earth. Thou hast brought me to great honour and comforted me on euery syde. Therfore will I praise thee & thy faithfulnes O God. Also in another

place he saith: they that sowe in teares,Psal. cxxvi. shal repe in ioy. He that now goeth on his way weping & bereth foorth good sede, shal doutles come againe with ioy, & bryng his sheues with him. Thauncient father Toby in his prayer vnto God saith:Tobi. iii. after a storme, O Lord thou makest the weather faire & still: after weping and heauinesse thou geuest great ioy. Thy name O God of Israel, be praised for euer.
            
            
               Epa.
               Amen. Amen, good Lord I trust thou wilt doe so with me.
            
            
               Phile.
               Doubt ye not neighboure, but if ye call on the name of the Lord, ye shall finde great comfort. For as that princelike Prophet sayth:Psal. xxxiiii. The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth them, and deliuereth them out of al their troubles. The Lord is nie vnto thē that are of a contrite heart, and will saue suche as be of an humble spirite.

Great are the troubles of y• righteous, but the lord deliuereth thē out of al: he kepeth all their bones so that not one of them is broken.
            
            
               Euseb.
               These are cōfortable sentē
                  ces neighbor Epaphrodotus.
            
            
               Epa.
               Confortable in dede.
            
            
               Phi.
               And no les true then cōfortable, as diuers histories of the holie scriptures do euidently declare.
            
            
               Epa.
               I pray you reherse some of them for my comfort.
            
            
               Phi.
               I will do it gladly. As I may let passe the auncient Patriarkes. What a crosse laid God vpō Iosephes shoulders in Egipt? yea and that for no fault that he had committed but only to proue and try his faith, loue, obedience, pacience, thankfulnes & perseuerance. He suffred Ioseph being a godlie and chast yong man to be falsly accused of his whorish mystres,Gen. xxx.xix. and to be cruelly throwne of his master into prison, where he continued

certen yeares in captiuitie and thraldom. But behold ye mercifull dealing of God with his faithfull seruāts. Afterward, whā God by prouing him, had foūd him faithful, cōstant & pacient: he deliuered Ioseph out of prison, restored him vnto his libertie, won him into ye kings fauor, in so much yt the king toke of his ring from his hand, & put it vpō Ioseps hand, & araied him in cloth of rains, & put a golden chain about his necke, and set him vpon the best charet yt he had saue one. And they cried before him: bow the kne. And king Pharao made hym ruler ouer all the land of Egipt.
            
            
               Ep.
               O ye great mercies of God.
            
            
               Phi
               Before God quietly satled king Dauid in his kingdom (of whom he reporteth in this maner,i. Reg. xvi. Act. xiiii. I haue found Dauid ye son of Iesse a man after mine owne 
                     •
                  art, which shal fulfil al my wyll)

how hunted he him by king Saul euen as the ferret hunteth the cony? yea after the death of Saule what trouble & disquietnes had he thorow the wicked conspiracie of his children against him being so louing, gentle and naturall a father? Notwithstāding afterward God brought him vnto great honour, glory, ritches, quietnes, and al kind of wealth, wherin he cōtinued vnto his death, whiche was both glorious and full of yeares.
            
            
               Epap.
               
                  iii. Reg. ii.A blessed end.
            
            
               Phi▪
               
               To whō is the history of pacient Iob vnknowne?Iob. i.ii. His Crosse was so greuous, that I knowe not whether the like trouble hath chaunsed to any mortall man since his tyme or afore Al his substance in one moment almost was lost, all his cattel were driuē away .vii.M. shepe iii M. Camels .v.C. yoke of Oxen and v.C. she asses. All these were

taken away sodenly. His house fel downe, his childrē that wer within were slaine. Of all that euer he had, nothing remained vntouched, that might comfort him any thing at all, but only his wife, and she semeth to be left of the deuill, only to this purpose, euen to mock and scorne her husband, and to moue him to blaspheme the name of God. Whiche thing without al doubt greued the holy mās minde more, then all his calamities and wretchednesses. Furthermore his frendes whiche came out of farre countries to comfort hym, seyng his sorowe and paine to be moste 
                     •
                  ehement, being also wōderfully astonied with the horrible greatnesse of the plage, by the space of 
                     •
                  ii. daies spake not one comforta
                  
                     •
                  le worde vnto hym. For they 
                     •
                  hought (although not truly) that God had cast this most greuous

paines vpon Iob worthely, euen for his sinful life & wicked conuersation. And did they not at the last fall to mocking and taunting of that good mā, and tolde hym that those plages happened vnto hym for his sinnes, by the righteous iudgement of God? for they thought it a matter of hie iniquitie and vnworthy Gods righteousnes yt so great calamities and miseries shuld causeles chaunce vnto any holy and innocent man.Iob. ii. Moreouer after the losse of al his goodes, after the driuing away of his cattell, the casting down of his house the cruell death of his children & seruaunts (which, al the most pacient man very quietly suffered) what intollerable pains suffere
                     •
                   he on his body? Did not Satha
                     •
                   thorow Gods suffrance smite Io
                     •
                   with maruelous sore biles fro
                     •
                   the sole of his fote vnto ye crown
                     •
                  
                  
of his head, so that he sate vpon the grounde in the ashes, and scraped of the filth of his sores with a potsherd? Oh who is hable to expresse what paines he suffred? And notwithstanding being on euery side moste miserably plaged his mind continued still constant and perfect in abiding the good pleasure of the Lord his God, being thorowly perswaded that all those plagues and punishmentes were not tokens of Gods anger, but rather of his singuler good wyll and fatherlye fauoure toward hym. For as he moste paciently suffered the losse of all his goodes and the death of his children, so with lyke constancie and lusty courage, did he bear the most greuous woundes and bitter sorowes of his body, speakinge no blasphemous, impacient, or vnreuerent worde against God, in

all his trouble, but mekely, paciently, and thankefully, brast oute into these and suche like wordes: Naked came I out of my mothers wombe,Iob. i. and naked shall I tourne thither againe. The Lord gaue, & the Lord hath taken away. Euen as it hath pleased the Lorde, so is it come to passe, blessed be ye name of the Lord,Iob. ii. If we haue receiued prosperitie at the hand of the lord, why should we not abide aduersitie also?
            
            
               Epa.
               Oh God graunt me the like pacience.
            
            
               Christo.
               Doubt ye not of ye goodnes of God neighbor. Be strong and stedfast in the Lord your God, abide pacientlie his good pleasure, & he shall work al things for the best,Psal. xxxvii. as the Psalmograph saieth: O tary thou the Lordes leisure, be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart, therfore put thou thy trust in the Lorde.Esay. xxx. In silence and hope shall youre

strength be, saieth the Prophet. O how good is the lord vnto thē,Iames. iii▪
                   that put their trust in him, and to the soule that seketh after hym? The good man with stilnes and pacience tarieth for the sauinge health of the Lorde. The righteous haue cried, and the Lord hath graciously heard them, and deliuered them out of all their troubles.
            
            
               Phi.
               But nowe neighbour marke the end of the history.Psal. xxxiiii.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Saye on, in the name of God.
            
            
               Phile.
               After that God by dyuers kindes of punishmentes had thorowly tried this holy, perfect and pacient man Iob, and had found him in all pointes a constant and 
                     •
                  aleaunt souldiour, not hable to 
                     •
                  e ouercome with any kynde of 
                     •
                  lague that Sathan could lay on 
                     •
                  im, the Lorde greatly cōmended 
                     •
                  is cōstant faith and faithfull con
                  
                     •
                  ancie, and gaue vnto him twyse

twyse so muche as he had afore. For he had nowe .xiiii.M. shepe,Iob. xiii. vi.M. camels, a .M. yoke of Oxē and a .M. asses. He had .vii. sōnes also, and .iii. doughters. And after this he liued an .C. & .xl. yeres, in muche ioy and quietnes, so that he sawe his childrens children into the .iiii. generation, and died being old and of a perfect age.
            
            
               Epa.
               Oh, blessed be God. For he is euer good to his seruauntes and neuer forsaketh thē that put their trust in him.
            
            
               Euse.
               Of this holie man Iob saynt Iames also maketh mencion,Iames. v. saying: Ye haue heard of the pacience of Iob, and haue knowne what end the Lord made. For the Lorde is very pitifull and mercifull.
            
            
               Phile.
               Will it please you neighbor to hear the history of thauncient father Toby▪ whiche is also very comfortable▪
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Yea very gladly. For it doth

me much good and easeth wel my pain to hear your godly talke.
            
            
               Phi.
               This Toby was a faithfull man and euen from his very childhod feared God, and led a vertuous life. He forsoke not ye way of truth nether defiled he him selfe with any kynd of Idolatry.Tob. i. He worshipped the Lord God of Israel faithfully, offring of all his first frutes and tithes. Whatsoeuer he might get, he departed it daily with his felow prisoners & brethrē. He was ful of good works, he gaue largly vnto the pore, he fed the hōgry, he gaue drink to ye thirsty, he clothed the naked, he lodged the harborles, he visited the sick, he redemed the captiues & prisoners, he buried the dead. Ther was no work of mercy that he had left vndone. He was rich & plenteous in all good works. And whatsoeuer he did, he did it with a ioyfull & ready hart.

For God,ii. Cor. ix. saith S. Paule, loueth a cherefull geuer,
            
            
               Epa.
               A blessed man and a faithfull seruaunt of God.Tob. ii.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               And yet mark what followeth. It hapned vpon a day, yt he had buried the dead, and was weary, came home and layd hym down by the wall and slept. And whyle he was a slepe, there fell downe vpon his eies warm dong out of the swalowes nest, so that he became blind.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               A pitiful chaūce.
            
            
               Phile.
               This tentacion did God suffer to happen vnto hym, yt they whiche came after, myght haue an example of his pacience like as of holy Iob.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               But how did Toby take this tētacion?
            
            
               Phile.
               Uery Godly, quietly, paciently, and thankefully. For in so muche as he euer feared God frō his yougth vp, and kept his commaundementes, he grudged not against God, that the plague of

blindnes chaunsed vnto him, but remained stedfast in the feare of God, and thanked God al yt daies of his life.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               But what was the end of the matter? Continued he blind vnto his dying day? Did not God deale mercifully with Toby, as we heard afore of Iob?
            
            
               Phile.
               Yes verely,i. Reg. ii, Deut. xxxii. Tob. xiii. Sap. xvi. for God scourgeth and healeth. God ledeth vnto hel and bringeth out again. God killeth and maketh aliue. God after a storme maketh the weather faire & calm. God after weping & heauinesse, geueth great ioye. When God had throughlye tried Toby, and found him constant in his faith, he restored vnto him his sight againe. For the which Toby moste humbly thanked hym and said:Tob. xi. O Lord God of Israell, I geue the prayse and thanks, for thou hast chastened me, and made me whole again.
            
            
               Christo.
               O praised

be the Lord our God, which is maruelous in his Sainctes, and holy in all his workes.
            
            
               Epa.
               Liued Toby long after his sight was restored vnto him?
            
            
               Phi.
               Toby (saith the scripture) after he had gotten his sight againe, liued .xlii. yeres in great ioy and wealth, and saw his childrens children.Tob. xiiii. And when he was .C. and .ii. yeares olde he departed in peace and was honorably buried.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               A blessed end.
            
            
               Phi.
               Of a good life cometh a good end. Thus haue you heard out of the holy scriptures brother Epaphroditus, that the Crosse, that is to saye corporall affliction is not a token of Gods anger, but of his fauour, and that he layeth temporall punishement more customably vpon his frendes, than vpon his ennemies, yea and that not to destroy them, but to proue and try them, euen as the fire trieth

the gold. For as thaungel Raphaell sayd vnto Toby:Tob. xii. Because thou wast accepted and beloued of God, it was necessary, that temtacion should try thee. You haue heard also the louing kindnesse of God toward his faithfull & constant seruauntes, how after a iust triall made, he restoreth them vnto a more blessed state, than they were in a fore. Therfore take a good heart vnto you & faint not. Be strong in the Lord. Be faithful vnto the end. Be paciēt in this your sicknes. Be thākeful for this louing visitation of God. Abide the good pleasure of God. Suffer him quietly to do with you what soeuer his good wil is. If you wil thus do: dout ye not, but that god wil be merciful vnto you, & bring that thing to passe, which is most for your comfort and profit.Rom. xv. For whatsoeuer is written, is written

for our learning, that through pacience and the comfort of the scriptures we may haue hope.
            
            
               Epaph.
               The Lordes will be done in me. He knoweth what is moste mete for me a wretched synner, let him therfore worke his good pleasure in me:Rom
                        •
                     . xiiii. come lyfe, come death. For if we liue, we liue to bee at the Lordes will, and if we die, we die at the Lordes will. Whether we liue therfore or die, we are the Lordes.A praier. Only O heauenly father I beseche thee for Christes sake, to geue me a pacient and thankefull hart, that I neuer grudge against thy blessed will, but be obedient vnto it in all thinges, that whan the pains of my sicknes be most bitter: I may lift vp my hart vnto thee,Psalm. vi. cal on thy blessed name, and say: O Lorde, rebuke me not in thy indignation, nether chasten me in thy displeasure. Haue mercy

on me O Lorde, for I am weake. O lord heale me for my bones are vexed. My soule also is sore troubled: but Lord how lōg wilt thou punish me? Turne thee (O Lord) & deliuer my soule, oh saue me for thy mercies sake.Psal. lxxxv
                        •••
                     
                   O my God saue thy seruant, that putteth his trust in thee. Be mercifull vnto me (O Lord) for I wil cal daily vpō the. Comfort the soul of thy seruaunt, 
                     •
                  or vnto thee (O Lord) do I lifte 
                     •
                  p my soule. For thou Lorde art good & gracious, & of great mercy 
                     •
                  nto all them that cal vpon thee.
            
            
               Theo.
               Neighbour Epaphroditus his is vnto vs a singuler pleasur 
                     •
                  nd great comfort to hear so god
                  
                     •
                  y wordes proceade out of youre 
                     •
                  outh. Be diligent continually 
                     〈◊〉
                   call on the Lorde, and he in all our afflictions & troubles, shall 
                     〈◊〉
                   vndoubtedly your strōg tower, our mighty shield, and inuincible

fortres. He will not leaue you nor forsake you, but assist you and be present with you in your sicknesse, according to this his promesse:Psal. xci. Because he hath trusted in me, I wil deliuer him, I will defend him, because he hath known my name. He shall cal vpon me, & I will gratiously hear him, yea I am with him in trouble, I wil deliuer him and glorifie him. With long life wil I satisfie him, & shew him my saluation.
            
            
               Ep.
               I must nedes cōfesse most gētle neighbors, that I haue receiued muche consolation and great cōfort of youre company, and specially that 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue thus enarmed, yea and fortressed my brest with the cōforta
                     •
                  ble sentenses and histories of th
                     •
                   holy scriptures against the bitte
                     •
                   stormes of aduersitie, and I hart
                     •
                  ly thank you for your pains. Not
                     •
                  withstanding this must I nede
                     •
                  
                  
say vnto you, that I finde not my self in my conscience to be of suche godlines and vertue, that I dare compare my selfe with Ioseph, Dauid, Iob, and Toby, whome ye recited vnto me, but muche inferior bothe vnto them and vnto their godlines of life, so that although they being righteous of the very loue, which God bare toward them, wer assailed with aduersitie, to this ende, yt their faith and constancy might be proued & tried vnto the example of other, yet I fynd in my selfe such imperfection, yea such aboundaunce of 
                     •
                  in, that it may iustly be thought that this sicknesse, whiche is laid vpon me, commeth from suche a God, as is angry with me for my 
                     •
                  innefull life, and therefore is his heauy hand thus laide vpon me. What thinke ye good neighbors.
            
            
               Philemon.
               Brother Epaphroditus

this humbling of your self in the sight of the Lord our God, is a certain argument and sure token of your euerlasting saluatiō. For he that exalteth him self shall be made lowe,Mat. xxiii but he that humbleth hym selfe, shall be exalted. God is an enemy to ye proude,i. Pet. v. but he is a frende to the humble and lowly.Prou. xx Truth it is, that in ye sight of God no man is pure and cleare from sinne.Iaco. iii Who is hable to saie. My heart is cleane, and I am fre
                     •
                   from sinne? In many thinges we all offend.i. Iohn. i. Rom. iii If we saye, we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues and the truthe is not in vs.Luk. xvii All hau
                     •
                   sinned, and wāt the glory of God We all are vnprofitable seruaūts Euery man is a lier.Psal. cxvi Psalm. li. We were be
                     •
                  gotten in sinne, conceiued in sinn
                     •
                   and borne in sinne. Our heart 
                     〈◊〉
                   leude and vnsearchable.Ier. xvii. All our righteousnes are as cloth pollu
                     •
                  ted

with menstrue. Al haue swarued and gone out of the way,Esay. lxiii. Psal. xiiii they are altogether become vnprofitable, there is not one that doeth good, no not one. The moste perfect among vs all, may well say wt the sinnefull Publicane:Luke. xviii. O God be mercifull to me a synner.Math. vi. We may worthely pray, as our sauiour Christ taught vs, forgeue vs our trespasses as we forgeue thē that trespasse againste vs, God found no truth in his seruaunts, and in his angels ther was folly.Iob. xiii. How much more in them yt dwell in the houses of clay,Iob. xxx. and whose foundations are but dust? The stars are vncleane in the sight of God. How much more then man, that is but corruption, and the sonne of man, whiche is but a worme? And albeit Ioseph, Dauid, Iob and Toby, be set forth in 
                     •
                  he holy scriptures with greate

commendations, yet may we not thincke that they wanted theyr faultes.Iob. xxv. For no man that is borne of a woman is clene before God, although he be but one day olde. How oft doth Dauid cōfesse hym selfe a sinner? How oft doth he fle vnto God and pray for the remission of his sinnes? Howe oft doth he cast away his own righteousnes, & with strong faith, lay hand on Gods mercy? Among many other, are not these his wordes? Haue mercy on me (O God) according to thy great mercy.Psalm. ii. And according to the multitude of thy mercies, do away myne offences. Wash me thorowly from my wickednes, and cleanse me from my sin. For I knowledge my faultes and my sinne is euer before me. Against thee only haue I synned, and done euyll in thy sight. &c. Also in another place.Psalm. xxv. Oh remem
                     •
                  ber

not the sinnes and offenses of my youth, but according vnto thy mercy thincke thou vpon me (O Lord) for thy goodnesse. For thy names sake (O Lord) be merciful vnto my synne. For it is great. Loke vpon mine aduersitie, & misery, & forgeue me all my sinnes. Againe. Out of the depe haue I called vnto the Lorde,Psalm. cxxx. Lord hear my voyce. Oh let thyne eare consyder well the voyce of my complaint. If thou Lorde wilt be extreme to marcke what is done amysse (oh Lorde) who may abyde it? But ther is mercy with thee. &c Item.Psal. cxiiii. Enter not into iudgement with thy seruaunt (O Lorde) for no man liuing shall be iustified in thy syght. Thus see you howe holy Dauid, whome the scripture commendeth so greatlye, bosteth not his owne righteousnesse, but humbleth him selfe in the syghte

of God, and wholy betaketh hym vnto Gods mercy. Nowe hear what Iob, whom the scripture so greatly commendeth, saith of him self,Iob. ix. If I wil iustifie my self, mine own mouth shall condemne me. If I will put forth my selfe for a perfect man, he shall proue me a wicked doer. Again. If I washe my self with snow water, & make mine hands neuer so cleane at the well, yet shalt thou dip me in the mire, and mine owne clothes shal defile me. And as concerning the godly mā Toby, how litle he trusted in his owne innocency and righteousnes, these his words do manifestly declare: O Lord (saith he) be mindfull of me,Tob. iii. and take no vengeaūce of my sinnes, nether remember my misdedes, nor ye misdedes of mine elders. for we haue not bene obedient to thy cōmaundements. &c. And as Dauid, Iob,

and Toby, humbled them selues in the sight of God, so lykewyse doth the whole company of al the faithful, that the glory of our saluation may be Gods alone, as he saith by the Prophet: Thi destruction, O Israell,Ose. xiiii. commeth of thy self, but thy saluation commeth only of me. Therfore though ye fele synne to be in you, as who is without it? yet despair not, nether be dismaide, but with strong faith make haste vnto the glorious throne of Gods great mercy, lament your sorowfull case, craue fauor and remission of sinnes in Christes name, of Gods most hie maiestie, and without doubt you shall haue your hartes desire.Psal. cxlv. For the Lorde is gracious and merci
                  
                     •
                  ul▪ long suffring & of great good
                  
                     •
                  es. The Lord is louing vnto euery man, and his mercy is ouer all his workes. O truste in the

Lord, for with the Lorde there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.Psalm. cxxx. And he shall redeme Israell from all his sinnes.
            
            
               Epap.
               Oh my hart. Ah what a greuous paine did I fele nowe euen at my very heart. God be mercifull vnto me.
            
            
               Euseb.
               Be on a good comfort neighbour (I pray you) God shal worke all thinges for the best. Ye may se what frail vessels we are, and how litle a pain doth greatly trouble vs.
            
            
               Epa.
               Ye say truth. But to you neighbor Philemō once again. Me thincke if God shuld punish me in this world for my sinne so shuld it be a token rather of his anger then of his fauour towarde me.
            
            
               Phi.
               Nay, not so neighbor. I
                     •
                   is rather an euident token of his singular loue & hartie good wil to
                     •
                  ward you, which louingly correcteth you in this world, that ye ma
                     •
                   repent, knowledge your fault, a
                     •
                  mend

your life, call for mercy and so liue worthy your profession, again that through this temporall paine, ye may be fre from euerlasting plagues,Apoc. xxi. & neuer come into that lake, that burneth with fire and brimstone.i. Cor. xi. This witnesseth s. Paul, saying: Whyle we are punished, we ar corrected of the lord that we should not wt this world be condempned.Psal. xxxvii. Whan God suffereth the wicked in this world to florish like a bay tree, and licenciously to sinne without any punishement, as he suffred the ritche glotton, of whome ye reade in the Gospell of blessed Luke,Luk. xvi, it is an euident argument, that suche one is reserued vnto the paines of the world to come,Mat. x
                        •••
                     
                   whiche neuer shall haue end, wher weping and gnashynge of teethe shall be, as ye see it chaunced to the afore saide ritche glotton, vnto whome God

said: sonne, remember that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure,Luke. xvi. and contrariwyse, Lazarus receiued pain. But nowe is he cō
                  forted, and thou art punished: so doth our sauiour Christ threaten the vngodli,Luke. vi. saying: Wo be to you that are full, for ye shall hunger, Wo be vnto you that now laugh, for ye shall wayle and wepe. The holie Apostle also saieth: What sonne is he,Hebr. xii. whom the father chasteneth not? If ye be not vnder correction (wherof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes & not sonnes. A terrible end therfore abideth them, which in this world licenciously and without punishment do sinne. For all such be bastardes and no sonnes, therfore haue they no part of the heauenly enheritaunce.
            
            
               Epa.
               Yet the world iudgeth otherwyse. For they thinke suche only to be beloued of

God, as walowe in all kinde of worldly pleasures, as the filthy sow in the mire, so longe as they liue, & neuer tast of any aduersitie
            
            
               Phile.
               But the holie scripture iudgeth otherwise. For those voluptuous Epicures whiche in this world say:Sap. ii. Come & let vs enioy the 
                     •
                  leasures that are, and let vs sone 
                     •
                  se the creature, like as in youth. Let vs fill our selues with good wine and oyntment, and let there no flower of the tyme goe by vs. Let vs crowne our selues with roses afore they be withered. Let 
                     •
                  here be no fair medowe, but our 
                     •
                  ust go thorowe it. Let euery one of you be partaker of our volup
                  
                     •
                  uousnes. Let vs leue some token of our pleasure in euery place, for 
                     •
                  hat is our porcion, els get we no
                  
                     •
                  hing. &c. Shall in time to come, 
                     •
                  ry out on this maner & saye:Sap. vi. We 
                     •
                  aue erred from the way of truth

the light of righteousnesse hath not shined vnto vs, and the sunne of vnderstanding rose not vp vpō vs. We haue weried our selues in the way of wickednes & destruction. Tedious wayes haue we gone, but as for the way of ye lord, we haue not knowne it. What good hath our pryde done to vs? Or what profit hath the pompe of riches brought vs? All these thīgs are passed awaye like a shaddow &c. Suche wordes shall they that haue sinned, speake in hel. For the hope of thungodly is lyke a drye thistil flower that is blown away with the wynde. &c. Therfore we may well conclude, that suche as enioy continuall prosperitie, liue at their heartes ease, obey their sensuall appetites, are free from all aduersitie, and as the Psalmo
                     •
                  graphe saieth: come in no misfortune lyke other folke, neither ar
                     •
                  
                  
plagued lyke other men: shall not reigne with God in glory, nether haue they any portion in the lande of the liuing. For though they prosper for a litle while in this world be puffed vp with pryde, swell for fatnes, do what they list, rule as they will, haue plenty of ritches in possessiom, haue the world at commaundement. &c. Yet are they set in slippery places, and shal be cast downe and destroyed Yea sodenly shall they consume, perishe, and come to a fearful end. I haue sene saith that Princelike Prophet,Psal. 37. thungodly in great power, & florishing like a greue bay tree. And he vanished away, and lo he was gone, I sought him, but he coulde no wher be found. &c. For the wicked shall perishe together, and the end of the vngodly, is euerlasting damnation.
            
            
               Christo.
               If it please you, I will tell you a history, that

I heard once.
            
            
               Epa.
               I pray you tell on good brother Christopher.
            
            
               Chri.
               
                  An historie.Saint Ambrose that godly & couragious Bishop traueiling at a certain time toward Rome, chaunced by the way to goe vnto a great richemans house to lodge. after other talke he demaunded of the man of the house, howe the world went with him, & in what case he stode. The ryche man answered: sir my state hath alway bene fortunate and glorious, I neuer tasted any kynd of aduersitie. I neuer had sicknes or losse of goods. All thinges hitherto haue chaunced vnto me according to my hartes desire. Whan. S. Ambrose heard this, he said vnto thē that accompanied him: Rise, and let vs go hence with al expeditiō, for the Lorde is not in this place. And when they wer departed frō the richemans house, euē straight

waies, thearth sodenly opened & swalowed vp the man with all that euer he had, so that nothing at all remained.
            
            
               Phile.
               A notable history, declaring that God is not there present, where the crosse is absent, and that thinges can not long continue in safe state, where God fauoureth not.Psalm. xxxvii.
               
            
            
               Theo.
               Here was that thing fulfilled that is spoken by the Psalmograph. The vngodly shall sone be cut downe like the grasse, and be withered, euen as the grene herbe. &c. Yea a litle while and the vngodly shall be clene gone: Thou shalt loke after his place, and he shalbe away. Thungodly shall perishe, and the enemies of the Lord shal consume as the fat of lambes, yea euen as 
                     •
                  he smoke shall they consume away. Againe in an other place. Thou, O Lord, dost set the vngod
                  
                     •
                  y in slippery places, and castest

them downe, and destroiest them. O how sodenly do they consume, perish, and come to a feareful end? yea euen lyke as a dreame when one awaketh, so shalt thou make their Image to vanishe out of the citie.
            
            
               Phile.
               Where continual successe of thinges is: wher al things at all tymes serue and content the fleshly appetites of voluptuous worldlinges: where no affliction nor trouble is: there is not God, there is not his grace, fauoure, and blessing. He that is free from the crosse, hath no enheritaunce in the kyngdome of heauen. Yea, it is a moste certaine signe of euerlasting damnation, where a life is led without affliction. For whom the Lorde loueth,Hebr. vii. he chasteneth, they are bastardes and no sonnes that sometime fele not the Crosse.Act. xiiii. Who euer went vnto heauen by ioy and pleasure? By many tribu
                     •
                  lations

(saieth the Apostle) must we enter into ye kingdom of God. Hereunto pertaineth the saying of the vertuous woman Iudith:Iudit. vi
                        ••
                     . Our father Abraham being temted and tried thorowe many tribulations, was founde a louer & 
                     •
                  rend of God. So was Isaac, so was Iacob, so was Moses, and al 
                     •
                  hey that pleased God, being tried 
                     •
                  horowe many troubles, were founde stedfast in fayth. Blessed 
                     •
                  s the man, that suffereth temp
                  
                     •
                  ation, saith saint Iames,Iames. i. for whē 
                  
                     •
                  e is once tried, he shall receiue ye 
                  
                     •
                  rown of life, which the lord hath 
                     •
                  romised to them that loue hym.
            
            
               Euse.
               I red once of a certaine her
                  
                     •
                  it,An history. which was wōt euery yere to 
                     •
                  e sicke, wherin he greatly delited & felt much quietnes of conscience 
                     •
                  eing perswaded, yt his sicknesse 
                     •
                  as the louing visitation of God, 
                     •
                  nd an vnfained token of Gods

singular good will toward hym. It chaunced that by the space of an whole yeare he was fre from al maner of sicknesse. Whiche thing whan he considered, he was inwardly sory and wept beyond all measure, greuously complaining that God had forgotten him, and denied him his grace.
            
            
               Phile.
               This history also sheweth howe necessary and wholsome, sicknes is to a Christen man, and that corporall affliction is a certaine perswasion to a faythfull cōscience of Gods singulare good wyll and fatherly fauour towarde vs, as he hym self testifieth, saying: as many as I loue I chastē and rebuke.Apoc. iii. Th
                     •
                   wyse man also sayeth:Prouerb. iii. My sonn
                     •
                   despise not the chastening of th
                     •
                   Lord, nether faint whan thou ar
                     •
                   rebuked of him. For whome th
                     •
                   Lord loueth, him he chastneth, 
                     〈◊〉
                   yet deliteth in him, as a father i
                     •
                  
                  
ther in his owne sonne.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               So followeth it, that they, whom God visiteth with sicknes in this worlde, and laieth the crosse vpon their shoulders, are more dear vnto him than those, whiche all their life tyme, liue in all wealth, ioy, & pleasure.
            
            
               Phile.
               Yea verely, so thei beare their crosse willingly, paciently, and thankfully. For by the crosse are christen men knowē, as noble mens seruauntes by theyr Lordes cognisances. He that beareth not the crosse, is not Christes: For suche as will be his disciples, he cōmaundeth them not to seeke how to flee ye crosse, that they may liue al in pleasure, but he biddeth them take the Crosse vpon their shoulders,Math. xvi. and folow him. If any man will folow me, (saith our sauiour Christ,) let him forsake him 
                     •
                  elf, and take vp his crosse, and fo
                  
                     •
                  ow me. The head bare the crosse,

the members also must do ye same, or els pertaine they not vnto the head. For there is none other way to enter into glory, but the same way that our head Christ entred by,Luke. xiiii. which is the crosse. Whosoeuer beareth not his crosse and cometh after me, (saith the Lorde Christ) he can not be my disciple. The seruant is not greater then his Lord nor the disciple aboue his master.
            
            
               Chri.
               That such as bear the crosse and be tried with diuers tribulations are more dear vnto god, thā they which liue all in pleasure, the history of the ritch and vnmerciful glotton,Luke. xvi. and of poore and pacient Lazarus proueth euidētly. For as ye hard before, the welthie epicure whiche liued galantlie and pleasauntly all the daies of his life, euen vnto his dying daye, so son
                     •
                   as he was dead, was caried of th
                     •
                   Deuell and his Aungels into th
                     •
                  
                  
flames of hell fire: where he was miserablie tormented: contrarywyse, pore and sick Lazarus, whō the wicked worlde estemed moste vile, moste abhominable, yea, and vtterly despised and cast away of God,Esay. lxiiii. whome also fortune neuer fauoured, but aduersitie cōtinuallie assailed, immediatly after his departure was moste tenderly & ioyfully borne of the blessed Aungels of God into the bosome of Abraham,i. Cor. ii. wher he hath such ioyes as eie hath not sene, nor eare hath heard, nether is any mans hart able to thinke them.
            
            
               Euse.
               Here is that fulfilled & found true, whiche the Psalmograph speaketh,Psal. cxv. both of the death of the faithfull, and of the vnfaythfull. Concernyng the faythfull (he sayeth) preci
                  
                     •
                  us in the sight of the Lorde, is 
                     •
                  he death of his sainctes. Of the 
                     •
                  nfaithfull he also sayeth: The

death of sinners is worst of all. As ye ioyes of Gods people begin not till after their death:Psal. xxxiiii. so lykewise the sorowes and paines of ye wicked doe chiefly begin at their death, and so for euer and euer cō
                  tinue.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Happy is that man therfore, whiche hath and endeth his sorowe in this worlde, that after this life he may haue the perfect and true ioy, whiche knoweth no end
            
            
               Phi.
               He is thrise happy, as they vse to say, and greatly blessed of God. Therfore .s. Austen praied on this manner and said, O Lord burn me here, cut me here in this world, that thou maiest spare me for euer after. Only geue me pacience pleasing vnto thee, and necessary vnto me.
            
            
               Christo.
               Like vn
                     •
                  to this are the wordes of a certain auncient father, whiche saieth, I know that diseases chaunce vnto men for their sinnes. And it is be
                     •
                  ter

here paciently to beare afflictions and paines, then after death to suffer euerlasting punishmēts.
            
            
               Theo.
               S. Gregory saith, that God sparith some in this world, to torment them afterward, and som he tormenteth here, which he wil afterward spare. This is a christen mans comforte, yt by present tribulation, he shall escape euerlasting damnation. For according to the common prouerbe, God punisheth not one thing twyse.
            
            
               Epa.
               Of these your wordes I conceiue a good hope, that although God punisheth me iustly for my sinnes yet he wil not take away his mercy from me.
            
            
               Phil.
               No, be you sure. For these are his wordes by the Psalmograph.Psal. lxxxi
                        •
                     
                   If they forsake my 
                     •
                  aw, and walke not in my iudgements. If they breke my statutes, 
                     •
                  nd kepe not my cōmanndemēts, I will visite their offences with

the rod, & their sinnes with scourges. Neuertheles, my louing kindnes will I not vtterly take from him, nor suffer my truth to fayle. My couenaunt wil I not breake nor alter the thinge that is gone out of my lips. Here God our mercifull father, promiseth, yt though he punisheth vs for our sinne and wickednes, that by this meanes he may call vs vnto repentance & amendement of life, yet wil not he take away from vs his mercy and louing kindnes, but when so euer we turne vnto hym, repent vs of our former life, call on his blessed name, beleue and hope to haue remissiō of sinnes for Christes sake, and labor to frame our life according to the rule of his holy testa
                     •
                  mēt, he will surely receiue vs ioy
                     •
                  fully, pardon all our iniquities and as derely loue vs, as though we had neuer offended his deuin
                     •
                  
                  
maiestie. God saith also by ye Prophet Ieremy:Iere. xviii. when I take in hād to rote out, to destroy, or to wast away any people or kingdome, if ye people (against whō, I haue thus deuised) conuert frō their wickednes: I repēt of the plague, that I deuised to bring vpon them.Esay. lv. The prophet Esay also saith. If thungodly forsaketh his way, and the vnrighteous man his owne Imaginations, and turne againe vnto the Lorde, he will surely be mercifull vnto him. For he is very ready to forgeue. He will not alway be chyding, (sayth the Psalmograph,Psalm. ciii.) neither kepeth he his anger for euer. Yea lyke as a father pitieth his owne children, euen so is the Lorde mercifull vnto them that feare hym.
               For he knoweth whereof we bee made, he remembreth that we are but duste. My thoughtes

(saith God) are to geue you peace and not trouble.Ier. xxix. Why God punisheth vs Though the lord punisheth vs for our sinnes, yet doth he not punishe vs, to cast vs away and to condemne vs, but to call vs vnto repentance, to mortifie our fleshly lustes, & afterward to make vs the more circumspect in obseruing the rules of our profession, yt is, the christen profession as that princelike Prophet saith:Psal. cxix. It is greatly for my wealth, that thou hast punished me & brought me low, euen that I may learne thy righteous ordinances.Esay. xxviii. Uexatiō or trouble (saith the Prophet) geueth vnderstanding. And whā
                  soeuer we repent & cease to sinne, the Lord straightwais remoueth and taketh away the crosse that he hath laid vpon our backes, and poureth his blessing againe plentiously vpon vs. For though he maketh a woūd,Iob. v. he geueth a plaster,

though he smite, he maketh whole again.i. Reg. iii▪
                   The Lord killeth & maketh a liue, bringeth down to the graue, and fetcheth vp again. The lord maketh poore, & maketh 
                     •
                  ich, bringeth lowe and lifteth vp again.Tob. iii. After a storm (O lord) saith holy Toby, thou makest the weather faire & calme: after wepyng and heauines, thou geuest great 
                     •
                  oy. Thy name (O God of Israel) 
                     •
                  e praised for euer.
            
            
               Euseb.
               If God 
                     •
                  oueth a man and entendeth to make him partaker of euerlasting glory: he wil not cease to punishe him, vntill he knowledgeth his 
                     •
                  ault, repenteth, & become a newe 
                     •
                  an.
            
            
               Phi
               Ye say truth. For vnto 
                     •
                  his end doth God correcte suche 
                     •
                  s he loueth, and entendeth to 
                     •
                  aue. The Lord saith by the Pro
                  
                     •
                  het, that he will punishe his peo
                  
                     •
                  le, which sinne against him, and 
                     •
                  un on whoring after straunge

Gods, vntill they cōfesse their falt and say: I wil turne again to my first husband,Ose. ii. for at that time was I better at ease, then now.
            
            
               Chri.
               This is a great comfort for a christen man in his affliction to hear, that God punisheth hym in this world to this end, yt he may cease to sinne, that he may repent, turn againe vnto the Lord his God, & so for euer be saued.
            
            
               Epaph.
               But I pray you rehearse vnto me out o
                     •
                   the holy scripture, for the quiet
                     •
                  nes of my conscience, some histories which may declare vnto me that God punishing synners fo
                     •
                   their disobediēce, doth afterwar
                     •
                   whan they repent and turne, for
                     •
                  geue them, and receiue thē agai
                     •
                   into his fauour.
            
            
               Philemon.
               In th
                     •
                   fourth boke of Moses, called N
                     ••
                  mery, we reade that the pepole 
                     〈◊〉
                   Israel murmured and grudged 
                     ••
                  gainst God and against Mose
                     •
                  
                  
saying vnto Moses: wherfore hast thou brought vs out of Egipt,Num. xxi. for to die in the wildernesse? For here is neither bread nor water, & our soule lotheth this lyght bread.
               Now se ye the sinne of the Israelites. They murmur, thei grudge they are vnfaithfull, vnpacient, & disobedient against God and against his lawful magistrat: now heare again the reward of sinne. Wherfore the Lord sent firy Serpentes among the people, whiche 
                     •
                  tong them, & muche people of Israel died. Here haue ye the punishment of the sin. Now hear also ye 
                  
                     •
                  emedy against this punishment, 
                     •
                  nd the salue against this plage. Therefore the people came vnto Moses & sayd: we haue sinned, for 
                     •
                  e haue spoken against the Lord 
                     •
                   against thee. Make intercession 
                     •
                  o the Lord that he take away the 
                     ••
                  rpentes from vs. Here the people

of Israll repenteth, confesseth their sinne, turneth againe vnto the Lorde, and besecheth Moses to pray for them vnto the Lorde. Repentance cōfession of the sinne, conuersion vnto the Lorde, and faithfull prayer are the meanes, wherby Gods wrath is turned away from vs, & his plagues cease. For when Moses had made intercessiō for the people, the Lord said vnto him. Make a brasen serpēt, and set it vp for a signe, that as many as are bitten, may loke vpō it and liue. And Moses made a seruent of brasse, and set it vp for a signe. And when the Serpents had bitten any man, he beheld th
                     •
                   serpent of brasse, and was healed▪ Here se you the mercy of God, e
                     •
                  uen in the middes of the crosse to
                     •
                  ward penitent sinners. The Is
                     •
                  raelites sinne: God plagueth: th
                     •
                   people repenteth: God turneth a
                     •
                  way

his plague: and healeth thē.
            
            
               Epa.
               A cōfortable history. Be ther no mo such in the holy scriptures?
            
            
               Phi.
               Uery many.
            
            
               Ep.
               Rehearse thē I pray you. For I delight to hear such comfortable histories.
            
            
               Phile.
               I am very glad.ii. Pet. xxx
                        •••
                     
                   Manasses. king of Iuda was an abhominable Idolatoure. He went to and built 
                     •
                  he hill altares whiche good king Ezechias his father had broken 
                     •
                  owne. And he reared vp altares 
                     •
                  or Baal, and made groues, and worshipped all the hostes of heauen, and serued them, and he built 
                     •
                  ltares in the house of the Lorde, wheras the Lord yet had said: In Hierusalem shall my name be for euer. And he builded aultares for 
                     •
                  l the host of heauen in the courts 
                     •
                  f the house of the Lorde. And he 
                     •
                  urnt his children in the fire, in 
                     •
                  he vally of the sonne of Hinon. 
                     •
                  e was a sorcerer: he regarded ye
                  
crying of birdes, vsed enchauntments▪ and mainteined workers with spirites, & seers of fortunes, & wrought much euill in the sight of the Lord to anger him withall. And as he him self was an Idolatar & forsoke the Lord God of his fathers: so likewise made he Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem to erre, and to do worse then the Heathen. &c. Nowe haue ye heard how greuously king Manasses sinned against ye Lord his God.
            
            
               Chri.
               His sinnes were grea
                     •
                   & worthy of much punishmēt.
            
            
               
                  Eu
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Yea of euerlasting damnation, i
                     •
                   he were handled according to his desertes.
            
            
               Epa.
               I pray you, what b
                     ••
                  came of him?
            
            
               Phi.
               Albeit ye sinnes of this Manasses were great, ye
                     •
                   behold the louing kindnes of Go
                     •
                   toward him & his people. Befor
                     •
                   he sent any punishement amon
                     ••
                   them, he raised vp his Prophets

which exhorted both him and his subiectes to turne from their euil, to repent, and to walke in the ordinaunces and lawes of God, but both he and his people would not heare the gentle admonitions of God by his Prophetes, nether regard them.
            
            
               Epa.
               O stony hartes. But how than?
            
            
               Ph.
               Whan ye Lord 
                     •
                  aw, yt by no meanes they woulde 
                     •
                  urne from their abhominations. 
                     •
                   went forth stil to effēd, he brou
                  
                     •
                  ht vpō them the captaines of the 
                     •
                  ost of the king of the Assirians, 
                     •
                  hiche toke Manasses in hold, & 
                     •
                  ound him with chaines, and ca
                  
                     ••
                  ed him to Babilon,
            
            
               Theo.
               O the 
                     ••
                  ghteous iudgemēts of God.
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  
                     •
                  ere we heare yt Manasses was 
                     •
                  unished for his sinnes: yea, and 
                     ••
                  at worthely, but did God caste 
                     〈◊〉
                   away for euer?
            
            
               Phi.
               Ye shall 
                     •
                  ear. Whā Manasses was in tri
                  
                     ••
                  lation, he besought the lord his

God and humbled him self exceadingly before the God of his Fathers, and made intercession to him, and God was entreated of hym, and heard his prayer, and brought him againe to Hierusalē into his kingdom. And than Manasses knew yt the lord was God. After this he became a new man, and toke away straunge Gods, & Images out of the house of God and all thalters that he had buil
                     •
                   in the mount of the house of God and Ierusalem, and cast them ou
                     •
                   of the citie. And he prepared tha
                     ••
                  tare of the Lord, & sacrificed ther
                     •
                   on peace offringes and thanck of
                     •
                  fringes, & charged Iuda to seru
                     •
                   the Lord God of Israell.
            
            
               Chri.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   happy change.
            
            
               
                  Epaph
                        •
                     .
               
               Yea O th
                     •
                   great mercies of God.
            
            
               Phile.
               I
                     •
                   this history many notable thin
                     •
                  ges are to be learned. First, if a
                     ••
                   such as God entendeth to saue, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
offend, and breake his holy commaundementes, the Lord wil not suffer them to escape vnpunished, but he visiteth them with his louing rod of fatherly correction, that by this meanes he may call them to repentaunce & saue them. Secondly, we learne, that whan the Lorde correcteth vs, & casteth vs into trouble, than as we see in Manasses, we make haste vnto ye Lord, seke him, pray vnto him, hū
                  ble our selues before his deuine maiestie, & become new men, as ye psalmograph saith: When he slue thē,Psal. lxxviii. they sought him, and turned them early, & enquired after God. And they remembred, that God was their strengthe, and that the 
                     •
                  hie God was their redemer. God him self also saith by the Prophet: In their aduersitie they shall ear
                  
                     •
                  y seke me,Ose. vii. & say: come, let vs turn again vnto the Lorde, for he hath

smitten vs, and he shall heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and he shall bind vs vp againe. Thirdly it setteth forth vnto vs the great and exceding mercies of God toward penitent sinners, whome so sone as they cōuert & turn, he receiueth into his fauor, forgeueth them, taketh away his plagues, and restoreth them to their former, or els muche better state accordinge to this saying of the Prophet.Esay. lv. If the vngodly will forsake his waies, & thunrighteous his imaginations & turn again vnto ye lord, the Lord will surely haue pity on him, for he is very ready to forgeue. Forthly, we learne of this history: what the duty of such is, whom God to fore hath plagued, and now restored to their former state. Uerely, to become newe men, to walke for euer after in the feare of God, to mortify their carnall affectes,

to fle from sinne, as from a venomous Serpent, to garnishe their conuersation with godly and christen manners,Luke. i. and to serue the Lord God in holines and righteousnes all the daies of their lyfe. So saith the Psalmograph:Psal. cxix. It is greatly for my profit, that thou, O Lord hast corrected me, that I may learn thine ordinances. Here to perteineth the saying of ye Prophet.Esa. xxviii. Uexation geueth vnderstanding (O Lord) thou hast corrected me, and thy chastning haue I receiued, as an vntamed calf, saith the prophet Ieremy.Ier. xxxi. Turne thou me, and I shalbe turned, for thou art my Lorde God: yea, as assone as thou turnest me. I shall refourme my self, & when I vnderstand, I shal smite vpō my thigh.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Many godly lessons haue you taught vs out of this history brother Philemō. They that rede

and consider the histories of the holy scriptures on this manner,The true vse of reading the holy scriptures. they are no vayne readers, but they read with much profit.
            
            
               Phile.
               This is the true vse of histories, otherwyse to read them auaileth litle. In the histories of the holy scriptures as in moste pleasaunt mirrors & goodly glasses, we behold our frail nature, our wicked wyll, our beastlyke manners and sinful life. We se Gods iustice, punishment & vengeaunce vpon the disobedient and stifnecked transgressers of his holy commaundements. Again, we behold his tender mercy and louing kindnes toward penitent sinners, and howe ready he is to forgeue, whansoeuer we tourne vnto hym. Moreouer in holy histories, we consider what our dutie is toward God, after we haue receiued benefites of him. Uerely to labour vnto the vttermoste

of our power, to be thākfull vnto him, and to liue worthy his kindnes. These and suche like thinges must the godly reader cō
                  sider, when he readeth the histories of the holy scripture, or els his reading auaileth little.
            
            
               Theop.
               It is truly sayd.
            
            
               Ep.
               I remember that I heard once ye praier, which Manasses king of Iuda praied vnto God, whan he was a prisoner in Babilon. I would gladly hear it again.
            
            
               Phi.
               Is there not a bible here?
            
            
               Eusebius.
               Here is one.
            
            
               Ep.
               I pray you turn vnto ye praier and read it vnto me.
            
            
               Eusebi.
               The praier is this.The prayer of Manasses
                  O Lord almighty, God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, and of the righteous sede of them, whiche haste made heauen and earth withall thornament therof, whiche hast ordeined the sea, by the worde of thy commaundemēt, which hast

shut vp the depe, and hast sealed it for thy fearfull and lawdable name, which al men feare & tremble before the face of thy vertue, & for the anger of thy threatning, whiche is notable to be borne of sinners. But ye mercy of thy promes is great & vnserchable: for ye art the Lord God most hie aboue al thearth, long suffring, & exceading merciful, and repentant for the malice of men. Thou lord after thy goodnesse hast promised repentāce of the remissiō of sins: and thou that art the God of the rightous, hast not put repētance to the righteous Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, vnto thē that haue not sinned against thee: but because I haue sinned aboue the number of the sandes of the sea, and that mine iniquities are exceding many, I am brought low with many bondes of Iron, and

there is in me no breathing, I haue prouoked thine anger, and done euil before thee in cōmitting abhominatiōs, and multiplying offēces. And now I bow ye knees of my hart, requiring goodnes of the (O Lord) I haue sinned, lord I haue sinned, and I knowledge mine iniquitie, I desire thee by praier (O Lorde) forgeue me: forgeue me and destroy me not with mine iniquities, nether doe thou alwais remember mine euils, to punishe them, but saue me (which am vnworthy) after thy great mercy, & I wil praise the euerlastingly al the daies of my life: for all the power of heauen prayseth the, & vnto thee belongeth glory world without end.
Amē.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               A fruteful & godly prayer. God geue me grace so to repent and to pray that I may haue the lord my God mercifull vnto me. For I haue

also greuously offended my Lord God, and I most humbly beseche him for his names sake to haue mercy on me, and to forgeue me.
            
            
               Phile.
               Be on good cōfort & wepe not.Esay. lxiii. God seing your repentaunt and faithfull heart hath frely forgeuen you al your sinnes, and cast them away behind his back, so yt he wil neuer remember thē more. The bloud of Iesus Christ,i. Iohn. i. Gods son hath made you clene from all sin.Hebr. x. By thoffring of Iesus Christs body done once for all you ar sanctified and made holy.Psal. xxxiii. Ye are the blessed of God, for your iniquities are forgeuen, your sinnes are couered, and no vnrightousnes shall be layde to your charge.
            
            
               Epa.
               God graunt.
            
            
               Phile.
               It is most certen. Where repentaunce and faith is: there is also Gods mercy, fauor, louing kindnes, and remission of sinnes.Sap. xi. Thou (O lord) saith ye wise

man, makest thee as though thou 
                     •
                  awest not the sinnes of men for 
                     •
                  epentance sake. And the Prophet 
                     •
                  aieth.Esay. xxviii. All that beleueth on him 
                     •
                  he speaketh of Christ) shal nat be 
                     •
                  onfounded.Rom. x. And Christ saith of 
                     •
                  im selfe I am the resurrection & 
                     •
                  he life.Iohn. xi He that beleueth on me, 
                     •
                  ea though he were dead, yet shall 
                     •
                  e liue. And whosoeuer liueth and 
                     •
                  eleueth on me, he shall neuer die. 
                     •
                  lso in another place he sayeth, 
                     •
                  od so loued the worlde,Iohn, iii. that he 
                     •
                  aue his only begottē sonne, that 
                     •
                  hosoeuer beleueth on him, shuld 
                     •
                  ot perishe, but haue euerlastinge 
                     ••
                  fe. For God sent not his sonne in 
                     〈◊〉
                   the world to cōdemne ye world, 
                     •
                  ut that the worlde through hym 
                     •
                  ight be saued.
            
            
               Epap.
               Godly and 
                     •
                  omfortable sentences. God geue 
                     〈◊〉
                   grace neuer to forget them.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     hristo.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               You brother 
                     •
                  hilemon haue rehearsed two notable

and comfortable histories out of the old testament, which declare that God punishing sinners for their disobedience, doeth notwithstāding afterward whē they repent and turne, forgeue thē and receiue them againe into his fauoure. Rehearse vnto me also I pray you one or two histories out of the new testament, concerning that matter.
            
            
               Phi.
               I wil do it very gladly. Ye remember the history of the prodigal sonne writtē in the Gospel of blessed Luke?
            
            
               Ep.
               What is that, I pray you.
            
            
               Phil.
               Blessed Luke telleth,Luk. xv. that a certaine man had two sonnes, and the yonger of them said vnto his father: father geue me the porcion of the goods that to me belongeth. And he deuided vnto them his substaunce Hitherto haue ye heard of the fathers liberalitie toward his sōne It foloweth: and not long after

                  
                     •
                  hen the yōger son had gathered 
                     〈◊〉
                   yt he had together, he tooke his 
                     ••
                  urney into a far coūtrey▪ & there 
                     •
                  e wasted his goods with riotous 
                     ••
                  uing. Here se we the wickednes 
                     •
                  f the son. Now behold ye plage of God. And whē he had spēt al: ther 
                     •
                  rose a great dearth in al yt lande, 
                     •
                  nd he began to lack, and went & 
                     •
                  ame to a citezen of the same coun
                  
                     •
                  ry, & he sent him to his farme to 
                     •
                  epe swine. And he wold haue fil
                  
                     ••
                  d his belly with the cods that 
                     〈◊〉
                   swine did eat, & no man gaue 
                     •
                  nto him. Thus see ye into howe 
                     •
                  reat misery he is fallen for the 
                     •
                  ifusing of his goods. Beholde 
                     •
                  ow again his repentant & sorow
                  
                     ••
                  ll hart: Thē he came to him self, 
                     〈◊〉
                   said: how many hired seruantes 
                     〈◊〉
                   my fathers haue bread inough? 
                     ••
                  d I perishe with honger. I 
                     •
                  ill arise, and go to my Father, 
                     •
                  nd will say vnto him: Father, I

haue sinned against heauen & before thee: and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hired seruants. And he arose and cam to his father. Now marke also the pitiful compassion and tender mercy of the father toward his sonne.
But whē he was yet a great way of, his father saw him, and had compassion, & ran, and fell on his neck, & kissed him▪ And the sonne sayde vnto hym
                        •
                      father I haue sinned against heuen & thy in sight, & am no more worthy to be called thy son. Bu
                        •
                      the father said to his seruauntes bring forth the best garment, an
                        •
                      put it on hym, and put a ring o
                        •
                      his hand, and shoes on his feete And bring hither that fat calf, 
                        •
                      kill it, and let vs eate & be mery for this my sonne was dead, & i
                        •
                      aliue againe, he was lost, and i
                        •
                      found.
And thei begō to be mer
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  n this history do ye se ye exceding 
                     •
                  reat mercy of God toward peni
                  
                     ••
                  nt sinners moste liuely painted 
                     〈◊〉
                   set forth. So sone as this wast
                  
                     ••
                  l sonne repented him of his rio
                  
                     •
                  ous liuing, & had a mynde to re
                  
                     •
                  urne home vnto his father, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   humble him self before him, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   desire mercie and forgeuenesse 
                     •
                  f his sinnes, oh how gladly and 
                     •
                  ow ioyful did his father louing
                  
                     ••
                   embrace him, swetely kisse him, 
                     •••
                  endly salute him, hartely enter
                  
                     •
                  ain him, & so derely receiue him 
                     ••
                  to his fauour, as though he had 
                     •
                  euer offended?
            
            
               Epa.
               O the great 
                     •
                  nd infinite mercies of God.
            
            
               Phi.
               
                  
                     •
                  ere see ye that to be true, whiche 
                     •
                  od him self saith by the prophet: 
                     •
                  hou disobedient Israel tourn a
                  
                     •
                  ain saith the Lorde,Iere. iii. & I will not 
                     •
                  t my wrath fall vpon you. For I 
                     •
                  n merciful, saith the Lorde, & I 
                     •
                  il not alway bear displeasure against

thee. &c. O ye disobedient children, turn again (saying:) lo, we are thine, for thou art the lorde our God, and so shal I heale your back turnings.Esech. 33 By an other Prophet he also saieth: as truly as I liue, saith the Lord God, I haue no pleasure in the death of the wicked but much rather yt the wicked turn from his way and liue. Turn you, turn you from your vngodli
                     •
                  waies, O ye af the house of Israe
                     •
                   oh, wherfore will ye die? The wickednes of ye wicked shal not hurt hym, whensoeuer he conuerteth from his vngodlines.Esech. 18 Again by ye aforsaid Prophet, he saith: repen
                     •
                   and turn you from al your iniquities, & your iniquities shall work
                     •
                   you no displeasure. Cast away fr
                     •
                   you, all your wickednesses, wher
                     •
                   in ye haue offended, and make yo
                     •
                   a new hart and a new spirit. An
                     •
                   wherfore will ye die? O ye hous
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  f Israel? For I wil not yt any mā 
                  
                     •
                  huld die, sayth the Lord. Return 
                     •
                  herfore & liue.
            
            
               Ep.
               Are these wor
                  
                     •
                  es spokē as wel to vs as to ye peo
                  
                     •
                  le of Israel?
            
            
               Phi.
               Yee to vs. Of a 
                     •
                  ruth,Act. x. saith blessed Peter, I per
                  
                     •
                  eiue yt ther is no respect of persōs 
                     〈◊〉
                   God, but in al people, he yt fea
                  
                     •
                  eth him, & worketh righteousnes 
                     •
                  s accepted wt him. Is he ye God of 
                     •
                  he Iewes only?Rom. iii. Is he not also ye God of the gētils? yea euen of the 
                     •
                  entiles also, saith blessed Paule. For it is God only,Rom. ii. which iustifi
                  
                     •
                  th the circumcision yt is of faith, & 
                     •
                  ncircumcision thorowe faith. 
                     •
                  or he is not a Iewe whiche is a 
                     •
                  ew outward, nether is it circū
                  
                  
                     ••
                  siō, which is outward in ye flesh. 
                     •
                  ut he is a Iew, which is hid wt
                  
                  
                     ••
                  , and the circūcision of the heart 
                     〈◊〉
                   true circumcision, which consi
                  
                     •
                  eth in the spirite, and not in the 
                     ••
                  ter, whose prayse is not of mē,

but of God. There is no differēce betwene the Iew and the gentill.Roma. x. For one is Lorde of all, whiche is riche vnto all that call vpon him.Iohn. ii. For who so euer doth call on the name of the Lorde,Rom. xv. shall be safe. Therefore what so euer thinges were written aforetime, they wer
                     •
                   written for our learning, that we thorow pacience and the comfor
                     •
                   of ye scriptures, might haue hope.
            
            
               The.
               
                  Ephe. ii.Ye gentils, saith s. Paul, we
                     •
                   in times past without Christ, be
                     •
                  ing aliauntes from the Common
                     ••
                  wealth of Israel, and straunger
                     •
                   frō the testaments of the promes hauing no hope, and being with
                     •
                  out God in this world. But now by the meanes of Christ Iesu, 
                     〈◊〉
                   which somtime were a far of, 
                     〈◊〉
                   made nie by the bloud of Christ
                     •
                   For he is our peace, whiche hat
                     •
                   made of both one, and hath brok
                     •
                   downe the wall, that was a sta
                     •
                  
                  
betwene vs, and hath also put away through his fleshe, the cause of hatred, euen the lawe of commaundementes conteined in the law written for to make of twain one newe man in him selfe, so making peace & to reconcile both vnto God in one body through the crosse, and slue hatred therby: and came and preached peace to you, which were a far of, and to them, which were nie. For through him we both haue an entraunce in one 
                     •
                  pirit vnto the father. Nowe ther
                  
                     •
                  ore, ye are not straungers and fo
                  
                     •
                  einers, but citezins with ye sain
                  
                     •
                  es, and of the houshold of God, & 
                     •
                  re built vpon the foundation of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ him self being the head cor
                  
                     •
                  er 
                     〈◊〉
                   stone, in whome what buil
                  
                     ••
                  ng soeuer is coupled together, 
                     〈◊〉
                   groweth vnto an holy temple 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Lord, in whome ye also are

builded together, to be an habitation of God through ye holy ghost:
            
            
               Epa.
               Blessed be the Lord our God, whiche hath made vs gentils also partakers of his heauenly blessinges. But brother Philemon, hetherto haue ye rehearsed out of the newe Tastament but one history. Your promise was to recite two at the least. Fulfill your promis I pray you.
            
            
               Phi.
               In the gospell of Iohn,Iohn. v. we read, that there was a certaine man, whiche had bene diseased .xxxviii. yeares, pla
                     •
                  ged of God (without doubt) fo
                     •
                   his sinnes. So sone as our saui
                     •
                  our Christ perceiued, that he ha
                     •
                   a mynde to be made whole he sai
                     •
                   vnto him: Rise, take vp thy bed 
                     〈◊〉
                   walke. And streightways the 
                     〈◊〉
                   was made hole. Afterward Chr
                     •••
                   found him in the temple, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnto him: Behold thou art 
                     〈◊〉
                   whole, loke thou sinne no 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
after this, least a worse thynge chaunce vnto thee. These wordēs of our sauiour Christ doe playnly declare that this man was a greuous sinne, & that this his longe disease, sicknes and trouble, was cast vpon him for his sinne & disobediēce against the Lord his god. And yet note, so sone as he had a mind to be made hole euen before he made his mone vnto Christ, or knew whot Christ was, this most louing & gentle sauior made hym hole, & bad him sin no more.
            
            
               Euse.
               Here is ye fulfilled, which God speketh by the Prophet.Esa. lxv. It shall be that or euer they call, I shall an
                  
                     •
                  were them. Whyle they are yet but thinking howe to speake, I shal heare them.
            
            
               Phi.
               The history of ye thefe,Luke. xxiii. which was put to death with Christ, is not to be let passe. What a malefactour and wicked persone he was, the holy scripture

doth declare. Notwithstāding so sone as he humbled him selfe, repented him of his former life: cō
                  fessed his sinne, and called vpon Christ for mercy, saying: Lord remember me, whā thou comest into thy kyngdom, he was straightwaies receiued into fauor, & hard these most comfortable wordes at the mouth of Christ: Uerely I say vnto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise.
            
            
               Chri.
               Here is also the saying of God by the Prophet founde true: at al times when a sinner turneth vnto me, saith ye Lord: I wil no more beare his iniquities in minde, but frely forgeue them.
            
            
               Epa.
               Here is than a good and comfortable lesson, that whensoeuer we turn frō our wickednes, the Lord our God wil for
                     •
                  geue vs our sinnes, and geue vs fauor, grace, mercy, life and euerlasting glory.
            
            
               Phi.
               Truth it is brother

Epaphroditus. Beleue it, & all thinges shal go wel with you. You shal find muche comf
                     •
                  rt and great ioy in your cōscience. A quiet and mery heart shall you haue within you,Rom. x. as s. Paul saith: We being iustified by saith haue peace that is to say: quietnes of consciē
                  ce toward God, through our Lord Iesus Christe, by whome also it chaunced vnto vs to be brought in thorowe faith vnto this grace, wherin we stande, and reioyce in hope of the glory of God.Luk. x.xv. Howe greatly also do the histories of the wounded man & of the lost shepe▪ (as I may let other passe) set forth gods exceading mercy toward penitent sinners, be they neuer so greuously wounded and diseased? A certain man saieth, our sauiour Christ, descended from Hierusalē 
                  
                     •
                  o Hierico, and fel among theues, whiche robbed him of his raimēt,

and wounded him, and departed, leauing him halfe dead. And it chaunced that there came down a certaine Priest that same waye, & when he sawe hym, he passed by. And likewyse a Leuite, when he went nie to the place, came, and loked on hym, & passed by. But a certain Samaritan, as he iourneyed, came vnto hym, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound vp his woundes, and poured in oyle and wyne, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to a common Inne, & made prouision for him-And on the morowe, whē he departed, he toke two pence, & gaue them to the host, & said vnto him: take cure of hym, and what soeuer thou spendest more, whe
                     •
                   I come again, I wil recompenc
                     •
                   thee.
            
            
               Ep.
               Ther was small chariti
                     •
                   both in the Priest and in the Le
                     •
                  uite.
            
            
               
               Phi.
               You say truth.
            
            
               Epa.
               But who was that Samaritan? For he was very gentle and louinge.
            
            
               Phi.
               Christ Iesus the Lord which is the self gentlenes & loue, which also refuseth no labour, no paine, no cost,, in seking our saluation. He it is alone,Esay. liii. which, as the Prophet saieth: hathe taken on hym our infirmities, and borne our pains.i. Pet. ii. He him self as Peter saith, bare our sinnes in his body on the tree, that we being deliuered from sinne, should liue vnto righteousnes, By whose stripes ye wer hea
                  
                     •
                  ed. For as ye were as shepe going astray, but are nowe tourned vnto the shepeheard, and Bishop of your soules.
            
            
               Epaphroditus.
               You 
                     •
                  pake of the lost shepe also.
            
            
               Phile.
               Truth.Luke. xv. Blessed Luke telleth the parable on this manner.
               What man of you hauing an C. shepe (if he lose one of them)

doeth not leue ninety and nine in the wildernes, and goe after that whiche is lost, vntill he fynde it? And when he hath found it, he laieth it on his shoulders with ioye. And assone as he commeth home he calleth together his louers and neighbours, saying vnto them: reioyse with me, for I haue founde my shepe whiche was lost. Hereof our sauiour Christe concludeth: I say vnto you, that lykewyse ioye shalbe in heauen ouer one sinner that repenteth, more then ouer ninety & nine iust persones, which nede no repentance. This parable with the other of the woman that lost a grote, setteth forth maruelouslye the louinge kyndnesse of Christ toward penitent synners. For of that he also cōcludeth and saith: Likewyse I say vnto you, shall there be ioy in the presence of the aungels of God ouer one sinner

that repenteth.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Great comfort is there, for penitent synners and weke cōsciences: in these histories and parables which you neighbour Philemon haue full gently declared vnto me.
            
            
               Phile.
               I 
                     •
                  m glad brother Epaphroditus 
                     •
                  o heare you so say. And be ye wel 
                     •
                  ssured, they are no lesse true than 
                     •
                  omfortable.Mat. xix. Perswade your self 
                     •
                  hat Christ is a moste louing and 
                     •
                  aithfull Phisition to so many as 
                     •
                  ele them selues diseased, yea he so 
                     •
                  uche tendreth our health, that 
                     •
                  e calleth vs vnto hym, and pro
                  
                     •
                  iseth that he wyl ease vs of our 
                     •
                  rief, if we will come vnto hym, & 
                     •
                  eal all our diseases.Math. ix.xi. They that 
                     •
                  e strong, nede no Phisition, but 
                     ••
                  ey yt are sicke. And Christ came 
                     ••
                  t to call the righteous, but syn
                  
                     ••
                  rs vnto repentance. If ye ther
                  
                     ••
                  e fele your selfe sick and greued 
                     •
                  ith the burdē of sinne, come vnto

the Phisition Christ,Luk. x. shew him your woundes, and he will vndoubtedly heal them, as ye heard afore of the wounded man. Despaire not though your sinnes bee neuer so great and innumerable.Luke. xx. For the sonne of man came to seke vp and to saue that was lost. Christ is that lambe of God,Iohn. i. whiche taketh away the sinne of the world.i. Tim. ii. This is a true saying and worthy of all men to be receiued, that Christ Iesus came into this worlde to saue sinners.Esay. xxviii. Whosoeuer beleueth on him, shall not bee ashamed.Roma. x. Because he hath pu
                     •
                   his trust in me,Psalm. xci. sayth God by th
                     •
                   Psalmograph, I will deliuer, ye
                     •
                   I will defende hym, because h
                     •
                   hath knowne my name.
            
            
               
                  Epaphro
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Than I trust whether the Lord my God punisheth me for the tr
                     ••
                  all of my faith, or for my sinnes that by this meanes he may ca
                     •
                  me

vnto repentaunce, it is no token of his wrath and heauy displeasure toward me.
            
            
               Phile.
               No, be 
                     •
                  e well assured.Prouerb. iii. For whome the Lorde loueth, him he chastneth, & yet delighteth in him, as a father 
                     •
                  n his owne sonne. What sonne 
                     •
                  s he, whome the father chastneth not? If ye be not vnder correctiō, (saith S. Paul,) wherof all are 
                     •
                  artakers,Hebr. xii. then are ye bastardes, and not sonnes. And God himself 
                     •
                  aith:Apoc. iii. As many as I loue, I re
                  
                     •
                  uke and chasten. So that this 
                     •
                  our sicknesse is the louing visi
                  
                     •
                  ation of God, sent vnto you, not 
                     •
                  or your destruction, but for your 
                     •
                  aluation.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               I may then 
                     •
                  e bolde to call vpon the Lord my God in this my sicknesse.
            
            
               Phile.
               Why not? God hath commaun
                  
                     •
                  ed you so to do, and hath also pro
                  
                     •
                  ised to heare you
            
            
               Epaphroditus.
               Where is that commaundement

and promise of God?
            
            
               Ph.
               It is written in a certaine Psalme by that Princelike Prophet Dauid.
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  Psalm. i.Let me heare it.
            
            
               Phil.
               Call on me, saith God, in the time of thy trouble, and I wil deliuer thee, & thou shalt honoure me. Here God doth not only commaund vs to call o
                     •
                   him in the tyme of our trouble, but he also promiseth graciously to heare vs, and to graunt vs ou
                     •
                   request. And for this his benefit
                     •
                   he requireth nothinge of vs,Math. i. bu
                     •
                   thankes geuing.
            
            
               Chri.
               Ful grati
                     •
                  ous is the Lord, & a strong hold i
                     •
                   the time of trouble, he knowet
                     •
                   them that put their trust in hym▪ The Lord is nie vnto them tha
                     •
                   are of a troubled hart,Psal. 33. & will sau
                     •
                   suche as be of an humble spirit
                     ••
                   The Lorde healeth those that a
                     ••
                   broken in hart:Psal. 147. and geueth m
                     ••
                  decine to heale theyr sickenesse. The Lord remembred vs (saith

Psalmograph,Psal. cxxxvii) when we were in trouble, for his mercy endureth for euer. Unto whom shal I haue 
                     •
                  espect, or whome shall I fauour, 
                     •
                  aith God by the prophet? Uerely 
                     •
                  uen him,Esay. lxxvi. that is miserable, poore, 
                     •
                  ow brought, troubled in spirite, & 
                     ••
                  andeth in awe of my woordes.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     hi.
               
               Truth it is,zach. i. that the Lorde is 
                     •
                  ood and gratious vnto thē that 
                     •
                  ut their trust in hym, and to the 
                     •
                  ule that seaketh after hym. 
                     •
                  herfore brother Epaphroditus, 
                     •
                  re not in this your sicknes dili
                  
                     •
                  ently and without ceasing to flee 
                     •
                  nto God with harty and fayth
                  
                     ••
                  ll prayers, nothing doubtinge 
                     〈◊〉
                   that he will fauourably heare 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and graunt you, whatsoeuer 
                     〈◊〉
                   aske according to his will as s. 
                     •
                  ohn saith:i. Iohn, v. this is the trust that 
                     •
                  e haue in him, that if we aske 
                     •
                  y thyng according to his wyll, 
                     〈◊〉
                   heareth vs. And if we know yt
                  
he heare vs whatsoeuer we aske, we knowe that we haue the petitions that we desire of him. For the Lorde is nie vnto all that call on hym, yea that call on hym in truth.Psal. cxlv. After this manner did all good men & women behaue them selues, whansoeuer they were assailed with any kynde of trouble or aduersitie.iii. Reg. xx. King Ezechias whā he was greuously sicke, and had receiued a commaundemēt from God, that he should set his hous
                     •
                   in an order, for he should die an
                     •
                   not liue, tourned his face to th
                     •
                   wall, and prayed vnto the Lord, the Lorde hearde hym, made hi
                     •
                   whole and saued hym aliue .xv
                     ••
                   yeares after. The thre chyldre
                     •
                   Sidrach,Dan. iii. Misach, & Abednag
                     •
                   when they were cast into the fy
                     •
                  rie fornace because they would not worship the golden Image 
                     〈◊〉
                   the commandement of kyng N
                     ••
                  buchodonosor,

praied vnto ye Lord and he both graciously heard thē and deliuered them. Daniell being in the den of Lions,Dan. vi. praid vnto God,Dan. xiii. and was preserued. Susanne forsaken of all men, and at the poynt to be stoned vnto death thorow the vniust and false accusations of twoo wicked Iudges, praid vnto the Lord her God, and she was both heard and safely deliuered.Luke. xxiii. Our sauioure Christ in the time of his trouble and passiō, prayed so feruently vnto his heauenly father, that his sweat was lyke droppes of bloud trickeling downe to the grounde.Act. vii. Blessed Stephen when the stones came batteryng about his body, prayed earnestly.Act. xii. When Peter was in prysone, there was Prayers made of the Congregation for hym. Manie other suche lyke examples haue wee in the holye

Bible, whiche declare vnto vs, yt all good men and women in their aduersitie, haue alway fled vnto God by feruent prayer for remedy neither haue they bene deceiued of their purpose.i. Cor. x. For God is faithfull, which wil not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our strengthe, but shall in the mids of the temptation, make away, that we may be able to beare it. For the Lorde hym selfe saith:Psalm. xci. forasmuche as he hath put his trust in me: I wyll delyuer hym, I wyll be good to hym because he hath knowē my name He hath cried vnto me, and I 
                     〈◊〉
                   graciously heare him, I am wit
                     •
                   him in trouble, I wil deliuer hi
                     •
                   and bring him to honour. Wit
                     •
                   long life will I satisfie hym, an
                     •
                   shewe him my saluation. When I was in trouble,Psalm. cxx. sayeth Dauid, I called vpō ye Lord, & he heard 
                     〈◊〉
                   Again he saith, I wil cal vpon 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Lord, whiche is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies. The sorowes of death cō
                  passed, and the ouerflowinges of vngodlines made me afrayd. The pains of hell came about me, the snares of death ouertoke me. But in my trouble I called vpon the Lord, and made my complaint vnto my God, and he full gratiously hard my voyce from his holy temple, and my complaint came before him, so that it entred euen into his eares. And as the Psalmograph in all his trouble cried vnto the Lord and was holpē
                  ▪ so did all his faithful ancestors, as these his words do declare, and they al so were hard.Psal. xxiii. Our fathers hoped in thee, they trusted in thee, & thou diddest deliuer them. They called vpon thee, and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and were not confounded. And vnto this

day haue all yt faithful in their aduersitie cried vnto ye Lord, & haue receiued help.Rom. x. For ther is one lord of all rich ynough for all that call on him,Ioel. ii. Act. ii. Esay. xxviii. so that whosoeuer calleth on the name of ye Lord, he shall be safe. For none shalbe confounded, yt putteth his trust in hym. This poore mā cried saith Dauid,Psa. xxxiiii. & the Lord hard him, & saued him from al his troubles. For the aungell of the Lord pitcheth his tent round about them that fear him, & deliuereth them. O tast therfore & se, how gētle, gratious & louing the Lorde is, blessed is the man yt trusteth in hym.
            
            
               Euse.
               Brother Epaphroditus, all these sentences and histories which our neighbor Phi
                     •
                  lemon hath here recited vnto you out of the holy scriptures, ought to encourage you to pray vnto the Lord God in this your sicknes wt a strong and vnshaken faith, and to be fully perswaded that God

will both gratiously heare you, & also worke that in you, which shal turn moste vnto his glory, and vnto the saluation of your soul?Esay. l
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   For behold, the Lordes hand is not so shortned, that it can not helpe, nether is his eare so stopped, that it may not hear.Psal. lxviii▪
                   Our God is such a God as saueth. With the lord our God there is health, & he laith his blessing vpon his people.Psal. iii. Whome did God euer despise, that called faithfully vpon hym?Eccl, ii. For God is gratious & merciful, he forgeueth sinnes in the tyme of trouble, & is a defender for al them that seke after him.Eccl. xxxvi
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The.
               The wise man saith: sonne in thy sickenesse, despise not thy self, but pray to the Lord, & he shall heale thee. Here is a cōmaundement geuen to pray vnto God in the tyme of our sicknes, & also a promise added, that he wil hear, heale, and help vs, as he saieth by

the Psalmograph:Psalm. i. Call on me in the day of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thee, and thou shalt honor me
            
            
               Chri.
               
                  Iames. v.S. Iames in his Epistle also saieth: If any be diseased among you, let hym call for the elders of the congregation, and let them praye ouer him, and anoynt him with oyle in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall saue the sick, and the Lorde shall raise him vp, and if he haue committed sinnes, they shall be forgeuen him.
            
            
               Phile.
               That God being faithfully called vpon, wyll helpe in the time of sicknesse: we haue many examples in the holy scriptures, whiche may worthely comfort vs & stir vp our faith toward God, lokyng for helpe at his most mercifull hand. But for this present, let this one example of kyng Ezechias suffice,iiii. Reg. xx. whome being apoynted to die, after he had called

                  
                     •
                  n the name of the Lord, the lord our God graciously heard his request, restored him to his health, & gaue him .xv. yeares mo to liue in this world after that his sicknes. Notwithstanding, brother Epaphroditus, all be it we doubt not but that you praying vnto God in this your sicknes, God wil mercifully heare you, and worke that in you whiche shall be moste vnto his glory: and the health of your soule, yet forasmuch as you know not what is most expediēt for you, be content in all your prayers to submit your will do the good will of God, whiche without all doubt tendereth the health of your soule more than any mortall frend tendereth the healthe of your body. In al temporal & worldly things, that you craue of God in your praiers, prefer the wil of God vnto your owne will, and be content

to receiue at the hand of God, as shall be his godly pleasure to appoynte. For whether we lyue or die,Rom. xiiii. we are the Lordes. An example hereof haue you of our sauiour Christe,Math. xxvi. Mark. xiiii. Luk. xxii. whiche a little before his passion, being greatly dismaid wt the terrours and feares of death, praied vnto his heauenly father, that these bitter paynes and tormentes, whiche were at hand for him to suffer, myght be remoued from hym, so that he myght not suffer them, but be fre from them. Notwithstanding knowing that the will of his heauenly father is euer best and moste perfecte, and that all willes of men oughte t
                     •
                   geue place vnto his godly will, h
                     •
                   wyshed rather the will of God t
                     •
                   be done, then the wyll of hym be
                     •
                  yng man, and so submitted hy
                     ••
                   selfe to Gods holy wil, being con
                     •
                  tented to suffer in his body, wha
                     •
                  soeuer

should be his godly pleasure to appoynt. The wordes of Christes praier in this behalf, are these:Math. xxvi. O my father, if it be possible, let this cup depart from me, notwithstanding not as I wyll, but as thou wilt. Again, O my father, if this cup can not goe from me, but that I must drincke it, thy wil be done. That we ought in al our praiers for temporall things, to submit our wil to the good wil and pleasure of God, and no more to desire of him, then may stande with his blessed wyll. Christ our Lord and sauiour teacheth vs in that common prayer, whiche we call the Pater noster, where we praye on this manner.Math. vi. Thy wyll be done in earth, as it is in heauen. This manner of praying,Mat. xxvi
                        •
                     . practised the Leper, which came vnto Christ to bee healed of hys Leprosy. Lorde (saith he) if thou

wilt, thou art hable to make me whole. Here this faithfull Leper confessed Christ thorow ye almighty power of his Godhead to be able for to clense him, and to make him whole, not withstanding he submitted his will to the will of Christ, that if the Lorde Christe, thought it not mete to make hym whole, but yt it was better for his saluation to continue a leper still, he refused not to suffer that plague of leprosy vpon his body euen vnto the very death. Thus affected, neighbor Epaphroditus, must we all be whansoeuer we aske anye tēporall or worldly thing of God. And this trade folow you in this your sicknes, whē you pray vnto God. Desire God to remoue this your disease frō you, and to blesse you agayne with the benefite of health, that you may liue long & se good daies on earth, yet in these

your prayers be content to submit your will to his godly wyll, yea though death should follow, knowing that if death doe ensue of this your sicknesse, it shalbe no losse, but auauntage vnto you, as saint Paul saieth:Phil. i. Christe is to me life, and death is to me auantage. On this manner did Christ our elder brother submit his will vnto the wil of his heauenly father, as you afore heard, and so hūbled himself, that he became obedient vnto death, euen ye death of ye cros. Note now what foloweth:Phil. ii. wherfore God hath also exalted him on hie and geuen him a name, which is aboue al names, that is ye name of Iesus euery kne should bowe, bothe of thinges in heauen and thinges in the earth, and thinges vnder the earth, & that all tonges should confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Lord vnto the praise of God

the father. He that humbleth him self,Luk. xviii. 
                        •
                     . Pet. v. shall be set hie. For the Lord is a frend to them that be humble, & submit their willes to his godlye wyll and pleasure.
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lorde thy will be done and not mine.
               
                  
                     A praier.I confesse (O heauenly father) that my manifold wickednesses and vnnumerable sinnes, haue not only deserued this sickenesse, which is thy most gentle, fatherly and louing correction, but also very hell, and the bitter paines thereof, if thou shouldest handle me according to my desertes, I haue sinned, I haue synned, O lord God, against thy holy lawes and I haue broken thy blessed commaundementes, moste greuously offending thy glorious maiestie. Whatsoeuer I suffer, I worthely suffer, ah wretch that I am. My sinne I confesse, and with an humble heart and broken spirit,

I fle vnto the throne of thy fauorable mercy, most humbly besechinge thee for Iesus Christes sake to forgeue me all my synnes which I haue cōmitted against thy deuine maiestie, frō the houre of my birth vnto this presēt time, and to receiue me into the holy felowship of those thy blessed and chosen people, whome before the beginning of ye worlde, thou diddest appoint heires of thi heauēly kingdom in Christ Iesu our lord, that they might for euer and euer raigne with thee in glory. Ah, lord geue me grace to bear this crosse both paciently & thankfully. Suffer me not once to murmur, grudge, or spurne against thy holye wil, but with a pacient & thankefull heart to waite on thy blessed pleasure, being alway content to beare, whatsoeuer burdē thou laiest on my shoulders, with this

perswasiō and assured faith, that whatsoeuer I suffer, is vnto the glory of thy name, and vnto the health of my soule. (O Lord) thy will be done, and not mine.
               
               Amen. Amen.
               Neighbours, I am very sicke, and my paine encreaseth more & more.
            
            
               Phi.
               The Lords wil be done in you neighbour Epaphroditus. Feare not,Rom. xiiii. no although present death were at hand. For whether you liue or die, ye are the Lordes. God hath sealed you vp in Christes bloud vnto euerlasting lyfe. Your name,Luk. x. Ephe. ii. doubt ye not, is written in the booke of life. Ye are of ye nombre of those, whome God, before the foundations of the world were layd, hath chosen in Christe to be his sonnes and heires, ye are the dearly beloued sonne of God. Ye are enheritours of Gods glorious kingdom. God for your earnest

faithes sake in the bloude of Christ, hath forgeuen you al your sinnes, that euer ye committed against him from the daye of your birthe vnto this houre. He hath cast away all your iniquities 
                     •
                  ehind his backe, so that he wyl neuer remember them any more. Ye are counted among thē,Psal. 3
                        •
                     . whose vnrighteousnesses are forgeuen, and whose sinnes are couered, & vnto whome the Lorde imputeth no sinne. God loueth you, God careth for you, God is on your syde, who then can endomage or hurte you? Who can lay any thyng vnto your charge?Rom. 
                        •
                     . It is God that iustifieth you, who then can condemne you? ye nede not fear ether sathan or sinne, or any other thinge that should trouble your conscience. For there is no damnation to thē that are in Christ Iesu,Rom. 8. whiche walke not after the fleshe, but after

the spirite. For the lawe of the spirite of life, thorow Iesus Christ hath made you fre frō the lawe of sinne and death. For what ye lawe could not do (inasmuch as it was weke because of the flesh) that performed God, and sent his sonne in the similitude of sinfull fleshe, & by sinne damned synne in the fleshe, that the ryghtedusnes of the lawe myght be fulfilled in vs, whiche walke not after the flesh, but after the spirite.
            
            
               Epa.
               I thāke you neighbor Philemon for your gostly and comfortable instructions. For I am wel comforted with these your wordes, and I faithfully beleue, that God the father for his promise sake made vnto all faithfull penitēt sinners in Christes bloud, hath so frely and wholy forgeuen me all my sinnes, that he will neuer remember them more, nor lay them vnto my charge, but so loue

me and tender my saluation, as though I had neuer offended his fatherly goodnesse. And in this faith I submit my self, my body, and soule, & all that I haue vnto his godly wil, to do with me in al things,Rom. xiiii. whatsoeuer his good plesure shallbe.A praier. For liue we, die we, we ar the Lords.
And lord I most humbly besech thee, call to remē
                     brance thy tender mercies, & thy louing kindnesses, whiche haue bene euer of olde.Psal. xxv. Oh remember not the sinnes and offences of my youth, but accordyng vnto thy mercy thinke y• vpon me, O lord for thy goodnes. Turne the vnto me & haue mercy vpon me, for I am desolate & in misery. The sorowes of my hart ar enlarged, O bring thou me out of my troubles. Loke vpon mine aduersitie and misery and forgeue me al my sinne. O kepe my soule and deliliuer

me, let me not be confounded, for I haue put my truste in the.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               I much reioyce to see in you these workes of faithfull repentance. This humbling of your self before ye maiestie of God, this lamenting of your sinnes, this faithfull and hartie calling on the Lordes name for remission of sins in Christes bloud, for the tranquilitie, peace, quietnes, and reast of conscience, for the fauour & grace of God, for gods wil to be done in you, is without doubt a sure seale vnto your conscience, that God loueth, fauoureth and tendereth you, yea and that muche more thē any natural father maketh of his sonne.Eccle. xxxv. Who so serueth God (saith the wise man) after his pleasure, shalbe accepted, and his praier rea
                     •
                  cheth vnto the cloudes. The praier of him that humbleth him self, goeth thorowe the cloudes, till she

come nie. She wil not be comforted, nor go her way, vntill the hyghest God haue respect vnto her. The Lord is nie vnto them yt are of a contrite heart (saith the Psalmograph)Psal. xxxiiii
                        •
                     
                   & will saue suche as be of an humble spirite.Luk. xviii. The sinfull Publican, thus hūbling him self, obtained the fauor of God, remission of sinnes, & went home more righteous than the proud Pharisey.Math. viii. So likewise the Centurion cō
                  fessing his vnworthines for the receiuing of Christ into his house, obtained health for his sicke seruāt. Likewise the Leper with diuers other, humbling them selues before Christe, obtained their hartes desire.Psalm. ci. For God, saith Dauid, hath respect vnto the prayer of the humble, & suche as be destitute, & despiseth not their desire, but heareth 
                     •
                  heir mournings, yt he may deliuer 
                     •
                  hem and saue them.
            
            
               Euseb.
               Now neighbour,

how do you? I pray you bee strong in God, & reioyce in his sauing health.
            
            
               Epa.
               O neighboure Eusebius, my body is weake, my heare is faint, my wits are feble, my memory almost faileth me: no part of me is fre from sicknes and paine.
                     A praier. But Lord, I beseche thee, strengthē thou me, & endue me wt power from aboue, that as ye spirit is ready:Math. xxvi. so likewyse the flesh, which is euer weake & vnready, may be obediēt to thy godly wyl, & frely consent to the working of thy blessed pleasure.Luk. xvii. Mark. ix. Lord encrese my faith. Lorde, helpe my vnbelief. Lord, remēber not mine olde sinnes, but haue mercy vpon me, and that sone, for I am come to great misery.Psal. lxxix. Healpe me, O God my Sauiour, for the glory of thy name. O deliuer me, & be merciful vnto my sinnes for thy names sake.
               
            
            
               Euse.
               God hath euer be me
                     ••
                  full

vnto you, & so will cōtinue vnto thend, doubt you not.
            
            
               Ep.
               That is my only comfort. A praier. Psal. lxviii.
                  And Lord, I most humbly pray thee, cōfirme yt whiche thou hast begon to worke in me, and kepe me blamelesse against the comming of thy deare sonne.
But where is my louing neighbour Philemon? I wold be glad to haue his counsell in a certaine matter. Where is he?
            
            
               Phile.
               Neighbour, here at hand. What is your pleasure?
            
            
               Epa.
               I perceiue right well, yt my sicknesse doth not discrease, but encrease, so yt I can not long continue in that state, wherin I am now. And I thinke 
                     •
                  erely, yt the lord my God hath sēt this sicknes vnto me as a messenger, to afore warne me of my departure from this world, yt whan he come, he may not finde me vnprepared or vnready. And I most hartely thanke him for it. Therfore

neighbor Philemon & neighbors al, I think it best euen out of hand to dispose my temporall possessions, and to set an order in such worldly goodes as God hath lent me, that after my departure there be no dissension nor strife for thē, among suche as I most wishe to be linked together with perpetual amitie, and continuall frendship. It shall also, I trust, be a great quietnes vnto my mynd.
            
            
               Phile.
               If you haue not already brother Epoporoditus, disposed and set an order in your temporal things, I wishe it to be done with all expedition. For suche thinges ought to be considred, when we be most perfect in health, forasmuche as our life is vncertaine, & we know not, howe sone death commeth.
            
            
               Epa.
               I thought not that the tyme of my life had bene so short, & ther
                     •
                  fore I deferred the matter. But I

se now,Mar. xxiiii. Mark. xiii. Apoc. xvi. that no man is certain of his life vntill to morowe: therfore ought we all to watche, & to prouide that we be not found vnready, whē the Lord commeth.
            
            
               The.
               Whan that godly king Ezechias was sicke,iiii. Reg. xx. God sent the Prophet Esaias vnto him, and willed him to saye vnto hym on this wyse. Thus saieth the Lord God: Set thi house in an order, for thou shalt die and not liue. Here learne we ye good will of God, whiche is, that they, whome the Lord hath endu
                  
                     •
                  ed with the goodes of the worlde, 
                     •
                  hould before their departure set a godly order and quiet stay in their 
                     •
                  emporal possessions.
            
            
               Epaph.
               You 
                     •
                  ay truth neighbour Theophile, & 
                     •
                  herfore I pray you bring hether 
                     •
                  en, inck, & paper, withal expedi
                  
                     •
                  ion, and let my will be written. 
                     •
                  or I thank the Lord my God, I 
                     〈◊〉
                   aswell contented to leaue the

goodes of ye world, as euer I was to enioy them. And in this behalf I haue to thank the lord my God, that since I came to the vse of reason,The true vse of ritches. and had any worldly possessions at all, I haue alwayes made them to serue me, and I neuer serued them, but at all times coulde be contented to depart from them whansoeuer the glory of god, and the commoditie of my neighbour did require.
            
            
               Christ.
               Than did you vse your goodes aright. And you were not ritch in the world, but in the Lorde, & of the nōbre of those, of whom it is written: blessed are the poore in spirit,Math. v. for vnto thē belongeth the kingdome of heauen The Psalmograph saith:Psa. lxii. If ritches do abound, set not thy heart vpon them.i. Cor. vii. And the holy Apostl
                     •
                   commaundeth, that they which vse the world should be as thoug
                     •
                   they vsed it not. For the fashio
                     •
                  
                  
of this world goeth away Saint Iohn also saieth:i. Iohn. ii. Se that ye loue not the world, nether the thinges that are in the worlde: for all that is in the worlde (as the lust of the fleshe, and the luste of the eies, and the pryde of life) is not of the father, but of the worlde. And the worlde passeth away, and the lust therof: but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth for euer.
            
            
               Epa.
               God graunt al men, to follow this doctrine. O Lord how sick am I? Where is the pen, Incke and paper?
            
            
               Euse.
               Here syr.
            
            
               Epaph,
               Wright neighbor Philemon I pray you.
            
            
               Phile.
               What is your pleasure that I should wright?
            
            
               Epaphrodi.
               On this manner.
               
                  IEpaphroditus the vnprofitable seruaunt of God,The sickemans will. weke in body & notwtstanding strong

in mynde do willingly and with a fre hart, render and geue againe into the handes of the Lorde my God,Soule. my spirit, which he of his fatherly goodnesse gaue vnto me, whan he fashioned this my body in my Mothers wombe, by this meanes making me a liuing creature, nothing doubting, but that this my Lord God for his mercies sake set forth in ye precious bloud of his derely beloued sonne Christ Iesu our alone sauiour and redemer, will receiue my soul into his glory, and place it in the company of the heauenly aungels and blessed sainctes. And as concerning my body,Body. euen with a good will & fre hart, I geue it ouer, commending it vnto the earth, wherof it came, nothing doubting, but that according to ye article of our faith at the great day of the generall resurrection, whan we shall all appeare

before the iudgemēt seat of Christ, I shal receiue it again by the mighty power of God, wherwith he is able to subdue al thīgs vnto him selfe,Phil. ii. not a corruptible, mortail, weake, and vile body as it is nowe, but an vncorruptible, immortall, strong, perfect, and in all poyntes like vnto the glorious body of my Lorde and Sauioure Christ Iesu. Haue ye writtē this, neighbour Philemon?
            
            
               Phi.
               Yea forsothe Sir. But what is your mind now, cōcerning your world 
                     •
                  y possessions.
            
            
               Epaph.
               First as touching my wyfe:Wife. with whome I 
                     •
                  oupled my self in the fear of God, and refusing all other women, I 
                     •
                  inked my selfe vnto her, liuing wt her in the blessed state of honoura
                  
                     •
                  le wedlocke, by whome also tho
                  
                     •
                  owe the blessing of God, I haue 
                     •
                  ad certen children, wherof part 
                     •
                  re gone before me vnto the lord,

and part yet remain a liue, albeit I dout not, but ye god, after my departure according vnto his promis, will be vnto her an husband, yea a father, a patrone & defēder, & will not suffer her to lack, if she go 
                     •
                  orth to liue in his feare, to serue hym, and diligently to call on his holy name, yet forasmuch as God hath blessed me with worldly substance, and she is mine own flesh, and whosoeuer prouideth not for his,i. Tim. v. hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidell, I bequeth & geue vnto her for tearme of her life, this house wherein I nowe dwell, with ye appurtenances, and all the housholde stuffe contayned therein. And after her departure, I wil that my eldest sonne (whom now I only haue aliue of all my sonnes) haue the house. Let this suffice for my wiues portion, whō I doubt not, God will take into

his protection, and so prouide for her in the tyme of her short pilgrimage, that she shall want no good thing. Only I craue this at her hand, that she be diligent in training vp my children in the feare and doctrine of the Lorde: so shall God be vnto her an husband, and to her childrē a father. Moreouer as concerning my children, albeit I am fully perswaded that God according to his promise will be a father vnto them, & if they liue in his fear, he wil not se thē lack, yet both ye law of God, & of nature requireth, yt I should also haue some care for them.Sonne. Therfore vnto my sonne I bequeath the house & the land, which I haue geuē my wife for tearme of her life, frelye to be his owne after his Mothers departure. And if God so appoynting, he chaunceth to departe before his mother, I will that the

house & the land,Daughters. goe to the vse of my .ii. daughters. Haue you written these thinges.
            
            
               Phile.
               Yea syr. But what nowe for your daughters.
            
            
               Ep.
               If thei be godly brought vp, I doubt not, but if they liue, God will aboundauntly prouide for them. Notwithstāding I geue vnto eche of them .ii. C. pounds, of good & lawfull mony to be paid in the day of their mariage. And if my sonne fortune to die: I geue vnto them also my house and my land.
            
            
               Euse.
               Sir we be all mortall, both old and yong, & God knoweth how sone we shal depart hēce. For as the common prouerbe is:

                     Assone to the market for to be soulde,
                     Cometh the yong shepe as the oulde.
                  
What if al your childrē die before they come to mariage?
            
            
               Epaphro.
               My wil is, that in such case, all I haue geuen them, shall go to the vse of the pore. I will that they be

mine heirs. I pray you neighbour Philemon, write so.
            
            
               Phi.
               I haue done so.Seruantes
               
            
            
               Epaphro.
               I thinke it conuenient to geue to my seruauntes somwhat, that it be not said, they haue serued an vnthankfull maister.
            
            
               Chri.
               Sir that is very mete. For the wyse man saith:Eccle. vii. wheras thy seruaunt worketh truely, entreat him not euill, nor the hirelyng that is faithfull vnto thee. Loue a discrete seruaunt as thine owne soule, defraude him not of his libertie, nether leue him apore man.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               I geue to euery one of my seruauntes .vi. pound .xiii. 
                     •
                  hillinges .iiii. pence, to be paid in the daye of my buriall. Write it.
            
            
               Phile.
               It is done.
            
            
               Epa.
               God blesse 
                     •
                  hem, and encrease them, for they haue serued me both honestly and faythfullie. The Lorde our God 
                     •
                  eale wt them, as they haue dealt with me.
            
            
               Theo.
               They haue done

but their dutie.
            
            
               Phile.
               But neighbour Epaphroditus, wherof shall these sommes of mony be raysed?
            
            
               Epaph.
               God hath blessed me aboū
                  dantly. Ye shal haue it in my coū
                  ting house with a more summe.
            
            
               Christ.
               
                  Debters.But now syr, concerning your debts: what order will you appoynt for them?
            
            
               Epa.
               The Lorde my God be thanked, I owe no mā any thing, but loue & good wyll. My chief study hath euer bene, to kepe my self out of debt. And if at any tyme I ought any thing, to labour vnto the vtter moste of my power, to dispatche my self of that debt withall expedition. I neue
                     •
                   counted other mens goodes min
                     •
                   own. That I truly got with min
                     •
                   own labour, yt did I alway coun
                     •
                   mine owne, my debtes being onc
                     •
                   paid. I owe nothyng, many ow
                     •
                   me, but forasmuch as they be por
                     •
                   men, & can not pay that they ow
                     •
                  
                  
me, except it should be vnto theyr great hindrance, yea I think vnto their vtter vndoing. I freely forgeue all my debters what so euer they owe me, vnto the vttermoste farthing, euen as I would God ye father should forgeue me all my debts for Christes sake. Wryght this, that I haue forgeuen all my debts, so that none hereafter shall demaūd any det of any mā, in my behalf.
            
            
               Phi.
               I haue done your appoyntmēt.
            
            
               EU.
               Neighbor Epaphro 
                     •
                  itus seing ye god hath richly blessed you wt the goods of this world 
                     •
                  t wer very expedient to remēber 
                     •
                  he pore scholers of ye vniuersities of Cābridge & Oxford.Scholers of Cambridge and Oxford. For if they 
                     •
                  e not mainteined, all learning & 
                     •
                  ertue wil decay, and a very bar
                  
                     •
                  ary shall brast in among vs, & at 
                     •
                  he last bring this our realme into 
                     •
                  estructiō. And verely the loue of many now a daies toward good

letters is very colde, in so muche yt we se daily many good wits compelled for lack of exhibition to forsake the vniuersitie, and to becom seruing men, whiche kinde of lyfe is most abhominable, and vnwor
                     •
                  thy a good nature.
            
            
               Epa.
               I haue not in times past bene altogether vnmindfull of the vniuersities. What benefits the students hau
                     •
                   heretofore receiued at my hands I wil not here rehearse: God an
                     •
                   they know it. And the knowledg
                     •
                   therof, I would wish rather to b
                     •
                   learned of other, then to be hear
                     •
                   of me. Surely I thincke him 
                     〈◊〉
                   good christian, nor frend vnto hi
                     •
                   countrey (whiche if he be able) r
                     ••
                  fuseth to help forward the studie of good wittes. I pray you neigh
                     •
                  bor Philemon set in .ii. C. pound
                     •
                   of mony, one. C. to be geuen vn
                     ••
                   the vniuersitie of Cambridge, th
                     •
                   other vnto Oxford.
            
            
               Phile.
               This

Godly and charitable dede.
            
            
               Epa.
               Haue ye done?
            
            
               Ph.
               Yea forsoth sir.
            
            
               Epa.
               Let me se, what now remaineth.
            
            
               Chri.
               Sir, will it please you to remember the poore?Poore p
                        ••
                     ple.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               I neuer forgot them, since the Lorde my God, gaue me any portion of worldly goodes, I always considred to what vse, thei were geuen me: verely, that I shuld distribute part of them to the necessitie of ye pore sainctes. And I thanke the Lord my God, so haue I don: yea, and that with a good wyll and free hart.ii. Cor. 
                        •
                     . For God loueth a chere
                  
                     •
                  ull geuer, I haue not bene of the minde ye some are, whiche, so long as they liue, gredely gather together, and bestowe nothing at all vpon the poore. But when they se nothing but present death, then 
                     •
                  ash they out, and liberally geue 
                     •
                  nto the pore scilicet, because they 
                     •
                  an kepe it no longer, I truste, I

haue laid vp for my selfe all ready treasures in heauen,Math. vi. where neyther rust nor moth doth corrupte, and where theues doe not breake through or steal. For I haue euer thought it better to send my workes before me, while I liue in this world, than to haue them sent after me I know not by whō, whā I am gone.Purgatorie rakers. These purgatori rakers shall nether rake nor scrape for me with their masses and Diriges, when I am departed.Phil. iii. For I trust no suche workes. Neither do I any thyng regard ye prayers of suche as haue ye belly for theyr God. But as touching the pore. I geue vnto them .iiii. C. poundes, whiche I wil haue bestowed, no
                     •
                   vpon idle lubbers & sturdy quea
                     •
                  nes, but vpon the halt, the lame, the blind, the sick, and suche other as be comfortles. And in this nō
                  
                     •
                  ber also of the pore, I comprehend

prisoners, pore maides, yong mē, which haue not wherewith to set vp their occupation, & my neadie neighbours. These .iiii. C. pounds are in four seuerall bagges, lying in my countyng house by them selues, with this wryghting vpon euery one of them. Mony for the poore. This mony I wil haue distributed with all haste, if it be possible, euen before I departe. Haue you wrytten in this monye for the pore?
            
            
               Phile.
               I haue done it.Hie waies.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               The hie wayes may not bee forgotten, whiche in many places are very foul & ieopardous. Unto the repayring of them, I geue. xl. poundes. Write it. For I thincke this also to be a dede of charitie, & a commendable worck befor God to repair hie wayes, that the people may safely and without danger trauaill by the way
            
            
               Chr.
               The 
                     •
                  et is very godly wtout all doubt.
            
            
               
               Ep.
               Neighbour Philemon, I pray you, put in that. xl. pound for the hie wayes.
            
            
               Phi.
               It is done already.
            
            
               Epa.
               That which I shuld chiefly haue remembred, I had almost forgotten
            
            
               Euse.
               What is that?
            
            
               Epi.
               Sermons.
            
            
               Phile.
               What is your minde in that behalfe?Sermons.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               This. At the tyme of my buriall, when the people be gathered together, I wold gladly haue some learned man to make a Sermon, wherin the people may be admonished of their mortalitie, and be taught, howe they ought to dispose them selues in this life, that whan the tyme come, they may yelde vp a good soule into the handes of the liuing God. For his paines I appoynt. x.s. to be geuen him. Also I geue for the preaching of foure score sermons at other times, whē it shalbe thought most conuenient xx. poundes. And as I with these

Sermōs to be preached by godly & discrete learned men: so I wishe them to be preached in suche places, as the people haue most nede of doctrine and teaching. For the Lorde knoweth, the people perish for want of godly knowledge.Esa. lvi. The greatest parte of our beneficed men (God helpe vs) are blinde guides, and dom dogges, not once able to barke. The people are desirous to knowe God, and omong the great multitude of so many beneficed men, none almoste ether is able, or els endeuoreth him selfe to bring them vnto Christ. It is in these our daies found true, that is written in the gospel.Math. ix. The haruest truely is plenteous, but the labourers are fewe. It behoueth therefore euery Christen heart to pray the Lord of the haruest, that he will send labourers (not loyterers) into his harnest, and to procure

so much as lieth in his power, that the worde of God may be vniuersally preached, that the people may repent, turn vnto ye Lord our God, and serue hym in holynes and righteousnes al the days of their life, whiche can not bee brought to passe, where the word of God is not preached.Luke. i. Rom. x. How shal they beleue on him, of whom they haue not hard? How shal thei hear without a preacher? To declare therfore my good will toward the word of God, & the saluatiō of the Christians, I geue .xx. poundes for the preaching of .lxxx. sermōs. I pray you note it in my wil,
            
            
               Phi.
               It shall be done.
            
            
               Epa.
               To beare all these charges, ye shall haue ye mony in my coūting house
            
            
               Chr.
               Sir concerning the costes of your burial, what order wil it please you to make in that behalf?
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  Ministers.Let ye ministers with the other officers

of the church haue their duties according to the custome.Mourning gownes.
               
            
            
               Eu.
               Howe many mourning gownes sir, wil ye geue?
            
            
               Epa.
               Of what mourning gownes speake you?
            
            
               Eu
               The manner is (as ye know) yt whan a man of honest reputation departeth, & is brought to be buried, ther shuld follow him certaine in fine blacke gownes, & certain pore men & women in courser cloth.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Unequally hādled, that the pore shuld haue the worst, & the rich or wealthy the best. And cal ye these mourners?
            
            
               Eu.
               So are they called.
            
            
               Epa.
               For whō shuld they mourn.
            
            
               Euse.
               For you.
            
            
               Ep.
               Why for me? Because good thinges haue chaunced vnto me? Because I haue passed ouer ye daungerous sea, and am come vnto the hauen of quietnes? Or because I am deliuered from al euil and set in a blessed and ioyfull state? I thinke that at the burials

of the faithfull, there shuld rather be ioy & gladnes, then mourning and sadnes, rather pleasant songes of thankesgeuing: then lamentable and dolefull diriges. Let the infideles mourn for their dead: the Christians ought to reioyse, whan any of the faithfull be called from this vale of misery vnto the glorious kyngdome of God.
            
            
               Phi.
               
                  i. Thes. iiii.In dede that most worthy Apostle S. Paule would not haue vs mourn for them that are fallen aslepe, as the Heathen doe, which know not God.Apoc. xiiii. And s. Ihō saith in his reuelation. I heard a voyce from heauen, saying vnto me: wrighte. Blessed are the dad, which die in the Lord. For from henceforth the spirit saith, ye they are at rest frō their labours, pains and trauailes. &c. The Psalmograph also saith:Psal. cxvi. O full precious in the sight of the Lord is ye death

of his sainctes. Hereto belongeth the saying of the wyse man.Sap. iii. The soules of the righteous are in the hand of God, & the paine of death shall not touche them▪ in the sight of the vnwyse they appeare to die, but they are in peace. Againe in another place.Sap. v. The righteous shall liue foreuer more: their reward is also with the Lorde, and their remembraunce with the highest. Therfore shall they receiue a glorious kingdome, and a beutifull crown of the Lordes hand. For wt his righthād shall he couer them, and with his own holy arme shall he defend thē.Luke. xvi.
               
            
            
               Chri.
               Blessed Luke declareth in his Gospell, ye so sone as Lazarus was dead, (which in his life time, was diuersly afflicted, and miserable punished with many sores and diseases,) he was receiued into the bosome of Abrahā, where he enioyed all pleasure,

felicitie and comfort. Such as die in ye Lord, are not to be mourned, but God is rather to be thancked for their Christen departure. For they are now in reast. They ar wt him,Esay. xxv. in whom alone, al glory, ioy, comfort and felicitie is. God hath wiped away al teares from their eies,Apo. vii.xxi. so that they are past al sorow al mourning, all paine, why than should other mourn for them, ye ar in so ioyful state? The eie hath not sene,Esay. lxiiii. i. Cor. ii. nor ye eare hath hard, neither hath it entred into ye hart of man, what ioyes god hath prepared for them that loue him.
                     Ser. de mortalitate.
                  
               
            
            
               Theo.
               Saint Cipriane in his sermon of mortalitie hath these words: how much it profiteth to go out of the world Christ him selfe the author of our saluatiō & prophet sheweth, which whan his disciples were sad, because he said,Iohn. xiiii. that he shuld depar
                     •
                   from them, spake vnto them say
                     ••
                  ing:

If ye had loued me, ye wold haue reioysed, because I goe vnto the Father: teaching and shewing by these his wordes, that whan our frendes, whome we derely loue, depart out of the worlde, we ought rather to reioyse, than to be sad. Thereof the blessed Apostle Paule, being myndfull, saieth in his Epistle:Phil. i. Christ is to me lyfe, and death is to me a vauntage. He thinketh it great auauntage to be rid out of the snares of this lyfe, when he shalbe no more subiect to any offence, or synne of the flesh, but be exempted from the afflictions that do trouble vs and deliuered frō yt in venimed chawes of the deuil, by going vnto the ioy of eternal saluation, through the calling of Christ. Also in the same sermon he saith: I my selfe, being the most simple of all other, haue through the goodnes of God diuers

times, aswell by Reuelation as otherwyse, receiued instructiō manifestly to affirme and preach, that our brethren, whiche be deliuered from the worlde, by the calling of God, ought not to be mourned for, seing they be not lost, but sent before to make the waye for vs that do come after. We should not therfore couet them againe which be dead, nor mourne for thē any otherwyse, then we vse to do for such as haue taken their iourny into a straunge lande. And for them we ought not to wear black, sence they in heauen be clothed in white.
                     
                        •
                     po. vi. Herein we should not geue occasion vnto the gentils, yt they might iustly reproue vs, when we mourn for them as dead and lost, whom we do affirme to be liuing with God. &c. And a litle after he saith: The Apostle Paule doth reproue & blame such as do mourne

at the departure of the persones y• they loue.i. Tes. 
                        •••
                     . I would not brethren (quod he) that you should be ignoraunt concerning them, which be fallē on slepe, that you sorowe not as other do, whiche haue no hope. If we beleue that Iesus died and rose againe, euen so then, also thē whiche slepe by Iesus, wyll God bryng again with him. He declareth, that suche as be sorowfull at their frendes departure, haue no hope. Why should we that liue by hope, that beleue in God, & truste that Christ suffred for vs, & is risen again, that remain in Christe, and be rysen by hym, and in hym, 
                     •
                  e so vnwylling to departe out of this worlde, or els mourn & lamēt suche as be departed, as though they were lost, sence Christ our 
                     •
                  ord & our God doth admonish vs, 
                     •
                  aying:Iohn. 
                        ••
                     . I am the resurrection and 
                     •
                  he life, he that beleueth on me,

yea though he were dead, yet shal he liue, and whosoeuer liueth and beleueth in me, shall neuer die. If we beleue in Christ, and trust his wordes and his promises, we shal neuer die, but shal com with glad suerty vnto Christ, with whome we shal euer liue & raigne. And yt in the meane season we do die, we do but therby passe to immortalitie. For except we departe from hence, the lyfe euerlasting can not come. Death is no departure, but a passage, to ye entent yt this worldlye iourney once ouer runne, we may come vnto eternitie. Wh
                     •
                   will not make haste to a better estate? Who will not desyre to bee chaunged and transfourmed into the likenes of Christ, and to come out of hand to the dignitie of the heauēly grace? which thing Paul the Apostle doth declare. Our cō
                  uersacion, saith he:Phi. ii. is in heauen

from whence we loke for a Sauiour, euen the Lord Iesus Christ, whiche shall transforme our vile body, that he may make it like vnto his glorious body. And Christe the Lorde, doth promise, that we shalbe such, when that we may be with him, liue with him in his eternall seat, and reioyce with hym in his heauenly kingdom, he praieth vnto the father for vs on this manner: father I will that they, whiche thou haste geuen me, be wt me wher I am, that they may see my glory whiche thou hast geuen me, for ye didst loue me before ye making of the worlde. Therfore we 
                     •
                  ught nether to mourne nor to la
                  
                     •
                  ent for cōming vnto the seate of Christ, to ye glory of ye heauēly king 
                     •
                  ō, but ought rather according to 
                     •
                  he promise of God, according to 
                     •
                  he faith of the veritie to reioyce 
                     〈◊〉
                   our departure and transformation.

Hitherto haue I rehearsed the words of. S. Cipriane, which do manifestly declare that they whiche die in the Lorde: are in a blessed state,Apoc. xiiii. and therfore not to be mourned nor lamented. I fear least I haue bene tedius vnto you in rehersing so much of .s. Cipriās mynde concerning this matter.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               You haue rather neighbour Theophile cōforted me, then molested me: yea, you haue ryght well confirmed my faith, & mightely encouraged me to goe vnto this battel, and willingly to geue ouer this my life, forasmuch as I am thorowly perswaded, that after my departure from this vale of mysery, I shal come vnto a glorious kingdome, and shal se God, face to face. And one thing I noted in the wordes of. S. Ciprian, whiche you haue reheased, & tha
                     •
                   is this: yt we ought not to wear
                     •
                  
                  
black clothes & mourning gowns for them, whiche are deliuered frō the world, and are gone to God, seing thei be clothed in whight, and wear ioyfull apparell, and are in heauen with God, reigning in glory and eternall felicitie.
            
            
               Euse.
               In dede it is a poynt of fondnesse to mourn for thē that are in ioye, and to bee sory for them that are mery. The Apostle saith: Reioyce with them that reioyce,Rom. viii. & mourne with them that mourne. Seynge that the faythfull, which are deliuered out of this worlde, are in 
                     •
                  oy: it is more semely yt we should 
                     •
                  oy in God with them, thā mourn 
                     •
                  nd be sory for them, as though 
                     •
                  hey were in worse case now, then 
                     •
                  hey were afore. Let the Heathen 
                     •
                  ourne, whiche haue no hope, for 
                     •
                  he departure of their frends, the 
                     •
                  rue christians, which ar perswa
                  
                     •
                  ed, that such as die in the Lord,

are in muche better case then they euer were in this worlde, we ought rather to reioyce, & to singe psalmes, praises, & thākesgeuings vnto God, for the christē and godly departure of their brethren, and for their blessed estate, wherein God hath placed them.Apoc. xiiii. For the holy scripture pronounceth them blessed and happy, which die in ye Lord.Psal. cxviii. And ye Psalmograph saith: precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saintes.Sap. iii. The wise man also sayth, that ye soules of the righteous are in peace.
            
            
               Chr.
               They therfore which are in so blessed estate, ar not to be mourned nor lamented, but God is rather to be thancked for them.
            
            
               Th.
               The holy scripture declareth, that king Dauid praied vnto the Lord for the child,ii. Reg. xii. whiche he ha
                     •
                   by Bethsabe, Urias wife, when i
                     •
                   was sicke, and that he fasted, an
                     •
                  
                  
lay all the night vpon the earth, in so much that the Elders of his house arose and went vnto him, to take hym vp frō the earth, but he would not, nether did he eat meat with them. But when he hearde that the childe was dead, he arose from the earth, and washed and annoynted him selfe, and chaūged his apparell, and came into the house of the lord and worshipped▪ and afterward came to his owne house, and commaūded that they shuld set bread before him, & he did eate. And whan his seruauntes maruelling at these thinges, said vnto hym: What thinge is this, that thou hast done? Thou didst fast and wepe for the childe, while it was alyue, and as sone as it was dead, thou diddest aryse vp and eate. He answered: While the childe was yet aliue, I fasted and wept. For this I thought.
               
                  Who can tell, whether God wil haue mercy on me, that the childe may lyue. But nowe seyng it is dead, wherfore should I fast? Can I bryng him any more? I shall go to hym, and he shal come no more again vnto me. In this history yt godly wisdom of Dauid, is greatly to be considred. For hereof may we learne to pray vnto the Lorde our God for our sycke frendes, so long as they be aliue, and to seke all meanes possible at the Lordes hand, to obtain health for the diseased. But if the good wil of God be to take them out of this world, then are we taught, here no more to mourn, to wepe, to lament, and to be sory for them, but rather wt a ioyfull hart to worship the lord, (as Dauid did) and to geue hym moste harty thankes, that it hath pleased his goonesse to delyuer our brethren or sistern from this

sinck of euils, I mean this world: and to receiue them into his blessed kyngdom. Heathen like mourning, therefore, is to be banished from the burialles of the Christians.
            
            
               Euse.
               The maner among the Thraciās is,The maner of the Thracians. that whan any child is borne, and commeth into the world, thei wepe, lamēt & mourn, but when it goeth out of ye world, they reioyce and are mery.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               What moueth them so to do?
            
            
               Euse.
               Whan a childe commeth into the worlde, they consider into what great miseries he is lyke to fall, if he liue: contrariwise, when he departeth hence, they know that an end of all sorow & care, of all pain and trauail is come. Therfore the one thing moueth them vnto sadnes, the other vnto gladnes.
            
            
               Phi.
               Ther is great plentie of histories, whiche declare, that the very hea
                  
                     •
                  hen haue taken ye death of their

deare frendes paciently, so far is it of, that after ye manner of some whiche professe Christ, they immoderatly toke the death of theyr frendes, wept, wayled, mourned, wrong their hāds, tare their hear rent their clothes, and in manner killed them selues with sorowe and thought taking. Whan our Sauioure,Luk. xxiii. Christ went vnto hys death, certayne women followed hym, wepyng and mournyng, to whome he sayd: Ye daughters of Ierusalem, wepe not for me, but wepe for your selues, and for your children.
            
            
               Theo.
               Is he to be lamē
                  ted and mourned for whiche is remoued from thraldom vnto libertie, from mysery vnto welth: from darknes vnto lyght: from ieopardy vnto safetie: from sicknesse vnto health: frō mortalitie vnto immortalitie: from corruption vnto vncorruption: from paine vnto

ioy: from transitory thinges vnto euerlasting thinges: from the cō
                  pany of men, vnto the felowshyp of the blessed aungels and heauē
                  ly spirites. &c? Let the Heathen whiche haue no hope of the ioyful immortalitie of the soule, nor of the glorious resurrection of the body, mourne, wepe, and lament for their diseased: let the faythfull Christians be ioyfull in the Lord, and thank God for his great mercy and infinite goodnes, whiche he hath shewed vpon the brethrē, by calling them from this vale of wretchednes vnto his heauenlye kingdome.Apo. xiiii. For the voyce of God euen from heauen, pronounceth them blessed, happy, & fortunate, which die in the Lord.
            
            
               Phi.
               What is your mynde, therefore neyghbour Epaphroditus, concerninge mourning gownes?
            
            
               Epaphr.
               If it were not for offending other, and

that it should also be some hynderaunce vnto the poore, I woulde wysh rather to haue none, than otherwyse. For I would haue no man mourne for me. My trust is, that so sone as my soule shalbe deliuered out of the pryson of this my body: it shall strayght wayes possesse the blessed enheritance of the heauenly kyngdome, & raigne in glory with God for euer. What nede shall I haue then of mourners? Or wherfore should any mā mourn for me? Notwithstanding: I wil not striue with thē for their garmentes. Let my wyfe, and my children weare what garmentes they wyl, at my buriall, so they be such, as become the professours of true godlinesse. Only this I require, that .xxx. pore men and wemen, do accompany my body vnto the buriall, and that eche of thē haue a gowne of some conuenient

colour. I wyll also that .xxx. poore children be there also, and that euery one of them haue a semelye gown. And after my burial, I wil that both those pore men, women, and children, come home vnto my house, and haue some repast, for ye refection of their bodies. And so 
                     •
                  et them depart in the name of the 
                     •
                  ord. Haue you writtē this neighbour Philemon?
            
            
               Phile.
               Yea syr, it is done.
            
            
               Epa.
               I am glad of it. To se that these thinges may be done, according to my wyl, I make my wife sole executresse, & you neighbour Philemon, with my neighbours Christopher, Theophile, & Eusebius, here present, I make you fower myne ouerseers, char
                  
                     •
                  ing you in the name of God, and as ye wyl answere before the high 
                     •
                  udge Christ, at the dreadeful day 
                     •
                  f dome: yt ye se these my bequestes 
                     •
                  ruely, diligently, and faithfully

fulfilled.
            
            
               Chr.
               we were twyse vngodly, if we shuld not satisfy your desire and will, being so Christen and righteous.
            
            
               Epa.
               I bequeath to euery one of you foure, for youre paynes taking, fiue poundes sterling, not to the ende to make you hearlinges, but that it may be a token of my hartie good wyll towards you.
            
            
               Chr.
               Sir, wil it plese you to be buried in the churche, or in the churchyard?
            
            
               Epa.
               All is one to me.Psal. xxiii. The earth is the Lordes, & all that is conteined in it, I am not curious of the place. Wherso
                     •
                  euer I lie,Phil. iii. I doubt not, but ye lord our God at the last day shall raise me vp again, and geue me a body like vnto ye glorious body of our Lorde and sauiour Christ Iesus▪ Let the body therfore returne vnto the earth from whēce it came and the spirite vnto God,Eccle. xi. which gaue it.
            
            
               Euseb.
               Your children ar
                     •
                  
                  
buried in the churchyard.
            
            
               Ep.
               Bu
                  
                     •
                  y me there also. God geue vs all a ioyfull resurrection.Burials.
               
            
            
               Theo.
               Sir, what solempnitie will you haue at your buriall?
            
            
               Epa.
               What meane you
            
            
               The.
               Solempne singing, de
                  
                     •
                  out ringing, holy sensing, prie
                  
                     •
                  es pattering, candels lightning, 
                     •
                  orches brenning, Communions 
                     •
                  aying, and such like.
            
            
               Ep.
               No kind of superstitious custome do I al
                  
                     •
                  ow. That is godly, I only commend. As touching your solempn 
                     •
                  inging,Singing. it is all one to me, whi
                  
                     •
                  her you sing or say. Those Psalmes, hymnes, prayses & thankesgeuinges that be appointed to be 
                     •
                  ong or said at the burial of ye faith
                  
                     •
                  ul, let them be done in the name 
                     •
                  f God wtal cherefulnes of mind. 
                     •
                  s for your deuout ringinge,Ringing. I 
                     •
                  raue no more but one 
                     •
                  el to be e
                  
                     •
                  her tolled or rong, for to gather 
                     •
                  he people together, to heare the

word of God, and the thankes g
                     ••
                  uing. The ringing of the Belles can do my soule no good. And a
                     •
                   for your holy sensing, priestes pattering, candels lighting, torches brennyng: away with them, a
                     •
                   thinges superfluous and vnprofi
                     •
                  table. Now as concerning Communions,Communion. saying or singing: the
                     •
                   serue not for the burials of them that are departed, but for the exe
                     ••
                  cises of them that be alyue, tha
                     •
                   by that meanes they should call t
                     •
                   remembraūce the death of Christ and the fruites therof, as the Apostle sayth:
                     
                        ••
                      Cor. xi. So oft as ye shal eat o
                     •
                   this bread, and drinck of the Cupye shal remēber the Lords death till he come.Note. These sumpteous 
                     •
                   costly burials, are not to be commended, nether do they profit either body or soule, but onely se
                     ••
                  forth a folish, vain, and boasting pompe.
            
            
               Phile.
               The buriall of th
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  aithfull, ought to be done honest
                  
                     ••
                  , but not sumptuously. Neither 
                     ••
                  ught the dead bodies of the chri
                  
                     ••
                  ians, to be vilely handled, but 
                     •
                  onestly buried, for the hope of the 
                     ••
                  orious resurrection. So did A
                  
                     ••
                  aham bury his wife Sara.Gen. xxiii. and .l. Io
                  
                     ••
                  ph his father Iacob, and diuers 
                     ••
                  her, as the holy scripture men
                  
                     ••
                  neth. The bodies of the dead, 
                     ••
                  ith S. Austen,
                     Lib. 1. de C
                           •
                        
                        uitate dei. Cap. xiii.
                   are not to be de
                  
                     ••
                  sed, and to be cast awaye, and 
                     ••
                  ecially the bodies of the righte
                  
                     ••
                  s, and of the faithful, whom as 
                     ••
                  strumentes and vessels vnto all 
                     ••
                  od workes, the holy ghost hath 
                     ••
                  ed. But as concerning sumptu
                  
                     ••
                  s burials, thaforesaid authour 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                   they rather comfort the ly
                  
                     ••
                  g, thē help the dead. As sump
                  
                     ••
                  us exequies profit nothing ye 
                  
                     ••
                  ul ritche men: so in like maner 
                     〈◊〉
                   or no exequies at all, hynder 
                     ••
                  hing the sepulture of the poore

sainctes. That galant company o
                     •
                   the ritchemans seruauntes (o
                     •
                   whome we reade in the Gospel o
                     •
                   Luke)Luke. xvi. buried their master gorgeously in the sight of mē, notwith
                     •
                  stāding his soul was caried down into hel fire, wher it lieth in mos
                     •
                   miserable tormentes. What profited hym the gorgious, galan
                     •
                   pompous. and costly sepulture o
                     •
                   his body: seing his soule lieth wt out redemption in those moste in
                     •
                  tollerable flames of that lake whiche burneth with f
                     •
                  re & brim
                     •
                  stone?Apo. xxi. We read not, that Lazaru
                     •
                   was so sumptuouslye buried, n
                     •
                   that he was buried at all, notwt
                  
                     •
                  standing the angels of God ca
                     ••
                   & caried hym (not into a tombe
                     •
                   marble) but into the bosome of Abraham. And the golden mouth
                     •
                   Doctour, saieth in a certaine H
                     ••
                  mily.
                     
                        
                           ••
                        m. 84. in 
                           ••
                        . C
                           •
                        . 20.
                   When thou hearest that t
                     ••
                   Lord did ryse againe naked, ce
                     •••
                  
                  
I pray thee, and leaue of the fond & vain charges that thou bestow
                  
                     •
                  est vpon funerals, and burying of dead bodies. What meaneth this superfluous & vnprofitable cost, seyng that it hindreth thē greatly that doe it, & auaileth nothyng at all the dead, but rather hurteth them. &c.
            
            
               Epa.
               Simply, not sump
                  
                     •
                  uously, honestly, not honorably 
                     •
                  et me be buried. I require no more. You haue wrytten all these thinges according to my desyre, 
                     •
                  eighbor Philemon?
            
            
               Phi.
               Altoge
                  
                     •
                  her.
            
            
               Ep.
               Then am I at a poynt wt 
                  
                     •
                  he worldly possessions, & I truste 
                     •
                  n a good forewardnesse towarde God
            
            
               Chr.
               The custome in times 
                     •
                  ast was,Monethes mindes and yeare minds yt ther should be month 
                     ••
                  ndes & yere minds kept for the 
                     •
                  ead.
            
            
               Ep.
               To what end?
            
            
               Ch.
               That 
                     ••
                  e dead might be remēbred and 
                     ••
                  ayed for.
            
            
               Epa.
               Wherfore shoulde 
                     ••
                  ey be praid for?
            
            
               Chr.
               That their

sinnes (say they) might be forgeuē them.
            
            
               Epa.
               Whiche they, saye so?
            
            
               Chri.
               The Papistes.
            
            
               Epa.
               I haue nothing to do with papistes, nor with their doctrine. God blesse me from them.Phi. iii. For they are enemies of the crosse of Christe, deprauers of the holy scriptures, and corruptours of Christen soules. I beleue that a man, euen in this worlde, hath perfect and full remission of al his sinnes, or els he shall neuer haue it. God in this worlde, doth ether forgeue all the faultes, & th
                     •
                   paine due for the same: or els h
                     •
                   forgeueth none at all. I feare nothing at all, the Popes boylyng
                     •
                   fornace (I mean purgatory) Chr
                     ••
                  stes bloud, is a sufficient purgatory for my sinnes. The bloud 
                     •
                   Christ, Gods son, hath clensed v
                     •
                   from al sinne.i. Iohn. i. Hebr. ix. The bloud of Chri
                     ••
                   hath purged our conscience from dead worckes, to serue the liuin
                     •
                  
                  
God. We be sanctified, and made holy by the offring of the body of Iesus Christ done once for all.Heb. x. With the one only oblation of his blessed body, and precious bloud, hath Christ made perfect for euer and euer: them that are sancified. I requyre none other purgatory to pourge & clense my snnes, but the bloud of Christ.Ephe. v. For Christ hath offred him selfe aswete smelling sacrifice vnto God the father 
                     •
                  or my sinnes, yea and that so perfecte, absolute, consummate, and 
                     •
                  n all poyntes, so omnisufficient: 
                     •
                  hat there can be found no imper
                  
                     •
                  ection in it. Christ hath borne away all my synnes on his bodye. By the stripes of Christes body, 
                     •
                  m I healed. Christ died for my 
                     ••
                  nnes,Esay. liii. 1. Pet. 11. Rom. iiii. and rose againe for my iu
                  
                     ••
                  ification. Christ is made of God 
                     •
                  nto me, wysdome, righteousnes, 
                     ••
                  anctification, and redemption,

that as it is written, he that reioyseth, shuld reioyse in the Lord,i. Cor. i. Hier. ix. Christ is inough for me. Let the Papistes seke their saluation at whose hāds they list.
            
            
               Phile.
               Wher as the Papistes heretofore haue taught for the maintenaunce of their idle bellies, that mēs sinnes after their death be forgeuen thē, through the sacrifice of that most wicked and abhominable Popish Masse, & by pilgrimages going, by trētals, by Diriges, by ye good dedes of other. &c. It is a plain
                     •
                   errour, & agaīst the word of God. For remission of sinnes, the fauo
                     •
                   of God, & euerlasting life, is eithe
                     •
                   gotten or lost in this worlde. H
                     •
                   whiche through his owne repen
                     •
                  tance & faith in Christes bloud
                     •
                   obtaineth not forgeuenes of hi
                     •
                   sinnes in this worlde: shall neue
                     •
                   haue it by ye meanes of other 
                     〈◊〉
                   after this life.Iohn. iii. It is written, he

beleueth on the sōne of God, hath euerlasting life. But he that beleueth not in him, shall not see lyfe, but the wrath of God abideth on him. So many as die, are eyther faithfull or vnfaithfull. If they be faithful, so haue they in possession straightways euerlasting life. If they be vnfaithfull, then doth the wrath of God abide vpon them, & they receiue ye reward of infidelitie, which is euerlasting dānatiō. And albeit this appereth manifestly of the words aboue rehersed: yet the history of the vnmercifull 
                     •
                  ich man, & of ye pore Lazare, pain
                  
                     •
                  eth it out very liuely.Luk. xvi. In ye ye se, yt 
                  
                     •
                  he faithful man, which was La
                  
                     •
                  arus, so sone as he died, was re
                  
                     •
                  eiued into the bosom of Abrahā. Contrariwyse, the vnfaithful mā which was the vnmerciful glotō, 
                     •
                  as caried down streightwais in 
                     〈◊〉
                   hel fire. The like thing is manifestly

set forth in the two theues whiche died with Christ.Luk. xxiii. The one repented, beleued, and called for mercy vnto Christ, God and man saying: Lord remember me, whan thou commest into thy kyngdom, and Christ aunswered him: This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Here se we that this theife both repented & beleued, for howe shall they cal on him (sayth sainct Paule) on whome they haue not beleued?Roma. x. And therfore was receiued into glory. The other whiche continued in his vnbelief, and so died without repentaunce and faith, obtained the reward of vnbelief, that is to say: the wrath of God and eternall damnation. They therfore that die, are either faithfull or vnfaithfull. If they be faythfull: so haue they out of hād the reward of fayth, whiche is euerlasting glory, if they be vn
                     •
                  faithfull:

than receiue they their reward of vnfaithfulnes, and misbelief, whiche is eternall damnation. If the Papistes can fynde the third kind of men (whiche are nether faithfull nor vnfaithfull) then wyll we consent vnto theyr Purgatorie, for such haue nether place in heauen nor in hell. But suche sort of people, the holie scripture knoweth not. Therfore knoweth it not suche a place of purging after this life, as the Papistes haue heretofore deuised.
            
            
               Eus.
               The blessed Apostle.Rom. ii. S. Paule sayth: God shall geue to euery one according to his owne dedes.ii. Cor. x. i. Cor. ii. Againe, to the Corinthians, he also sayth: Euery one shall receiue his 
                     •
                  owne labour.ii. Cor. v. In an other place he also sayeth. We must all appear before the iudgemēt seat of Christ that euery man may receiue the workes of his body accordyng to

that he hath done, whether it bee good or bad.Gala. vi. Item. Whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. For he that soweth in his flesh, shal of the flesh reape corruption. But he that soweth in the spirite, shall of the spirite, reape life euerlasting. Let vs not bee weary of well doing. For when the tyme is come: we shall reape without wearines. While we haue therefore tyme let vs doe good vnto all men, and specially vnto them, whiche are of the houshold of faith. Hereto agreeth the saying of our sauiour Christ.Math. xvi. The son of man shal come in the glory of his father with his aungels, and then shall he rewarde euery man according to his dedes. Againe, I wyll geue euery one of you according to his dedes.Apoc. ii. Out of these scriptures we learne▪ that we sha
                     •
                   not be rewarded according to other

mens dedes, but accordinge vnto our owne deedes. If we haue wrought nothing at all in oure lyfe: what shall other mens dedes than do vs good, after our death? And I doubt whether any man (Christ alone excepted) haue good dedes sufficient for him self.
            
            
               Chri.
               If we consider well the history of the tenne virgins,Mat. xxv. it shall easly be perceiued, that no mā haue scasely oyle inough for him selfe. Yea, wer not the great mercies of God set forth to all faithful penitēt sinners in ye precious blud of Christ: we with al our oyl, should perish. For euerlasting life is the gifte of God,Rom. vi. through Iesus Christe oure Lord. If thou (O Lord) shouldest narowly loke vpō our iniquities, (saith the Psalmograph) O Lord who were hable to abide it?Psal. ciii▪
                   But ther is mercy with the in store. &c.
            
            
               The.
               The holy scripture moueth

vs to doe good whyle we are alyue, and not to truste other mens workes, to be done for vs, when we be dead.Eccl. xiiii. The wyseman saith: doe good vnto thy frende, before thou die, and according to thy abilitie, reache out thyne hand, and geue vnto the poore. Be not disapoynted of the good daye, and let not the portion of the good day ouerpasse the. Shalt thou not leue thy trauails & labours vnto other men? In the deuiding of thy heritage, geue and take, and sanctify thy soule. Worke thou ryghteousnes before thy death, for after thy death,Eccl. xviii there is no meat to fynd. Again: Abide thou not in the errour of the vngodly, but geue God thā
                  kes before death. As for the dead, thanckfulnes perisheth from him as nothing. Geue thou thanckes in thy lyfe, yea, whyle thou art liuing and whole shalt thou geue

thankes, and prayse God, and reioyce in his mercy. O howe great 
                     •
                  s the louing kindnes of the lord, and his mercifull goodnes vnto 
                     •
                  uch as turne vnto hym?Pro. iii. Salomō 
                  
                     •
                  n his prouerbes saith: withdrawe 
                     •
                  o good thing frō them that haue 
                     •
                  ede, so long as thy hande is able 
                     •
                  o doe it. Say not vnto thy neighbour, go thy way & come againe: 
                     •
                  o morowe wil I geue thee, wher 
                     •
                  s thou hast nowe to geue hym. Hereto agreeth the saying of the 
                     •
                  reacher:Eccle. ix. whatsoeuer thou art a
                  
                     •
                  le to do, do it out of hande, for in 
                     •
                  he graue that thou goest vnto: here is neither worke, counsell, knowledge nor wisdom. The prophet also sayth.Esa. lv. Seke the Lorde, 
                     ••
                  hyle he may be founde, and call 
                     •
                  pon him, while he is nie. Let the 
                     •
                  ngodly forsake his owne waies, 
                     •
                  nd the vnrighteous his owne imaginations, and turne againe

vnto the Lord, so shal God be merciful vnto him. Our sauior Christ saith in the Gospell. I must worke the worckes of him that sent me,Iohn. ix. while it is daye. The night commeth, when no man can worke. Walke while we haue light, least ye darknes come on you.Iohn, xii. &c. While ye haue light, walke in the light, that ye may be ye children of light. I say vnto you, make you frendes of the vnrighteous Mammō, that when ye shal haue nede,Luke. xvi. they may receiue you into euerlasting habitations. That seruaunt,Mat. xxv. which receiued one talent of his Lord, and gained nothing therewt, but went his way, and hid it in the ground; was cast into vtter darknes, wher
                     •
                   wepinge and gnashinge of teeth shalbe. The .v. folishe virgins, because they had no Oyle in theyr lampes, were not suffred to enter into the mariage. Moreouer the

most worthy Apostle. S. Paule saith.Gal. vi. While we haue tyme, let vs do good vnto all men, and special
                  
                     •
                  y vnto them, which are of ye houshold of faith. These and diuers other textes of the holye scripture moue vs to doe good our selues, while we be aliue in this worlde, and not to trust the workes of other to be done for vs, whē we be dead. For by our own works, and not by other mēs, shall we be iudged. Euery mā shall bear his own burdē. Euery man shal receiue the works of his own body according to yt he hath done, whether it bee good or bad:Gala. vi. ii. Cor. v. euery mā shal receiue his reward according to his own dedes. Beholde I come quickely (saith our sauiour Christ) and my reward is with me,ii. Cor. iii. Rom. ii. Apoc. xxii. yt I may geue to euerye one accordinge as his worke shalbe.
               And saint Iohn pronouncing

them blessed,Apoc. xiii. which die in ye Lord, saith on this maner. Their workes folowe thē. He saith not, other mens workes shal folow thē, whē they be dead, but their owne workes do follow, and presently accō
                  pany them▪ as the shadow doth ye body, euen vnto ye throne of Gods maiestie, to be testimonies & witnesses of their true and vnfained sayth. They therfore are to much fond and negligent of their owne saluation, which trust other more then them selues in matters pertayning vnto the health of their soules.
            
            
               Chri.
               There is an old saying in Latin, and as I thinck, no
                     ••
                  les true thā old. It is this. Da tua, dum tua sunt, post mortē, tunc tuae non sunt.
               
               Geue thy goodes while they be thine, for after thy death, they be none of thine.
            
            
               Euse.
               I remember whan I was a child, I learned .ii verses of my scholemaister, which

I haue not yet forgotten, I wyll rehearse them vnto you.

                     Quod sibi quis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         serit, praesentis tēpore vitae
                     Hoc sibi messis erit, cum dicitur Ite, Venitae.
                  
               
               That a mā soweth for him self in ye time of this present life, that shalbe his haruest or reape, when it is saide: Go, Come.
            
            
               Epap.
               What meane you by that, Go: Come.
            
            
               Eu.
               You know that to the vnfaithfull it shalbe sayd,Mat. xxv. go ye cursed in to euerlasting fire, whiche is prepared for ye deuill and his angels. But to the faithfull, it shalbe said on this maner: Come ye blessed of my father, possesse the kingdome, whiche was prepared for you, frō the beginning of the world.
            
            
               The.
               S. Paule hath a sentence muche lyke vnto your verses:Gala. vi. whatsoe, 
                     •
                  er a man soweth, saith he: yt shall he also reape. For he that soweth in his flesh, shall of the flesh, reape corruption. But he that soweth

in the spirit, shall of ye spirite reape life euerlasting.
            
            
               Phil.
               It is not wt
                  out cause, that the holy scripture doth so diligently call vs vnto repentaunce, faith, and good works in this present worlde. For euerlasting life euen in this worlde is ether gotten or loste. As God findeth vs, so iudgeth he vs. Euerye tree is knowen and iudged by her owne fruite, and not by the fruite of other trees. Euery man lykewyse is iudged by his owne workes, & not by the workes of other, as Christ saith to the vnprofitable seruaunt:Luke. xix. Of thine owne mouthe wil I iudge thee, thou euil seruāt. Teophilact saith.Mat. xxv. The vertue of my neighbour shall scacely be inough to defend him selfe, so farre is it of,☞ that it can profit me also. For all men shall be declared to be righteous by their owne workes, and not by the workes of theyr

neighboures.Eccle. xi.
               
            
            
               Euse.
               The Preacher saieth. When the tre falleth (whether it be toward the Southe or north) in what place so euer it fall there it lieth.
            
            
               Epap.
               What is ment by that.
            
            
               Euse.
               The tre signifieth euery one of vs, yt are the children of Adam. We fal, that is to say we die, ether toward the south, or toward the north, that is, either in the state of saluation or damnatiō. In what state soeuer we die, in the same remaine we. There is no chaunge after this life. Ether with poore Lazarus we goe into the bosome of Abraham,Luke. xvi. or els with that vnmercifull ryche man into the fier of hell. There are but two places after this life, hel and heauen. If we depart in the faith of Christe, we goe straighawayes vnto the glory of heauen. But if we die in vnbelief, than go we to the Deuill, as the scripture sayth.

He that beleueth on ye sonne, hath euerlasting life.Iohn. iii But he that beleueth not on the sonne, shall not see lyfe, but the wrath of God abideth vpon him.
            
            
               Christo.
               S. Iohn Chrisostome saith, he that washeth not awaye his synnes in this present life, shall finde no comfort afterward. &c.
            
            
               Theph.
               The same doctor also hath this saying. Let vs not thinke (saith he) that whē we come thither (he meaneth vnto the iudging place of God) mercy shal be geuen vnto vs, seing we do not so behaue our selues in this world that we may deserue to haue forgeuenes, though Abraham shuld pray for vs, though Noe, though Iob, though Daniell shuld make intercessiō for vs. Therfore while we haue tyme, let vs prepare for our selues, that whiche may stand vs in steade a fore God an other day.
            
            
               Eus.
               Hereto agreeth the saying

of S. Ciprian: Then (that is to say,
                     Tract. 
                           〈◊〉
                         demet
                   after death) shall repentāce be without fruite, and the sorowe of paine, weping also shall be in vayn, and praier shalbe to no purpose. Therefore make prouision, while ye may, for your safegard & life. Again he saith. When we be once departed out of this worlde, there is no more place for repentaunce, there is no effect of 
                     •
                  atisfaction. In this worlde life is either lost or gotten. Here through the worshipping of God, and the fruit of fayth, prouision is made for euerlasting saluation.
            
            
               Epa.
               I se than both by the aucthoritie of ye holy scriptures, and of the aunciēt doctours, that the workes whiche are done for them that are departed out of this worlde by other, are but vayne and vnprofitable, whether they departe in fayth, or otherwyse. For ye faithfull departe

straightwaies vnto glory, and the vnfaithful vnto euerlasting pain. The one sort haue no nede of praier, for they be already in most blessed state and ioyful reast. And the other are in so damnable case, that praier can do no good for them, no though Abraham, Noe, Iob, Daniel, and all the best that euer lyued shuld pray for thē. For in hell there is no redemption. And Abraham said to the rich mā.Luke. xvi. There is betwene vs and you a great space set, so yt they, whiche wold go from hēce vnto you, cānot, neither may they yt are there come hither vnto vs.
            
            
               Phi.
               The truth is neighbor Epaphroditus, ye papistes haue long bewitched the eies of ye simple,Purgatory a place of the Papistes deuising. by making thē beleue, that the soules of the faythfull goe not straightwaies after their departure, vnto eternal glory, but rather vnto purgatory, a place of their own deuising

for the maintenance of their idle bellies, there to lie miserablie puling, til they be redemed by trē
                  talles, by pilgrimages going, by pardons. &c. Our sauiour Christe in the gospell teacheth & maketh mēcion of two waies. But ye third is not found in the holy scripture. One is a straight way,Math. vii. which leadeth vnto life, & fewe ther be that finde it. The other is a brode way which leadeth vnto destruction, & many ther be yt go in therat.
            
            
               Ep.
               I beleue & am throwly perswaded, yt by yt merits of his precious bloud, which said vnto ye penitent thefe,Luk. xxiii. this day shalt thou be with me in paradise, my soule immediatly after the departure frō this vile body, shall be receiued vnto glory, & 
                     •
                  se ye glorious maiestie of God,Psal. xxvii. face to face, as ye Psalmograph sayth, I beleue to see the pleasures and good thinges of the Lorde in the

land of the liuing. I fear the Popish purgatory & the paynes therof nothing at all. My pain endeth in this life. And the ende of this life is the beginning of my ioye. This hope lieth vp buried in my breast. Therfore wyll I haue neither month mindes nor yere mindes kept for me, nor no idle Papistes and superstitious Massemongers sing or say for me. For I doubt not, but that the Lorde my God hath prepared me a vessel vnto honoure, and hath written my name in the boke of life, and hath also made me his sonne and heire of eternall glory,Sap. v. this is inough for me.
            
            
               Chr.
               The righteous (saith the wyseman,) shall liue for euermore, their reward also is with ye Lord, and their remembrance wt the hiest. Therfore shal they receiue a glorious kingdom, & a beautifull crowne of the Lordes hand.
            
            
               
               Epa.
               Neighbours, now am I at a poynt with the goods of ye world, yea and with the world it selfe, so that I may saye with the holy Apostle: The world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world.
            
            
               The.
               He is an happy man and greatly blessed,Gala. vi. which forsaketh & geueth ouer the worlde, before the world forsaketh him. For such obey this commaundement of S. Iohn. Loue not the worlde,i. Iohn. ii. nor those thinges that are in the worlde, albeit I doubt not (neighbour Epaphroditus) but that you shal right well recouer your health, and liue yet many yeares among vs.
            
            
               Epa.
               No neyghbour Theophile. The ende of my life is at hand. And I moste hartely thank the Lord my God for it.Phi. i. For I wishe to be losoned out of this life, and to be with Christ.Psalm. xliiii. Like as the hart desireth the water brokes, so longeth my

soule after thee, O God. My soule is a thurst for God, yea euen for ye liuing God. When shal I come to appere before the presence of God▪ O howe amiable are thy dwellinges,Psal. lxxxiiii. thou Lorde of hostes? My soul hath a desire and longyng to enter into the courtes of the Lord: my hart and my fleshe reioyce in ye liuing god. I had rather be a dore keper in the house of my God, thē to dwell in the tentes of the vngodly. O blessed are they,Psal. cxlii. yt dwell in thy house (O Lord) for they wil be alway praysing thee, (O lord) deliuer my soul out of the prison of my body, that I may come & geue thanckes vnto thy blessed name. Deale with me (O lord) according to thy will,Tob. iii. and commaūd my spirit to be receiued in peace. For it is more expedient for me to die thē to liue.
            
            
               Phile.
               I greatly reioyce in the Lord my God, good neighbor

Epaphroditꝰ, to se you in so good a mind, and to hear so godly wordes procede out of your mouthe. These thinges are euident testimonies of your good conscience toward God. Feare you not, the Lord hath sealed you with his hol
                     •
                   spirit, & made you through his mercy, a vessell vnto honor.
            
            
               Epa.
               Now that an order is taken concerning my worldly possessiōs, I wish to haue my wyfe, & my chyldren with my seruaunts brought hither vnto me, that I may take my leaue of them, and commende them vnto ye lord my God. I pray you neighbour Eusebius cal them hither.
            
            
               Euse.
               It shall be done.
            
            
               Epa.
               Oh, howe sicke am I? My wekenes encreaseth more and more.
Lorde be mercifull vnto me,A praier. and geue me grace paciently & thank fully to beare this Crosse, and in the middes of this my sicknesse,

alwaies to say.
Thy wil, O heauenly father be done & not mine.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Be strong in the Lorde, good neighbour,Math. xxvi. and faint not, and you shall see the wondrous workes of God. For God will either shortly restore vnto you your health: or els make an end of this your pain by taking you frō this wretched world, and place you in his glorious kingdom.
            
            
               Epa.
               God graunt. But is my neighbour Eusebius come againe?
            
            
               Chri.
               Yea sir.
            
            
               Epa.
               Where is he?
            
            
               Euse.
               Here sir am I.
            
            
               Epa.
               Where is my wife & my chyldren and my seruauntes?
            
            
               Phile.
               They are all here present.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               
                  The sickmās exhortation vnto his wife
                  COme hither wife. You see in what case I lie here, sicke, weake, and the prisoner of God, loking euery hour for my departure out of this worlde.

And this visitation of God is vnto me welcome, and I thanke the Lord wtal my heart for it. I doubt not, but that whan I am once gone out of this wretched lyfe, I shal be in a far better case then euer I was in this worlde. Therfore I pray thee good wife, be not heauy, neither take thought for me, but rather pray, that ye good wyll of God may be done in me. And be aswell contented, that I should nowe at the calling of God go from thee, as euer thou wast to haue me in thy company, I haue run my rase. I haue passed those yeres, which the Lord appoynted that I should lyue in this world. And now is the time of my departure come. And I geue ouer this my life willingly, and with a free hart. Therefore take no thought for me. And doubt thou not (swete wife) but if ye goest forthe to liue

in the feare of God, and to please him, God in the time of thy wyddowhod will be an husband vnto thee. He wilbe thy patron and defender. He wilbe thy mighty shield & strong buckler. He will prouide and afore see, that thou and thine shall want no good thing.Psalm. cxlv. For he hath promised in his holy worde, that he wil take charge of the widowes and defend their cause.Exo. xx. Esa. i.x. Iere. v.xii. Zach. vii Iames. i. He hath also geuen a strait commaū
                  dement to the magistrates & head rulers, to loke vnto wydowes, & to deliuer them from oppression. And his holy Apostle saith, that ye pure and vndefiled Religion before God ye father, is to visit, help, & comfort widowes. Therfore I doubt not but the Lord our God, will aboundantly prouide for thee and thine. Notwithstāding wife, forasmuch as from the first time o
                     •
                   our mariage vnto this presēt day

thou hast alway bene vnto me a true, faithfull, honest, diligent, & seruiceable wife. I haue made the mine Executresse, and geuen vnto thee in my wyll, suche a portion as shal aboundaūtly satisfie thee, both vnto the bringing vp of thy children, and also vnto the maintenance of hospitalitie: God hath sent me inough,Psal. xxxiii. & therfore I leaue vnto thee & thine inough. I praye God send you alwayes his feare before your face, so shall you neuer uant. To forbid the mariage after my departure according vnto the propertie of some husbādes, I wyll not.ii. Cor. vii. For the holy Scrip
                  
                     •
                  ure saieth: the wyfe is bound vn
                  
                     •
                  o the mariage, as long as her husband lyueth. If her husband die, 
                     •
                  he it at libertie to marie wyth whome she will, only in the Lord. If thou therfore after my depar
                  
                     •
                  ure (O wife, hast a minde to marye

agayne, marry in the name of the lord our God. For I know, as the wyse man saith,Sa
                        •
                     . viii. that no man can liue chast, except God geueth the gift. Only haue this care, that he, with whome thou doest determine to couple thy self in the blessed state of honorable wedlock, be such a man as feareth God▪ loueth his worde, is well reported of his neighbours, dealeth ryghteoussly with all men, embraceth vertue, despiseth vice. &c. Follow not the manners of certaine olde dotinge wydowes, which for bodely luste in their old croked age, couple thē
                  
                     •
                  selues to yonkers, whiche myght right wel haue bene their childrē, and vnto whome they might also haue geuē suck. But to what end such mariages come for the moste part, dayly experience teacheth. The one marieth for bodely pleasure, the other for couetousnesse.

Such mariages ar not blessed of God. Chuse thee therfore suche an husband as loueth thee, and not thy goods only, as is equall to the in condition, state, and age, as also will tender my children, and be a father vnto them, and see them brought vp in ye feare of God, & in ye knowledge of his blessed word. Pray vnto God, and he shal geue the good successe in all thy trauayles, loke diligently to the ver
                  
                     •
                  uous education and brynging vp of my chyldren. Graffe in theyr partes so much fruit of Gods spi
                  
                     •
                  it, as is possible, and wede out of 
                     •
                  heir myndes all kyndes of vice & wickednes, that their brestes may 
                     •
                  e made the Temples of the holy 
                     •
                  host. Loke wel vnto thi seruāts. Geue them their couenauntes, & 
                     •
                  uffer them not to be idle. So go
                  
                     •
                  erne thy houshold, yt there may 
                     •
                  e founde in it no vice but vertue,

no wickednes but godlines, no sinne but honestie and christen be hauour. And be thou thy selfe, an example of godly lyfe to thy chyldren & seruaunts: so maist thou be sure to haue obedient childrē and faithful seruants. Yea so shalt y• be wel reported of thy neighbours, & be loued both of god & al good mē.
               
                  The sickmās exhortatiō vnto his childrē
                  NOwe my chyldren, come ye hither vnto me, God blesse you, and sende you manye, yea and those ioyfull and quiet daies vpon the earth. Ye see in what case I am, sore, sycke, and very weake, abiding the good plesure of God. The ende of this my life is come, and I am glad of it, and most hartely thanke the lord my God. Let it not dismaye you, (my moste deare children) that I shall nowe be taken away from you. For albeit, that I being your naturall Father, shall no more

serue you nor prouide for you, as hitherto I haue done, yet doubt ye not, but if ye goe forthe, as ye haue begonne, to feare God, and to serue hym, he wil not leaue you comfortlesse, but in my steade he will be a father vnto you, receiue you into his tuition, and prouide better for you than euer I was able to doe. Therfore if ye wil haue God a mercifull and gentle father vnto you: feare him, loue him, honoure him, serue him, praye vnto him, call on his blessed name, be thanckfull vnto him for his benefites, and in all thinges seeke to please his godly Maiestie. Geue your mindes to the reading of the holy scriptures, and what so euer ye rede therein, practise it in your 
                     •
                  ife and cōuersation. Be not only fauourers, but folowers also of ye worde, not only louers but also 
                     •
                  iuers of the gospel, not only professers,

but also practisers of gods holy law, so shal God blesse you, & al good men loue you. Auoid idlenes & to much childish pastimes. Let no time of your life passe away without fruit. Escheue all euill company, and haue nothynge to doe with them, that be vngodly. Desire alway the felowship of them that be good and vertuous. Haue all your whole confidence and trust in the Lorde your God. Take nothing in hande, before ye haue craued his helpe by feruent prayer. And after the thing done, geue God moste harty thanckes, knowledging him to bee the geuer of all good thinges. The Saboth day, and suche other feastiful dayes, spend them holily and godly. Geue your selues to prayer, to hearing of Sermons, and reding the word of god. Se that ye defile not the name of ye Lord your God

with vaine and vnlawfull othes. Reuerence your elders, Honour your mother, be obedient vnto her pray for her, do for her, whatsoeuer lieth in your power, that God may blesse you and geue you long and ioyfull lyfe vpon the earth. Be no euill speakers. Be courteous and gentle vnto all men. Let no lightnes appere in you, nether in gesture nor countenaunce. Be true and faithfull. Cast away all pride, and embrace humilitie. Auoid superfluous eating & drinking. Use temperance in al your doinges. Be not moued vnto anger, but be pacient and ready to forgeue. Be merciful to the poore. Helpe all men to the vttermost of your power. Study to do good vnto all, and to hurt none. Loue all mē, yea euen your very enemies. Be not ouercome of euill,Rom. xii. but ouercom euyl with goodnes. If ye

obserue these few lessons, ye shall continue in the fauor of God, and God as a moste mercifull father shall blesse you and cause you to prosper on the face of the earth.
               BUt now heare thou my sonne the wordes of thy father,The sickmās exhortatiō vnto his sonne. and imprint them well in thy memory. Of all the sonnes that God hath geuen me since I was married to this thy Mother, thou alone art left a liue. And I thanke God for thee. For in thee lieth the hope of my posteritie. Loke therfore yt thou seruest God al the dais of thy life, yt thou maiest be the father of many children through the blessing of God. If thou dost resē
                  ble me as in countenaunce and lineamentes of body: so lykewise in manners and conditions of life & conuersation, it shall not repente me to haue begotten such a sonne:

nether shall it forthynke thee to haue had such a father.Tob. iiii. Take hede therfore that thou doest not degenerate and growe out of kynde. Honour thy mother all the dayes of her life. Pray for her, and do for her whatsoeuer lieth in thy power. Remēber yt God hath appoynted thee to be the staffe of her olde age, nether forget thou what and how great paines she hath suffred for thee.Prouerb. i. Beware of riotous cōpany, & haue alwais the fear of God before thine eies.Eccle. vi. Kepe companye with such as haue vnderstāding, and leane vnto their wisdom and counsell.ii. Tim. ii. Be sober mynded, and eschewe the lustes of youthe, but followe ryghteousnes, faith, loue, and peace: with them that cal on the Lord with a pure faith. When thou shalt come to the possession of suche worldly substaunce, as I haue apoynted for thee, through ye
                  
goodnes and liberalitie of God: loke that thou dost vse, and not abuse thy goodes. Spend in measure, and as present necessitie shal require. Beware of superfluous expenses. Auoide banketting and delicious fare.Prou. xxi For whosoeuer loueth delicately to fare, shall come to pouertie. Thinck that wel spēt, that is honestly spent in thy owne house. Extraordinarie bankettinges loke that thou flee, remē
                  bring that, that, whiche is gotten through long tyme, is consumed in a very little space.Tob. iiii. Geue almes of thy goodes, and turn neuer thy face from the pore, so shall it come to passe, that the face of the Lorde shall not be tourned away frō the. Be mercifull after thy power. If thou hast mutch, geue plēteously, if thou hast litle, doe thy diligence gladly to geue of that litle. For so gatherest thou thy selfe a good reward

in the day of necessitie. For merci deliuereth from all sinne & from death, and suffreth not the soule to come in darknes. A great comfort is mercy before ye hie God vnto all them that shew it. In the time of thy youth take hede thou defilest not thy selfe with whoredom, but bring an honest & chaste body vnto the blessed state of honorable wedlocke. And when the ripenes of thy age doth require ye to marry: take hede whome thou chosest to be thy yokefellow. Follow not the corrupt manners of ye wicked worldlings, which in chosing their wiues, haue their principall respect vnto the worthines of the stocke: vnto the welthines of the frendes, vnto riches, beauty, and suche other worldly vanities. Consider thou rather ye godlines than the worthines of the maides parentes, the honest and

vertuous bringing vp of her, her chaste and sober behauoure, her Christen and godly manners, her modestie, grauitie, sobrietie, and womanlines, her faith, obediēce, humilitie, silence, quietnes, honestie, howsewiuelines, and such other fruites of Gods spirite. Let her be no Papist, nor Anabaptist. nor Epicure, but one of the houshold of faith, and such one as feareth the Lorde God vnfaynedly. With suche one couple thy selfe in the feare of God,Pro. ix. and knowe her to be the gift of God, as Salomō saieth: house and richesse may a man haue by the heritage of his elders, but a discrete wyfe is the gift of the Lorde. Therfor when thou art once ioyned with her in ye holy order of Matrimonie: seeke after no strange fleshe, beware of whoredome,Pro. v. entangle thy selfe with no other womans loue, but

be glad with ye wife of thy youth. Let her brestes alway satisfie thee & hold thee euer content with her loue. And if God send thee childrē thanke him for them,Ephe. vi. and study to bring them vp in the feare, nourtour & doctrine of the Lorde, that they may learn to know God, euē from the very cradels.Colos. iiii. Order thy houshold godly and honestly. Cherish thy seruauntes, & geue them their couenauntes, remembring yt thou also hast a maister & Lorde in heauen. Loue thy neighbours, dwell quietly among them.Luke. vi. Lend vnto thē gladly whatsoeuer they nede, if thou hast it. Oppresse not thy tenaunts. Raise not thy rents. Take no incomes nor synes. Be content with the olde and accustomed paimentes. Bringe vp no newe customes. Maintaine the lawfull liberties of ye town wherin thou dwellest. Be no vnprofitable

mēber of the common wealth. Diffame no man, but speake well of al men. Hurt no man, but to the vttermost of thy power be beneficiall to all men.
                     
                        •
                     ob. iiii. Let neuer pride haue rule in thy mind, nor in thy word, for in pride begā al destruction. Who so euer worketh anye thyng for thee: immediatly geue him his hire, and loke that thy hired seruauntes wages remaine not by the ouernight.Math. vii. Luke. vi. Loke that thou do neuer vnto an other man the thing, that thou wouldest not another man should do vnto thee.Tob. iiii. Esay. lviii. Eat thy bread with the hongry & poore, and couer the naked with thy clothes. Aske euer counsell at the wyse.Col. iii. Tob. iiii. Be alwaye thanckefull vnto God, and beseche hym, that he will order thy wayes, and that whatsoeuer thou deuisest or takest in hande, it may remayne in hym. My sonne do these thynges,

and God shal blesse thee, and prosper all thy doinges.
               WHat shall I say vnto you my little Daughters?The sickmā
                     
                        •
                      exhortatiō vnto his daughters. I pray God blesse you▪ and make you ioyfull mothers of many Children. Serue God. Obey your mother. Be diligent to please her. Geue eare to her wholesome admonitions and folowe them. Do nothing without her counsell and aduisement. Whan your age shal require to be maried, followe the counsel of your mother, and other of your faithful frēds, which wish you to doe well, in choising your husbandes. Take hede ye be not corrupted with the giftes of noughty packes, nor deceiued wt the flattring tongues of wicked & vnthrifty persones. For many in these our daies seeke not the woman, but the womans substance.

Couple your selues with suche as feare God, loue his worde, and be of honest report. And when ye be once maried,Ephe. v. Colos. iii. 
                        •
                     . Pet. iii. reuerence your husbands, know thē to be your heads & gouernours appointed of God, obey them, & submitte your selues vnto them.Hebr. xiii. Suffer not your loue to depart frō your husbands, neither know any mā besides them, but kepe the bed vndefiled, yt your Matrimony may be honorable & pure in the sight of God, & of his holy cōgregatiō. And if God blesseth you with children, loke yt you bring them vp in the glory of God in his fear and doctrin. Engraffe in their yong brests, euen frō their tender age, vertue, godlines, and good māners, loke wel vnto your houshold, and be an example vnto your maides of godlines and honestie. Be no gadders abroad, nor haunters of Tauernes, but kepe

your houses continually, except some earnest and lawfull busines prouoke you to go forth. Be no bablers nor vain talkers, but for the most part vse silence.1. Tim. ii. For silēce is an ornamēt and precious Iewell vnto a godly womā. Aparell your selues in comely aray, with shame fastnes and discrete behauioure, not with broyded hear, ether gold or pearles, or costly garmēts, but as it becommeth women yt profes godlines thorow good workes. Let the hid man,i. Pet. iii. whiche is in the heart be without all corruption, so that ye spirit be at rest and quiet, which spirit before God, is a thing much set by. For after this maner in the olde tyme did the holye wemen, whiche trusted in God, tier them selues, and were obedient to their husbandes, euen as Sara obeyed Abrahā and called him Lord, whose daughters ye are, so

long as ye do wel. If you obserue these fewe lessons, which I your sicke father haue now geuen vnto you: doubt ye not, but ye shall right well prosper and liue a ioyfull & quiet life on earth. Yea God shalbe your father and defendor. Wel, stande a side a little whyle. Gods blessing be with you. Come hither ye my seruauntes.
               
                  The sickmās exhortatiō vnto his seruantes. i. Par. xxixSIrs, ye see in me what shal be the end of all fleshe, euen a departure from this world. For we are but strangers & pilgrimes on the earth, as our fathers were before vs.Hebr. xiii. and .ix. We haue no continuing citie here, but we seke one to come. The ordinaunce of God is, that all men shall once die. There lyueth no man,Psal. xxxix. that shall not die. A man in his time is but grasse, and flourisheth as a floure of the field. Our life is euen a vapour that apeareth

for a little time,Hebr. xi.ix. Psa. lxxxix. Psal. ciii. Esay. xi. Iames. iiii. and then 
                     •
                  anisheth away. On this condi
                  
                     •
                  ion came we into the world, that we shuld leaue it again. We haue 
                     •
                  een sure of death, euer sence we were conceiued in our Mothers wombe. These thinges do ye now 
                     •
                  e practised in me: ye time of my departure out of ye world is at hand. I thought it good therfore to send 
                     •
                  lso for you, & to take my leaue of 
                     •
                  ou, til we mete again in ye king
                  
                     •
                  om of God. I thanke you for the 
                     •
                  ood seruice yt ye haue done me. I 
                     •
                  aue not forgotten your seruisea
                  
                     •
                  le hearts and good wils toward 
                     •
                  e. If the good pleasure of God 
                     •
                  ad bene, that I shuld lōger haue 
                     •
                  ontinued with you, I wold haue 
                     •
                  onsidred your seruice better. But 
                     •
                   haue geuen to euery one of you 
                     •
                  uche portion of mony, as shal de
                  
                     •
                  are some part of my thanckefull 
                     •
                   wel willing heart toward you?

This nowe remaineth to be craued at your hands. As ye haue hetherto faithfully, truly & honestly serued me in my life time, euen so after my departure, so long as ye
                     •
                  tary here, shewe the like faithfulnes, truth & honestie toward your mistres. Consider, that as lōg as I liued, I was a stay vnto her, & vnto her thinges. But nowe her chief hope next vnto God, consisteth in you. Therfore I pray yo
                     •
                   loke well vnto the thinges, which appertaine vnto her. Se that nothing go to wast. Prouide that through your diligēce, her things may rather encrease then decrease. Ye knowe rightwell the dutie of a good seruaunt, notwithstanding euen at this my departure from you, I wil put you in remem
                     •
                  braunce of it, that whē I am gon
                     •
                   ye may yet remēber my admonitions, & the more spedely aunswe
                     •
                  
                  
vnto your vocatiō.The dutie of a good seruāt The duty of a good seruāt is to serue his maister and mistres willingly & with a fre courage euen for conscience sake,Ephe. vi Collos. iii. i. Tim. vi. Titus. ii. i. Pet. ii. not with the eie, but with ye heart, to obey them, to honor thē, gently to aunswere them, not to picke or steale away their goods, but to be faithfull vnto them in all thingee. Se therfore yt ye on this manner behaue your selues towarde your mistres: auoid al stubbernes, churlishnes, cursed speakinges, telling of tales, lying, picking, wast, idlenes, negligence and sluggishnes. Eschue all euill and riotous company. Fly dronkennes and whordome. Abstaine from vaine othes and folishe pastimes. So behaue your selues in all your life & conuersation: that the name of God & his doctrine be not euil spoken of. Yea, let the lyghte of your godlye behauioure so shine before men,i. Tim. vi.
                  
that ye may do worship to the glorious gospell of our sauior Christ in al thinges.Titus. ii And in thus seruing your mistres with a glad, ready & faithfull will, thincke your selues to serue the Lorde your God, and to do that thing, whiche is pleasaunt in his godly sight, and that he also will se your paines recompensed,Collo. iii. as the holy Apostle saith: ye seruauntes be obedient vnto thē, that are your bodely maisters in al thinges, not with eie seruice, as men pleasers, but in singlenes of hart fearing God▪ And whatsoeuer ye do, do it hartely, as though you did it to the Lorde, and not vnto men, knowyng, that of the Lorde ye shall receiue the inheritaunce, for ye serue ye Lord Christ. But he that sinneth, shall receiue accordynge vnto his synne. For there is no respect of persons with God. If ye serue your mistres truly

and faithfully, hereafter when ye shall your selues be housholders. God shall likewyse send you true and faithful seruauntes. But if ye serue her falsly and vngodly: then shal ye of your seruauntes be likewise serued hereafter.Luke. vi. For with what measure that ye mete withall, shall other mete to you again, saith our Sauioure Christ. Liue therefore according to your vocation in the feare of God, & ye shall prosper right well. God shal blesse you, & neuer leaue you succourles, as the holy man Toby sayth.Tob. iiii. Be not afrayd, truthe it is, we leade here a pore life, but great good shal we haue if we fear God and depart from all sinne, and doe wel. Wel, the blessing of God be wt you, I am very faint:
            
            
               Ph.
               No maruell. For ye haue talked a greate while.
            
            
               Epa.
               I trust, my talke hath not bene euil.
            
            
               Phil.
               Forsoth it hath

bene both good and godly. I pray God geue bothe them and all vs grace to followe these your moste wholesome and christen admonitions. But sir, will it please you to take your leaue of your wyfe, chyldren and seruauntes, & geue your self to reast for a litle whyle? Peraduentur it shal do you much good.
            
            
               Epaphro.
               Slepe I can not. And I am lothe to let them goe from me. For the sight of them is comfortable vnto me, and as me thincketh easeth my payne.
            
            
               Chri.
               God cōfort you & ease your payn.
            
            
               Epa.
               Before they depart from me, I wysh greatly euen in their presence to confesse my faithe, yt both you and they may be witnesses before God & the worlde, that I die a Christen man.
            
            
               Phile.
               Although we nothing doubt therof, yet we greatly desyre to heare the confession of your faith, that we may be

able to testifie hereafter, that you departed in yt faith of Christ.
            
            
               Epa.
               Heare then.
               I Unfainedly beleue wt my hart,The sick
                        •••
                      faith. and frely cōfesse with my mouth that there is one only true,Esa. xiiii. i. Cor. viii. Math. xx
                        •••
                      i. Iohn. 
                        •
                     
                   lyuing, immortall and euerlasting God, God the father, God ye sonne and God the holy gost .iii. distinct persons in the godhead, and notwithstāding one very God in substāce, of like maiestie, glory, might power, iudgement and will.
               As touching the first parson in the deitie,Of God the father. I vnfainedly beleue wt my heart, and frely confesse with my mouth, yt he is the God, which alone is the father not only of our Lorde and sauiour Christ Iesu,ii. Cor. i. Psalm. ii. Ephe. iiii. 
                        •
                     
                   whom of him self frō euerlasting, he begot his natural sonne, & therfore likewyse true and immortall God, but also of all ye faithfull, not

by nature but by adoption, whom he hath chosen to be his children in Christ Iesu before the foundations of the worlde were laide, to loue, fauour cherish, comfort, norish, gouern, defend and blesse thē both corporally and spiritually. This God the father I beleue & confesse to be almighty and hable to do,Gene. xvii Psal. cxv. Mat. xix. 
                        •
                     ach. viii. Apoc. xvi. whatsoeuer his godly wil & pleasure is▪ With him all thinges are possible. There is nothing to hard for him to doe, neither is any thynge vnpossible in his syght. This God the father almighty I beleue and confesse,Gene. i. Psal. lxxxix. that he is the creator and maker of heauen and earth, and of all thynges contained in thē. Of nothing by his wō
                  derful and almighty power made he the heauens with the blessed aungels and heauenly spirites, that are in them. Thone he chose to be his glorious seate, the other

he made to be his Ministers, to do his blessed will and holy commaundement.
               This God the father almighty made also the earth of nothinge with her encrease,Esay. xliii. & gaue breath to the people that are in it, and spirit to thē that dwel therein. The heauens, the earth and the sea, wt all that euer is cōteined in them, are the creatures of this God the father almyghtye, created vnto this ende, euen that they shuld set forth, magnifie, prayse, and commend the maiestie, power, might and glory of this moste myghty & glorious god.Prou. viii. And whatsoeuer he made, he made it thorow his only begotten sonne, by whō al things were made and without whome was made nothing yt was made.Iohn. i. For when he made the heauens, this his only begotten sonne was present, whan he hāged ye cloudes

aboue, when he fastned the springes of the depe, when he shut the sea within certaine boundes, that the water should not go ouer the marckes that he commaunded. When he laide the foundations of the earth, he was with hym, ordring all thynges, deliting daily, and reioysing alway before hym. For the sonne of God caused the iyght that fayleth not to aryse in the heauen,Eccl. xxiiii. and couered all the earth as a cloud.Psalm. xxxiii And that prince like Prophet sayeth: By the word of the Lord (which word is Christ the natural sonne of God)Iohn. i. are the heauens made, and all the hostes of them by ye breath of his mouth. This God the father almightye maker of heauen and earth, I beleue & am fully perswaded, that he for Christes sake (by fayth) is my moste mercifull father,i. Pet. i. & that I am borne againe of him not by

mortall but immortall seede thorowe the worde of God, which, liueth and abideth for euer, and so am become his sonne, and that he therfore loueth and fauoreth me, gouerneth and defendeth me, 
                     •
                  eadeth and nourysheth me, and finally, hath made me his heire and fellow heir of eternall glory with his only begotten and moste derely beloued sonne Christ Iesu our Lorde and sauiour.Roma. viii. Now haue ye heard my fayth concerning God the father.
            
            
               Phil.
               It is a faith both true and christen, and from the beginning receiued of all godly parsons. Will it please you likewyse to reherse your faith concerning Iesus Christ ye sonne of God, yea God and man.
            
            
               Epaph.
               This it is.
               I vnfainedly beleue,Of God the sonne. with my heart and frely confesse wyth my mouth ye, Iesus Christ the seconde persone in the godhead is the onlyMath. viii and .xvii.
                  
begotten sonne of God,Iohn .i. yea and true, immortall and euerlasting God,Rom. i. begotten of God the father before any beginning,Hebr. i. of lyke maiestie, myght, power, & glory with God the father,Collos. i. of the same nature, essence, being and substance.Iesus. I beleue that this Iesus Christe whiche is the very brightnesse of his fathers glory, and the very image of his substance, first begotten before all creatures, is oure Lord, euen the Lord of all ye faithfull.Math. i. And I beleue that as he is called Iesus, that is to saye, a sauiour: so likewyse he is both able and will saue me frō al my sinnes. A God that is righteous,Esay. xlv. & suche one as saueth, there is none but he.Act. iiii. There is saluation in none other.Iere. xvii. Neither is there any other name vnder heauen geuen vnto men, wherein we may be saued, but only the name of Iesus. Of

hym therfore alone as of an almighty sauiour doe I loke for my saluation.Psal. ixx. For vain is the sauing health that is loked for of any other. And as he is called Christ,Christ. ye is to saye, annoynted, because he is the Kyng and Priest of all the people of God, and is annoynted with the true oyntment,Iohn. iii. euē with the fulnes of the holy ghoste (for God geueth not the spirite by me
                  
                     •
                  ure vnto him,Psa. xlv. but he hathe annoynted him with the oyl of gladnes aboue his fellowes) euē so do I beleue, that out of hym euen as out of a liuely spring and flowing fountaine, this oyle of gladnes, I meane the holy ghoste, come forth vpon all the members of Christ, and they also in him, & tho
                  
                     •
                  om him are made Christes, that 
                     •
                  s to say, the annointed of the lord. For of his fulnes haue all we receiued, euen grace for grace.Iohn. i. And

whosoeuer beleueth on hym (as sayeth the scripture)Iohn. vii. flouds of lyuing water shall flowe out of his belly. As I am of this Christ called a christian: so do I beleue, that this Christ hath annoynted me wt his holy spirite, and therwith also sealed me vp vnto euerlasting life▪ For they that are led with the spirit of God, are the sonnes of God. For the same spirit certifieth our spirite,Math. viii. that we are the sonnes of God. If we be sonnes, then ar we also heires, the heires I meane o
                     •
                   God, & fellow heires with Christ of eternall glory.
               Furthermore I beleue, tha
                     •
                   Iesus Christe the onlye begotten sonne of God, is called our Lord not only because he is Lorde of al
                     •
                   thinges, in asmuche as he is Go
                     •
                   and hath all thinges in subiection vnto hym by the ryght of his di
                     •
                  uine nature, but also because h
                     •
                  
                  
is the Lord, ruler & gouernour of all the elect and chosen people of God, & myghtely deliuereth them from the power, violence and tiranny of Satan, sinne and death by this meanes making them his owne and peculier people, & continually defendeth and preserueth them against all euils and perils, wherunto they should dayly fall thorow the deceitfull suttelties of Satan, the vaine perswasions of the world, & the poysonfull entisements of the flesh, if by the mighty power of him they wer not preserued.i. Cor. viii. For althogh there be many lords yet haue we but one lord, euē Iesus Christ, by whō ar althings & we by him. And this Iesꝰ Christ ye only begottē son of god, I faithfully beleue to be my lord, my protector, my mighty shield, bukler & defender, and yt he hath deliuered me frō the tirany of Satā from ye
                  
law of sin and death,Rom. viii. Rom. v. and brough
                     •
                   me in thorowe faithe vnto this grace, wherin I stād and reioys
                     •
                   in hope of the glory of God.
               
                  Of Christes humanitie.Moreouer I vnfainedly beleue with my heart, & frely confesse wt my mouth that this Iesus Christ the only begotten sonne of God,Hebr. iiii. is also very true and naturall man, of the same flesh & bloud with vs, and like vnto vs in all poyntes, sinne alone except.Esay. vii. And he became man not after the maner of other men, but by the wonderful operation, and aboue natural working of Gods naturall spirite.Math. i. For he was conceiued of the holy ghost, & borne of the Uirgin Mary. That which was conceiued in her, was not of man, but it came of the holy ghost.Luk. i. For ye holy ghost came vpō that godly maid, and the power of the hiest ouershadowed her, & so conceiued she and brought forth

Christ her true & natural sonne, a pure and vndefiled Uirgin before the birth, in the birth, & after the birth.Psalm. ii. It was necessary, that Iesus Christ shuld be so both conceiued and borne,Rom. v. that by this his pure and cleane birth,Ephe. ii. he myght washe and put away the corruption and filthinesse of our nature, which was distained in the fall & 
                     •
                  inne of Adam. For it was not cō
                  
                  
                     •
                  enient,Iob. xiiii. that he which was come 
                     •
                  o purge the world from all sinne, 
                     •
                  huld in any point be spotted with 
                     •
                  iune,Eccl. xxxiiii. but that both his conceptiō 
                  
                     •
                  nd natiuitie should be so pure & 
                     •
                  ithout blemish,Psal. ii. that by the pure
                  
                     •
                  es therof, the filthines & corrup
                  
                     •
                  ion of our conception and nati
                  
                     •
                  itie might be put awaye.Ephe. ii. For of 
                     •
                  e vncleane, who can be clensed? 
                     •
                  ll we be vncleane in Adam both 
                     ••
                  ncerning our conception and 
                     •
                  rth, for after yt God had made

man like vnto his own similitud
                     •
                   and Image,Gene. i he placed hym in paradise,Gene. ii. and gaue him lybertie t
                     •
                   eat of all the fruites in the garden of pleasure, except ye tree of knowledge of good and euill.Gene. iii But ma
                     •
                   disobeyed the Lorde his God, and transgressed his holy commaund
                     •
                  ment.Roma. v Thorow the whiche disobedience and transgression of God
                     •
                   holy cōmaundement, Ephe. lisinne, curse and death came ouer al mankind so that nowe in Adam so many a
                     •
                   are borne after the commō cours
                     •
                   of nature, are begotten, cōceiued and borne in sinne.Iohn. iii They are th
                     •
                   children of wrath, & defiled wit
                     •
                   all vnclennes both bodely & gho
                     •
                  ly.Psal. ii Now whan there was no he
                     •
                   nor comfort for man, whereby 
                     •
                   might be redemed out of Satan power, and deliuered from his i
                     ••
                  tollerable miseries,Gene. vi. wherewith 
                     •
                   was to muche wretchedly wra
                     ••
                  ped

and brought into slauery (for now man wtal his thoughts, imaginations, deuices, words, dedes, enterprises. &c. is become thorowe the sin of Adam: wicked, vnpure, 
                     •
                  ilthy and synfull) then God that mercifull father had pity vpō mā
                  kind, and promised them a sede, euen Iesus Christ his only begotten sōne,Gene. iii which shuld tread down the head of the serpent, ouercome 
                     •
                  he deuill with al his power, & re
                  
                     •
                  tore vs to life againe.Psalm. ii. Psalm. cxiv Titus, 
                        •
                     
                   And lykewise as god is righteous in al his wayes, & holy in all his workes, & 
                     •
                  rue & faithfull in all his wordes: 
                     •
                  uen so hath he kept al his promi
                  
                     •
                  es truely.Gala. iiii For whē the time was 
                     〈◊〉
                   he sent his only begotten 
                     〈◊〉
                   dearely beloued sonne into the 
                     •
                  ombe of the virgin Mary,Math. i. Luk. i. wher of whome thorowe the working 
                     •
                  f the holy ghost, he became fleshe, 
                     ••
                  at is to saye, true and naturall

man, as the scripture witnesseth saying:Iohn. i. The word became fleshe, & dwelt among vs, and we saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten sonne of the father full o
                     •
                   grace and veritie. He brought no
                     •
                   his body with him from heauen (as certain heretikes affirme) bu
                     •
                   as he receiued all his deuine nature and substance of God the fa
                     •
                  ther alone: euen so likewyse did h
                     •
                   take all his humaine nature and substance of the pure virgin Mary alone, through the wonderful operation of the spirite of God,Rom. i. a
                     •
                   S. Paule saithe, he was borne o
                     •
                   the sede of Dauid after the fleshe Againe he sayth,Hebr. ii. he that sanctif
                     ••
                  eth, and they whiche are sanctif
                     ••
                  ed, are all of one. For which ca
                     ••
                  ses he is not ashamed to call the
                     •
                   brethrē,Psalm. xxii. saying: I wil declare th
                     •
                   name to my brethren, and in th
                     •
                   mids of the congregation wyll

praise thee. And againe I wil put my trust in hym.
               And again.Esay. viii. Behold here am I, and the children which God hath geuen me. Forasmuch therfore as the childrē were partakers of flesh and bloud, he also him selfe lykewyse toke part with them, for to put downe (thorow death) him, ye had lordship ouer death, that is to say, the deuyll, and that he myght deliuer them, which through fear of death were all their life time in daunger of bondage. For he in no condition taketh on him the aungels, but the sede of Abraham taketh he on hym, wherefore in all thinges it became him to be made lyke vnto his brethren, that he myght be mercifull, and a faithfull hie Priest in thinges concerning God for to pourge the peoples sinnes.Hebr. iiii. &c. This only begotten sonne of God by takyng fleshe

of the Uirgin Mary, became lyke vnto vs in all things, sinne alone except.Psa. ii. I beleue that by his pure conception and vndefiled natiuitie, my conception, and my byrth, whiche cōming from Adam,Ephe. ii. was altogether vnpure and defiled,Iohn. iii. is clensed, and that no parte of that sinfull birth is imputed vnto me,Iohn. i. but ye thorowe faith in this moste blessed sede of the Uirgine,Rom. viii. I am born a new & begotten of God, so that he is my father, & I am his sonne, and therfore enheritor also of his heauenly kingdome.
               Furthermore I vnfainedly beleue with my hart, and frely confesse with my mouth, yt this seede of the woman Iesus Christ, at the commaundement and wyll of his heauenly father (whiche from euerlasting by his godly prouidēce ordained his only begotten sonne, to be a sacrifice for the sinnes of

his people, that through his only oblation they myght for euer and euer bee saued) suffred many greuous paynes on his bodye vnder the Heathen ruler Pontius Pilat, and that he was crucified, died and was buried. All those bitter paines and greuous torments he suffred, not for him selfe, but for vs, for our iniquities, sinnes and wickednesses, that he might recō
                  cile vs vnto God the father. His paines satisfied for the paines due vnto vs for our faultes,Esay. iii
                        •
                     
                   as ye prophet saieth, he only hath taken on him oure infirmities, and borne our paines.Mat. xxviii. He was wounded for our offences, and smitten for our wickednesses.
               For the chastisement of oure peace was layde vpon him, and with his strypes are we healed.i. Pet. ii. As for vs, we haue goone all astray (lyke shepe) euery one hath

turned his own way. But ye Lord hath heaped together vpon hym the iniquitie of vs all. He was cut of from the ground of the liuinge, whiche punishment did come vpō hym for the transgression of my people, saieth God, which in dede had deserued that punishement.
               
                  Ephe. ii.He was crucified and nailed to the crosse, that by the suffraunce of his fleshe, he might put away the cause of hatred, euen the lawe of commaundementes contained in the lawe written, and so wyn vs againe vnto the fauoure of God. For it pleased the father,Collos. i. yt in him shuld all fulnes dwell, and by him to reconcile all thynge vnto hym selfe, & to set at peace by hym thorowe the bloud of his crosse, bothe thinges in heauen and thinges in earth.Collo. i. His blessed body crucified, and nayled to the crosse, buffeted, beaten and scourged was a swete

smellyng sacrifice & a right deare offring vnto God the father,Ephe. v. sufficient inough and hable to the vttermoste to put away all the synnes of the faythfull and all the paynes due for the same. It satisfied at the full the iustice of God, and apeased his wrath, sturred vp through sinne agaynst the posteritie of Adam, and made God of an angry Lord & righteous iudge a most merciful father and gentle sauiour. Nether nede the faithfull go for saluation vnto massemongers, vnto iusticiares vnto monkish hipocrites, nor yet vnto sainctes. The sacrifice of Christes body, which he him self that euerlasting priest offred on the altare of the crosse to God the father, is a plenteous, full, perfect, and sufficient satisfaction for the sinnes of the whole worlde, if they repent, beleue & amend. We nede no such

daily sacrifices, as the Papistes hearetofore for lucres sake haue deuised. As Christe Iesus is an euerlasting Bishoppe,Hebr. ix. so abideth his sacrifice, whiche he once for all offred on the Crosse, of ful vertue, power, might and strength, euen vnto the ende of the world. Iesus Christ yesterday,Hebr. xii. and to daye, and the same continueth for euer. For asmuche therfore as Christ endureth for euer and hath an euerlasting Priesthode:Hebre. vii he is able also euer to saue them to the vttermost and vnto the full, that come vnto God by hym, seyng he euer liueth to make intercession for vs. For he is not entred into the holy places that ar made with handes (which are similitudes of true thinges) but is entred into very heauen for to appeare nowe in the sighte of God for vs, not to offer hym selfe often, as the hie priest entreth in

to the holy place euery year with straunge bloud, for then must he haue often suffred sence the world began. But nowe in the ende of the world hath he appeared once to put sinne to flyght by the offering vp of him self. And as it is apoynted vnto all men, yt they shall once die, and then commeth the iudgemēt:ii. Pet. iii euē so Christ was once offred to take away the sinnes of manye, and vnto them that loke for him shall he appeare again wt out sinne vnto saluation. We are sanctified and made holye by the offeringe of Iesus Christes bodye done once for all.Hebr. 
                        •
                     
                   With one only oblation hath Christ Iesus made perfecte for euermore them that are sanctified. Adue therfore to all newe counterfaict and straunge sacrifices deuised for lucres sake, by the crafty conueyance of man through the subtile suggestion of

slie Satan, let the faithfull people of God embrace that sacrifice, that offringe of Christes blessed body, which he him self offred vnto God the father on the altare of the crosse once for al, for the sinnes of the worlde. Let them cleue and sticke vnto that. Let them repose their whole affiaunce, and put all trust in that swete smelling sacrifice, and saye with the holy Apostle, God forbid,Gala. vi. that I should reioyse in any thing, but in ye crosse, passion, and death of our Lord Iesu Christe. So may they be sure neuer to perishe, but to haue euerlasting life.
               Againe. This Iesus Christ the sonne of God, and the sonne also of the glorious virgin, after that he had suffred many bitter paines and greuous tormentes hauing vpon the crosse, died the death of the body & was buried. I beleue

that Christ by his death hath conquered,Hebr. ii. vanquished, subdued and ouercome him that had Lordship ouer death, that is to saye, the deuill, that he myght deliuer them, which thorow fear of death were all their lyfe tyme subdued vnto bondage. Yea by his death Sathans power is so broken, and the violēce of death so weakened, that we may be bold to saye. Death is swalowed vp into victory. Death where is thy sting?i. Cor. xv. Hell, where is thy victory. The sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is ye law. But thankes be vnto God whiche hathe geuen vs wictorye through our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Christe after the death of his body went downe in his soule to hell,Of Christes going downe to hell. Psal. xv. Act. ii. zach. ix. as clearely appeareth by the 
                     •
                  criptures, not that he shuld there 
                     •
                  uffer mo paines (whiche had all ready on the crosse suffred to the

vttermoste and done whatsoeuer was nedefull for our redemption)Osee. xiii i. Pet. iii but to breake the pride of Sathan and to destroy the fury of the hellishe powers againste the chosen people of God, that al the faithful thereby might be deliuered from death and hell,Ose. xiii. and triumphantly say with the Prophet, O death I wyll be thy death, O hell, I wil be thy destruction.
               
                  Of Christes resurrection. Rom. iiii Psalm. iii. Ose. vi. Act. iii. Rom. i.And lykewyse as Christe died for our synnes, so I vnfaynedlye beleue with my hearte, and frely confesse with my mouthe, that he rose agayn the third day through the power of his father, for oure iustification according to the scriptures. And by this his resurrection and lyfe, he hath not only shewed hym selfe a glorious and triumphante conquerour ouer Sathan,ii. Tim. 
                        •
                     
                   death and hell, but he hath also brought lyfe and immortalltie

vnto light, and assured vs of the resurrectiō of our bodies, that as he is rysen from the dead, so likewyse shall we with our bodies ryse agayne out of the earth at the last daye.i. Cor. x
                        •
                     
                   And therfore is he called the fyrst frutes of them that ar fallen aslepe.
               Moreouer I vnfaynedlye beleue with my heart,Of Christes Ascention. and frely confesse with my mouth that as Iesus Christ the sonne of God, & the sonne of the Uirgin Mary, shewed him selfe oftentimes after his resurrection vnto his disciples:Mark. xvi Luke. xxiiii Act. i. Rom. viii▪
                   so likewise he ascended vnto heauen in their presence perfect God and perfect man, & sitteth at the righthand of God ye father almighty, aboue all rule, power, might & dominion,Ephe. i. & aboue all yt may be named, not only in this worlde,Collos. ii. but also in ye worlde to come. For God the father hathe put all thynges

vnder his feete, and hathe made him aboue all thinges the head of the congregation,Math. xxviii whiche is his body, and the fulnes of hym, that filleth all in all. Al power is geuē vnto him bothe in heauen and in earth.Apo. xix. He is a lord aboue al lords, and a king aboue all kinges.i. Timo. vi. Yea he is an almighty God with his father, of ye same Maiestie, might, power and glory, and not withstā
                  ding inasmuche as he is man, he is also our intercessour,Rom. viii. i. Tim. vi. i. Iohn. ii. mediator, and aduocate. For he is not gone vp into heauen to be an idle gaser, nor to neglect his churche, but to pray for the faythfull to make intercessiō for them vnto God the father, to be our mediatour & aduocate, and to appease the wrath of God the father, if at any tyme through sinne it waxeth whote against vs, and to wynne vs again vnto his fauoure, and to kepe vs

in the same vnto thende.Christ is a sufficient mediatour, aduocate, & inter
                        •
                     cessour. We nede not seke helpe of other, neither yet call on the sainctes departed that they may pray for vs, and pleade our cause before God. The man Christ Iesus alone,i. Tim. ii. i. Iohn. ii. Rom. viii. Hebr. vii. whiche gaue him self a raunsom for all men, is our sufficient mediatoure, aduocate and intercessour as the holye scripture teacheth in diuers places. Whosoeuer therefore refuseth to pray vnto this man Christ Iesus to be his mediatoure and aduocate vnto God the father, and 
                     •
                  leeth vnto other: wtout all doubt, he is an ennemy vnto Christ, and to the vttermoste of his power, he 
                     •
                  aboureth to make Christ (as they 
                     •
                  se to saye) Iacke out of office. For since the time of his ascention 
                     •
                  is chief and principall office is to 
                     •
                  e our intercessoure, mediatoure, 
                     •
                  nd aduocate.
               He ascended also into heauenPsal. lxvi.
                  
to leade captiuitie captiue, and to geue giftes vnto men.Ephe. iiii Satan that old enemy of mankind had taken vs captiue, made vs his bond slaues through sine, caried vs away with his craft & subtiltie from the Lord our God, and brought vs in to his kingdō of darcknes, whiche is the dreadful kyngdom of sinne, death and hell. Thus were we in great misery, and should for euer haue bene damned, if we had not bene holpen by some other meanes, then we withall oure wittes could deuise.Luke. xi. Therfore euen of very pity & tender compassion came one, which is much stronger the
                     •
                   Satan,Apoc. v. euen Christ that mighty Lion of the tribe of Iuda, a ryght conquerour,Osec. xiii. a strong Sampson, a valeant subduer of death, sinne, & hell, a puissaunt vanquisher of Satan.i. Cor. xv. &c. He as a king of glory mightely brast into Satās kyngdome,

brake open the gates of hel toke the Prince of darknes,Hebr. ii. boūd hym, toke him prisoner, made him his bound slaue, destroied his Empire, ledde away his prysonners, bringing them againe into moste ioyfull and blessed libertie, so that al they, which beleue in this most mighty Emperour and valeaunt conquerour Christ Iesus:Iohn. iii.x
                        ••
                     
                   are deliuered from the tyranny of Satan, and from the power of sinne death and hell.Roma. 
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   There is no damnation nowe vnto them, whiche are engrafted in Christ Iesu. Satan, sinne, death and hell withall the infernall army cannot hurt ye elect and chosen people of God. Who shall lay any thynge to the charge of Gods chosen?Roma. 
                        •••
                     
                   It is God 
                     •
                  hat iustifieth▪ who is he that can 
                     •
                  ondemne? It is Christ, whiche died, yea rather whiche is rysen againe, whiche is also on the righthād

of God and maketh intercession for vs. Who shal then seperat vs from the loue of God? &c.
               
                  Psal. lxviii.And as Christ by his most glorious and triumphant Ascension hath led captiuite captiue: so likewyse hath he geuen giftes vnto men,Ephe. iiii. euen that holy ghost, that spirite of truthe, that comfortoure, whiche worketh in the heartes of the faithfull newe mocions and spiritual affectes,Ioh. xiiii.xv. faith, hope, loue, feare, humilitie, modestie, mekenes, pacience,Gala. v. Roma. viii. long suffring, ioye, peace, quietnes of conscience, tem
                     •
                  peraunce, goodnes, mercy. &c. It mortifieth the old man, and quieneth the newe man, whiche is renued vnto the knowledge and Image of him,Collos. iii. Ephe. iiii. yt made him▪ whiche after God is shapen in righteousnes and true holines.
               Againe Christ ascending vp in
                     •
                  to heauen by ye power of his godhead,

hath prepared in the kingdō of his father euerlasting and ioyfull dwelling places, for so manye as beleue in hym, as he him selfe witnesseth,Ioh. xiiii. saying: I goe to prepare a place for you, and I wyll come agayn vnto you, & take you vnto my self, that where I am, ye also maybe. He hathe also ascertained vs of our ascension, and going vp into heauen, not onlye in soul but also in body. He corporally is rysen agayne and gone before into the glorious kingdom of his father, to declare that we also after the generall resurrection shall both body and soule be caried into heauē. The members must nedes be lyke the head. Christ our head is risen againe, therfore shall we his members ryse agayne. Christ our head is ascended and gone vp into heauen both body and soule: therfore shal we his members ascend

and go vp into heauen bothe body and soule also, Christ our hed was taken vp into Heauen in a cloud bothe body and soule, therefore shall we his members also be taken vp in a cloude to meete the lord, and so shal we both body and soule dwel with the Lord Christe our head for euer and euer,i. T
                        ••
                     . iiii. as the holy Apostle testifieth, saying: If we beleue that Iesus died, & rose againe, euen so them whiche slepe by Iesus, God will brynge again with hym.i. Cor. xv. For this say we vnto you in the worde of the Lord, that we whiche shall liue, and shall remaine in the comming of the lord, shall not come yer they whiche slepe.Math. xxiiii. For the Lorde him selfe shal descend from Heauē with a shout, and the voyce of the Archaungell and trompe of God.Dan. xii. And the dead in Christe shall aryse fyrste: then we, which shal liue (euē we which

shall remaine (shalbe caughte vp with them in the cloudes to mete the Lorde in the ayre. And so shall we euer be with the Lorde.
               Finally I vnfainedly beleue with my hearte,Of Christes comming vnto the iudgement. and frely confesse with my mouth, that as the Lord Christ is ascended into heauen: so shall he come agayne from heauen with power and muche glory, nobly accompanied with thousands of blessed▪ Aungels and heauenly sainctes, for to iudge the quicke and the dead, the faithfull and vnfaithfull, and to geue▪ euery man his rewarde according to that he hathe donne,Actes. i. whether it be good or badde.Ephe. Ind. And when he thus gloriously shall come vnto the iudgemente,Apo. i. Acte
                        •
                     . x. ii. Corin. v all that are in the graues, shall heare his voyce, and shall come forthe: they that haue done good,Ihon. v. vnto the resurrection 
                     •
                  f life, and they that haue done euil,

vnto the resurrection of damnation.Math. xxv The faithfull shal go into eternall life,Dan. xii. the vnfaithfull into euerlasting damnation.Roma. iii Euery man shall be reward according to his dedes, that is to say: prayse, honor & immortalitie to them which continue in good doyng, and seke immortalitie. But vnto thē, that are rebels, and that doe not obeye the truthe, but followe vnrighteousnes, shall come indignation & wrath, tribulation and anguishe, vpon the soule of euery man that doth euell.
               Now haue ye heard of my faith cōcerning Iesus Christ God and man. And I beleue al things that I haue spoken to be vndoubtedly true.Note. And I am fully perswaded, that Iesus Christ my lord and sauiour wrought all the thinges yt euer he did in his humanitie for me and for my saluation. To saue

me to reconcile me vnto God the father, to make me enheritour of euerlasting glory, he came downe from heauen, was incarnate by the holy ghoste, and borne of the virgin Mary. Yea he 
                     •
                  uffred, was crucified, died, went down to hel, rose agayn the third day from the dead, ascended vnto heauen, and shall come again vnto iudgement for me, for my sake, for my glory, & saluatiō. Thus haue ye heard my fayth concerning God the father, and God the sonne, whiche also is man, receuing his humain nature of the glorious virgin Mary.Rom. 
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Eus.
               Whosoeuer this beleueth and confesseth of God the father, and of his sonne Christ:Iohn. xvii the same can neuer perishe. For as our sauioure Christ saide vnto God the father in his praier: This is euerlasting life, euen to know thee ye alone tru God, and whom thou hast sente

Iesus Christ.
            
            
               Chr.
               The wise man also saieth:Sap. xv. To know the (O god) as perfect righteousnes.
               God sayth by the Prophet, yea to know thy rightousnes and power, is the roote of immortalitie.
            
            
               Theo.
               By the knowledge of him,Esdr. iiiii whiche is my righteous seruaunt, he shal iustify the multitude.
            
            
               Phi.
               God graunte vs the true knowledge of his sonne Christe, so may we be sure to be iustified, saued & gloryfyed.
            
            
               Epa.
               Amen.
               But now heare also my faythe concerning the third parson in the deity, which is the holy gost,
            
            
               Chr.
               We heare you gladly.
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  Of God the holy Ghost. Genesis. i Psalm. ii. Math. iii.I vnfainedly beleue with my harte, and frely confesse with my mouthe, that the holy ghost is one and equal God in glory, maiestie, power and might with the father and the sonne, proceading from the father and the son after an vnknowne

and vnexpresseable maner.Iohn. i. This spirite of God and God him selfe is he,Mat. xxviii by whom God the father through his sonne Christe and in Christ worketh and quickneth all thinges.Iohn. xv and. xvi. All the benefites and graces which God the father bestoweth vppon vs for Christes sake,i. Ihon. v. Iohn. iii this holy ghost bringeth thē vnto vs, and maketh vs new vessels to receyue them, which otherwise euen of nature are so fleshly minded,i. Cor ii. that we perceiue nothing at all of those thinges,ii. Cor. iii which pertayne vnto the spirite of God,Gala. v neyther are we able to thinke a good thoughte of our selues.Phill. ii For this godly spirite worketh in vs newe motions and new affectes,Iohn. xiiii xv. and. xv
                        •
                     
                   and geueth vs grace both to will and to doo good. He is a teacher of al the faithfull, and leadeth them into al truth. He is a confortour of weake and sorowfull mindes.
               
                  He kepeth the true christians vnmoneable in one faith,i. Cor. xii and openeth their senses to vnderstand ye misteries of God aright.Act. x. He doth clothe them with his giftes, and geueth to euery one a seueral gift euen as he wyll. He is the ruler of the Christen congregation. He is the anoyntment,i. Iohn. ii Psal. ciiii. Ephe. i. wherwith all the faithful are anoynted, and thereof are called the annoynted of the Lord. He is geuen vnto the faithfull to be the earnest of their enheritaunce for the recouering of the purchased possession vnto ye praise of his glory. He with his godlie breath quickeneth, maketh aliue, and conserueth all thinges. He of carnall maketh vs spirituall, of worldly godly, of wicked blessed, of the bond slaues of Sathan, the dearly beloued sonnes of God, of sinnefull sinckes, his owne moste pleasaunt and holy temple, of cruell

meke, of proud: humble, of malicious: charitable, of contentious: quiet, of couetous, liberal, of hard harted: meke spirited, of froward: gentle, of stubburne: obedient, of dissolute: temperat and sober, of false: true, of folish: wyse, of idle: godly occupied, of vnchast: pure and cleane, of the haters of God: the frendes of God, of the louers of pleasures: the louers of godlines, to ende, he maketh vs of earthy: heauenlye. Whatsoeuer goodnes we haue, he is the alone author, worker and geuer of the same. Therfore I beleue and confesse that this holy spirite is one and equal God with God the father and God the sonne, proceading from them bothe with lyke maiesty, glorie, might and power. I beleue that this holy gost is my comforter, and that he prayeth for me, renueth me, dwelleth in

me, and hathe sealed me vp vnto euerlastyng glorye. Now haue ye hard my faith and my beilefe in the father, and in the sonne, and in the holy ghost, which .iii. I beleue and confesse to be one God, whose seat the heauen is, and whose fotestole is the earth.Esay. 
                        •
                     xvi Actes. vii. Psal. cxlv. Deuter. vi. Iohn. iiii. Esa. xliiii. He is an euerlastyng and almighty God, whiche alone is to be honoured & serued in spirit and truthe. For he alone can helpe vs forasmuche as he is almighty, & will helpe vs because he his mercifull true and faithful, yea and that not for our rightousnes, but for his names sake.i. Timo. i. To this one, true, liuing, euerlastyng immortal, inuisible, & alone wise God, king of kinges and Lorde of Lordes, be all honoure and glory, worlds without end.Apoca. iiii
               
            
            
               Thi.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               Thou art worthy (O Lord) to receyue glory and honour, and power, for thou haste created all

things, and for thy wils sake they are and were created. Blessing & glory and wisdome,Apoca. vii. and thankes and honor and might, be vnto our God for euermore.
            
            
               Chr.
               So be it.
            
            
               Epa.
               Simply and plainely haue I here before you all rehearsed my faithe and belief in God and in the thre parsons of the Godhead, as I haue here tofore learned it of gods moste holy worde.
               I confesse that many thinges mo mighte be spoken of the wonderfull misteries of this most blessed and holy Trinitie, but they farre exceade my vnderstanding, and therefore I dare not meddle with them.Pro. xxv. For it is written, he that is a searcher of the Maiestie, (of God) shall be oppressed of the glorye (thereof.Eccle. i
                        ••
                     
                  ) Againe: Seke not oute the thinges that are aboue thy capacitie, and serche not the ground of suche thinges as ar

to mighty for thee, but loke what God hath cōmaunded thee: think vpon that alway, and be not curious in many of his workes. For it is not neadeful for thee, to se wt thine eies the thinges that are secreat.
            
            
               The.
               The holy Apostle also counselleth vs to be modest,Rom. xii. & sober, and that we be not curious to searche after the knowledge of things, which passe our capacitie.
            
            
               Eu.
               The holy psalmograph semeth to haue followed this coūcel wel, whiche saieth on this manner of him selfe:Psal. cxxxi. Lord I am not hie minded, I haue no proud lokes, I doe not exercise my self in great matters, which are to hie for me. But I refrain my soule, & kepe it lowe, like as a child that is weaned frō his mother, yea, my soule is euen as a wened childe, O Israel trust in the Lorde from this time forth for euermore.
            
            
               Phil.
               Neighbour Epaphroditus,

there remain yet behind mo articles of the Christen faith, Haue you forgotten them?
            
            
               Epap.
               No good brother Philemō, God forbid I should forget them. For in them (next vnto God) lieth now my chief consolation & comfort. Should I being in this case forget the holye congregation of God, whiche is the company and felowship of the sainctes & chosen people of God, of whome Christ ye Lord is the head, ruler and gouernour? Should I in this my sickenes forget the hie and singulare benefites of God, whiche of his own fre mercy and mere goodnes he liberally geueth to al faithfull penitent sinners, namely remission of sinnes, the Resurrection of the body, and lyfe euerlasting? God forbid. God forbid. For the remembraunce of these thynges comforteth me greatlye. I wyll

therfore (although my winde beginneth to waxe shorte, and it is painefull vnto me muche for to speake) declare my faithe concerning these Articles.
            
            
               Eusebi.
               God strengthen you.
            
            
               Chri.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               As I vnfainedly beleue with my heart,Of Christes Church or congregatiō. and freely confesse with my mouth, that there is but one God, in whome alone I put al my confidence, truste and hope of saluation, and at whose hand only I loke for all good thinges, pertayning either vnto the bodye or vnto the soule:Canti. vi. so lykewyse I bothe beleue and confesse, that there is but one holy vniuersal churche or congregation of the faithefull, all be it they be despersed and scattered abrode thorow out the world in diuers and sondry places,i. Corin. i which are gathered & knit together through the operation of the holy ghost in the vnitie of the spirite,Roma. xii. and ioyned

together in one faith, as members of one bodye,Collos. 
                        •
                     . whereof Iesus Christe is the heade. This holy Churche or congregation lynked together in the felowship of the holy Ghoste is a spirituall house,i. Peter. ii. builded of liuing stones, a chosen generation, a royall Priesthod to offer vp spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Iesus Christe, an holy nation, a people whiche are won that they should shewe forth the vertues of hym, whyche called them oute of darkenesse into his maruelous lighte, this Churche is the congregatiō of the liuing god, the pillar and ground of truthe.i. Tim. iii. This holy company are Citizens with the Saincts and of the housholde of God,Ephes
                        •
                     . ii. and are builte vpon 
                     •
                  he foundation of the Apostles 
                     •
                  nd Prophets, Iesus Chryst him selfe being the hed corner stone.
               Thys Churche is the spouse

of Christ, and knoweth none other husband & head but Christ alone.Iohn. x. This blessed company are these shepe whiche gladly heare ye voyce of their shepehard Christ, but they flie from the voyces of straūgers.
               
                  Ephe. iiii. And as they are one body and one spirite, so confesse they on
                     •
                   Lord, one faithe, one Baptisme
                     •
                   one God and father of all.
               
                  i. Cor. i. There is among them no dissen
                     •
                  tion, but thei maintain one truth preache one doctrine, speake on
                     •
                   thing, are of one minde and of on
                     •
                   meaning. This holy Catholik
                     •
                   churche or vniuersall congregatiō is that holy city,Apoc. xii. that newe Hieru
                     •
                  salem, whiche came downe fro
                     •
                   God out of heauen, prepared as 
                     •
                   bride garnished for her husband And because no man shall doub
                     •
                   of what Churche I speake,What the churche is. I con
                     •
                  fesse that to be the holy Catholik
                     •
                   and Apostolike Churche, which
                     •
                  
                  
is the company and felowship of the sainctes, that is to saye of the faithfull, whiche are sanctified & made holy by the spirite of God, and by the bloud of Christ our sauiour,i. Cor. vi. whiche haue the pure word of God truely and sincerely preached,Math. xviii. and the Sacramentes duely and faithfully ministred amōg them,i. Cor. v. whiche excommunicate all disobedient notable sinners,ii. Cor. 
                        ••
                     
                   and receiue into their felowship suche as vnfainedly repente and tourne from their wickednes,i. Tim. i
                        ••
                     
                   which study in all things to please the Lord God, and to liue in all godlinesse and honestie. This church and cō
                  pany Christ loued so dearly,Ephe. v. that he gaue him self for it to sanctifie it, and clensed it in the fountaine of water thorow ye word to make it vnto him selfe a glorious congregation without spot or wrincle,Cant. iiii. or any suche thinge, but that it

shoulde be holy & without blame. Whosoeuer is in this church and congregation: he may be sure to besaued. But whosoeuer is not in it, he is without all dout damned.Gene. vii. For like as in ye time of Nohe no man escaped with his life,ii. Peter. ii, but was drowned in the floud, excepte he entred into the Arcke of Nohe:Iohn. xv Euen so whosoeuer is not founde in this felowship or Catholicke Churche, agreing with it in one faith, doctrine, hope, loue, and sacramentes, he shall pearish and be lost. For without the Churche of Christe there is no saluation, no forgeuenes of sinnes, no fauoure of God, no quyetnes of conscience no true Gospell, or glad tidinges of eternall healthe.
               Therfore in this holy Churche & blessed felowship of the sainctes and faithfull, I vnfainedly beleue with my harte and frely confesse

with my mouthe that there is remission and forgeuenes of sinnes,Of the forgeuenes of sinnes. and that withoute it, no sinne is forgeuen, nether is there any hope of saluation. For as it is vnpossible that a member can liue which is not in the body, so it is vnpossible that any man may lyue in hys soule, and be released out of death by remission of synne, whyche is not a mēber of the body of Christ.Ephesi. 
                        •
                     
                   For Christe hathe reconciled vs al vnto God his father in one body.Ephesi. i. And therfore must all they stande at variance with God,Ep
                        •••
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   that ar no mēbers of this body of the which Christe is the head, to the whiche also he geueth saluation. This therfore is a great conforte to the faithfull congregation, that allthough thorowe infirmitie of nature or otherwise they doo fall, of
                  
                     •
                  end God & break the Lords commaundements: yet in this cōpany

there is remission and forgeuenes of sinnes, so sone as euer they repent, be sory for their synne, and beleue to haue remissiō of all their sins for Christes precious bloudes sake. Synne we neuer so oft and neuer so greuously, yet being mē
                  bers of this holy company, we ar straight waies forgeuen and deliuered a paena & culpa, frō the pain and the fault,Math. ix Mark▪ ii Luke. v. so sone as we turne vnto the Lord our God. And these our sinnes be not forgeuē of men, but of God alone, neither forgeueth he part and reserueth part, but he forgeueth all or els none at all. Again he forgeueth not the fault, and reserueth the paine, but with the faulte he also forgeueth the pain due for the fault, that he may be an whole and perfect sauiour, as s. Iohn saith: If we say we haue no sinne,
                     
                        •
                     . Iohn. i. we deceiue our selues, and the truthe is not in vs.

But if we cōfesse our sinnes. God is faithfull and righteous to forgeue vs our sinnes, and to make vs cleane from all iniquitie. And God himself saith by the Prophet:Iere. xx
                        •
                     
                   I wil forgeue their misdedes, and wil neuer remember their sinnes any more.Esay. xliii. Againe, I am he, yea I am he alone, which put away thy iniquities, yea, and that for myne own sake, and I wil remēber thy sinnes no more. And king Ezechias in his praier vnto God said: it is thou (O Lord) that cast all my sinnes behind thy back.Esay. xxxviii The Prophet Miche also saith:Miche, vii Where is there such a God as thou art? that pardonest wickednes, and forgeuest the offences of the remnaunt of thine heritage? He kepeth not his wrath for euer. And why? his delite is to haue compassion. He shal turne agayne and be merciful to vs. He shall put down our wickednes,

and caste all oure sinnes into the bottom of the sea.
               I faithfully beleue that I am a member of Christes church, and I am also fully perswaded, that al my sinnes be forgeuen me of God the Father,Iohn. i not for my merites, whiche are none, but for Iesus Christes sake,Iere. xxxi Esay. xliii for Christes merits passion, death, and bludshedding. For grace and truthe came by Iesus Christe sayth the holy Euangelist.Mich. vii And I beleue,Psal. xxxii. that God fo
                     •
                   his sonnes sake hathe so frely and wholy forgeuen me all my sinnes, that he wil neuer remembre them more, neuer impute thē vnto me, nor lay them to my charge, but so receyue me into his fauoure, as though I had neuer offended him and make me his sonne, and heyer of euerlasting glory.Roma. vi. For euerlasting life is the gift of god through Iesus Christe oure Lorde sayeth

the Apostle. Thys is the stay and quientes of my conscience at thys presente. This maketh me not to feare deathe,Philem. i but ioyfully to loke for it,Psal. xlii. and louingly to embrace it, when soeuer it commeth. For I wish to be losoned from this mortall body, and to be with Chryste.Psal. cxix. My soule hath a feruent desire to God euen vnto the Lord my god. Deliuer my soule, O Lord, out of prison, that I may come vnto the, and glorify thy holy name.
               For albeit this my weak, feble, sicke and mortall body shall geue ouer to nature, and die, yet I vnfamedly beleue with my hart, and frely confes with my mouth, that at the last day it shall rise agayn, as the bodies of all other,Of the resurrection of the body. both mē and women, that haue died, shall likewise do. There shalbe a generall resurrectiō of the flesh.Esdr. xxvi. Al that are dead, shall rise agayne, some

to euerlasting life,Eze. 
                        •
                     xxvii Dan. xii and some to euerlasting paine and damnation, as our sauiour Christ saith:Iohn. v The hour shall come, in the which all yt are in the graues, shall heare the voice of the sonne of God, and shal come forthe, they that haue done good vnto the resurrection of life, and they that haue done euill vnto the resurrection of damnation.ii. Cor. xv Yea they that shall lyue and remaine vntill the comming of oure Lord & sauiour Christ Iesu, shall all be chaunged, yea and that in a moment, in the twinckling of an eie by the last trompe. For the trompe shall blowe, and the dead shall rise vncorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged, for this corruptible body must put on vncorruptibilitie, and this mortall bodye must put on immortalitie. Therfore I fear nothing at all the putting of of this body: for although

it slepeth in the earth for a time & according to the ordinance of god be turned into dust, yet shall it awake and ryse againe out of the earth: so that I shall receiue it in a far better state, then euer I had in it this world, euen like vnto the glorious body of our Lord and sauiour Christ Iesu.Phil. iii. Wherfor I say with the holy man Iob,Iob. ix. I beleue that my redemer liueth, and that I shall rise out of the earth in the 
                     •
                  atter day, and that I shall be clo
                  
                     •
                  hed again with this skin, and se God my sauiour in my flesh. Yea, I my selfe shall beholde him, not with other eies, but with these 
                     •
                  ame eies. This hope is stedfastly 
                     •
                  et in my heart.
               To ende,Of euerlasting life. I vnfainedly beleue with my heart, & frely cōfesse with my mouth, that after my body & soul be vnited and knit together, I with all the faithful that haue

liued from the beginning vnto the very end of ye world shall through the benefit of Christ Iesu, enioy euerlastyng lyfe.
               
                  Sapien. iiiSo many as haue truely beleued on Christe Iesu,Dani. xii Mat. xxii shall enioy continuall and blessed peace, glister as the shining of heauē, 
                     •
                  e as the stars world without end,
                     
                        •
                     poca. iiii yea they shall be clad with white garments, and haue golden crownes vpon their heades.Psal. lxxxiiii They shal glorify God and doo seruice day and nighte before the glorious throne of his maiesty. They shall se God face to face,Apo. iiii.v. and for euer and euer enioy the presence of Gods moste excellent Maiesty,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. xiii. and the compa
                     •
                  ny of all the heauenly Angels and blessed sainctes.
               Of the ioyes of euerlasting life, whiche God hathe in store for all faithfull beleuers, can no man eyther write, speake, or thincke at

                  
                     •
                  he full,Esai. lxiiii. as it is written: the eye hathe not sene, and the eare hathe not heard, nether haue entred into the hearte of man,i. Cor. ii the thinges whiche God hath prepared for thē that loue him.Roma. v
                        •
                     
                   And this euerlasting life is the gift of god thorow Iesus Christ our Lord, to whom be all honoure and glory for euer and euer.
            
            
               Theo.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               Thus haue I declared before you my faith concerning God and his holy misteries, grounded, I trust, on the true and vndeceyueable worde of God. And I faithfully beleue, that God my heauenly Father will be mercifull vnto me, and forgeue me all my sinnes for Christes sake, and receyue me into his heauenly kingdome, and geue me euerlasting life, whiche I now most entirely desire, wish and longe for, counting my selfe then most happy, whiche through

death I shall take my passage toward that most glorious and heauenly kingdom.ii. Cor. v For I know and am fully perswaded, that if my earthy mansion of this dwellinge were once destroied, I shuld haue a building of God, an habitation not made with handes, but euerlasting in heauen.
            
            
               Chri.
               God geue vs all that heauenly mansion.
            
            
               Euse.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               Well, come thou hither myne owne deare wife,Wife. let me kisse thee, and bid thee farwel. God kepe thee & defend the.Children. Come ye hither also my most swete children, that I may kisse you also before I die. God blesse you, & sende you prosperous daies on thearth. God geue you his spirite, that ye may liue in his faith, feare, and loue,Luk. i. and serue him in holines & righteousnes al the daies of your life.Seruauntes Ye my seruaunts, draw nere, geue me your hands. Far ye wel.

God make you his seruauntes, & send you obedient harts vnto his holy and blessed lawe. Wepe not for me, but praye for me, that the wil of God may be done in me, & that I may bothe paciently and thankefully abide the good pleasure of God. I trust we shal haue a ioyfull meting againe together in the kingdome of our heauenlye father, where we shall reigne one with an other in ioye and glorye worldes without ende,i. Cor. xii
                        •
                     
                   and se the glorious maiestie of God face to face,i. Iohn. iii. vnto our exceding consolation and comfort. Wel, depart in the name of God: The grace of oure Lord Iesu Christ, the loue of god and the felowship of the holy gost be with you all.i. Cor. xi
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Phile.
               Amen. Nowe good brother Epaphrodi
                  
                     •
                  us how do you.Math. xxv Mark. xiiii
               
            
            
               Epaph.
               The spirit is willing and ready, but the flesh is weake.
            
            
               Chr.
               I pray you sir be

on good confort.
            
            
               Epa.
               The Lord is my confort. He ful gratiously dealeth with me.
            
            
               Eu.
               Do you lack any
                     •
                  thing sir?
            
            
               Epa.
               Nothing but strenth frō aboue that I may paciently abide and suffer the good plesure of God. Thy wil be don, o heauen
                     •
                  ly father in erth,Math. vi. as it is in heauē Let me lie somwhat hier with my head. It is well: a litle thing, god knoweth, disquieteth this my sick & weake body. I trust, that within fewe houres it shalbe paste al
                     •
                   sicknes and misery, and shal bothe
                     •
                   quietly & swetely slepe in the harte
                     •
                   of the earth, vntill the great daye of the generall resurrection. In ye meane season shall my soule be in glory with Christ,Luke. xxiii. Iohn. xvii. Philip. i i. Cor. xiii. i. Iohn. iii and ioyfully be
                     •
                  hold the glorious maiesty of God. I will cease talking for a little whyle with you, and fall to cōmunication with my lord God in my hart. I pray you pray for me, that

I may continue faithfull vnto the end. For it is written: Be faithfull vnto the death, & I will geue thee the crown of life.Apoca. 
                        ••
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Neighbors 
                     ••
                  om aside a little while, and let vs fall to prayer.
            
            
               Chri.
               Most gladly
            
            
               Phi.
               Lord heare our praiers.
            
            
               Euse.
               And let our cry com vnto thee.
            
            
               Ph.
               Saue this thy seruaunt O Lord,Prayers for the sick.
thou father of mercies & God of all consolatiō.ii. Cor. i.
               
            
            
               Chr.
               And so worke in him by thy blessed spirit that he may put his whole trust in the.Psal, xi
                        •
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Ph
               Sēd him present help frō thy holy place.
            
            
               Th.
               And euermore mighte
                  
                     •
                  y defēd him against sathan, sinne, desperation, death & hell.
            
            
               ph.
               Let his enemy the deuill haue none a
                  
                     •
                  uantage of him.Psal, lxxxi.
               
            
            
               Eu.
               Nor ye wicked aproche to hurt him.
            
            
               Phi.
               Be vnto him o lord,Psal. lxi a strōg toure, a mighty castell & sure fortres.
            
            
               Chr.
               To defēd him frō the face of his enemy.
            
            
               Phi.
               O Lord hear our prayers.
            
            
               Eu
               
                  And let our cry come vnto thee.
            
            
               Phi.
               O Lord loke down from hea
                     •
                  uen,A praier. behold, visit, & relieue thi
                     •
                   thy seruaunt. Loke vpō him with thy eyes of thy mercy, geue hym comfort and sure cōfidence in the
                     •
                   defend him from the daunger o
                     •
                   the ennemy, and kepe him in per
                     •
                  petuall peace and safetie through Iesus Christ our Lord.
            
            
               The.
               Amē
                  ▪
               
            
            
               Phi.
               
                  Heare vs almighty and mos
                        •
                      merciful God and sauiour,A praier. extēd thy accustomed goodnes to this thy seruaunt, whiche is greued with sicknes, visit him (O lorde,) as thou diddest visit Peters wiues mother,Math. viii and the Capitaines seruaunt. Restore vnto this sick parson his former health (if it b
                        •
                      thy wil) or els geue him grace so to take thy visitation, that after this painfull life ended, he maye dwel with the in life euerlasting.
               
            
            
               Chr.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               Arise and let vs

go againe, vnto our sicke brother. Now neighbour Epaphroditus, how do you? Reioyce I pray you in the Lord, and beare this crosse which God hath now laied vpon you,Phi. iii. both paciently and thanckefully.
            
            
               Epap.
               If I haue heretofore bene glad to receiue health at the Lordes hand,Iob. ii. why shuld not I also nowe take in good worth this his moste gentle and louing visitation? The Lord gaue me health,Iob. i. and the Lord hath taken it away againe. It hath chaunced vnto me as the Lords pleasure is, blessed be the name of the Lord.
            
            
               The.
               This cōforteth vs greatly to hear so good and godly wordes procede out of your mouth.Mat. xii. For of the aboundance of the hart the mouth speaketh, saith our sauiour Christ. A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, bringeth forthe good things.Math. xix
               
            
            
               Ep.
               No man is good

but God alone. We are al vnclene & vnprofitable seruaunts.Esay. lxiiii If any goodnes we haue, it is of God, as blessed Iames saith: Euery good gift and euery perfect gift is from aboue, & commeth downe from yt father of lyghtes, that he whiche reioyseth,Luke. xvii. i. Cor. iiii. Iames. i Iere. ix. i. Corin. i shoulde reioyse in the Lord.
            
            
               Chr.
               Now good neighbour how fele you your self?
            
            
               Epa.
               O brother Christopher. I perceiue ther is none other waye with me but one, euen to depart from this lyfe.
            
            
               Phi.
               Let it neuer greue you moost genle neighbour to geue ouer vnto nature,An exhortatiō to the sick to die willingly. and to depart from this worlde, at the callynge of God. There is a time to be borne,Eccle. iii. and a time to die. We must be as wel cō
                  tent to die, as we were to liue, and as wel pleased to leaue the world, as we were to come into it.
               We ar mortal, we therfore must nedes die. Let vs not bear heauely,

that necessitie importeth. God crea
                     ••
                  d vs, that we shuld once die let vs not therefore repugne and striue against the good pleasure of God. There shal none other thing chaunce vnto vs by death, than that hathe heretofore chaunced vnto our predecessours,Psal. lxxxix. and shall likewyse chaunce vnto our posteritie. Who hath lyued, that hath not died? Who doth now or shall liue, that shall not also tast death? One & the same way must nedes be troden of all Adams posteritie. There is no meane to escape. Adam sinned and became mortall.Roma. v All we haue sinned also in Adam, therefore all we are made in him mortall and subiect vnto death. As by one man (saith S. Paule) sinne entred into the worlde, and death by the meanes of sinne? Euē so death also went ouer al men, in so muche as all we haue synned.Roma. vi.
                  
The reward of sinne is death.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . ii God in dede created mā at the beginning to be immortall and not to be destroyed by death, yea after the Image of his owne likenesse made he him. Neuerthelesse thorow enuy of the deuil came death into the world. The history of Adams fal is known,Gene. iii in whō we also fel. Sence that time he & all his posteritie haue bene mortall,Iohn. iii haue died & shal die. We al ar now flesh earth,Eccle. x dust & ashes. So sone as we be borne, so sone begin we to die. This our life is nothing els then a very passage vnto death. Noble and base, pore and riche, faire and foule, wel fauoured and il fauoured, mighty and weake, wise & folish, fortunate and wretched, ruler and subiect, faithfull and vnfaithfull, Christian and Painim, old and yong, man, woman and childe, euery bodely creature that

liueth on the face of the earth shall die. Whether the life be short or long, the end of it is death. All the holy Patriarkes, Iudges, kings, Priestes, Prophets, and all other whiche liued before the comminge of Christ, died. Ihō Baptist, Christes mother, & all the disciples of Christ died. Yea, Christ him selfe although moste innocent & without all sinne, after he was once clad with our flesh, and had taken on him our nature, became mortall, and to pay our raunsome vnto God the father,Phil. ii. and to set vs againe at libertie, he suffred death, euen the death of the crosse.Math. 
                        •
                     . Is ye seruaunt greater then his Lorde? Or the disciple aboue his maister? Our Lord hath troden the way a fore vs, and shall we his seruants refuse to follow him? Our maister hath geuen vs an example to die, and shall we his disciples disdain

to practise the lyke▪ If death had bene cast only vppon our backes, which liue in this age, so might ye burthen haue bene thought vnrighteous and intollerable, but forasmuch as our ancestors haue already tasted of death and are gone, why shuld we that now liue beare so impaciently this commō chaunce? On this condition came we al into the world, yt we should leaue it agayne.i. Par. xxix. For we be heare but strangers and soiourners, as were al our fathers.Psalm. xc. Our days on thearth also are but as a shadow, and there is none abiding. Oure daies passe away swiftly, and we are gone.Ioh. vii. The dayes of man are ye daies of an hirelyng, yea wynde and nothyng.Psal. cxliiii Man is lyke vnto vanit
                     •
                  e, and his dayes passe away like a shadow.Psal. lxxxix Where is ther any man that liueth, and shall not se
                     •
                   death?Ioh. xiiii. man that is borne of a woman,

hath but a short time to liue, and yet the tyme that he lyueth, he is full of mysery. He cometh vp and is cut down like a flower. He flieth as it were a shadow, and neuer continueth in one state.Hebr. xiii. Here haue we no continuing city, but we seke one to come. It is apoynted of God, that all men shal once die. For what is our life? It is euen a vapour,Hebr. ix. that appeareth for a little tyme, and then vanisheth away,Iacob. iiii. Iob. ix. as Iob saith, my dayes are more swift then a runner, yea they passe away as the shippes that be good vnder sayle, and as the Egle that flieth to the praye. Seing it is Gods will, pleasure and ordinaunce that wee should dye: why do we, which dayly pray on this manner. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heauen, shew our selues vnwilling to haue yt thyng chaūce vnto vs,Math. vi. for the which we

haue so often times praied? It is naturall to die, why then labour we to degenerate and growe out of kind? Our aūcestours the most holy and moste perfect haue died, why disdaine we then to followe their steps? It is highly for our profit to die, why are we than ennemies to our selues? We can not cease to sinne, except we die, why do we than not hast to fle from so great an euil? We shal neuer come vnto the true life where felicitie bothe ioyfull and eternall is, except we die, why than make we so litle spede to hast thither, wher so many good thinges shalbe geuen vs? We shal neuer haue ye fruition of Gods maiestie, & the blessed company of the heauenly spirits, except we die: why thē do we not pray daily vnto yt lord our god to deliuer vs from this stincking sinck of euils (I mene this world)

that we may come and enioye his most glorious presence? The very Heathen, which knew not God a right, but only dreamed of the immortalitie of the soule, & loked for a better lyfe after this, they knew not why they should feare death, but wyshed death and died bothe valeantly and ioyfully, and shall we being christians which know God and his holy word, and vnto whom so much comfort, hope, and euerlasting life is promised, refuse gladly and willingly to die? What a saying of an Ethnicke is this?Lib. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •••
                     
                     tuseul. O immortall God, howe is that pleasant and ioyfull iourney to be wished for, which being once done and past,Lib. de sence there remaineth no sorow, no care, no pensiuenes. Again, O that goodly and pleasant day, whan it shall be my chaunce 
                     •
                  o leaue this filthy & troublesome world, and come to their company

that inhabit the heauens. I
                     •
                   God wold suffer me, that I being of this age, might become an infant and sucking child againe, I woulde vtterly refuse it, neyther would I by any meanes call the rase that I haue run back again, that I might again be yong. For what pleasure & commoditie hath this life? yea rather what displeasure, incommoditie, pain, trauel & trouble hath it not? But let it be graunted that it hathe pleasure, certes: yet hath it ether satietie or mesure. And nature in this world hath geuen vs a place to tary in for a while, but not to dwell & to continue in it. The Heathen wryters in their monumēts cal death a changing for a better life, a quiet slepe: a remouing from mortalitie vnto immortalitie, from trouble: vnto quietnes, from ye shadow of a life: vnto a very & vncounterfet

life, from sorow: vnto ioy, from euill: vnto good, an hauē of rest, a solace of the mind, an end of all euill and wickednesse, and a beginning of all true ioy, felicitie & pleasure. Of these things may we easly learne, what opinion the very Heathen conceiued of death, and shal we that professe Christ, know God,Rom. 
                        •
                     . beleue his word and cal our selues dead vnto ye world, recoūt death an euill thing,Collos. ii
                        •
                     
                   and be lothe to go vnto it, whē God calleth vs, as though there were no resurrection of the body, no immortalitie of the soule, no life after this, no felowship with god, and with the heauenly spirites? The Iewes also beyng perswaded of the resurrection of the body, and of thimmortalitie of the soule, die ioyfully & with a lusty courage, whiche notwithstanding for their vnbelief in Christ are damned: and shal

we whiche are christians tremble and shake at ye name of death, as though after our death we should be in worse case then we be nowe, whan to say the truthe, the faithfull christians do than chiefly begin to liue, when thei depart from this world. All good men haue euer desired to depart frō this vile and wretched life, and to go vnto that ioyful and blessed state of immortalitie.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Dauid that Prince-like Prophet crieth out and saith. Wo is me, and sory am I for it, yt I must yet longer abide in this world. Again. Like as the hart desireth the water brokes,
                     
                        •
                     salm. lxii so lōgeth my soule after thee, O God. My soul is a thurst for God, yea euen for the liuing God: when shall I come to appeare before the presence of God?
                     
                        •
                     sal. lxxxiiii. Also in an other place he saith. O howe amiable are thy dwellinges thou Lord of hostes?

My soule hath a desire & longing to enter into the courtes of ye Lord my heart & my fleshe reioyse in the liuing God. Blessed are they that dwel in thy house, they shalbe alway praising thee. One day in thy courtes is better then a thousand. I had rather be a dorekeper in ye house of my God, then to dwell in the tentes of vngodlines. In another Psalme he praieth on this mā
                  
                  
                     •
                  er.Psal. 
                        •
                     x
                        ••
                     
                   Deliuer my soule out of pry
                  
                     •
                  on, that it may come and prayse 
                     •
                  hy name.Tobi. i
                        ••
                     . The holy man Tobias made his praier vnto God & said: O Lord deale with me according 
                     •
                  o thy will, and commaunde my 
                     •
                  pirit to be receiued in peace. For more expedient were it for me to 
                     •
                  ie, then to liue. How desirous the 
                     •
                  oly Apostle S. Paul was to go 
                     •
                  rom this vale of misery, vnto the 
                     •
                  eauenly kingdom, these his wor
                  
                     •
                  es declare manifestly:Phillip. Christe is

to me life, and death is to me aduauntage. Againe,Philip. i I desire to bee losed and to be with Christ. What shall I speake of that auncient & godly father Simeon, whiche so sone as he had sene Christ, knowing him to be the sauioure of the world: was very desirous to die, & brast out into these wordes & said▪ Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart in peace,Luke. ii. according to thy promes. For mine eyes haue sene thy saluation, whiche thou haste prepared before the face of al people. A light to lighten the gentils,Esry. xlix. and the glory of thy people Israel.Actes. xiii. Of the like affection with these tofore rehearsed, were without doubt all godly parsons from the beginning, then being moste ioyfull, whan they sawe the time of their departure from this wretched world to be come: so likewise brother Epaphroditus ought both

you and we to reioyse and be glad whan death approcheth and commeth vpō vs. For then beginneth our felicitie, welth, quietnes, safetie, ioy, pleasure, comfort & glory, as the voyce from heauen sayde: Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord.Apoca. xiiii. For from henceforth the spirite saieth, that they shall be at reast from their labours, paines & trauailes. Precious and ryghte dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his sainctes,Psal. cxix. saith ye Psalmograph. The soules of the righteous, saieth the wiseman,Sapi. iii. are in the hand of God, and the paine of death shall not touch them. In ye sight of the vnwyse they appeare to die, but they are in peace. Let vs not therfore fear death. To the infidele and vnfaithful mā, death is both fearefull and terrible, but to a faithfull man, it is bothe pleasaunte and amiable. Therefore

neighbour Epaphroditus, as you haue hitherto in all your wordes shewed your selfe a faithful man, and wel contented to obey the wil of God: so likewise practise ye same now in your workes. If the good pleasure of God be through this sicknes to cal you out of this val
                     •
                   of misery, stryue not against the wil of God, but submit your selfe to Gods holy working, & dout nothing, but it shalbe to your great commoditie and singulare profit. For all thinges worke for the best vnto them yt loue God.Rom. viii. God hath appoynted the boundes of your lyfe,Iob. xiiii. and beyond that ye can not go.Iohn. xi. When the twelfth houre commeth, then shall ye make an ende. Labour therfore to make suche an end, as God therwith may be plea
                     •
                  sed, seing you know and are fully perswaded,Math. 
                        •
                     . yt not an here doth fal
                     •
                   from your head without the good

wil of god,Luke. xii. much les shal your life be taken away frō you, til the very hour cōmeth, which God hath appoynted,Apoc. i. Psal. xxxi. in whose handes only are the keyes bothe of lyfe and death.Eccle. x
                        ••
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Death is terrible and fearfull.
            
            
               Ph.
               The wyse man saith,Remedies against ye feare of death. O death how bitter is the remembraunce of thee to a man that seketh rest and comfort in his substaunce and riches, vnto the man that hath nothing to vexe him, & yt hath prosperitie in all thinges, yea vnto him, that setteth all his mynde on belly cheare? O death, how acceptable and good is thy iudgement vnto the nedefull, and vnto him whose strength faileth, and that is nowe in his last age? &c. Be not thou afraide of death, remember them that haue ben before thee, & that come after thee. This is the iudgemēt of the Lord 
                     •
                  uer al flesh. And why wouldest yt
                  
be against this pleasure of the hiest. &c. To the vnfaithful death in dede is terrible and fearfull. For then begin their sorowes and miseries, their plages and torments, as we may se in the historie of the richman,Luke. xvi. but to the faithfull and true beleuers death is pleasant & amiable, as it is written,Psal. cxvi. precious in the sight of the Lord is ye death of his sainctes.Apoca. xiiii For then cease all their miseries and trauayles, and begin their ioyes and pleasures. Whosoeuer is a true Christian & fixeth ye eies of his minde through true faith on the death of Christe,Sap. iii. he shall not greatly be afrayde o
                     •
                   death, but he shall rather triumph ouer death and with a lusty courage saye thus vnto death:Ose. xii. O death I wil be thy death. For death is swalowed vp into victorye through Iesus Christ our Lorde
                     •
                   
                  i. Cor. xvThe sting of death can nowe no

more hurt the faithfull, as our sauiour Christ testifieth, verely, verely I saye vnto you: he that heareth my worde & beleueth on hym that sent me,Iohn. v. hathe euerlastinge life, and shall not come into damnation, but is scaped from death vnto life. Again, verely, verely I say vnto you:Iohn. vi. he that putteth his trust in me, hath euerlasting lyfe. I am that liuinge bread whiche came down from heauen. If any man eat of this bread, he shall liue for euer.Iohn. viii. Item, verely, verely I say vnto you: If a man kepe my saying he shal neuer tast death: al so in an other place, I am the resurrection & life, he that beleueth in me, although he be dead, yet shal he liue.Iohn. xi. And euery one that liueth & beleueth in me, shall neuer die.
            
            
               Epa.
               Death is painefull.
            
            
               Phi.
               Who will not be content to suffer a little and shorte paine, that he

may for euer after enioy continuall quietnes and euerlasting rest?Remedies against the paines of death. ii. Tim. ii Roma. viii Nothing is gotten without paine and trauaile. No man is crowned except he striue lawfully The afflictions of this life are not worthy of ye glory, which shalbe shewed vpon vs.ii. Tim. ii. Notwithstanding if we die with Christ: we shall also lyue with hym. If we suffer, we shall reigne with him. Therefore be on good comfort, God is faithfull, which wil not suffer you to be tempted aboue that you are able to beare.ii. Cor. i. The Lord our God is a father of mercies, and God of all consolation, whiche will without all doubt be present with you and comfort you in all your sicknesses and paines. For as the afflictions of Christ are plenteous in vs: euē so is our consolation plenteous by Christ. As you are partaker of the afflictions: so shall ye be partaker

also of the consolation.ii. Cor. iiii. For this short and lyght trouble, sicknes and pain prepareth an exceading & an eternal waight of glory vnto you, whyle you loke not on the thinges whiche are sene, but on ye thinges whiche are not sene. For ye thinges which are not sene, are eternall. If you consider the great & intollerable paines, that many good and godly men haue suffred on their bodies for Christes sake, it shal the les greue you to beare this your sicknes, yea death and the paines thereof. The Prophet Esaye for the hope of euerlasting life, suffred his body to be cut a sonder with the saw of wood. Ieremy was stoned vnto death. Amos after many greuous torments was thrust into the temples of the head with a great nail of yron, and so shortly after died. Iohn Baptist was cast into prisō
                  Math. xiiii.
                  
& beheaded. Iames the brother of Iohn was slaine with the sword.Act. xii. Act. vii. Math. xxvii. Stephen was stoned vnto death Christ our Lord & sauour suffred most bitter pains & died the death of the crosse. I passe ouer many other both of the old & newe Testament, whiche refused no kinde of pains, so that they might obtain ye reward of euerlasting life, some (as ye blessed apostle saith) wer tried wt mockings & scourginges,Hebr. xl wt bonds & prisonmēt,ii. Par. xxiiii. some wer stoned, some were hewen a sunder, some were slaine wt swerd,iii. Reg. i. al wer trobled & vexed. How glad ioyfull & ready the holy Apostle S. Paul was to suffer al kinde of paines, & tormētes for ye glory of God, these his words do aboundantly shew.Act. xx. The holy ghost doth testifie in euery citie, saying, that bonds and troubles doe abide me but I care not for them, nether is my life dere

vnto me, so that I may finish my course with ioy.Act. xxi. &c. Againe, I am ready not only to be bound but al so to die at Hierusalē for ye name of the Lorde Iesu. What shall I speake of the other blessed Martirs, where of some were deuoured with wild beastes, some burnt with fire vnto ashes, some broyled vnto the death vpon whot coales some slaine with the sweard, some hanged vpon Iebbets, some pearsed to death with arrowes, some beaten to death with stones, some boyled, some rent a peaces with whot burning yron cromes, some racked, some drowned, some cruelly murthered in prysons. &c. Who is hable to declare the moste bitter paines & greuous torments which they gladly suffred on their bodies for the glory of God, and the fruition of his Maiestie? If ye consider these thinges wel,

you shall easly finde, yt the paines which you now suffer, are nothing to be compared vnto the most bitter and intollerable tormentes, whiche the men of God suffred. And not withstanding if you abide these light paines ioyfully, paciently & thankefully, you shall moste certainly enioy and possesse that heauenly kyngdome, whiche they haue already obtained. Faynte not therfore good neyghbor Epaphroditus, but abide the good pleasure of God, & his blessed workyng, so shall he without fail bring all thing to suche passe, as shalbe most vnto his glory and vnto your comfort.
            
            
               Epa.
               Death taketh me away from my gorgious and pleasaunt houses,Remedies against thought taking, for departing from worldly goodes. Gen. xlvii. Psalm. xxxix. and from al the tēporal things that I haue.
            
            
               Phi.
               In this world we all are but straungers & Pilgrims, we haue here no dwelling City, but loke

for an other that is to come.i. Pet. ii. The houses that you leue behinde you here,Hebr. xiii. be they neuer so gorgious & pleasaunt, are but earthy made of clay, and wether beaten stones, & shall in proces of time decay & returne vnto dust & become thinges of nought. But after your departure frō this vale of wretchednes you shall haue a building of God,ii. Cor. v an habitatiō not made with handes, but euerlasting in heauen. You shall dwell in a city, that is of pure gold, like vnto clear glas, and the foundations of the wals of this city are garnished withall manner of precious stones,Apoc. xxi. the gates are of fine pearle. Yea the streates of this heauenly city are pure gold. It hath no nede of the sunne, nether of the Mone to lighten it, for ye brightnes of God doth lightē, and the lambe is the light of it. And as touching your other

tēporall things, frō the whiche, as you saye, death taketh you away, you haue no cause to be sory for yt. For as concerning your galant aparel, whiche if they be not worne wil sone be motheaten, if they be worn,Apoc. iii. they wil shortly fal to rags in ye steade of them you being once placed in the heauenly city, shalbe clothed of God with white garments, which shal neuer wax old, but alwaies abide glorious & incorruptible. You shall also haue a golden crown vpon your head, & you shall sit with Christ vpon his seat. And in the stead of your deinty fare, which how vile it is after the digestion you knowe, ye shall eat in the kingdom of God Manna yt is hid,Apoc. iii. yea ye shall eat of the tre of life, which is in the mids of the Paradise of God. And this meat shal abide for euer most pleasaunt and vncorruptible. As touching

your gold & siluer & suche other worldly treasures, wherwith God blessed you in this worlde for a season, neuer remember thē any more, but bid them farewell. For what other thyng are they (seme they neuer so precious, pleasaunt & goodly) then red & white earth, & hereafter shall returne vnto vile dust. In the stead of them God in his kingdō shal geue you such treasures, as neuer man with mortall eies saw ye like. You also shal haue such ioyes & plesurs,Esay. lxiiii. i. Cor. ii. as nether eie hath sene the like, nor ear hard the like, nether is any man able to cō
                  ceiue them in his heart, so great are the treasures, so infinite are the pleasures, which God hath prepared for thē that loue him. Who wil not be glad to change lead for siluer, & copper for gold, corruptible & earthly things for immortall & heauenly treasures. Here se you

that you lose nothing by death, but get very muche, so yt you may now saye with the holy Apostle, Christ is to me life,Phil. i. and death is to me auauntage.Remedies against thought taking for departing frō frende
                        •
                     .
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Death taketh me away from my deare frē
                  des, in whose company I greatly delight.
            
            
               Phi.
               In worldly frēdship ther is no certaintie nor assurāce. He which this day is a frend, is tomorow an enemy. This is proued true among men almost by dayly experiēce.Eccle. vi. Ther are diuers kinds of frendes, as the wyse man teacheth. Some be frendes but for a time, such will not abide in yt daye of trouble.Of worldly frendship, Some be frendes for the table sake, and when a man falleth into pouertie, they continue not. Some be frendes only in countenaunce, and in heart hate most extremely. Some be earnest and harty frendes, whiche will abide by man, whē fortune is moste

froward. But of these there are very few. And they which now such be, may sodenly thorowe some occasion be made a mans vtter enemy. Therfore saith Dauid:Psal. cxl
                        •
                     . put not your confidence in Princes nor in the children of men, in whom ther is no health. Also the Prophet: Cursed be he that trusteth in mā,Iere. xvii and maketh flesh his strength. Ye 
                     •
                  e in the Gospel, that they whiche 
                     •
                  o dearly loued Christ,Iohn. v
                        •
                     
                   that they would haue made hym a kynge, shortly after for no occasion fell away from him, & followed him no more. Again those people whiche very ioyfully receiued Christ whē he came ryding into Hierusalem,Math. 
                        •
                     xi. cut down bowes, strowed them in the wayes, yea and spread theyr garmentes in the waies and cried with a loud voyce, sayinge: Good lucke vnto the sonne of Dauid.Luke. ix. Iohn. xii. Blessed is he that commeth in the

name of the Lorde, within few
                     •
                   dais after cried with a stout voic
                     •
                   and said: To the crosse with him to the crosse with him.Mat. xxvii. Iohn. xix. Iohn. xviii If ye lettes
                     •
                   him go thou art not Cesars frend if he were not a noughty pack, w
                     •
                   would neuer haue deliuered hym vnto thee. Behold the frendship o
                     •
                   this worlde. Nether let any man promise him self better thinges o
                     •
                   his now most dear frend. Men a
                     •
                   vain & liers, fliting and vnstable. But when you come into the kingdom of God,Psalm. lxii Psalm. cxvi. you shall haue suche frendes as shall for euer continue faithfull, louing and cōstant. God the father,Psal. cii. Malac. i. God the sonne, & God the holy ghost shalbe your frends, which do neuer chāge but always abide one. All the glorious angels & blessed spirits of heauen shall be your frendes also. Who will not gladly change vncertaine frendes for such as are moste certain, most

faithfull? Haue you now lost any thyng by departing from worldly vnto heauenly frendes.
            
            
               Ep.
               But I shal neuer more se thē, nor haue ye cōpany of thē, yt we may reioyce & be glad againe together.Of knowing one another after this life.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               If your frendes liue in the feare of God, & depart in the christē faith, they may be sure to come thither, wher you shalbe, euē vnto ye glorious kingdō of God, wher you shal both see them, know them, talcke with them, and be much more mery with thē than euer you were in this world.
            
            
               Chr.
               Many doubt of that.
            
            
               ph.
               Why so? Shall ye knowledge of Gods electe and chosen people be lesse in the kingdome of God, then it is in this world? We beinge in this corruptible bodye know one another, whan we see not God but with the eies of our faith,ii. Cor. xii. i. Iohn. iii. & shall we not know one another after that we haue put of

this sinfull body, and se God fac
                     •
                   to face in the sight of whom is the knowledge of al things? We shall be lyke the glorious Aungels of heauē,Math. xxii. whiche know one another, can it than come to passe that one of vs may not knowe an other? Shal we be equal with ye angels in other thinges,i. Iohn. iii. Hebr. i & inferiour vnto them in knowing one an other? We shal know and se Christ as he is,Roma. xii. whiche is the wysdome, image and brightnes of the heauenly father, and shall the knowledge of one another be hyd from vs?i. Cor. xii. Collos. i. Ephe. ii. Apoc. xxi We are members all of one body, and shall we not knowe one another? we know our head which is christ & shall we not knowe our selues? we shalbe citezins of one heauenly city, wher continuall light shall be, and shall we be ouerwhelmed with suche darkenes, that we shal not see and know one another?Psal. lxxxiii. Apoc. iiii.v
                  
They that in this worlde be synging men continuing together in a place but for a season know one an other,Apoc. iiii.v.vii.xi.xii. and shall we, which for euer shall continue together synging praysing and magnifying ye Lord our God, not know one another? They that are in houshold & serue one Lorde or maister, know one another in this world, & shall not we know one another, which in the kingdome of heauen, shall continually serue the Lorde oure God together with one spirit, and with one mind? There is a certen knowledge one of an other here in the earth, euen among the vnreasonable and brute beastes, and 
                     •
                  hall our senses be so darkened in the life to come, that we being immortall, incorruptible, and lyke 
                     •
                  nto the angels of God, yea seing God face to face, shall not knowe 
                     •
                  ne another? We shall know God

as he is,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . ii▪
                   & shal we not knowe one another? Adam before he synned, beyng in the state of innocencie, knew Eua, so sone as god brought her vnto hym, and called her by her name, and shall not we being in heauen, where we shalbe in a
                     •
                   muche more blessed and perfecte state then euer Adam was in P
                     ••
                  radise, knowe one another? Shal our knowledge be inferiour to Adams knowledge in Paradise
                     •
                   Whē Christ was transfigured i
                     •
                   mount Thabor, his disciples, Pe
                     •
                  ter, Iames, & Iohn, did not only know Christ, but also Moses and Helias,Math. xvii. whiche talked there with Christ, whome notwithstanding they had neuer seene nor known in ye flesh.Mark. ix. Luke. ix. Wherof we may learne
                     •
                   that when we come to behold th
                     •
                   glorious maiestie of ye great God we shall not only know our sau
                     •
                  
                  our Christ, and such as with wh
                     ••
                  
                  
we wer acquainted in this world, but also all the electe and chosen people of God, whiche haue bene from the beginning of the world, as the holy Apostle saith: Ye are come to the mount Sion, and to the citie of the liuing God,Hebr. xii the celestiall Hierusalem, and to an innumerable sight of aungels, and vnto the congregation of the first borne sonnes, which are writtē in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the spirites of iust and perfect men, and to Iesus the mediatour of the new testament. &c. When we are once come vnto that heauenly Hierusalem, we shal wt
                  out al doubt both se and know Adam, Noe, Abrahā, Isaac, Iacob, Ioseph, Moses, Samuel, Dauid, Iosias, Ihon Baptist, Mary the Mother of Christe, Peter, Iohn, Iames, Paule, and all the moste blessed cōpany of the Patriarkes,

prophets, apostles, martirs, with al other the faithful. As we are al members of one body, wherof Iesus Christ is the head: so shall we knowe one another, reioyse together & be glad one with another. Moreouer the history whiche we read of the rich vnmercifull man and of Lazarus,Luke. xvi. declareth euidētly, yt in the lyfe to come we shall know one an other. In that we se that the riche glotton beyng in hel did knowe bothe Abraham, and Lazarus, being in ioye, and that Abraham also knew that vnmercifull riche man, although the one was in glory, the other in pain. If that they whiche are in hell, doth both se and know them that are in heauē, and they whiche are in heauen, know thē also that are in hell, the one place beyng so far distant from thother: muche more do they knowe one another that

be Citezins in one City, fellowe heirs of one kingdome, members of one body, and fellowe seruants in one houshold seruing one lorde & God. If there be mutual knowledge, after this life betwene good & euil, much more shall ye sainctes and the holy ones of God knowe one another in the kyngdome of our heauenly father.Math. xix. Our sauiour Christ said to his disciples: when the sonne of man shall sitte in the seat of his maiestie, you also shall sit vpon the .xii. seates, iudging the .xii. tribes of Israell. If after the generall resurrection▪ and at the iudgemente one shoulde not know another, how shal thē the apostles iudge thē vnto whom thei preached? They can not iudge nor be witnesses of the condemnation of them, whome they knowe not. Hereof also it manifestlye appeareth,Iohn. xxi. that after this life one of vs

shal know another. After ye Christ was risen again & had a glorified body, thapostles knew him, yea, & that so perfectly, yt none of thē neded to saye vnto hym: what art y•? For they knew well yt he was the Lord. Hereof also may it truely be gathered, yt the faithfull shall as perfectly knowe one an other in ye life to come, as the apostles knew Christ after his resurrectiō
                  ▪ or as Peter, Ihō, & Iames, knew Moses & Helias in the moūt Thabo
                     •
                  , whē Christ was trāsfigured.Math. xvii. Many other thinges might be alledged out of the holy scripture to declare yt we shall know one another after this life, but these for this present may seme to any indifferent person aboundantly to suffice. If I shuld reherse to you all the sayings both of thancient & late writers concerning this matter, I shuld spēd a great part of this day & to much t
                     •
                  ouble you, notwtstanding

I will reherse one saying of s. Gregory in his Dialoges, & bid al the other farwel.
                     Lib. 4. cap. 
                     
                        ••
                     
                   There is a certain thing (saith he) in gods elect & chosen people, which is to be marueled at, for they (being in heauē) do not only know thē, whom they knew in this world, but thei know also the good people, whō thei neuer sawe, euen as perfectlye as though they had afore both sene & known thē. For whē thei in yt euer lasting enheritance shall se thancient fathers, they shal not be vnknowne to thē in sight, whō they always knew in work. For when al there, wt one clearnes do behold God, what is it, that they shoulde not ther know: where they know him that knowe all thinges?
            
            
               Epa.
               This is a cōfortable hering.
            
            
               Phi.
               No les true then cōfortable.
            
            
               Epa.
               I trust then within fewe houres to se al the faithfull, whiche before

me haue departed in the Lord, my children also and all my other acquaintaunce.
            
            
               Phi.
               You shall both se them, know them, reioyse and be meary with them.
            
            
               Eu.
               I maruell yt any man shuld doubt of thys doctrine, beynge so clearlye set forthe both by the authority of the holye scriptures, and by the testimonyes of the godly wryters: seynge that the very heathen, which knew not God a right, beynge parswaded 
                     〈◊〉
                   the immortality of the soule, neuer doubted of it, but were thorowlye resolued that such as lyued in this world iustly and vprightly, and deserued wel of the common wealth. whan so euer they departed from this life, should go vnto the blessed company of the immortal Gods, & there not only se & know the gods, but also all those noble, good and vertuous parsons, that euer liued in this world, as wel suche as they

neuer knew, as also those, whome in this world they dyd moste perfectly know. And they beyng thus perswaded, desyred deathe, at the leaste when the tyme of theyr departure came, they toke their deathe the more ioyfully and paciently, I wil rehearse vnto you ye wor
                  
                     •
                  es of 
                     •
                  ne or two of them. I haue 
                     〈…〉
                   desire (said Cato the elder) 
                     •
                  o se your fathers,
                     Lib. de sence.
                   whom I honou
                  
                     ••
                  d and loued. But I wish not on
                  
                     •
                  y to talke wyth them, whome I haue knowen in thys worlde, but with such also, as of whom I haue 
                     •
                  eard and red, yea and I my selfe 
                     •
                  aue wrytten. If I were once go
                  
                     •
                  ng thitherward, I woulde neuer 
                     •
                  aue mynde to retourne hyther a
                  
                     •
                  ain. Againe he saith, O that no
                  
                     •
                  le and pleasant day, when it shall 
                     •
                  e my chaunce to come vnto that 
                     •
                  eauenly company and blessed fe
                  
                     •
                  owship, and depart frō this troublous

& stincking world. For the
                     •
                   shall I go not only vnto those mē
                  
                     •
                   of whom I spake vnto you befor
                     •
                   but also vnto my Cato, whiche was as worthy a man as euer liued, and as noble. And it is written of Socrates, yt when he wen
                     •
                   vnto his death amōg many other thīgs he said, yt it is a most blessed & goodly thing for thē to come together, which haue liued iustly & faithfully: o saith he what a grea
                     •
                   pleasure thinke you it to be, frēdl
                     •
                   to talk wt 
                  Orpheus,
                  
                     Lib. 1. 
                           •
                        us. quest.
                   
                  Musaeus Home
                        •
                     rus, Hesiodus, & such like? verely I wold die ful oft, if it were possibl
                     •
                   to get those things yt I speake of Thus se we yt many among yt very Heathē, which wer perswade
                     •
                   of thinmortality of ye soul, beleue
                     •
                   yt they whiche in this world liue
                     •
                   godly, iustly, vprightly & honestly should al go vnto a ioyful place o
                     •
                   rest, & ther hauing ye blessed comp
                     ••
                  ny of ye immortal gods, they shul
                     •
                  
                  
know one another, talk & reioyce one wt an other.
            
            
               The.
               As touching ye Ethnickes, which in this world led a iust & vpright life in the sight of mē. I pronoūce nothing, but leue thē vnto gods iudgmēt, but as concerning the faithful christians which beleue in God, feare & loue God, are perswaded of their saluatiō in Christes blud, & frame their life vnto the vttermost of their power, according to the cōmaundements of God, as they shall al obtain one glorious kingdome & be Citezins of one Citie: so likewyse shal they se & know one an other, talke, reioyse, & be mery one with another. This is my belief.
            
            
               Ph.
               I agre wt you in opiniō concerning this matter. Therfore good neighbor Epaphrodit. be of good 
                     •
                  here, take a good hart vnto you, faynt not, nether feare you death. For ye time is at hand, that you leauing

this wretched worlde and the inhabitantes therof, shall come vnto that most glorious and heauē
                  ly kingdom, where you shall haue the sight and knowledge not only of God and of his holy angels, but also of al Gods elect and chosen people. Al your dear frendes, which are gone afore you, shal glo
                     •
                  riously come and mete you, ioyfully receiue you, gladly present you vnto the maiestie of God, and so shall you altogether remain in al glory and ioy for euer and euer.
            
            
               Epa.
               Amen. God graūt.
            
            
               Chr.
               Sir how do you?
            
            
               Epa.
               As God wyll.
            
            
               Chri.
               I truste you do remember, what my neighbour Philemon hath sayd vnto you.
            
            
               Epa.
               Yea right wel, I thanke God.
            
            
               Chr.
               Then sir I praye you be of good comforte.
            
            
               Epa.
               I am well content to forsake the worlde and all that is in the world, and to go vnto the lord my

God.
            
            
               Eu.
               I trust yt there is none other thinge that troubleth you.
            
            
               Epa.
               Yes, not outwardly but inwardly.
            
            
               Eu.
               Inward trouble is ye greatest griefe in the worlde. Declare I pray you what it is, & we will doe the best we can to quiet your mind.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Let me alone a little, and pray for me.
            
            
               Euse.
               Well content. Neighbours, let vs commend this our sicke brother vnto God with our prayers. For he desireth it.
            
            
               Phi.
               God commaundeth vs by his holy Apostle,Iacob. 
                        •
                     
                   saying: If any be diseased amonge you, let him call for the elders of the congregatiō, & let thē pray ouer him, & annoint him wt oyle in the name of the Lord. And ye praier of faith shall saue the sicke, and the Lorde shall rayse him vp, and if he haue committed sinnes, they shalbe forgeuen him. Knowledge your fautes one to another, and praye one

for an other, that ye may be healed The prayer of a righteous mā auaileth muche, if it be feruent. Let vs therfore knele downe and praye.A praier. O Lorde heare our praier.
            
            
               Eu.
               And let our cry come vnto the
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               Phi.
               O almighty and euerlasting God, which lightnest al men that come into this world: we besethe thee lightē the heart of this sicke, weake and diseased persone, with the beames of thy deuine grace & mercy, yt al his thoughtes, wordes & workes may so be directed, that he may be acceptable to thy godly maiestie in true faith and perfect loue, thorow thi only sonne Iesus Christ our Lord & sauiour.
            
            
               Chr.
               A
                     •
                  men.
            
            
               Phi.
               O eternall and merciful God,A praier. loke down from heauē, and visit this thy weake seruaunt, as thou diddest visit Toby & Sara, Peters wiues mother & the Captaines seruaunt. Blesse hym as

thou didst blesse Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. Behold him, O Lord, with the eies of thy mercy. Replenish his hart with all ioye, & kepe from him al sinful thoughtes and wicked imaginations. And sende downe thy angell of peace, that he may kepe and defend him in euerlasting peace through Iesus christ thy deare sonne our Lorde & sauiour.A prayer.
               
            
            
               Eu.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               O Lord Iesu Christ, thalone sauiour of ye world and the true phisitiō both of body and soule, we most humbly besech thee, mercifully to behold this our sicke brother,Collo. 
                        •
                     . which is a mēber of ye mistical body, wherof thou art ye head and a braunche of the which y• art the true vine.Iohn. xv. Be thou vnto hym that moste louing Samaritane.Luke. x. Poure wyne and oyle into his woundes, binde them vp, la
                     •
                  e him vpon thy beast, & neuer leaue him vntill thou hast brought hym

into that Inne, whiche is the glo
                     •
                  rious kingdome of thy heauenly father Remoue from him all vnfaithfulnes and mistrust, & graue in his hart true & earnest faith in the & in thy moste precious bloud. Suffer him not to dispaire, nor to doubt of thy godly grace. Let ye remēbrance of thy most mercifull promises, setforth in thy holy gospel neuer be out of his hart. Suffer not Satā to preuaile against him. Let not his conscience be cō
                  bred with the terrours either of sinne or death. Be thou his strong castell and mighty fortresse. Assist him now in this his greuous affliction, let not his soule be a pray vnto his ennemies, neither geue thou him ouer into the cruel handes of hys terrible aduersaries▪ but shewe vpon him presently thy bountifull goodnes, that he thorowe thy helpe hauinge the ouerhand

of Sathan, may finishe his course with ioy, and so after his departure from this troublous world, come vnto the blessed hauen of quietnes, where thou with the father and the holy gost liuest and raignest one true and euerlasting God, worldes without end.
            
            
               The.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lord rebuke me not in thine indignation, nether chasten me in thy heauy displeasure. Haue mercy on me,Psalm. 
                        ••
                     . O Lorde, for I am weake, heale me, O Lord, for all my bones are sore troubled, yea my soule is greuously vexed, but Lord, how longe? O how long wilt y• defer thy helpe? Turne the (O Lord) & deliuer my soule, (oh saue me for thy mercies sake.
            
            
               Phi.
               O neighbour, how is it with you?Remedies against desperation.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Nowe that I had thorow your godly exhortations well digested my departure from this world, & was well content to

go hence, whēsoeuer the Lord my god calleth me: now am I so troubled in my conscience, that I begin almoste to dispayre of Gods mercy toward me, yea and wish yt there were no God, nor no life after this.
            
            
               Phi.
               Gentle brother faint not in your faith, neither dispaire you of the great mercies of God, but cal on the lord your God with strong faith, and he full gratiously will send present remedy for you frō his holy temple.
            
            
               Epa.
               O my cō
                  science is greuously vexed, troubled, & disquieted, while I behold the fearce wrath of God againste sinne, and consider how wicked a life I haue led, & how oft I haue broken Gods holy commaundemēts.
            
            
               Phi.
               Fear not dear brother, for though you be neuer so sinfull: God is mercifull. Though youre synnes be great: yet are the mercies of God muche greater. God

saueth not vs because we are righteous and withoute synne:Tit. ii. but for his mercie and promyse sake, when he seeth vs repente, beleue and seeke for remedy at his hande for Christes precious bloud sake.
            
            
               Epaphrod.
               Sathan nowe in this my sicknesse doeth so moleste and trouble me, that me thinke I fele a very hel within my brest.
            
            
               Phile.
               The manner of Satan,Remedies against the tē
                     tatiōs of Sathan. which is the common aduersary of all men, is,Note. whē any mā is greuously sicke & like to die, straightways to com vpon him at the beginning very fearcely, & to shew him selfe terrible vnto him, & to cast before his eies suche a mist: that except he taketh hede, he shall see nothing but the fearce wrath, & terrible iudgement of God against sinners, again, synne, desperatiō, death and 
                     •
                  el, and whatsoeuer maketh vnto vtter confusion of the sickmans

consciēce.
            
            
               Epa.
               So is it now with me.
            
            
               Phi.
               Feare not. It is his olde propertie. If you had led as holy & as perfect a lyfe, as euer did man in this world, yet would he deale on this manner wt you. He knoweth right well, yt the tyme of your departure is at hande, & that God will shortly call you from this sorowful & mortal lyfe, vnto a blessed and immortal lyfe: therfore laboureth he vnto the vttermoste o
                     •
                   his power, to plucke you from so ioyfull a state, and to make you his pray. But be you not afrayde. For whome of Gods elect hath he let pas vnassailed, vntempted, or vnproued?Math. iiii. He feared not to assay the sonne of God, after he had put on our nature: and thincke you to escape fre? His nature, disposition and desire, is to destroy: maruel
                     •
                   you therefore, if he goe aboute to seke your destruction? His proper
                     •
                  tie

is to disquiet: wonder you therfore if he trouble you?Iohn. viii. He is a lier: what truthe therfore can come out of his mouth? If he saye vnto you that God is angry with you, and wil destroy you, know him to be a lier, and whatsoeuer he sayth against your saluation, beleue it not: but knowe it to be a lye. He is a murtherer: what lyfe then can come from hym?Iohn. viii. He is an accuser of the brethren, how than can he speake anye good or comfortable thyng vnto you?Apoca. xii. He is your vtter enemy: how thē is it possible, that he may be your frende, and seeke your quietnesse? Feare hym not therfore,i. Pet. v. He is but a cowarde and a very slaue. They be but brags, whatsoeuer he threatneth. He may well hisse at you, but he can not styng you. He may loke vpon you with a terrible & fearful countenāce, but he cā do you no harme.

He may go about to tēpt you, but to ouercome you, it lieth not in his power.Iacob. iiii. Hear what s. Iames saith Resiste the deuill, and he shall fli
                     •
                   from you. Drawe nie vnto God, & he shal draw nie to you.
            
            
               Epa.
               Yea, but how shal I resist ye deuel.
            
            
               Phi▪
               
               Not as the supersticious papistes were wont to do,How to resist the deuell. with casting o
                     •
                   holy water about your chamber
                     •
                   wt laying holy bread in your window, with pinning a Crosse mad
                     •
                   of halowed Palmes at your beds head, nor with ringing of the hallowed bel, or such other beggarly superstitious, Popishe, & deuelish ceremonies.Of Faith.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               How then?
            
            
               
                  Phil
                        •
                     
                  
               
               With faith, with prayer, and with the word of God.
            
            
               Epa.
               Howe with faith.
            
            
               Phile.
               Cast the eies of your
                     •
                   mind with strong faith on the sed
                     •
                   of the woman, which hath trode
                     •
                   downe the serpents head, and destroyed his power, as he saieth by

the Prophet:Osc. xiii. O hel, I wyll be thy destruction,Hebr. ii. which by death hath put him to flight that had Lordeshippe ouer death, euen the Deuill, that he might deliuer them, whiche throughe feare of death were all their lyfe tyme subdued vnto bondage, whiche also (as the Apostle saith) hath spoyled rule & power,Collo
                        •
                     . i. & hath made a shew of thē openly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his own persone.i. Iohn. iii. So shal you be sure to escape his greuous assaultes. For the sonne of God apeared for this purpose, euen to destroy the workes of the Deuill. Christ was figured by that brasen serpent, which God commaūded Moses to set vp in the wildernes, adding this promise vnto it,Num. xxi. that whosoeuer beyng stricken of the firy Serpentes did loke on that, he shoulde be healed. After this maner, is it betwene Christe and

vs. If that firy serpent the deuill hath striken and wounded vs, let vs loke vpon Christ with stronge faith, and we shal surely for Gods promise sake be made whole, as Christe him selfe testifieth, saying: As Moyses lyfted vp the serpent in the wildernes:Iohn. iii. so must the son of man be lyfted vp, that all that beleue on hym should not peryshe, but haue euerlasting life. For god sent not his sonne into the worlde to condemne the worlde, but that the world shold be saued through him. If Sathan therfore hath either wounded you already, or els goeth about so to do, feare not, repare vnto Christ, loke on him with the eies of your faithe, so shall you be fre from his venomus chause. For as you are nowe tempted,Hebr. xi. so were al godly men, but they ouercame ye tēpter through strōg faith in Christ. Therfore saith s. Peter.

Be ye sober and watche, for your aduersary the deuill goeth about like a roring Lion,i. Pet. v. seing whome he may deuoure, whome resist ye strong in faith.i. Iohn. v Saint Iohn also saith, this is the victory, which ouercommeth the worlde euen our faith. Not only all godly & faithfull men were tempted, but also our sauiour Christ.Math. iiii. And this is a great comfort for vs. For in that it fortuned him selfe to be tempted,Hebr. ii. he is hable to succour them, also that are tempted. Christ being tempted, ouercame his temptations to get vs the victory ouer the tempter.Note. His triumphe is our victory, and his victory is our triumphe. Whatsoeuer he did & got in his humanitie, he did and got it not for him self, but for vs. And God is faithfull (saith the apostle) whiche will not suffer you to be tempted aboue your strength,i. Cor x. but

wil in the mids of the temptation make away, that ye may be able t
                     •
                   beare it. Beleue therfore in Christ & you are without al danger.Mark. ix.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue, O Lord, help thou min
                     •
                   vnbeliefe.Luke. xiii. O Lorde encrease my faith.
            
            
               Phi.
               Fear you not, but God both will & doth hear your prayers,Psal. cxiv.
for ye Lorde is nie vnto all thē that cal on him in truth.Of prayer.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               You made mention also of praier, saying that yt is also a mean to resist
                     •
                   Sathan.
            
            
               Phi.
               I reioyse greatly & I geue God moste harty thankes yt in this your sicknes your memory cōtinueth stil stedfast & perfect.
            
            
               Epa.
               I praise God for it.
            
            
               Phi.
               That prayer is a necessary remedy for the auoyding of Sathans temptations, the holy scriptures teache manifestly in diuers places. Our sauior Christ saith,Math. xxvi. watch & pray, that ye fal not into temptation. Againe. This kind of deuils is not

cast out, but by prayer & fasting.Mark. ix. To represse yt temtatiōs of Satā all godly men euen frō the beginning fled vnto faithfull praier, as a mighty & sure defence againste sathan and al his crafty assaultes. And God hath commaunded vs to pray, whensoeuer we are troubled, and doeth also promise vs, yt he wyll both heare and helpe vs. Call on me,Psal. 
                        •
                     . sayeth he in the tyme of thy trouble, and I wyl delyuer thee, and thou shalt honoure me. The Lorde is nie vnto them that are of a troubled heart,Psal. xxxiii. & he wyll help thē that be broken in spirite.
            
            
               Ep.
               Now good neighbors pray for me.
            
            
               Ph.
               Uery gladly. Let vs knele down together and pray.
            
            
               Chr.
               Lo here are we.A prayer.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               O heauenly and moste mercifull father, we moste humbly besech thee for thy sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Lord, haue pitie vpon this thy creature, and

succoure him in these horrible assaultes and temptations of the de
                     •
                  uill. Deliuer his soule in these extreame necessities from all the internall army. Sende him downe strength from aboue, that he may be able to resiste his ennemy, and to stande stedfaste in the tyme of this his temptation. Be thou his strong rocke, castell, shield, tower, and defense, that he in this greate trouble being preserued from the tyranny of his ennemies▪ through thy godly grace assistence & helpe: may continue in the true and christen faith vnto his liues end, and afterward be receiued into thy heuenly kingdome, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
            
            
               Euse.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               Now will I pore & wratched sinner offer my prayers also vnto the Lord my God in Iesus Christes name, trusting and beleuing vndoubtedly, that he gratiously wyl

heare me, and defend me against mine enemies.Mark. xi.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               These are the words of Christ: What things so euer ye desyre whan ye praye: beleue that ye receiue them, and ye shall haue them.
            
            
               Epaph.
               Out of the depth do I cry vnto thee,Psal. cxxx. O Lord O Lord hear my praier. Saue me O God,Psal. lxix. for the waters of trouble are come in euen vnto my soule.A praier. I stick fast in the depe myre, where no groūd is: I am come into depe waters, so that the 
                     •
                  loudes run ouer me. Take me out of the myre that I sinck not. Oh let me be deliuered from them that hate me, & out of the depe waters. Let not the water floud drown me, nether let the depe swalowe me vp, & let not the pit shut her mouthe vpon me. Heare me, O Lord, for thy louing kindnes is cōfortable: turne me vnto thee according vnto the multitude of thy mercies, & hyde

not thy face from thy seruaunt, fo
                     •
                   I am in trouble, O hast thee, and hear me. Draw nie vnto my soul, and saue it, oh deliuer me because of mine ennemies. For yt knowest my reprofe, my shame, and my dishonoure. Mine aduersaries are ful in thy sight. So shal I, beyng deliuered from these great miseries through thy gratious benefit prayse and magnifie the name of thee my Lord God for euer and euer.
            
            
               Chr.
               So be it.
            
            
               Epa.
               Neighbor Philemon.Of Gods worde.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Here sir.
            
            
               Epa.
               As I remember, you told me, that besides faythe and prayer, the word of God also is a goodly help and a strong fortresse against the cruell assanites of the Deuill.
            
            
               Phile.
               It is truthe.Luke. xiii. For so are we taught in the holy scripture. Our sauioure Christ, when the time of his Passion began to drawnie, knowing that his Disciples shoulde for his

                  
                     •
                  ake be greuously tempted bothe of the deuill, the world, & the flesh: commaunded thē to bie a sworde. This was no materiall but spirituall sword,Ephe. 
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   as S. Paul declareth vnto ye Ephesiās, saying: aboue all thinges, take to you the shield of faith, wherwith ye may quenche all the firy dartes of the wycked. And take the helmet of saluation, and the sword of the spirit, which 
                     •
                  s the word of God. And praye alwayes with all manner of prayer & supplication in the spirit.Math. iiii. With 
                     •
                  he worde of God Christ droue away Sathan and resisted all his wicked temptacions.Rom. i. For it is the power of God to saue so many as beleue. In the word of God plēteous & present remedies are founde against Satan, and al his subtile suggestions. Therfore said ye psalmograph. I haue hyd thy spea
                  
                     •
                  hes, O Lord in my heart,Psal. cxix. that I

might not sin against thee.Iohn. xv. Now are ye cleane sayde Christe, for th
                     •
                   word, whiche I spake vnto you. Hereto parteineth the sayinge o
                     •
                   the wyseman.Sap. xvi. Nether hearbe, no emplasture hath healed them, O lord, but thy worde which healet
                     •
                   all thinges. Like vnto this is 
                     〈◊〉
                   sentence in a certaine Psalme,Psal. cvii. h
                     •
                   sent his word, and deliuered the
                     •
                   from destructiō.
            
            
               Epa.
               God deliue
                     •
                   me from destruction.
            
            
               phi.
               Enar
                     •
                   your self wt faith, praier and wit
                     •
                   the word of God, & doubt ye not For these kyndes of armoures o
                     •
                   weapons, sathan can by no mea
                     •
                  nes abide.
            
            
               Ep.
               The Lord preseru
                     •
                   and defend me. Neighboures, I wil pray once againe vnto ye Lord my God, while I haue time.
            
            
               Chr.
               It is a godly exercise.
            
            
               Epa.
               I per
                     •
                  ceiue Sathan to be still busy, and to seke my dānation.
            
            
               Phi.
               Striu
                     ••
                  fully, & you shall haue the crowne

of glory▪
               
            
            
               Epa.
               How long wilt thou forget me (O Lord) for euer?A praier. How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?Psalm. xiii. O how long shal I seke councell in my soule, and be so vexed in my heart? How long shall mine enemy triumph ouer me? Consider & here me (O Lord, my God) lighten mine eies that I sleepe not in death, least myne ennemy saye, I haue preuailed against him. If I be cast downe, they that trouble me will reioyse at it. But my trust is in thy mercy, & my hart is ioyful in thy saluation. I againe for this thy louynge kyndnesse, wyll prayse thy holy name.
            
            
               Euse.
               So be it.
            
            
               Ep.
               Unto the wil I cry, O Lord my strēgth,Psal. xxviii thinck no scorn of me, 
                     •
                  east if thou make thee,A prayer. as though thou heardest not, I become like them, that go downe into the pit. Here the voyce of my humble pe
                  
                     •
                  icions when I cry vnto the, whē
                  
I cry vnto the, whē I hold vp my handes toward the mercy seat of thy holy temple.Psal. xxvii O hyde not thou thy face from me, nor cast thy seruaunt awaye in thy displeasure. The sorowes of death haue compassed me round about,Psal. xviii. and the ouerflowings of vngodlines made me afraid, The pains of hel came about me, yt snares of death haue ouertaken me. Be not thou farre from me▪
                  Psal. xxii O Lord, thou art my succour, hast thee to helpe me. Delyuer my soul from the swearde, my dearling frō the power of ye dog. Saue me from the Lions mouth. So shal I declare thy name vnto my brethren, and in the middest of the cōgregation wil I praise thee
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               Euse.
               I doubte not brother Epaphroditus, but yt God hath heard these your moste humble prayers & lamentable supplications, and will, (when he seeth conuenient
                     •
                  
                  
time,) send you remedy, and geue you a ioyfull and mery hearte, so that you shall leape vpō Sathan, and saye: The Lord is my light & my saluation,Psal. xxvii whom then shall I feare? The Lorde is the strength of my lyfe, of whome then shall I be afrayde? Though an hoaste of men were layde against me, yet shall not my heart be afrayd. And though there rose vp war against me, yet wyll I put my truste in hym.i. Cor. xv. Again, death is swalowed vp into victory.Ose. xiii. Death where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is synne, and the strengthe of synne is the lawe. But thankes be vnto God, which hath geuen vs the victory. through our Lord Iesus Christ,A praier.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               O whan will the Lord haue mercy on me, and deliuer me from the greuous assaultes of mine ennemyes, O Lorde, why hast thou

forgottē me?Psal. xlii. Why go I thus heauely, whyle the enemy oppresseth me? Up Lord, why sleapest thou? Awake,Psal. xliiii. and be not absent frō me for euer. Wherfore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest my miserie & trouble? My soule is brought low euen vnto the dust, my belly cleaueth vnto the grounde.Psalm. xxvii Arise and help me O Lorde, and deliuer me for thy mercies sake.
            
            
               Chri.
               Fainte not, nether despaire you of Gods mercy, but take a good heart vnto you & abide the Lordes pleasure. Be of like mynd with him, which praid on this manner vnto God, saying: Unto thee lift I vp myne eies,Psal. cxxii. thou that dwellest in the heauens. Beholde, as the eies of seruaunts loke vnto ye hande of their maisters: and as the eies of a maiden, vnto the hand of her mistres: euen so our eies wayte vpon the Lord our god, vntil he haue mercy

vpon vs.Thren. iii. It is good to be quiet saith the Prophet, and pacientlye to abide the sauing healthe of the Lord▪ For ye Lord wyl not forsake for euer, but though he punyshe you now, and suffre satan to trouble you a little while, for the triall of your faith, yet according to the multitude of his mercies will he receiue you to grace again, & not cast you out of his heart for euer. He is a father of mercies and God of all consolation.ii. Cor. i. Psal. cxliii. He wyll not be alwayes chiding, neither wyll he for euer be angry with vs. For like as a father pitieth his owne children: euen so is the Lord mercifull vnto thē yt feare him. For he knoweth whereof we be made, he remembreth that we are but duste.
            
            
               Epa.
               Lorde be thou mercifull vnto me.A prayer. Hide not thy selfe in a cloude, but shew me thy louing and gentle countenaunce, that I may be

saued. Send me present helpe frō aboue,Ephe. vi. or els I perysh. For I wrastle not against bloud and fleshe, but against rule, against power, against worldly rulers, euen gouernours of the darcknes of this worlde,Math. iiii. against spirituall craftines in heauenly thynges. This greuous conflict, O Lord, is with such an ennemy, as feared not to assail thee, whom thou thy self callest the Prince of this world,Iohn. xiiii. and the holy Apostle tearmeth hym, the God of this worlde. Arise therfore O Lorde,i. Cor. iiii. and take my part. Be thou, O God, my defender, my house of defence and my Castell. Deliuer me out of ye snare, whiche myne ennemy hath layde for me, that I being set at libertie, maye syng prayses to thy blessed name, and magnifie thee my Lord God for euer and euer.
            
            
               Theo.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               Neighbour, take a good hart

vnto you, and you shall shortly see the wonderfull working of God.Psal. cxvi. For behold, he that kepeth Israell, doth nether slomber nor slepe. The Lord him self is your keper, the Lord is your defence, the lord shall preserue you from all euill: yea, the Lord shal kepe your soule. For as he casteth down, so lifteth he vp againe. As he killeth: so he quickeneth.ii. Cor. i. As he nowe for a little tyme suffreth Sathan to disquiet you, for the exercise, probation, and triall of your faythe: so likewyse will he deliuer you oute of this agonie, & geue you againe a ioyfull, mery, and quiet conscience. For the nature and property of God is to woūd:The propertie of God in his elect. before he healeth, to throwe downe: before he lifteth vp, to kyll: before he quickneth, to condemne: before he saueth. Therfore feare not. For the lord dealeth none otherwise with

you, than he doeth with his other saincts. This your trouble he wil turn to ease, and this your sorowe wyl he turne to ioy, as he sayth in the Gospell,Iohn. xvi. verely verely I saye vnto you: ye shal wepe & lament: but contrariwise the worlde shall reioyse. Ye shall sorowe, but your sorow shall be turned into ioye. A woman when she traueleth hath sorow, because her houre is come, but assone as she is deliuered of ye childe, she remembreth no more ye anguishe for ioy that a mā is born into the world. And ye now therefore haue sorow, but I wil see you againe, and your heartes shal reioyse and your ioye shall no man take away from you. In this your heauy cōflict God semeth to haue withdrawn the glorious beames of his fatherly grace frō you, but he will straightways lighten his godly countenaūce vpon you, and

worke suche ioyes in your heart, through his holy spirit, as heretofore you felt neuer the lyke. And this your ioy, shall neuer be taken from you. Therefore whatsoeuer sathan that old canckred ennemy of mankinde goeth about to perswade you,i. Pet. v. beleue hym not, but resiste him with strong faith, euer remembring that he is both a lier and a murtherer. You are a member of that congregation,Iohn. viii. whiche is built vpon the rocke Christe,Math. xvi. againste whome the gates of hell, shall not preuayle. You are a lyuing stone of the blessed building and spiritual house,Math. vii. wherof Christ is the head corner stone, though ye windes blow, the shours of raine descend, and the cruell tempestes 
                     •
                  eate on the house, yet it falleth not, for it is grounded not vpon ye and,Luke. xxii. but vpon the rocke. Sathan 
                     •
                  n this temtation hath desired to

sifte you, as it were wheate, but Christ hath praied for you, yt your faith failed not. You are one of the shepe,Iohn. x. whiche God the father hath geuen to his sonne Christe, therfore can you not peryshe, neyther shall any creature plucke you out of his hande, but he shall geue you euerlasting life.
            
            
               Epa.
               Now per
                     •
                  ceiue I most gētle neighbor Philemon, that to be true, whiche I haue many tymes heard the godly preachers rehearse in their most comfortable Sermons.
            
            
               Phile.
               What is that I pray you?
            
            
               Epaph.
               That one faythfull Preacher, which is able with the swete promises of the holy scriptures to cō
                  fort the weake and desperate conscience: is better then ten thousande mumbling Massemongers whiche promise with their Massinge mountaines of golde, but perfourme molhilles of glasse.

I haue also many times heard it saide, that though the companye of a learned man be good and profitable at all times, yet chiefly in the tyme of syckenesse, and whan the weake creature is ready to depart from this wicked worlde, for asmuche as than Sathan is most busy and without ceasing laboureth to disquiet the conscience of 
                     •
                  he sickman, that by this meanes he may driue him to desperation, and finally to damnation.
            
            
               Phile.
               What meane you by that?
            
            
               Epa.
               I thanke God moste hartelye, that suche a learned man as you are, haue nowe vouchedsafe to visite me in this my sickenesse.
            
            
               Phil.
               No learned man, but a louer of learninge, and suche one, as hathe a good will well to doe, and enuieth no man that can doe better.
            
            
               Epa.
               In the tyme of this your godlye communication had with me, the

Lord my God be thancked for it I felt the heauines, trouble, and disquietnes of my conscience, by little and little to goe away, and certaine swete mocions of true & inward ioye to arise in my heart▪ so yt nowe Sathan with his wicked temtations semeth to haue taken his flight, and the holy ghost
                     •
                   with his most godly and comfortable inspirations to haue entred into my breast. Wheras before m
                     •
                   thought, I was in hell, nowe m
                     •
                   thinck I am in heauen so great
                     •
                   quietnes, rest, ioy, and confort do I finde in my conscience. Sainc
                     •
                   Paule wysheth not in vain to th
                     •
                   Philippiās this tranquilitie and quietnes of conscience,Phil. iiii. saying: th
                     •
                   peace of God which passeth al vnderstanding kepe your hearts and mindes in Christ Iesu. Again t
                     •
                   the Collossians.Colloss. iii. The peace of god mought rule in your heartes, t
                     •
                  
                  
the whiche peace ye are called in one body. For no man knoweth what a precious Iewell and heauenly treasure this peace of con
                  
                     •
                  cience is, but suche as fele it. Ne
                  
                     •
                  her can any man feele it a ryght, except he hath felt afore the grief, 
                     •
                  ain, and disquietnesse of conscience. I may now right wel say wt 
                  
                     •
                  he Psalmograph:Psal. xxxi. O howe great and plentifull is thy goodnesse, which thou hast laide vp for them 
                     •
                  hat feare thee, and that thou hast 
                     •
                  repared for them that put theyr 
                     •
                  rust in thee?Psal. 
                        •
                     xxi. O what great trou
                  
                     •
                  les and aduersities haste thou 
                     •
                  hewed me? And yet thou diddest 
                     •
                  urne & refresh me, yea, & brough
                  
                     •
                  est me from the depe of the earth 
                     •
                  gaine? Thou hast broughte me 
                     •
                  o great honour, and cōforted me 
                     •
                  n euery syde. Therfore wyll I 
                     •
                  raise thee and thy faithfulnes, O God.
            
            
               Phi.
               Here see you that fulfilled

in your selfe, whiche you ha
                     ••
                   full oft red in the holy Scriptur
                     •
                   The Lorde killeth and make
                     •
                   aliue,i. Reg. ii. bryngeth downe to hell, an
                     •
                   fetcheth vp againe. Great are t
                     ••
                   troubles of the righteous,Psalm. xxxiii but t
                     ••
                   Lord deliuereth them out of the
                     •
                   all.
            
            
               Chr.
               The holy man Toby 
                     〈◊〉
                   his praier vnto God,Toby. iii. saieth: Wh
                     ••
                  soeuer loueth thee & serueth thee 
                     •
                   right: is sure of this, that if his li
                     •
                   be tempted and proued, it stāde
                     ••
                   in the trying, & if he endure in pa
                     ••
                  cience, he shal haue a reward, an
                     •
                   be highly crowned, and if he be i
                     •
                   trouble that God (no doubt) sha
                     •
                   delyuer hym, and if his lyfe be i
                     •
                   chastning, that he shall haue le
                     ••
                   to come vnto thy mercy. For tho
                     •
                   hast no pleasure in our damnat
                     ••
                  on. And why? After a storme tho
                     •
                   makest the weather fair and stil
                     •
                   after weping and heauines tho
                     •
                   geuest great ioy. Thi name O go
                     •
                  
                  
of Israell be praysed for euer.
            
            
               Ep.
               Amē.
            
            
               Chr.
               The Psalmograph also saith:Psal. cxxv. They that sowe in tears, shall reape in ioye. He that nowe goeth on his way weping, and bereth forth good seede, shall doubtles come againe with ioy, & bring his sheues with him.Psal. cxxiii
                        •
                     .
               
            
            
               Epa.
               If the Lord him selfe had not bene of my side, when Satan rose vp against me, he had swalowed me vp quik. But praysed be the Lorde, whiche hath not geuen me ouer for a pray vnto his teeth. My soule is escaped, euen as a byrde oute of the snare of the fouler: the snare is broken and I am deliuered. My helpe standeth in the name of the Lorde, whiche hath made heauen and earth. But neighboure Philemon, it is good in the tyme of calme to prouide for tempest. We are taughte of Iob,Iob. vii▪
                   that a mans 
                     •
                  ife in this worlde, is a warfare

or knighthode, and that we therfore ought to watche & praye,Math. xxvi. tha
                     •
                   we fail not into temptation. The scripture declareth, that after Sa
                     •
                  than had tempted Christ, & was confounded by the worde of God
                     •
                   the deuil departed from Christ for a season.Luke. iiii. Wherof we may learne▪ that he returned afterward vnto Christ, and tempted him. I feare also, least that Sathā will shortly returne vnto me, and assaile m
                     •
                   with newe temptations.
            
            
               Phi.
               In
                     •
                  dede the propertie of Sathan is
                     •
                   whan he can not get his purpose one waye, to attempt some other meanes.Of the lawe. But whereof are ye afraid?
            
            
               Epa.
               Christ saith in the Gospel:Math. ix. If thou wilte enter into lyfe
                     •
                   kepe the commaundementes. Again, do this,Luke. x. and thou shalt lyue. He speaketh of fulfilling the lawe. And s. Paule saieth.Rom. ii. Not the hearers but the doers of the law, sha
                     •
                  
                  
be iustified before God.Deut. xxv
                        •
                     . Moses also pronounceth thē cursed, whiche abideth not in all thynges that ar written in the lawe. What if Sathan should lay the lawe againste me, and proue euidently that I haue not fulfilled the law of God, and therfore I can not enter into eternall life, but must neades be dampned?Remedies against ye curse of the lawe▪
                  
               
            
            
               Phi.
               The holy scriptur of God consisteth of two partes, of the lawe and of the Gospell. If sathan obiect ye lawe against you: laye you againste him straightewaies the Gospell.Iohn. i. For the lawe was geuen by Moses, but ye Gospell, that is, grace, fauour, remission of sinnes, truthe, faithfulnes, and euerlasting life, came by Iesus Christe.Of the lawe and the Gospell. The lawe maketh afrayd: but the Gospel comforteth. The law troubleth: but the Gospel quieteth. The law vttreth sin, but the Gospell pardoneth, and

forgeueth sinne.Rom. iii. The lawe declareth the fearse wrathe of God againste synners:Gala. iii. but the Gospel
                     •
                   preacheth the great and exceding mercies of God toward peniten
                     •
                   synners. The law woundeth, bu
                     •
                   the gospel healeth. The lawe maketh sicke:ii. Cor. ii. but the gospell maketh whole and stronge. The law driueth to desperation: but the gospel ministreth consolation & comfort. The lawe killeth: but the gospel quikneth. The lawe throweth downe to hel: but ye gospel lifteth vp to heauen. Therfore if Sathā be busy and lay the lawe agains
                     •
                   you, and that vnto you death
                     •
                   and dampnation, aunswere him with the Gospell, which bringeth lyfe and euerlasting saluation. For the law was not geuen vs o
                     •
                   God to iustifie and saue vs,why the law was geuen. but to be a doctrine vnto vs what w
                     •
                   should either do or leaue vndone

and to be a scholemaister to leade vs vnto Christe,Gala. iii. that of hym we might obtaine that, whiche by no meanes may be gotten of ye lawe, I meane, the grace, fauoure, and mercy of God, remission and forgeuenes of sinnes, the quietnes of conscience, a newe life, the gift of the holy ghost, and euerlasting life. Flie you therefore from the heauy burden of the lawe, whiche depresseth and wayeth downe the conscience, and take on you the swete and comfortable yoke of the gospel, and so shall you finde reast vnto your soul.Math. xi. For the yoke therof is easy, and the burden light. After this manner euen from the beginning haue all the godly in the conflicte of conscience fledde from the doctrine of the lawe vnto the mercifull promises of the Gospel,Act. xv. as blessed Peter testifieth saying: Now, why tempt ye God,

to put on the disciples neckes, the yoke, whiche neither our fathers nor we were able to bear. But we beleue, that through the grace of the Lorde Iesu Christ we shal be saued,Iohn. vii. as they were. Our sauioure Christ said vnto the Iewes, hath not Moses geuen you a law, and yet none of you kepeth the lawe? The doctrine of the law is such a burden, that the holiest that euer liued (Christ alone except) was neuer hable to bear it.Rom. vii. No maruell, for the lawe is spirituall, but we are carnall.Prou. xx Who among vs all is able to say, my heart is cleane, and I am free from sinne? The holy scripture pronounceth vs all sinners, and oure owne consciences beare witnes of ye same.Roma. iii. And how commeth it to passe? but only that we do not obserue the lawe of the Lord our God,Psalm. xi. but rather ar trāsgressours & breakers of that same,

in so much yt if our sauiour Christ had not come in the fleshe & fulfilled the law for vs▪ euen to the vttermoste, & so pacified the fathers wrath, we had bene dampned for euer and euer.Rom. viii. But Christ is come and hath fulfilled the lawe with suche perfection as the law requireth,Roma. x. euen at the full, and his fulfilling is our fulfilling.Gala. iii.iiii. i. Cor. i. Whosoeuer beleueth this, & taketh Christ to be his wisdome, rightuousnes, sanctifying and redemption, he cannot pearyshe but haue euerlasting life.
            
            
               Epa.
               I pray you declare vnto me some comfortable sentenses out of the holy scripture, that my conscience may be ascertained of Christes fulfillyng of the lawe for me.
            
            
               Phile.
               Christ saieth in the Gospell.Math. v. Thinke not that I am come to destroy the law or ye Prophetes, no. I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. All we are destroyers

and breakers of the law, but Christ is a perfect fulfiller of the same, not for him selfe, but for vs, and his fulfilling, is our fulfilling. The holy Apostle in his epistle to the Romaines, sayeth. There is no damnation to them,Rom. viii. whiche are in Christ Iesu, which walke not after the fleshe, but after the spirite. For the lawe of the spirit of life through Iesus Christ hath made me fre from the law of sinne and death. For what the law could not do (inasmuch as it was weake because of the fleshe) that parformed God, and sent his sonne in the similitude of synnefull fleshe, and by synne damned synne in the fleshe, that the righteousnes of the lawe might be fulfilled in vs, whiche walke not after the fleshe but after the spirite. Here see you, that where as none of vs was able to fulfyll the lawe,

Christ the sonne of God hath fulfilled it for vs, and by this meanes deliuered vs frō the lawe of sinne and deathe.Rom. x. Againe in the same Epistle, Christe is the perfect fulfilling of ye lawe to iustifie all that beleue. So many therefore as beleue, are iustified, and for them Christe hath fulfilled the lawe to the vttermoste. To the Galathians he also saieth,Galat. iii. Christ hath deliuered vs from the cursse of the lawe, in as much as he was made accursed for our sake.Deut. xxi. For it is writen. Cursed is euery one that hangeth on a tree. &c. It Christ by his death and passion hath deliuered vs from the cursse of the law, how than can the lawe condemne vs? Item, in the same Epistle, when the time was full come,Galat. iiii. God sent his sonne made of a woman, and made bonde vnto the lawe, to redeme them, which were bond vnto

the law, that we through election might receiue thinheritaunce that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes. If Christ became mā and was made bond vnto the lawe, to redeme and deliuer vs from the lawe: what power than hath the lawe ouer vs, that it may condēpn vs? If we be through ye fre choyse of God admitted to be the sonnes of God: thē are we no more slaues vnto the law, nor any more bound to the subiection thereof, that it may cast vs away as wicked trāsgressours and heirs of eternal dā
                  nation. For it is fulfilled for vs in Christ.Ephe. ii. To the Ephesians he writeth on this manner. Christe is oure peace, whiche hath made of both one (he speaketh of ye Iewes and Gentiles) and hath broken downe the wal that was a stoppe betwene vs, and hath also put away through his flesh the cause of

hatred euen the law of commaū
                  dementes contained in the lawe writtē. &c. Here haue we the cause why god was angry with vs. Uerely because we fulfilled not the law. Now is Christ come, & hath put away the cause of this anger and hatred, that is to saye, he hath fulfilled the law for vs, and recō
                  ciled vs vnto God, so that nowe the father for his sake hateth vs no more, but loueth vs, is no more angry, but wel pleased with vs, & accepteth his fulfilling of the law, as our own fulfulling.Collo. ii. Also to the Collossians, Christ saith he, hathe put out the hand wryting yt was against vs contained in the lawe written, and that hath he taken out of the waye, and hath fastned it to his crosse, and hathe spoyled rule and power, and hath made a shew of them opēly, and hath triumphed ouer them in his owne

person. If Christ hanging on the Crosse, hath by the vertue of his passion & death put out the hande wryghting that was against vs contained in the lawe than is our bond made frustrate and voyde, & we set at libertie, forasmuche as Christe by his bloude hathe bothe paid our debt vnto God ye father, and also subdued and brought vnder fote al our ennemies.Hebr. vii. The authour of the Epistle to ye Hebrues, hath these wordes. The cōmaundement that went afore, is disanulled, because of weakenes and vnprofitablenesse. For the lawe brought nothynge to perfection, but was an introduction to a better hope, by the whiche we drawenie vnto God. Here ar we taught also, that forasmuche as by ye lawe no man can be made perfect (for who amōg vs fulfilleth the law?) we haue our perfection in Christ
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     •
                  y whome for our sake the law is fulfilled, and remission of synnes and euerlasting lyfe is frely geuē vnto vs. This is the hope, profit and libertie, whiche so many as beleue, receiue in Christ. Let therfore the terrours and cursse of the lawe neuer trouble you, though Sathan do neuer so muche lay it vnto your charge: but remember what the Apostle saieth: ye are no more vnder the lawe,Rom. vi. but vnder grace. Againe. Now are we deliuered from the law,Roma. vii. and dead vnto it, whereunto we were in bondage, that we shoulde serue in a newe conuersation of the spirit, and not in old conuersation of the letter. For if righteousnesse commeth by the law, then died Christ in vaine.Galat. ii. But we know, saieth the Apostle, that a man is not iustified by the dedes of the lawe, but by the fayth of Iesus Christ.

And we haue beleued on Iesus Christ, that we might be iustified by the faith of Christe: and not by the deedes of the lawe, because by the deedes of the law, no flesh sha
                     •
                   be iustified. Againe: as manye o
                     •
                   you as are iustified by the lawe, a
                     •
                   fallē from grace. We loke for and hope in the spirite to bee iustifed thorow faith.Gala. v. For in Christ Iesu
                     •
                   neither is circumcision any thing worth, nether yet vncircumcision but faith, which worketh by loue▪ Comfort your selfe, neighbour E
                     ••
                  paphroditus, against the assaults of Sathan with these swete sayinges of the holy scripture, and s
                     •
                   shal nether the feare nor the curss
                     •
                   of the lawe hurt you.Remedies against sinne.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               God b
                     •
                   thanked, I trust, I am nowe we
                     •
                   enarmed against Sathan for this matter. But what, if he laye my sinfull life vnto my charge, and so burden my conscience with that,

that I know not what to do, but am like to fall vnto desperation? What shal I aunwere? How shal I escape? For I confesse vnto you that I haue bene all my lyfe time a very greuous sinner, and haue greatly offēded the Lord my God.
            
            
               Phi.
               Discomfort not your selfe, but take a good heart vnto you. You are in this behalfe in none other case then all the sainctes and faithfull people of God haue bene before you,Roma. iii. & are at this daye. For all haue sinned, and want the glory of God.Esay. liii. All haue gone astraye lyke lost shepe. We are vnprofitable seruauntes.Luke. xvii. Esay. lxiiii. All our righteousnesses are as a clothe defiled with menstrue.1. Iohn. i. If we saye we haue no sinne, we deceiue our selues, and the truthe is not in vs. But if we confesse our sinnes, God is faithfull and righteous to forgeue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from

al vnrighteousnes.
            
            
               Epa.
               What 
                     〈◊〉
                   I do than, that synne may be 
                     〈◊〉
                   clog vnto my conscience?
            
            
               Phile.
               
                  Repentance.Let it repēt you, that euer you of
                     •
                  fended so louing a father, and s
                     •
                   gentle a Lord. Be hartely sory fo
                     •
                   your misdoings. Lament and in
                     •
                  wardly bewail your wretchednes
                     •
                  ses, which so wickedly haue trans
                     •
                  gressed & brokē the holy cōmaun
                     •
                  dements of the Lord. For this ha
                     •
                  ty and vnfained repentaunce is a goodly preparatiue to saluation▪ and without it none can be 
                     •
                  aued Therfore Iohn Baptist,Math. iii. Christ & his Apostles begā their preaching of repentaunce.Mark. i. Act. iii. Math. ix. Esay. lxvi. For whosoeuer is not brought into the knowledge of hym selfe, he shall neuer haue delyghte to come vnto Christe▪ For suche as thynke them selues whole, haue no pleasure in a phisition, but they that are sycke.
            
            
               Epaphr.
               And will God accept this

my repentaunce?
            
            
               Phi.
               Hear what God saith by the Prophet Whom shall I regard? Euen hym that is pore and of a lowly troubled spirit, & standeth in awe of my wordes. The Psalmograph also saith:Psal. li. A sacrifice vnto god is a troubled spirite, a broken and a contrite heart: O God, shalt thou not despise. Again:Psal. xxxiii. the Lord is nie vnto them that are of a troubled heart, and he will saue them that are of a broken spirite.A prayer.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lord take away from me that stony heart, whiche can not repent, and geue me that fleshly heart, which gladlye and willingly lamenteth her synnes and miseries,Ezech. xi. and vnfainedly delyghteth in a newe lyfe. But what? is repētance ynough?
            
            
               Phi.
               As you ernestly and from the very heart do repent you of your former sinnefull lyfe:Confession of sinnes vnto God. so likewyse hūble your self in ye sight of God,

and confesse your selfe vnto him a moste wicked & miserable sinner Crie in your heart with Dauid, & say: haue mercy vpon me, O God after thy great goodnes. Accor
                     •
                  dinge vnto the multitude of thy mercies, do away myne offences Wash me thorowly from my wic
                     •
                  kednes,Psal. li. & clense me from my syn For I knowledge my fautes, and my sin is euer before me. Against thee only haue I sinned, and don
                     •
                   euill in thy sight. O turn thy fac
                     •
                   from my sinnes, and put oute al
                     •
                   my mysdedes. Make me a clean
                     •
                   heart, O God, and renue a righ
                     •
                   spirite within me. Cast me not a
                     •
                  way from thy presence, and tak
                     •
                   not thy holy spirite from me. Cry
                     •
                   with that lost sonne and say:Luke. xv. O fa
                     •
                  ther I haue sinned against heauē and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy sonne▪ Cry with the Publicane and say:Luke. xviii
                  
O God be merciful to me a sinner. Cry with the Leper and saye:Math. vii. O Lord, if thou wilt thou art hable to make me cleane. Cry with the blinde man and saye:Mark. x. O Iesu the sonne of Dauid, haue mercye on me.Math. xv. Cry with the woman of Canane and say
                     •
                  : haue mercy on me O Lord thou
                     ••
                  ne of Dauid: My doughter is greuously vexed of ye deuil.Math. v
                        •••
                     . Cry with the Centurion & say: I am not worthy that thou shouldest entre vnder my rofe, but speke the word only, and my sōne shalbe heled. But vnto this your harty repentaunce & humble confessiō of your sinnes, you must put mighty & strong faith, beleuing yt God ye father for his promise sake made vnto all penitent sinners in Christes bloud,Faith. wil frely & merci
                  
                     •
                  ully forgeue you all your sins, be 
                     •
                  hey neuer so manye or greuous. for without this faith all yt euer

you do, is nothing worth, as thapostle saith.Roma. xiiii. Whatsoeuer is not of faith,Gene. iiii. is sinne. Cain repented and confessed his fault, saying: my sin is greater, then I may deserue to be forgeuen. But because he wanted faith, he fell into desperation & was dampned:Math. xxvii. Iudas repented & confessed his sinne, saying: I haue synned, betraying the innocent bloud, yea he also made satisfaction: suche as it was, but not with
                     •
                  standinge because he added no
                     •
                   faith vnto his repentaunce, con
                     •
                  fession and satisfaction, all was in vaine. Peter his fellowe disciple
                     •
                   sinned also greuously,Math. xxvi. but becaus
                     •
                   he earnestlye repented, and als
                     •
                   faithfully beleued to haue remis
                     •
                  sion of his sinnes by the precious bloud of his maister, whome he 
                     •
                   fore had both denied & forsworne he was forgeuen, and receiued i
                     •
                   to fauour againe.Ephe. i. For by faith ar
                     •
                  
                  
we made of the children of wrath, the sonnes of God.Iohn. i. By faith are we maried vnto Christ.Galat, iii. By faith are our hartes purified. By faith sathan is ouercome. By faith the world is vanquished.Ose. ii. By faith we are preserued from dampnation. By faith we are iustified & made righteous.Act. xiii. i. Pet. v. By faith the wrath of God is asswaged. By faith we worke the will of God.i. Iohn. v. By faith our praiers are heard, and our requestes graunted. By faithe we please God.Rom. v. By faith we be made the children of light. By faith we are borne a new of God.Iohn. vi. By faith we are made the temples of the holy ghost.Mark. xi. Roma. xi. By faith we vnderstand the misteries of God.
               By faith we preuaile againste the gates of hell.Iohn. xii i. Iohn. iii
                        •
                      i. Cor. iii. Math. xxvi Rom. viii. By faith we are made the heyres of God, and fellow heyres with our Lord and sauiour

Christ Iesu, of euerlasting glory.
                     Lib. de fide ad Petrum.
                   Faith, as S. Austen saith▪ is the beginning of mans saluation. Without faithe no man can reache or come vnto the nomber of the sonnes of God. Withoute faith al the labour of man is frustrate and voyde. Faith, saieth S▪ Ambrose,
                     Lib. de Cain & Abel.
                   is ye rote of all vertues▪ and whatsoeuer thou buyldest o
                     •
                   this foundation, that alone profiteth vnto the reward of thy work
                     •
                   frute and vertue. Fayth, saith he▪ is ritcher then all treasures: strō
                  ger then all corporall power: and more healthfull then all Phisitions. Therfore loke that you hau
                     •
                   this true faythe in you, and tha
                     •
                   you cleue both toth and nayle (as they vse to say) to the merciful and comfortable promises of god: So may you be sure to haue remission and forgeuenes of your synnes.
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue, O Lord, helpe tho
                     •
                  
                  
my vnbelief.The sick mās confession of his sinnes. Mark. ix. Luke. xvii. O Lord encrease my saith, O heauenly father my God and my Lorde, I with an assured perswasion of thy goodnesse toward me, most humbly besech the for Iesus Christes sake, mercifully to behold me a moste miserable sinner, and clearly to forgeue all those sinnes & wickdnesses, which I wretched creature haue committed against thee my Lord God from the houre of my byrth vnto this present tyme. Forgeue me all my sins for thy names sake,Psalm. xxv they 
                     •
                  e bothe many and great. Oh remember not the sinnes and offen
                  
                     •
                  es of my yougth, but accordynge vnto thy mercy thynke vpon me, O Lorde,Psal. lxxx
                        •
                     . for thy goodnes. Oh remember not mine old sinnes, but 
                     •
                  aue mercy on me, yea and that 
                     ••
                  ghtsone, for I am come to great 
                     •
                  iserie. Helpe me, O God of my 
                     ••
                  luation, for ye glory of thy name.

O deliuer me, and be merciful vnto my sinnes for thy names sake. So shall I geue thee thankes for euer, & magnifie thy blessed name worldes without end.
            
            
               EU.
               Amen▪
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Doubt not neighbour Epaphroditus, but that god hath graciouslye heard this your humble sute, & also graunted your request▪ He hath forgeuē you al your sins He will neuer laye them to your
                     •
                   charge. He hath cast them away
                     •
                   behynd his back, so that he wil n
                     ••
                  uer remember them more, as h
                     •
                   saith by ye Prophet,Iere. xxxi. I will forgeue their misdedes, and wil neuer remember their synnes any more▪ Againe.Ezech. x
                        •
                     iii. If the vngodly wil tur
                     •
                   away from all his sinnes that h
                     •
                   hath done, and kepe all my com
                     •
                  maundementes, and do the thin
                     •
                   that is equall and right: doubtle
                     •
                   he shall lyue and not die. As for 
                     〈◊〉
                   his sinnes that he did before, th
                     •
                  
                  
shall not be thought vpon, but in his righteousnes yt he hath doone, he shal liue. For haue I any pleasure in the death of a sinner, saith ye Lord God, and not rather that he conuert and liue? Item. Repent, & turne you from al your wickednesses: so shal ther no sinne do you harme. Cast away frō you al your vngodlines that ye haue doone. Make you new harts, and a new spirit. Wherfore will ye die, O ye house of Israel? seing I haue no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, sayeth the Lorde God. Turn you then: and ye shal liue. Therfore feare not good brother: but cōtinue faithfull & repentant vnto thend, & ye shall surely be saued.
            
            
               Epa.
               Sinne is an heauy burden,Of sinne. Psal. vi. & very displeasāt vnto the lord our God, and maketh sinners to 
                     •
                  le frō the face of God, forasmuche as they know that God hateth sin

and al thē that do commit it.
            
            
               Phi.
               
                  Esay. iii.I confesse synne to bee an heauy burden and displeasant vnto God yet as heauy as it is,Math. viii Christ hath taken it on hym and born it away as the Prophet saieth, he hath taken on him oure infirmities, and borne oure sycknesses.i. Pet. ii. This witnesseth. S. Peter, sayinge. Christ hym selfe bare oure synnes in his body on the tree, that we beyng delyuered from synne, should liue vnto righteousnes. And where as ye say that synne maketh sinners to flie from the face of God, I answere. It driueth in dede the obstinat and desperate sinners from God, but not the penitent whiche repent in faith, and turne vnfaynedly vnto the Lorde theyr God, being perswaded that he is a father of mercies and God of al consolation,
                     
                        ••
                     . Cor. i. and that he for Christes sake wyll forgeue them. Doe they

whiche fele them selfe sick and diseased, flie and run away from the phisition? They rather make hast vnto the Phisition, being nothing afraid of him, because they ar sick & diseased, but rather somuche the more doo they desire to come vnto him, to shew him their woundes and to disclose their diseases, that they may be made whole. Now is Christ a phisitiō,Math. ix. & all we through sinne are diseased, shal we therfore runne away from Christ, and not rather make hast vnto him? what Phisition is so ready to heale the body, as Christe our Phisition is to heale the soule? Who euer came vnto him with a faithfull and penitent heart, and was refused? Who euer sought remedy at his hand, and was not holpen? Who euer opened vnto hym his disea
                  
                     •
                  es, and was not cured? he calleth all without exception, be they neuer

so diseased and loden with th
                     •
                   burden of sinne vnto him, and pro
                     •
                  miseth that he will ease them of their burdens, & make thē whole, & is it to be thought, that he wyl
                     •
                   refuse sinners, when they come vn
                     •
                  to him?Math xi Come vnto me, sayth he, al ye that labour and are loden, & I wil refreshe you. Take my yoke vpon you, and ye shall find rest for your soules. For I came not to ca
                     •
                   ye righteous, but sinners vnto repentance.Math. ix The sonne of man came to seke and to saue that was lost. How frequented he the cōpany of synners,Luk, xix when he was in this world, & that to this end only, tha
                     •
                   he might call them through his godly sermons vnto repentance,Math. ix vnto the fauour of God, and vnto the felowship of the sainctes, in so muche that he was called a frend of open sinners and whores?Mrth. xi.x How defended he alway the humble &

penitēt sinners against the proud and stifnecked Pharises and Iusticiaries?Luke. vii When Zache being a sinner & the Prince of the Publicans sought to see Christ,Luke. xix. how louingly did Christ speake vnto him and frendly came into his house, eat & dranck with him?Luke, vii Whē Mary Magdalē being a greuous sinner came vnto Christe, he refused not her company, but talked most gently with her, cōforted her, receiued her into his fauour, quieted her cōsciēce, healed her diseases, & gaue her euerlasting life.Luke, xvii Whan the poore Publicane, whiche had both ofte and greuously offended the Lord his God, came into the temple to pray, and in his praiers hūbled him self before the maiestie of God, and cōfessed him self a sinner, was he not ioyfully receiued into the fauour of God, and pronounced more righteous euen by

the mouth of Christ then ye proude▪ Pharesy for all his glistring workes? How ioyfully was that vnthrifty,Luke. xv. prodigal & wastfull sonne receiued home again?Luke. xxii. What frēdship founde that theif, whiche was crucified with Christe, at the hand of Christ, when he saide, Lord remember me when thou comest into thy kingdome? Did not Christ straightways aunswere him and say: This day shalt thou bee with me in Paradise? And yet was he both a thief, a seditious persone and a murtherer. Christe refuseth none although neuer so greuous a synner, if we come vnto hym. Turn ye vnto me,
                     
                        •
                     acha. i. and I wil turn vnto you, saith the Lord of hostes. Thou disobedient Israel.Iere. iii. Turne again (saith the Lord) and I will not let my wrath fall vpon you I am mercifull (saith the Lord) and I wil not alway bear displeasur against

thee: but this I will ye thou know thy great blasphemy, namely that thou hast vnfaithfully forsaken the Lord thy God, and hast made thi self partaker of straunge Gods vnder all greene trees, but hast had no wil to hear my voyce, saieth the Lorde. O ye disobedient chyldren, turne againe saieth the Lord, and I will be maried with you. &c. O ye disobedient childrē, turne agayne, saying: Lo, we are thyne: for thou art the Lorde our God, and so shal I heal your back turninges. Who wyll not boldely come vnto so mercifull a Lord & most louing father, seing he so gē
                  tely calleth all men vnto hym, be they neuer so greuous synners, & promiseth that he wyll not refuse them, but louingly receiue them, neuer lay their offences vnto their charge: but to forget them and cast them behinde his backe, that

he wyll neuer ether remember th
                     •
                   or loke vpon them more.
            
            
               Theo.
               
                  Ioel. iiThe Lord is merciful, gentle and louing, pacient, long suffring, & o
                     •
                   muche kindnes, and ready at all tymes to forgeue, yea euen wha
                     •
                   he is at the poynt to punyshe. Th
                     •
                   Lord is louing vnto euery man,Psalm. cliiii & his mercy is ouer all his workes▪ The lord is good and gracious, & of great mercy vnto all them that call vpon him.Psal. lxxxvi The Lord is ful of tender compassion and great mer
                     •
                  cy, long sufferyng and of muche goodnes.Psal. ciii. He wil not alway be chi
                     •
                  ding, neither kepeth he his anger for euer. He dealeth not with vs after our synnes, neither rewardeth he vs accordyng to our wickednesses. For loke how hie ye heauen is in comparison of the earth: so great is his mercy also toward them that feare him. Loke howe wide also the East is from ye west:

so far hath he set our sinnes from vs. Yea lyke as a father pitieth his owne children: euen so is the Lord mercifull vnto thē that feare him. For he knoweth whereof we be made, he remembreth yt we are but dust.Psal. cxxx With the Lorde there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption. And he shall redeme Israel frō al his sinnes.
            
            
               Phi.
               The great kindnes & dere hearty loue of God toward vs, appeareth not only in this, yt he both willingly and gladly admitteth and receiueth synners, whensoeuer they repent and tourne vnto hym, but 
                     •
                  n that he also most diligently seketh them vp, fetcheth them home again, and geueth them grace to repent and turne, that they maye 
                     •
                  e saued.Luke. xv This thinge is verye 
                     •
                  yuelye described and set forthe in 
                     •
                  he parables of the straid shepe,Luke. x. of the lost groat, and of the wounded

man. Herein is loue, saith S▪ Iohn,i. Iohn. iii. not that we loued God, bu
                     •
                   that he loued vs, & sent his sonn
                     •
                   to be the agrement for our sinnes Saint Paule saieth:Roma. v. God settet
                     •
                   out his loue toward vs, seing tha
                     •
                   while we were yet sinners. Christ died for vs. Much more thē now
                     •
                   we that are iustified by his blud
                     •
                   shalbe saued from wrath throug
                     •
                   him. For if when we were enne
                     •
                  mies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his sonne: much
                     •
                   more seing we are reconciled, we shalbe preserued by his life.
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue yt God is a mercifull father for Christes sake to all them tha
                     •
                   do truly repente, beleue and con
                     •
                  uert vnto him, but is it not to be
                     •
                   feared, that my repentaunce and conuersion is to late?Remedies against late repentaunce & cōuersion vnto God.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               Be on good comfort neighbor Epaphroditus, there is no repentaūce and conuersion to late in this worlde▪
                  
so that it be true & proceadeth frō a contrite heart & humble spirite. For at whatsoeuer hour a sinner dooth mourne and lamente for his sinnes,Iere. xxx
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   God promyseth, that he will so forgeue him his iniquities that he will neuer remember thē more.Ezech. xv
                        •••
                     
                     ▪
                   And Christe saithe.Math. v. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shal be comforted. In the holy scriptures God doth very often call vs vnto repentaunce, but he appoynteth not ether this or ye time, day & hour, but he willeth vs to repent, and promiseth that whensoeuer we returne vnto him, we shall bee safe and escape from death vnto life.Math. 
                        •••
                     
                   Our sauiour Christ also biddeth al that are diseased, come vnto him, and promiseth that he wil ease thē, but he assigneth no time, but at all houres he promyseth grace, mercy, fauour, help, and cō
                  
                  
                     •
                  ort. Christ is a sauior for al ages,

& refuseth no cōuersion, although neuer so late. If we come in childhode, in yougth, in middle age, or in olde age, whensoeuer we come, we shall be receiued. Only let vs come. It is better late then neuer. God is a like merciful, in al ages. Christ is a sauiour able inough to saue at all tymes.Math. i. He ceaseth not to be called Iesus, that is to say, a sauiour: niether ceaseth he at any time to saue, as ye Apostle saith, Iesus Christ yesterday & to daye,Hebr. xiii. and the same continueth for euer. If Christ were appoynted of God the father a sauioure for certaine times, & not for all times: so shuld he be no perfect sauiour.
                     
                        •
                      Note. If he could not as effectually saue at the hour of death as at the hour of the birth: he were vnworthy ye name of a sauiour. But he abideth a sauiour for all ages and for all kind of people, so that they vnfainedly

repent, beleue, and turn. Set before your eyes the parable,Math. xx. whiche we read in the gospel, of them that were hired to worke in the vineyard. Some came early in ye morning, some about the third hour, some about the .vi. and .ix. houre, and some about the .xi. hour. And when night once came, that they shuld receiue their wages, all had like reward. Whē they that came first saw that they that came laste & wrought but one houre, were equal vnto thē, whiche had borne ye burthen and heat of the day, & receiued like reward: one of thē murmured & grudged at ye matter: but it was answered. Frend I do the no wrong. Take that is thine and go thy way. I will geue vnto this last euen as vnto thee. Is it not lawful for me to doo as me listeth with mine owne goodes? Thus se you that they, whiche came at

the latter end of ye day & wrought in the vinyard but an hour, were not refused but receiued the lyke reward with thē that came first. Only let vs be labourers and no loiterers, only let vs come into the Lordes vineyarde, and not runne away backward, and at whatsoeuer hour we come, we shalbe welcome, & receiue our reward with the first.Luke. xxii. Againe the history of the thief, that hanged on the righthand of Christ, whiche thief was full of wicked dedes, & neuer turned vnto God vntil the very hour of his death, declareth manifestly that there is no conuersion in this life to late, if it bee accompanied with true repentaunce and vnfained faith. The thiefe hangyng on the crosse, & at the poynt of death only said vnto Christ: Lord remē
                  ber me, when thou commest into thy kingdom. And Christ wel accepting

his conuersion, saide vnto him: Truly I saye vnto thee: this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Who will now dispaire of the good wil and fauourable mercy of God, seing that this thief cō
                  uerting at the very last houre of his death, was not of Christ reiected: but receiued, & made a fellowe citizin with Christ of ioyfull Paradise?
            
            
               Epa.
               But I haue many times greuously offended the Lord my God, and broken his holy cō
                  maundementes.
            
            
               Phile.
               This is no let vnto your saluation, so that your conuersion be vnfained.Prou. xxiii The righteous man sinneth .vii. times in the day.Eccle. vii. Psal. xiii. Math. xix Who liueth & sinneth not. All go astray. There is none good but God alone. All our righteousnesses ar as a cloth polluted with mēstrue.Esay. lxiiii, If God shuld deale with the moste holy and most per
                  
                     •
                  ect accordinge to their desertes,

they should find nothing in them selues but worthy dampnation▪ Dauid with other very many of the old Testament oftentimes sinned and offended God with theyr wicked actes,ii. Reg. i. Gen. 2.9.19 20.27.36.31 34.37. Exod. ii iii. Reg. xi Mat. xx.xxvi yet forasmuche as they repented and vnfainedly turned vnto God, they were receiued into fauour and saued. The Disciples of Christ, Peter and his felowes were sinners also, and many tymes did that, whiche is not righteous in the sight of God, yet they be wayling their miseries, & truly returning vnto God, were admitted into the nūber of gods elect.Math. xviii. God is that Lord, which forgeueth not only one talent but the whole debt of .x. M. talentes, if we come truly vnto hym & knowledge our beggary, yea our nothing. If God would yt we should forgeue one an other, so oft as we

offend, doubtles God wil also forgeue vs whansoeuer we offend, if we vnfainedly turn vnto him, be our sinnes neuer so many and greuous. Mary Magdalē sinned ful oft, yet was she forgeuen, as it is written of her:Luke. vii. Many sinnes are forgeuen her, because she hath loued much.Luke, xviii The Publican was wt out doubt a very greuous sinner, and had many times broken the cōmaundemēts of god, yet so sone as he humbled him self before the throne of gods maiestie, & apealed vnto his mercy: he was receiued 
                     •
                  nto fauor & pronoūced of christes 
                     •
                  wn mouth more righteous then 
                     •
                  he Pharisy for all his glistring workes & outward holines of life. 
                     •
                  ing Manasses in his praier con
                  
                     •
                  essed vnto God, that he had syn
                  
                     •
                  ed aboue the nomber of ye sandes 
                     •
                  f the sea, and that his iniquities 
                     •
                  ere innumerable, yet after he returned

vnto the Lord, they were all forgeuen and he receiued into fauour. If there be not dayly remission of daily synnes at the hād of God for Christes sake,Math. vi. why are we commaunded daily to pray for the forgeuenes of our sinnes?Luke. xi. If the fauour of God be promised at all houres to suche as vnfainedly turne vnto their Lorde God,Iere. xviii. Ezech. xviii. and .xxxiiii. and seke him in singlenes of heart, thē followeth it, that sin we neuer so oft and neuer so greuously: yet if harty repentaunce come, there is hope of remissiō of sinnes through the bloud of Christ.Psal. cix. If Christ bee an euerlasting Bishop, than is he able at all tymes to saue euen at the full those, whiche come vnto God through hym.Hebr. vii If Christ go forth to be called Iesus,Math. i. that is to saye: a sauiour, then ceaseth he not to saue sinners.Rom. viii. If Christ be our intercessour, mediatour and aduocate

vnto God the father euen vnto the worldes ende,i. Tim. ii. then may we be sure thorow him to haue remission and forgeuenes of all oure sinnes euē vnto thend of ye world,i. Iohn. ii. yea & that at all times, sinne we neuer so oft & greuously, if we repent, beleue and amend. Therfore though you haue many times greuously offended ye Lord your God and broken his holy commaundementes, yet despair not but turne again vnto the Lord your God, & he will turn vnto you▪ deliuer you & saue you.ii. Cor. i. For he is the father of mercies & God of all consolation. He is riche inough for all thē that call vpon hym.Rom
                        •
                     . x. If you doo thus, though your sinnes be as read as scarlet, yet shall they be as whyte as snowe. And though they were lyke purple, yet shall they bee as whyte as woll. Heare what God saith by the Prophet: Commonly

whan a man putteth away his wife and she goeth from him,Iere. iii. and marieth with an other, then the question is: should he resorte any more vnto her after that? Is not this field then defiled & vncleane? But as for thee: thou hast plaide ye harlot with many louers, yet turn again to me, saith ye Lord. &c. and I will not let my wrath fall vpon you. I am mercifull, (sayeth the Lord) and I will not alway beare displeasure against thee. O tourn again and I will be maried with you. Whō wold not these words encourage to come againe vnto the Lord his God, and throughly to be perswaded of gods louing fauour toward him, and of the forgeuenes of his sinnes, be they neuer so many and greuous, if he repent, beleue & amend?
            
            
               Epa.
               These thinges comfort well my weake conscience. But one thinge dothe

                  
                     •
                  reatly discourage me.
            
            
               Phi.
               What 
                     •
                  s that?Remedies against ye want of merites.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               I haue no merites, nor plenty of good workes, wherwith I may make God fauorable 
                     •
                  o me, but I am a barren fig tree 
                     •
                  oyd of all good fruit.
            
            
               Phile.
               The wāt of merits ought not to pluck you from comming vnto god.Tit. iii. For God saueth not vs for the righteous works, which we haue done, but for his mercies sake. If oure saluatiō came of works & merits: then were grace no more grace.Rom. xi. If euerlasting life were gotten by deseruinges:Rom. vi than were it not the gift of God through Iesus Christ our Lord.Ephe. ii But the Apostle saieth.
               By grace are ye saued thorowe faith, and that not of our selues. It is the gifte of God, and commeth not of workes, least any mā should boast him self. If rightousnesse come of the lawe:Galat. ii. then Christ is dead in vaine. Christ came not

to call the righteous: but sinne
                     •
                   to repentance.Math. ix. And we are taug
                     •
                   in the Gospell, that ioye shall be 
                     〈◊〉
                   heauen ouer one sinner that rep
                     ••
                  teth,Luke. xv more then ouer ninety an
                     •
                   nine iust persones, which nede 
                     〈◊〉
                   repentaunce.Luke. x. What had the wou
                     ••
                  ded man deserued, that he shoul
                     •
                   be healed?Luke. xv. What had ye strayshep
                     •
                   merited, that the shephard shoul
                     •
                   so louingly fetch her home again
                     •
                   What good works brought Mar
                     •
                   Magdalen,Luke. v
                        ••
                     . when Christ receiue
                     •
                   her vnto grace & forgaue her, he
                     •
                   sinnes? And so likewyse of diuers other. If God shoulde saue vs because of our merites & good workes, so should we chuse god by our works and merites, and not God vs by his fauor, grace and mercy. But Christ saith,Iohn. xv. ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you.Iohn. iii. And S. Iohn wondring at this great mercy of God, brasteth out

                  
                     ••
                  to these wordes▪ and saith: Be
                  
                     •
                  olde, what loue the father hathe 
                     •
                  hewed on vs, yt we shuld be called 
                     •
                  he sonnes of God.i. Iohn. 
                        •••
                     . Againe herein 
                     •
                  s loue, not that we loued God, 
                     •
                  ut that he loued vs, and sent his 
                     •
                  onne to be the agrement for our 
                     ••
                  nnes. And S Paul saith, God ye 
                  
                     •
                  ather hath chosen vs in Christ,Ephe. i. 
                  
                     •
                  efore the foundatiōs of the world 
                     •
                  ere laid. God therfore did chuse 
                     •
                  s by his grace, and not we hym 
                     •
                  y our workes and merits:Exod. xxxiii. I wil 
                     •
                  aue mercy, sayd God to Moses, 
                     •
                  n whome it pleaseth me to haue mercy,Roma. ix. and I wil haue compassiō, 
                     •
                  n whō it is my pleasure to haue compassion. It lieth not therfore 
                     •
                  n a mans will or running, but in 
                     •
                  he mercy of God. And the Psal
                  
                     •
                  ograph saith,Psal. xvi
                        •
                     
                   speaking of God, 
                     〈◊〉
                   of him self: he hath saued me, be
                  
                     •
                  ause it was his pleasure to haue 
                     •
                  e.Psal. lvi. Againe he saith: Thou shalt

saue them for nothynge: what 
                     〈◊〉
                   to say,
                     De verb. Apo. serm. 15. saith S. Austen, thou sh
                     ••
                   saue them for nothing? but ye th
                     ••
                   findest nothing in them wherf
                     ••
                   they shuld be saued, and yet sau
                     ••
                   thou them.
                     Lib. 2. contra Pela.
                   Frely doest thou ge
                     ••
                   frely dost thou saue. And s. Iero
                     ••
                   alledging ye same sentence agai
                     ••
                   the Pelagians, saith, that ye rig
                     ••
                  teous are not saued by their ow
                     ••
                   merites, but by the tender merc
                     ••
                   of God. If we shall consider ou
                     ••
                   merites,
                     In Ioan. cap. 3 Home. 25. saith Chrisostom, we a
                     ••
                   not only worthy no reward, b
                     ••
                   we are also worthy punishemen
                     •
                   Let all mens merits, which per
                     ••
                  shed by Adam be still and kepe s
                     ••
                  lence, saith Saint Austen,
                     De predest. Sanctorum.
                   and l
                     ••
                   the grace of God reigne, which raigneth through our Lorde I
                     ••
                  sus Christe.
                     De vocat. Gene. lib. 1. Cap. 5. The redemption 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christes bloud should waxe vi
                     ••
                   and become of no price, sayth S
                     •
                   Ambrose, if ye iustification, which

commeth by grace were due vnto merites going afore.Psal. ci
                        ••
                     
                   Dauid sath in a certayne Psalme, prayse▪ the Lord. O my soule, and all that is within me, praise his holy name. Prayse the Lord, O my soule and forget not his benefites. Whiche forgeueth all thy sinnes, and healeth al thine iniquities. Which saueth thy life from destruction, and crowneth the with mercy and lo
                  
                     •
                  ing kindnes.
                     
                        •
                      Note. All good men from the beginning haue attributed & geuen the whole glory of their iustification and saluation, not to their own merits and good wor
                  
                     •
                  es:i. Cor. xv. but to the free grace and vndeserued mercy of God,i, Cor. i that God maye bee all in all, and that he, whiche reioyseth, should reioyse in 
                     •
                  he Lorde. For the contentation and quietnes of your conscience 
                     •
                  n this behalf, remember yt Christ 
                     •
                  ame not to cal ye iusticiaries, but

sinners vnto repentaunce. Remē
                  
                     •
                  ber that the sonne of man,Luke. xix. came t
                     •
                   seke and to saue that, that wa
                     •
                   lost. Remember that Christ is 
                     〈◊〉
                   Phisition,Math. ix and that the who
                     •
                   hath no nede of a Phisition, bu
                     •
                   suche as are sick.Math. xi. Remember tha
                     •
                   Christ calleth vnto him al such a
                     •
                   are diseased & loden with the bu
                     ••
                  den of sinne.Math. i. He requireth no m
                     ••
                  rites, only come, remember tha
                     •
                   Christ is called a sauiour to ye end that he should saue them, which otherwise should perish.Luke. ii Heare al
                     •
                  so what God saith by ye Prophe
                     •
                   Come to the waters al ye that b
                     •
                   thirsty and ye that haue no mony Come,Esay. lv. bie, yt ye may haue to ea
                     ••
                   Come bie wine and milk withou
                     •
                   any mony, or mony worth. Wher
                     ••
                  fore doo ye lay out your mony fo
                     •
                   the thyng that fedeth not, & spen
                     •
                   your labour about the thing tha
                     •
                   satisfieth you not? But harke
                     •
                  
                  
harken rather vnto me, & ye shall eat of the best, and your soul shall haue her pleasure in plenteousnesses. Encline your eares, and come vnto me, take hede (I say) & your soul shall liue. Our sauiour Christ also saieth.Iohn. vii. If any man thirst, let him come vnto me and drinke. Againe in an other place, I wyll geue to him that is a thirst, of the well of the water of lyfe.Apoca. xxi He that ouercommeth shall enherite all thinges, and I will be his God, & he shalbe my sonne.Apoca. xxi
                        •
                     
                   Itē. Let him that is a thirst, com. And let whosoeuer wyll, take of the water of lyfe, fre. Here is the fauor of God, remission of sinnes, the gift of the holy ghost, quietnes of conscience, and euerlasting life promised frely without merits or deserts to so many as wil come vnto Christ wt a repentāt hart & faithfull minde.Esay. ixi. For Christe was sent of God the

father to preach good tidings vnto the pore,Luke. iiii. that he might bind vp the woūded hartes, that he might preache deliueraunce to the captiue, and open the pryson to them that are bound, declare the acceptable yeare of the Lord, and comfort al them that are in heauines. He came into this worlde to saue sinners.i. Tim. i. Therefore let it not dismay you, though you find in your self plenty of sinnes & good workes very few. Cast rather ye eies of your mind wt strōg faith on Christ & on his righteousnes, on his merites, passiō, & death, on his blessed body breking, & his precious blud shedding.Cor. i. Iere. ix. Beleue him to be ordained of God the father to be youre wisdom, & righteousnes, your sāctification & redemption, that as it is written, he yt reioyseth, shuld reioyse in the Lorde.Phil. iii. Count all your merites, good works, & righteousnesses,

vile and of no price, for the excellēcy of ye knowledge of Christ Iesu our Lord. Labour to winne Christ, and to be found in him, not hauing your owne righteousnes, which commeth of the law, but yt that, which is through ye faith of Christ euen ye rightousnes whiche commeth of God through faith, yt you may knowe him and the vertue of his resurrection and fellowship of his passions. He yt through true faith hath gotten Christ, put him on his back withall his righteousnes and holines, he is not altogether without merites, neither walketh he naked in ye sight of God.Rom. xiii. Unto this exhorteth S. Paule, when he saieth. Put ye on the Lord Iesus Christe, that is to saye. Clothe your selfe throughe saith with al the merits and workes of Christ. Take his righteousnesse, holinesse, perfection, praying,

fasting, watching, law fulfilling, miracles working, preching passion, death, resurrection, assention, and al that euer he hath to be yours. Beleue him to be geuē you of God, withal that euer he hath. Christ is yours, all therfore that euer Christ merited in his flesh is yours also, as the Apostle saieth. God spared not his owne sonne,Rom. viii. but gaue him for vs al, how can it be than, that with him he shoulde not geue vs all thinges also? If you on this manner put on Christ his merites and good works thorowe true faith,Math. xxi you shall not appeare before God an vnfrutefull figge tree, neither shall the cursse of God fall vpon you. Hear what S. Austen saith:
                     In mantali. Cap. xxii.
                   All my hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit & my refuge, my helth life and resurrection. The tender mercy of the Lorde is my merit.

I am not without merits, so long as that Lorde of mercies fayleth not. And if the mercies of the Lord be plenteous, then am I also plē
                  teous in merites. The mightier that he is to saue, the better is my state and condition, and the more fre am I from all daunger. Here se you that this godly man. Saint Austen knoweth none other merites that may doo him good, but the merites of Christes death and passion. He counteth Christes merites his merites, and saieth that he is not without merites, so long as that Lorde of mercies fayleth not.
                     Lib. medit. Cap. 14. In an other place he also sayeth, all my hope, and assuraunce of my whole trust is in the precious bloud of Christ, whiche was shed for vs and for our saluation. In that is all my comfort, and reposing the whole affiance of my saluation. In that I desyre to come

vnto thee (O heauenly father) not hauing mine own righteousnes, but that righteousnes, which commeth by thy sonne Iesus Christe our Lorde. Item. Brethren, that we may be healed from sinne, let vs beholde Christe crucified. For as they that did beholde the brasen Serpent in the wyldernsse, did not die through the stinging of the serpentes: so lykewyse they yt do loke vpon the death of Christ with faithe, are healed from the bitinges of sinnes. Here to agreeth the saying of saint Barnarde,
                     In cantica.
                   what is of so mighty force & great strength to heale the woundes of the conscience, as the diligent remēbraunce of Christes woundes? Again, when I am troubled and put in feare of my sinnes, than do I hide me in the bloudy woundes of Iesus Christ. Loke yt you therfore likewise flie vnto the merites

of Christes death and passion, and so shall neither sinne, death, hell, desperation, lawe, or anye other thing hurt you.
            
            
               Ep.
               I beleue that whatsoeuer Christ did in his humanitie, he did it for me & for my saluation. And in thee, O Lorde God, is my whole trust, let me neuer be confounded. But neighbor Philemon.
            
            
               Phile.
               What is youre mind sir.Of predestination.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               What if I be not of the nomber of those, whome God hath predestinat to be saued?
            
            
               Phi.
               Feare you not. God withoute all doubt hath sealed you by his holy spirite vnto euerlasting life. Your name is written in the boke of life. You are a citizin of the new glorious and heauenly Hierusalem. Yow shall remaine with God in glory after your departure for euer & euer.Of repentāce
               
            
            
               Epa.
               It sore repenteth me, yt I haue at any time offended the lord my God.
            
            
               Phi.
               This repentance

is an euident testimonye of your saluation, and that god hath predestinat and tofore appoynted you vnto euerlasting lyfe.Math. ii For it is written, repent you of your former life,Eze. xviii for the kingdome of God is at hand. Again: If the vngodly shall repent him of al his sinnes yt he hath done. &c. Doubtles he shal liue and not die. As for al his sins that he did before,Of Faith. they shall not once be thought vpon.
            
            
               Epa.
               I haue an earnest fayth in the bloud of Christ, that God the father will forgeue me al my sinnes for Christes sake.
            
            
               Phi.
               You thus beleuing can not perish, but this your faith is an vndoubted assuraunce vnto your conscience, that you are predestinate to be saued. For it is written, God hath so derely loued the worlde, that he gaue his only begotten sonne, that all that beleue on hym, shoulde not pearishe, but

                  
                     •
                  aue euerlasting lyfe.Iohn. iii. For God 
                     •
                  ent not his sonne into the worlde 
                     •
                  o condempne the world, but that 
                     •
                  he world should be saued by him. He that beleueth on him, is not 
                     •
                  ondempned. He that beleueth on 
                     •
                  he sonne, hath euerlasting lyfe. Uerely, verely I say vnto you, he 
                     •
                  hat heareth my worde,Iohn. v. and bele
                  
                     •
                  eth on him that sent me, hath e
                  
                     •
                  erlasting lyfe, and shall not come 
                     •
                  nto dampnation, but is scaped 
                     •
                  rom death vnto life. This is the 
                     •
                  athers will, that sent me, that of 
                     •
                  l which he hath geuen me, I shal 
                     •
                  ose nothing, but raise them vp againe at the last day.Iohn. vii. And this is ye wil of him that sent me, that euery one whiche seeth the sonne and beleueth on him, haue euerlasting life. And I will rayse him vp at ye last day. I am the resurrection & life,Iohn. xi he yt beleueth in me, though he be dead, yet shall he lyue & euery

one that liueth and beleueth i
                     •
                   me,Iohn. xi. shal neuer die. To him (christ
                     •
                   geue all the Prophetes witnes saith S. Peter,Act. x. that through his name whosoeuer beleueth in him shall receiue remission of sinnes If thou knowledge wt thy mouth that Iesus is the Lorde,Rom. x. and beleue in thine heart that God raysed hym vp from death, thou shal
                     •
                   be saued. For to beleue with th
                     •
                   hert iustifieth, and to knowledge with the mouthe, maketh a man safe.Esay. xxviii For the scripture saith: Whosoeuer beleueth on him, shall not be confounded. Thus se you, that faith dooth assure your conscience of ye fauor of God & of euerlasting life. Doubt you not therfore, but that you are counted in the number of Gods elect and chosen people, and shall enherit the glorious kingdom of God:Of baptisme
               
            
            
               Epa.
               I was baptised in the name of God ye father,

                  
                     •
                  nd of god the sonne, & of god the 
                     •
                  oly ghost.Math. xxviii
               
            
            
               Phi.
               This is also a sure 
                     ••
                  kē of the fauour of God toward 
                     •
                  ou, and that you are predestinate 
                     •
                  nto euerlasting life, seyng that according to your profession, you do beleue, and vnto the vttermost of your power frame your life. For it is wrytten,Mark. xvi. he that beleueth & is baptised,Act. ii. shalbe saued. And s. Peter said vnto the Iewes: Repent you of your sinnes, & be baptised euery one of you in ye name of Iesus Christ for the remission of sinnes, and ye shall receiue the gift of the holy ghost▪ And Saint Paule saieth:Gala. ii. All ye that are baptized, haue put on Christ. And you know, there is no dampnation to them that are in Christ Iesu.Rom. viii For as when you wer baptised, ye forsoke the deuill, the world, and the flesh, withal their workes, pōpes, and vanitie, and gaue your selfe

only vnto the seruice of God, taking him for your Lord & maister euen so hath God likewise taken you to be his seruaunt, loueth and fauoureth you, and wil defend you against al your ennemies, and neuer forsake you, vntyll he hathe brought you vnto euerlasting life. By baptisme is he your lord God, therefore wyll not he suffer you to pearishe. By baptisme, is he your father, and you are born of him, & so become his sonne, therfore can he none otherwyse, then loue, tender and fauour you, and geue you the enheritaunce of his heauenly kingdome. By baptisme are you made the brother of Christ, heyre of God, and fellow heire wt Christ of euerlasting glory, thē may you be certen to be of that nōber, that shall enherit eternall life. By baptisme is the holy ghost geuen you, then are you the sonne of God and

                  
                     •
                  an not pearysh. For it is written. They that are led with the spirite 
                     •
                  f God,Roma. viii. are the sonnes of God. Baptisme is a continuall signe of 
                     •
                  he fauour of God towarde vs, of 
                     •
                  he fre remission of sinnes, of our 
                     •
                  econciliatiō vnto God for Chri
                  
                     •
                  tes sake, and that we be by adop
                  
                     •
                  ion the sonnes of God, & heires of 
                     •
                  uerlasting glory.Of ye Lordes supper.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               In tymes 
                     •
                  ast I haue also many tymes re
                  
                     •
                  eiued the misteries of the Lordes 
                     •
                  ody and bloud in the temples of 
                     •
                  he Christians, with the congre
                  
                     •
                  ation of God, wherin I confesse, I haue founde great comfort, and 
                     •
                  erye muche quietnesse vnto my 
                     •
                  eake and synnefull conscience.
            
            
               Phi.
               The often comming with a 
                     •
                  eruent de syre vnto the Lords ta
                  
                     •
                  le by true faythe to fede vpon the 
                     •
                  isteries of the Lordes body and 
                     •
                  loud: is a manifest argument, yt God hath chosen you to be his,

hath written your name in ye bok
                     •
                   of life, and predestinate you vnt
                     •
                   euerlasting glory. For in so doin
                     •
                   you haue not only called vnto re
                     •
                  membraunce the moste healthfu
                     •
                   death of our Lord and Sauiour Iesu Christ, and so bene thanke
                     •
                  ful for it, but you haue also shew
                     •
                  ed your selfe a lyuely member 
                     〈◊〉
                   that holy body, whereof Christ i
                     •
                   the head. You haue professed opē
                  
                     •
                  ly in the face of the Christen con
                     •
                  gregation, that God the father i
                     •
                   your father, yt Christ is your Lor
                     •
                   and sauiour, that by the one onl
                     •
                   oblation of his blessed body on th
                     •
                   altare of the Crosse, all your syn
                     •
                  nes are put away and forgeue
                     •
                   and you made the enheritour 
                     〈◊〉
                   euerlasting glory. Whē you thu
                     •
                   came vnto the Lordes Table, a
                     •
                   the fruites, benefites and merit
                     •
                   of Christes passiō were geuen yo
                     •
                   namely, the fauour of God, remi
                     ••
                  sion

of sinnes, the holy ghost, quietnes of conscience, new affectes, victory ouer Sathan, death and hell, and finally euerlasting lyfe, so that nowe ye are incorporated in Christ, & become a true & liuely member of that misticall bodye, wherof he is the head,Ephe. 
                        •
                     : yea, you ar fleshe of his fleshe, and bone of his bones, as the Apostle saith.
               Is not the cup of blessing,i. Cor. 
                        •
                     
                   whiche we bles, partaking of the bloud of Christ? Is not the bread, whiche we breake, partaking of ye body of Christ? &c.
            
            
               Epa.
               As I haue had many times an earnest and feruent minde to come reuerentlye vnto the Lordes table, and to be partaker of the holy misteries of Chri
                  
                     •
                  tes body and bloud with the congregation:Of hearing Gods word. so likewise haue I at all times bene glad to repare vn
                  
                     •
                  o those places, wher the word of God hath bene preached, and the

doctrine yt hath there bene taugh
                     •
                   I marked diligētly, kept it in me
                     •
                  mory, and to the vttermost of m
                     •
                   power I laboured to frame m
                     •
                   life according vnto the same,Iacob. i. tha
                     •
                   I might bee no forgetfull heare
                     •
                   but a diligent doer of those wor
                     •
                  kes, whiche I learned of the hol
                     •
                   scriptures to bee acceptable vnt
                     •
                   the Lord my Lord,Luke. i. that I migh
                     •
                   serue him in holines and righte
                     •
                  ousnes all the dayes of my lyfe
            
            
               Phi.
               As there is not a more euidē
                  
                     •
                   testimony and a surer argument
                     •
                   that that man is in the state of e
                     •
                  uerlasting dampnation, which
                     •
                   hath no mynd to hear the word o
                     •
                   God, nor to traine his lyfe according vnto the doctrine therof: s
                     •
                   likewise is there not a more cer
                     •
                  taine signe, that any man is pre
                     •
                  destinate to be saued, then whē h
                     •
                   hath a mynd to heare the word o
                     •
                   God, as our sauiour Christ testi
                     •
                  fieth,

saying: He that is of god, heareth gods words,Iohn. viii. ye therfore hear thē not, because ye are not of God. Here se you, how Christ putteth a difference betwene them that are of God, and them that are of the deuill. They that are the children of ye deuil haue no minde to heare the worde of God. But they that are the sonnes of God, haue a feruent delite and singulare great pleasure to hear gods word, yea, & as the Prophet saieth,Psal. i. to exercise them selues in it daye and night. In an other place our Sauioure Christ saith also. My shepe heare my voyce and I know them,Iohn. x. and they follow me, and I geue vnto them euerlasting life, & they shall neuer perishe, neither shal any mā plucke them out of my hande. In this sentēce ye se, that they whiche hear the voyce of theyr shepheard Christ, are the shepe of Christ, and

that they shall neuer pearishe, but haue euerlasting life.Iohn. xviii. Christ also said vnto Pilate: Euery one that is of the truth, heareth my voyce. You hauing a minde to heare the word of God & to heare the voyce of Christ that hie shepheard: haue shewed your self to be of ye truthe. So beyng, you cannot perish, but obtain euerlasting life.Luke. xi For Christ him self pronounceth them blessed which hear the word of God, and kepeth it, that is to saye: beleue it and study to frame their life according vnto ye same.Of Prayer.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Moreouer I haue euer had a desire (I thāke ye Lord my God for it) to pray vnto the Lord my God, and to call on his holy name, although, I cō
                  fesse, not so feruently as I ought.
            
            
               Phil.
               This thing also doth fully certifie your conscience, yt you are of the nūber of Gods elect, and to fore appoynted vnto euerlasting

saluation.Ioel. ii. For it is written. Whosoeuer doth cal on the name of the Lord,Psal. ix▪
                   shalbe safe. Againe, he hath cried vnto me, & I will gratiously heare him, yea I am with him in trouble, and I will deliuer him, & glorifie him. With long life wil I satisfy him, and shew him my saluation.
            
            
               Ep.
               God be thanked, I am now wel quieted in my cōscience, and fear Sathan nothing at all. I thinke my self at this present so strong and so thorowly enarmed against the deuill and all his wicked army: that I am nothing afraid to enter battaill with hym, but am fully perswaded that by the help and power of my graund captaine Iesu Christ, I shal ouer throw him. One doubt remaineth & that once dispatched, I trust I shalbe in some redines for ye Lorde my God, whēsoeuer he sendeth for 
                     •
                  e, & calleth me out of this wretched

worlde.
            
            
               Phi.
               What is that?
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  Of the certē
                     tie of Gods fauour toward vs and of our saluation.I haue heard many times at the mouth of diuers men, whiche haue a good opinion of thē selues of their owne wit, doctrine & learning, that no man in this worlde is certain of his saluation, niether can any man say with a safe conscience and vndouted faith, I am of the nūber of Gods elect, I am a vessell of mercy, I shal be saued. My name is registred in the boke of life. &c. but all men euen ye most godly and faithful, must doubt of their saluation, of the remission of their sinnes, of the fauour of God toward them, and of euerlastinge life.
            
            
               Phi.
               This is the doctrine of ye Papistes both wicked and dampnable. The Papistes in teaching this doctrine doth not only trouble, disquiet, make afraid, wound▪ kill, and slea the consciences of the simple people, and of suche as

credit their deuelish doctrine: but as muche as in them lieth, they make God a lier, his holy worde false, and our faith frustrate, void and vain. Take away the certentie of saluation from any man: and to what poynt serueth the mercyful promise of God, and the faithe whiche apprehendeth and layeth hād on the most louing promises of God? This doctrine openeth a very path vnto hell, and bringeth vnto desperation.
            
            
               Chr.
               Yet ye Papistes alledge the Scripture for them.The manner of the papists in alledging the scripturs
               
            
            
               Phile.
               I thinke that: for so is their accustomed propertie. They alledge many times ye scriptures of God to defend and to stablish their errours and heresies, & 
                     •
                  o blear the simple peoples eyes, whiche are not able to discerne A. frō B. nor to iudge betwene truth and falshode, but are easly led that waye, wherunto the subtile and

wily papist perswadeth. If I had leasure to declare vnto you, what Iuglīg ye vngodly Papistes haue vsed and yet doo vse in wryting & wrestting, incorrupting and abusing that holy worde of God, ye would not a little maruell at the matter: But I wold gladly hear, what the papistes can alledge ou
                     •
                   of the word of God for the confirmation of their wicked opinion in this behalfe.Eccle. ix.
               
            
            
               Chr.
               The sentence whereunto they stick and cleue as vnto an inuincible bulwarke is this: A mā knoweth not whether he bee worthy loue or hatred, bu
                     •
                   althinges are kept vncerten vnto the time to come.
            
            
               Phi.
               The kyngdome of the Papistes is not without a cause called the kingdom o
                     •
                   lies, and the Papists them selues may rightwel be resembled to the beast which rose out of the sea,Apoca. xiii vnto whom was geuen a mouthe to

speake great things and blasphemies, yea to speake blasphemy agaīst god, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and thē that dwel in heauen. &c. But as concerning the text which they alledge (although the learned in the Hebrue tounge know right wel how greatly this text after the cōmon Latin translation differeth from the truth of the Hebrue) it is abused of them, and wrasted contrary to the minde both of the authoure and of the translatour as the wordes that immediatly followe, doo manifestly declare. When Salomon saieth, a man knoweth not whether he be worthy loue or hatred, he speaketh not of the knowledge and iudgement of the cōscience toward God, for who knoweth not, that he is worthy hatred which sinneth against the Lorde his god, contrariwise, that he pleareth

god, & god loueth him, which dooth that thing, that is pleasaunt in his godly sight, but he speaketh of the outward and carnall iudgement and knowlede which men haue of them selues, of their owne strengthes, wisdome or free wyll concerning thinges which chaūce to them outwardly. As though he should saye. If a man should only beholde and consider the outward face of thynges, and iudge the fauour or the disfauour of God toward any man of the things that outwardly chaunce vnto any mā, he were not able to affirme and to parswade his conscience, whether God loueth him or not. For God indifferently without anye respect had to ether of the parties, geueth as aboundantly to the vngodly, as to the godly, to the vnfaithfull, as to the faithfull, to the sainctes as vnto the wycked his

temporall and outward giftes, as beauty, strength, rytches, healthe of body, reason, wisdom, eloquēce, honor, nobilitie, wealth, glory. &c. yea many times the ennemies of God haue more plenteously geuen vnto them of God the ritches and pleasures of this lyfe, then the frendes of God. Therfore if a naturall man not being regenerat nor borne a newe of the spirite of God, considreth the outward face of thinges, and iudgeth of them ye fauour or disfauour of God, verely so knoweth he not, who is worthy Gods loue or hatred, so is he not certain whom God loueth, or whom he hateth. This is thaforsaid text of Salomon (as it is trā
                  slated) to be vnderstand. And that this is the meaning of the author, ye words that folow do manifestly declare. It happeneth, saith he, vnto one as vnto an other: it goeth

with the righteous as with vngodly,Luke. ix. with the good & cleane as with the vncleane: with him that offreth, as with hym that offreth not, like as it goeth with th
                     •
                   vertuous, so goeth it also with th
                     •
                   sinner. As it hapneth vnto the pe
                     •
                  
                  iured, so hapneth it also vnto hym that is afraide to be forsworne. Among all thynges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, this is a misery, that it hapneth vnto all alike. Of these wordes it euidently appeareth, that Salomon speaketh of the knowledge which a naturall man hath by the outwarde gifts of god, wherof, because they be indifferently geuen aswell to ye good as to the bad, he is not able to iudge, whō God loueth, & whō he hateth. Now wher as the Papists wrest this text vnto ye knowledge or iudgement of the conscience, which commeth of the spirite

of God and of his holy word, and would that Christen men in theyr cōscience shuld dout whether God loue thē or not, whether they be in the fauour of God or not, whether their sinnes be forgeuen thē or not whether they shalbe saued or notthei teache a deuelishe errour, and leade ye receiuers of their doctrin, the right way to hell fire. For he yt douteth of the mercifull good wil & fauorable grace of God toward him, & beleueth not that God for christes sake is louing vnto him & forgeueth him al his syns, verely he is no true christian, but dying in this his doubtfulnes and vnbelief he shall surely be dampned acording to this saying: he that doth not beleue on the sonne, shall not se life,Iohn. 
                        •••
                     
                   but the wrath of God a bideth on hym. This erroneous doctrine of the Papistes maketh God false of his promyse, quencheth

fayth, blotteth out hope, destroieth loue, disquieteth the conscience, filleth ye hart with whole seas of vnreastfull and wycked imaginations, and so driueth the doubtful parson vnto desperation and finally vnto dampnation. O murtherers. O soule s
                     •
                  ears. If no man can be certaine in his conscience, whether he be in the fauour of god or no, whether god for christes sake wil forgeue him his sins or not, and geue him euerlasting lyfe, to what poynt serue all the promises of Gods tender mercies made to all faithfull penitent sinners in Christes bloud? vnto what end doth faith serue? If faith certifieth not our conscience of Gods good wyl toward vs, and so bringeth peace and quietnes vnto it: what is then the office of fayth? If a man, whose credit is approued, promiseth vs any thinge, we

surely loke for it, & nothing doubte of the performance therof,Psalm. cxlv & shall we doubt of the accomplishment of the promises of God,Titus. i whiche is faithful in all his wordes,Iohn. xiiii. whiche can not lie, which is not only true but also the self truth?Roma. iii. Let al men be liers,Ezech. xxxiii and let God abide true. God hath promised, that at whatsoeuer hour we tourne vnto him, he will forgeue vs al our sinnes, & neuer remember them more, but so frely fauour vs, and so tenderly loue vs, as though we had neuer offended him. This is the promise of him, which can nether deceiue nor be deceiued, and shal we doubt of the performance therof? Shall we doubt, whether ye Lord oure God wyll be as good as his word? whether our sinnes be forgeuen and we receiued againe into fauor or not? God hath promised, that in Christ all nations of ye
                  
earth shalbe blessed. And shal we, which loke for our whole saluation in the bloud of Christe, doubt whether we shall bee blessed in Christ,Galat. iii. yt is to say, fauoured of god the father for Christs sake or not? Christ our Lord & sauiour,Math. xi. calleth all that labour and be loden vnto him, and promiseth yt he will ease, remedy, comfort and helpe them. And shal we doubt of this his promise? What other thynge is it to doubt of the promises of god▪ then to doubt whether God be true or no, iust & faithfull or no, ye same in his dede that he is in his word or no? O the to much vnfaithfulnes of the wicked Papistes.Iohn. iii. The scripture saith, he that beleueth on the sōne of god, hath euerlasting life. The faithful christians beleue on Christ the sonne of God, embrase him with strong faith as their alone sauiour, redemer, atonement

maker, intercessour, mediatour & aduocate, and shal they doubt of ye 
                  
                     •
                  nheritaunce of euerlasting lyfe? Ether they that do beleue & so cō
                  tinue vnto thēd, haue euerlasting life at their departure out of this life, or els God is not true of his promise.Psal. cx
                        •
                     v But God is faithful in al his wordes, therfore doo the faithful christians receiue according to gods promises & their faith. If all thinges be possible to him y• beleueth, if al things chance to a faithfull man according to his faith,Mar
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     
                   wt what whorish & shameles forheds dare the proud and vngodly Papistes teache vs to doubt of the grace and fauoure of God, of the 
                     •
                  emission of sinnes, and of the enheritaunce of euerlasting lyfe? Where doutfulnes is, there is no 
                     •
                  rue faith but rather misbeliefe, 
                     •
                   to such a doubting faith, yea ra
                  
                     •
                  her no faith, nothinge is promised,

but the fearce wrath and vengeaunce of God and euerlasting
                     •
                   dampnation. Se to what poyn
                     •
                   the wicked Papistes bryng they
                     •
                   whelpes with their deuelysh doc
                     •
                  trin. Saint Iames saith:Iacob. 
                        •
                     . If any man lack wisdom, let him aske i
                     •
                   of him, that geueth it: euē God. & But let him aske in faith and wa
                     •
                  uer not. For he that doubteth, i
                     •
                   like a waue of ye sea, which is to 
                     •
                   of the wyndes, and caried wit
                     •
                   violence. Nether let ye man think
                     •
                   that he shall receiue any thyng o
                     •
                   the Lorde. A wauering minde
                     •
                   man is vnstable in all his wayes Are not they that professe Christ much boūd to the papistes,The scholing of the Papistes. whic
                     •
                   teach their scholers to doubt of th
                     •
                   mercy of God, & not to be through
                     •
                  ly perswaded in their conscience
                     •
                   that God loueth them, pardonet
                     •
                   them for Christes sake, & maket
                     •
                   them enheritours of euerlasting

glory? Is this anye other thynge then to say, despair, die, be dampned? O deuils incarnat. God lighten the eies of the simple, that thei may once see the iugling castes of these wily wicked Papistes, and come vnto the vnfained truthe of gods word, whiche is able to saue their soules, whiche also is the mighty power of God to saue euery one that beleueth.Iacob. i. Roma. i.
               
            
            
               The.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               Al the godly euē from the beginning haue beleued the promises of God, and nothing doubted of them, whether they concerned temporall or spirituall things, and according to their fayth, so recey
                  
                     •
                  ed they. Yea when God seamed most to be angry with them & vt
                  
                     •
                  erly to cast them from his fauor: 
                     •
                  uen then did they nothing doubt 
                     •
                  f his mercifull goodnesse, but wt 
                  
                     •
                  rong faith cleaueth to the promi
                  
                     •
                  es of God, as a certain mā saith:

Though he kil me,Iob. xiii. yet will I put my truste in hym. The Psalmograph also saith:Psal. xxvii. Though an host of men were laid against me, yet shall not my heart be afraide. And though ther rose vp war against me, yet wil I put my trust in him. If ether Abrahā, Isaac, Iacob, or any other saintes of the olde testamēt had doubted of the promises whiche God made vnto them, so had they neuer found fauour at ye maiestie of god, nor obteined those thinges, which God had promised them.Hebr. xi. For without faith it is impossible to please God. He yt doubteth of the promises of God, shall obtain no good thing at the hand of God. To what end ar we so often in the holy scripture exhorted to beleue God and his promises, if it were lawfull for vs to doub
                     •
                   of them? If to beleue and to doub
                     •
                   be one thing, why is euerlasting saluation promised to the one, and

eternall dampnation to thother? Whosoeuer therfore wilbe saued, let him cast away al vnbelief and doubtfulnes, and with tothe and 
                     •
                  ayle (as they vse to say) clene to ye promises of God, nothing doubting, but according as God hath promised, so shall it chaunce vnto him. If we doo repent and beleue his worde, God hath promised vs for christes sake to fauour vs, to forgeue vs all our sinnes, and to bring vs vnto euerlasting life, let vs not therfore doubt of this his promise, but with strong and vnshaken faith beleue it, and looke for boldly that is promised, so we may be sure to haue the grace and 
                     •
                  auour of God, to haue remission and forgeuenesse of oure synnes, 
                     •
                  nd finally to haue euerlasting 
                     •
                  ife. Let vs therfore approch with 
                     •
                  oldnes, and not with doubting 
                     •
                  nd wauering,Hebre. iiii▪
                   vnto the throne of

Gods Maiestie, as thapostle warneth that we may obtaine mercy and finde grace to helpe in ye tyme of nede.
            
            
               Chri.
               If a man after the Papistes shuld doubt of the grace and fauour of God toward him, with what conscience could he be bold to say the Lordes praier,Math. v. & to desire the forgeuenes of his trespasses? Or how could he say with a true faith, I beleue the forgeuenes of sinnes and euerlasting life? To beleue,What it is to beleue. is it to doubt of the promises of God? or rather to be thorowly perswaded of the promises of God, that as God hath promysed, so shal it vndoubtedly chaunce vnto vs.
            
            
               Euse.
               When a man beleueth the gospel he is certaine of ye remission of his sinnes, he is certen of the fauour and good will o
                     •
                   God, and he is certaine also of euerlasting life. And he that lettet
                     •
                   go this faith, and falleth to doub
                     •
                  ting,

he shall neuer enioy thaforesaid benefites, but be cast into euerlasting dampnatiō.
            
            
               The.
               This considred the holy Apostle rightwel, when he without any doubting being throughly perswaded and assured of Gods good will toward him,ii. Tim. 
                        •
                     
                   (set forth in his holye promises,) saide on this maner, I know & am sure, that he (in whom I haue put my trust) is hable to kepe that, which I haue committed to his keping against that dai. Againe,ii. Tim. i
                        ••
                     i▪
                   I haue fought a good fight, I haue fulfilled my course. I haue kept the fayth. From hēceforthe there is layde vp for me a 
                     •
                  rowne of righteousnes, which ye Lord (that is a righteous iudge) 
                     •
                  hall geue at that daye, not to me only, but vnto all them also ye loue 
                     •
                  is comming.Psal. xx
                        ••
                     .
               
            
            
               Phile.
               When that Dauid saide these wordes: I be
                  
                     •
                  eue verely to see the pleasures of

the Lord in the land of the liuing▪ doubted he of the enheritaunce of the heauenly kingdom, or was he rather thorowlye perswaded by stronge faithe in the promises of god, ye he shuld without all doubt raigne with God in glory?Phi. i. If the godly Apostle S. Paule had not bene sure of the fauor of God, and of a better life after this, would
                     •
                   he haue wyshed to bee deliuered from this worlde, and to be with Christ?Actes. vii With what coūtenaunc
                     •
                   durst the blessed martir S. Stephen haue commended his spirit
                     •
                   vnto Christe, if he had not ben
                     •
                   perswaded of gods fauor towar
                     •
                   him, and of the ioyful enheritanc
                     •
                   of the euerlasting kingdom? An
                     •
                   so likewise of al the other saincts The spirit of God certifieth our spirit,Rom. viii. saith the Apostle, that w
                     •
                   are the sonnes of God. If we be sonnes, then are we also heyres.

I meane of God & fellowe heyres with Christ.i. Iohn. iii. Hereto agreeth the saying of S. Iohn. Dearely beloued, nowe are we the sonnes of God, and yet it doth not appeare, what we shalbe. But we knowe, that when it shall appeare, we shall be like him. For we shall see him as he is. Againe: We knowe, that we are translated and caried from death vnto life.
               Here you se that the holy scriptures teache vs to be certaine of our saluation throughe fayth in Christes bloud, and not to be doutfull of it, as the Papistes trifle. Away therfore without al doutfulnes, and lay hand by strong faith on the promises of God, lokynge wt assured hope for all those heauenlye and blessed thynges, that God hath promysed vs in his holy worde. So maye we be sure to receiue according to our fayth.
            
            
               
               Epa.
               Without wauering or doubting I faithfully beleue and am assuredly perswaded, that God ye father is a mercifull father vnto me, that he hath forgeuen me all my sinnes, receiued me into his fauor and made me heir of his euerlasting glory. And all this hath he done vnto me not for my merites & deserts (which are vtterly none) but for Christes sake, in whom I beleue, whome also I confesse to be my alone sauiour & redeamer.
            
            
               Ph.
               Neighbor Epaphroditus, you thus beleuing cannot pearishe. Therfore be on good comfort, quiet your conscience,Iohn. iii. and sattle your minde. For it is written. He that beleueth on ye sonne of God hath euerlasting life.
            
            
               Epa.
               Brother Philemon I thanke you and my other neighbours here for the great cō
                  fort, whiche I haue receiued by this your godly communication.

I fele my selfe nowe in muche better case, then I was, when you came first vnto me. I fele muche quietnes and ease in my conscience. The Lord hath driuen away mine enemies, and geuen me rest in my mynde. If I had not had your company, God knoweth to what poynt my ghostly enemy the deuil would haue brought me. But I praise God for you. For by your godly and christē talke. God hath wrought in me a good and glad wil to die. I haue in my hart bidden the world and all worldly thinges adue. My mind is all together fixed, on the lord my God, and on the ioyes whiche he hath prepared in his glorious kingdom for all them that loue him, I fele such inward ioy in my heart, and such a feruent desire to see ye Lord my God face to face, yt the paines, which I now suffer on my body,

although they be very greuous in dede, seme litle or nothyng to disquiet me.Roma. viii. For I am fully perswaded, that the afflictiōs of this life, are not worthy of the glory which shall bee shewed vppon vs: Againe,ii. Cyr. iiii that though the outwarde man perish, yet thinward man is renued day by day, and that this our tribulation whiche is short & light prepareth an exceding, and an euerlasting waight of glorye vnto vs, while we loke not on the thinges whiche are sene, but on ye thinges whiche are not seene. For the thinges whiche are seene, are temporall, but things, whiche are not sene, are eternall.
            
            
               Chr.
               God kepe you in this mind, euen vnto thend.A Praier.
               
            
            
               Eu.
               Amē.
            
            
               Epa.
               Confirme & make that perfect (o lord) which y• hast begon to worke in me vnto the glory of thy blessed name, and vnto the saluation of my soule.
            
            
               
               The.
               Amē.
            
            
               Epa.
               Neighbors I pray you tourne me that I may lye on my right side.
            
            
               Chr.
               The Lord our God graunt, that ye may syt in his kingdome on the right hande of his glory.
            
            
               Ep.
               Yea & that shortly:
            
            
               Euse.
               So be it.
            
            
               Phile.
               Sir howe do you nowe?
            
            
               Epaphro.
               Well, God be thanked, but I trust to doo better euen anone.
            
            
               Phile.
               Lacke you any thing sir?
            
            
               Epa.
               My paine approcheth nearer vnto my heart, wherby I perceiue the end of my life, not to be far of: I beseche you pray for me, that I may continue faithfull, constaunt and stedfast in the faith of the Lorde my God, euen vnto the very end of my life.
            
            
               Phi.
               We wil do it gladly. Neighbors let vs knele down and pray.
               Lord,A Pray
                        ••
                      for the sicke man. we moste humbly besech thee heare our prayer.
            
            
               Chri.
               And let our crye come vnto thee.
            
            
               Ph.
               O lord Iesu Christ thou only

sonne of the heauenly father, our alone redemer and omnisufficiciēt sauiour, we moste humbly beseche thee, deliuer this sicke and weake parson now being in great pains and at the point to departe out of this worlde from all vgsome and terrible assaultes and temptations of the deuill, synne and hell.Gene. vii. Deliuer him (O Lord) as thou deliueredst Noe frō the raging waues of the sea.Gene. xix. Lot from the destruction of Sodome. Abraham from the feare of the Chaldees.Gene. xx. Exod. xxiii.xxiiii.xxv. i. Reg. xvii. Dan. iii. The children of Israell from the tiranny of Pharao. Dauid from the hand of Goliah, The thre men from the violence of the firy fornace in Babilon.Dani. vi. Daniel from the mouth of the Lions.Ionas. ii. 
                        •
                     et. xii. Ionas from the belly of the whalefishe, & Peter from the prison of Herod: euen so, O gratious Lord God, deliuer the soul of this person, both nowe

and whensoeuer he shall departe hence from all pearill & daunger. Opē vnto him at ye hour of death the dore of Paradise, the gates of heauen, & the entry of euerlasting life. O Lord Iesu Christe forgeue him all his synnes, and lead him with ioye into the kingdom of thy heauenly father euē vnto the bosom of Abrahā, and appoynt him vnto euerlasting rest, that he may reioyse with thee, and with all the elect childrē of God in euerlasting life.
            
            
               Eu.
               Amen.
            
            
               Epa.
               Neighboures I thanke you. Nowe will I also pray vnto the Lord my god, while I may speake, and I trust, he wil for Christes sake gratiously heare me.
            
            
               Th.
               Doubt you not neighbor, God hath so promised.The sicke mans prayer▪
                  
               
            
            
               Epa.
               Lorde harken vnto my prayer, and geue ear to my most humble requestes, O moste mercifull God, O father of all mercies, the father of oure

Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christ, be mercifull to me a sinner. Haue pitie on me, and quickely healpe me poore wretche, for the moste bitter passion and moste precious death of Iesus Christ, thy only begotten sonne, and oure alone redemer and Sauioure.
               
                  Psal. cxiiii.Enter not into iudgemēt with thy seruaunt, O Lord. Handle me not according to my desertes and merites, neither rewarde me after mine iniquities, but for thine infinite and vnmeasurable bountie, and exceading gret merci, receiue me and take me into thy fauour, I miserable & weake creature, am in thy hand.Math. xviii. I am thy bonde seruaunt and thy depter. O most gentle God, o most fauorable father, forsake me not, cast me not away pore wretch that I am. For I am thine withal that euer I cā make. No man is able to strengthē me,

no man is able to deliuer me, no man is able to help me, but thou alone. Thou art the true helper in aduersite. Thou art ye most sure & present comfort in all necessitie. Thou alone art our helper, oure bulwarke, our fortres & our most mighty & strongly defenced tour. Thou o god, art our refuge. Thou art our strengthe. Thou art our helper in all our tribulations. In the (O Lord) do I trust, let me not be cōfoūded. Let me neuer be put to shame, let me not be deceiued of my hope, but preserue me for thy rightousnes sake. Bow doun thine ear vnto me, make haste to deliuer me. Be my defēder O god & my strōg hold, yt thou maist saue me, For yu art my strength, and my refuge. Yea thou art my God, and my destinies are in thy handes. Lighten thy countenaunce vpon thy seruaunt,Psal. xxxi. and saue me for thy

mercies sake, O Lord. And foras
                     •
                  much (O swete father) as it is thy godly pleasure to call me now frō this miserable life and wretched worlde, I most entirely besech the
                     •
                   so to defend me in this agony o
                     •
                   death, that neither sathan nor his ministers preuaill against me, but that I continue faithful and constant vnto thend, in the confessiō of thy holy name, loking for full remission of all my sinnes in the precious bloud of thy welbeloued sonne and my only sauiour Iesus Christ, and that I departing in this faith and perfect trust, maye be placed among thy blessed saintes and heauenly spirites, and so for euer and euer remaine with ye in glory. Graunt this, O moste mercifull father, for thy dear sons sake. Iesus Christ our alone mediatour and aduocate.
            
            
               Chr.
               Amē.
            
            
               Epa.
               Me thinke good neighbours

I begin to waxe very coulde and numme in my limmes.
            
            
               Euse.
               Syr discomfort not your selfe. Be content with the good workynge of God. This cold is a present tokē, that the death of your body is not far of.
            
            
               Epa.
               My fleshe is consumed and wasted away.
            
            
               Eu.
               That is ye end of all fleshe.Gen. iii
                        •
                     
                   Earth thou art, saith God, and vnto earth shalt yu retourne.
            
            
               Epa.
               My feling is gone, and my tasting decaieth. All my senses grow out of course.
            
            
               Eu.
               To that end wer they geuen you, that you shuld lose them againe. With the body, al bodely thinges decay.
            
            
               Phi.
               Brother Epaphroditus, let ye care of the body & of bodely thīgs passe. You doo beleue the resurrection of the body?Of the resurrection of the body.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue that my redemer liueth, and that I shall ryse out of the earth in the latter day,Iohn. xix. and that I shalbe clo
                  
                     •
                  hed, again with this skin, and see

God my sauiour in my flesh. Yea I my sef shall beholde him, not wt other eyes, but with these same eies. This hope is stedfastly set in my hart.
            
            
               Ph.
               Beleue this earnestly, and it shal not greue you to depart frō your body. For wher as it is now mortal, incorruptible, sick, weake, vile, & lothsome, it shal at ye generall resurrection, be immortal, vncorruptible, whole, strong, precious, and in al poynts lyke to the glorious body of our Lorde, & sauiour Christ Iesus.Phil. iii. Hear wha
                     •
                   the Apostle saith: our conuersati
                     •
                  on is in heauen, from whence we loke for a sauiour, euen the Lorde Iesus Christ, which shal chaung
                     •
                   our vile body, that he may mak
                     •
                   it like vnto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby he is able also to subdue al things vnto him selfe.ii. Cor. v Agayne: We know that if our earthy mansion of this

dwellinge were destroyed, we haue a building of God, an habitation not made with handes, but euerlasting in heauen. For therefore sighe we, desiring to be clothed with our mansion, whiche is from heauen, so yet, if that we be founde clothed and not naked. For we that are in this tabernacle, sighe, and are greued because we woulde not be vnclothed but woulde be clothed vpon, that immortalitie might bee swallowed vp of lyfe. He that hath ordained vs for this thing, is God, whiche very same, hath geuen vnto vs the earnest of the spirite. Therfore we are alway of good cheare and knowe, that as longe as we are at home in the body, we are ab
                  
                     •
                  ent from God. For we walke in 
                     •
                  ayth, not after outwarde apperaunce. Neuerthelesse we are of 
                     •
                  ood comfort, and had rather to

be absent from the body, and to be present with God
            
            
               Epa.
               This is cō
                  fortable doctrine. I can be contēt with al my heart to make such a chaūge, whensoeuer the Lordes good pleasure shalbe.Sentences concerning ye resurrection of the body. But I pray you rehearse some wholsome sayinges oute of the holy scriptures concerning the resurrection of the body for strēgthning of my faith, and for the comfort and quietnes of my conscience.
            
            
               Phi.
               In the prophet Esay we read on this manner:Esay. xxvi. Thy dead men shall liue, euen wt my body shall they rise againe. Awake and sing ye that dwell in dust. For thy dewe is euen as the dew of herbes, and the earth shall cast out them, that be vnder her. Againe,Esay. lxvi. your bones shall floryshe like an herbe.Ezec. xxxvii. The Prophet Ezechiell, hath these words: The hād of the lord came vnto me and caried me out in the spirit of ye Lord

& let me downe in a playne field, that lay full of bones, and he led me round about by them, and beholde the bones that lay vpon the fielde, were very many, and maruelous dry also. Then sayd he vnto me. Thou sonne of mā, thinkest thou these bones may liue again? I aunswered: O Lord God thou knowest. And he sayd vnto me: prophecy thou vpon these bones, and speake vnto them. Ye drye bones, heare the worde of the Lord. Thus saith the Lorde God vnto these bones: Beholde, I will put breth vnto you, that ye may lyue, I will geue you sinowes & make fleshe grow vpon you, & couer you ouer with skinne: and so geue you breath, that ye may liue, & knowe that I am the Lord. So I Prophecied as he had cōmaūded me. And as I was prophecying, ther came a noyse, and a great motion,

so that the bones ran euery one to an other. Nowe when I had loked, behold, they had sinnowes, & flesh grewe vpon them, and aboue they were couered with skin, but there was no breath in thē. Then said he vnto me. Thou sonne of man, prophecy thou towarde the wind: prophecie & speake vnto the wind. Thus saith the Lord God: Come (O thou ayr) from the foure windes, & blowe vpon these slaine that they may be restored to life. So I prophecied, as he had commaūded me: then came the breath into them, and they receiued life, and stode vp vpō their fete a maruelous great nomber. Againe: Thus saith the Lord god: behold, I wyll open your graues (O my people) and take you out of youre sepulchres. The wordes of the Prophet Daniel are these:Daniel. xii. Many of them that slepe in the dust

of the earth, shall awake, some to euerlasting life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. God saieth by Esdras:iiii. Esdr. ii. those that be dead will I rayse vp againe from their places, and bryng them out of theyr graues. Moreouer Christ saide to the Saduces, which denied the resurrection of the body:Math. xxii As touching the resurrectiō of the dead, haue ye not red, what is said vnto you of God, which saith: I am Abrahams God, & Isaacks God, & Iacobs God. God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuing. Also in an other place: The houre shall come,Iohn. v▪
                   in the whiche all that are in the graues, shall heare the voyce of the Sonne of God, and shall come forthe, they that haue done good, vnto the resurrection of life, and they that haue done euil vnto the resurrection of dampnation.Iohn. xi. Martha said vnto Christe

of her brother Lazarus, when he was dead: I know yt my brother shall rise againe at the latter day. The holy Apostit s. Paul is plenteous in the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. I wyll reherse one or two of his sentences,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. xv. & byd the other farewell. The trompe, saith he, shall blowe, and the dead shall ryse incorruptible, and we shalbe chaunged. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, & this mortall must put on immortalitie.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Again the Lord Iesus shal chaūge our vile bodies, that they maye bee fashioned like vnto his glorious body. Also in an other place: I would not brethren haue you ignoraunt concerning them, which are fallen aslepe,
                     
                        •
                     . Thes. iiii. that ye sorow not as other do, whiche haue no hope. For if we beleue, yt Iesus Christ died & rose againe, euen so they also, whiche slepe by Iesus,

will God bring againe with him. Diuers examples of the resurrection of our bodies haue we bothe in the old and new testament. Helias the Prophet raised vp from death vnto lyfe the sonne of ye widow of Sarepta.iii. Reg. xvii The like thinge read we of Heliseus the Prophet.iiii. Reg. iiii. Christ raised frō death the daughter of a certain ruler,Math. ix. the sonne of a certayne widowe,Luke. vii. and Lazarus wt many other.Iohn. xi. Christ rose again, and the bodies of many sainctes whiche slept, arose also, and came out of their graues after their resurrection and came into Hierusalem and appeared vnto many. Peter raysed vp Tabitha from death.Mat. xxviii. Mark. xxvii
                        •
                      Act. ix.xx. S. Paul restored vnto life a certaine yong man named Eutichus. Al these are euident examples of our resurrection. Therefore good brother Epaphroditus, feare not to geue ouer this your

body and frely to commend it vnto the earth. At the great daye of the generall resurrection, you shal receiue it in a far better case, then euer you had it in this world.
            
            
               Ep.
               I leue this my vile body willingly, yea and that with this hope, that at the last day, I shall take it againe immortall and vncorruptible.Philip. i. I beleue the resurrection of the fleshe. I wish to be losoned frō this body, and to be with Christe.
            
            
               Eu.
               
                  Of ye immortalitie of the soule & of the blessed state of the faithful after this lyfe.You doubt nothing of the blessed state of ye godly departed, and of the immortalitie of the soule?
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue euerlasting lyfe.
            
            
               The.
               You are not of the opinion of the Papistes, whiche say that ye souls of the faithfull go not strait vnto heauen, but vnto purgatory, there to be boyled in the fyry fornace of the B. of Rome, til they haue made satisfaction for theyr sinnes, either by them selues in

suffringe, saye they, the most bitter paines of purgatory, or els by their frendes in this worlde thorowe Masses, Pardons, Pilgrimages.i. Iohn. ii. &c.
            
            
               Ep.
               I beleue that there is none other purgatory for my soule helth, but only the precious bloud of my Lorde and Sauiour Christ Iesu.
               And I beleue yt Christ through his innocency of life,Hebr. ix. and the most greuous paines, that he suffred on the crosse, hath aboundauntly satisfied for all my synnes, & hath vnto the vttermost paid al the det that I ought vnto god the father, so that nowe through faith in the bloud of Christ,Roma. viii. I walke with a clear conscience before God, forasmuche as there is no dampnacion to them that are in Christ Iesu, and that they also are blessed, whose sinnes are remitted, whose iniquities are couered,Psal. xxii. and vnto

whose charge God laieth no wickednes.
            
            
               Chr.
               Ye agre not wt such in opinion, as affirme, yt the soules of both the faithfull and vnfaithfull slepe vntill the day of iudgement, and then shall awake out of slepe, so that then the faithfull shall go vnto euerlasting glory, & the vnfaithfull vnto eternall dāpnation?
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue that the soul slepeth no more, then this my bed sted waketh and talketh with vs. I am fully perswaded, yt so sone as the souls of the faithfull are departed from the bodies, wherein they were as in a prison enclosed, they are straightwaies placed in the glorious kingdome of God. And contrariwyse the soules of ye vnfaithfull, goe straight vnto the deuil,Apoc. xxi, euen vnto hel fire, vnto that lake that burneth with fier, and brimstone, where weping & gnashing of teeth is, where the worme

that gnaweth their consciēce,Math. xiii. neuer dieth, and the moste greuous fier, wherwith they are without ceasing intollerably tormented,Esay. lxvi. is neuer quenched. Is it not thus neighbor Philemon?
            
            
               Phi.
               Yes verely sir. For so ar we taught in the holy scriptures, as the history of the ritche glotton,Luke. xvi. and of pore Lazarus, with diuers other, doo manifestly declare.
            
            
               Epa.
               I faithfully beleue, that immediatly after my departure out of this worlde, I shall haue a place in the kingdom of God, and se the glorious maiestie of god face to face. And I pray you good neighbor Philemon, rehearse vnto me some comfortable places out of the holy scripture cō
                  cerning ye ioyfull and blessed state of the faithfull soules after this life, that I may be confirmed in my faith, and be the more willing to depart.
            
            
               Phi.
               I wil do it gladly.

Balaam said:Num. xxiii. I pray god that my soul may die the death of the righteous, and that my last end may be like vnto theirs. The Psalmograph saith: O howe amiable are thy dwellings,Psal. lxxxiiii. thou lord of hosts? My soul hath a desire and lōging to enter into the courts of ye lord: my heart & my fleshe reioyce in the liuing God. Blessed are they that dwel in thy house, they will be alwaies praysing thee. One day in thy courtes, is better then a thousand. I had rather be a dorekeper in the house of my God, then to dwel in the tents of the vngodly. The Prophet Esay saith:Esay. ii. The redemed of the lord shall turn again and come with ioye vnto Sion, ther to endure for euer, that mirth & gladnes might be with thē, that sorow & wo might flie from them. My people,Esay. xxxii saith God, shall dwel in pleasant peace, & in safe holdes,

and shal haue continual rest with out disturbaunce.Esay. xlix. They shall nether hunger nor thurst, heat, nor Sunne shall not hurte them. For he that fauoureth them, shall lead them and geue them drinke of the spring wels.Esay. xlv. They shal eat, drink, be mery and reioyse for very quietnes of heart. Yea their gladnes and their ioy shall continue for euer and euer.Dan. xii. Daniell saith: The wise (suche as haue taught other) shall glister as the shining of heauen, and those that haue instructe the multitude vnto godlines, shal be as the starres, world without end.iiii. Esdr. ii. Esdras saith: Be redy to the reward of the kingdome, for the euerlasting light shall shine vpon you for euermore. Fle the shadow of this worlde, receiue the ioyfulnes of your glory. O receiue the gift that is geuen you, & be glad, geuyng thankes vnto hym that

hath called you to the heauenlye kingdom. The author of the boke of wisdom saith. The soules of the righteous are in the hand of God,Sapi. iii & the pain of death shall not touch them: In the sight of the vnwise they appeare to die, and their end is taken for very destruction: the way of the righteous is iudged to be vtter destruction, but they are in reast. And though they suffer pain before men, yet is their hope full of immortalitie. They are punished but in few thinges, neuertheles in many thinges shall they be wel rewarded. For god proueth them, and findeth them mete for him self: yea as the gold in the fornace doth he try them, and receiueth them as a brent offring, and whē the time commeth, they shall be loked vpon. The rightous shall shine as the sparckes, that runne through the rede bush. They shall

iudge the nations, and haue dominion ouer the people, & their Lord shall raigne for euer. Again: The faithfull are counted among the children of God,Sap. v. and their portion is among the sainctes. The righteous shall liue for euermore: their reward also is wt the lord, & their remembraunce with the hiest. Therfore shall they receiue a glorious kingdome,Toby. iii. and a beautifull crowne of the Lordes hand. The holy father Toby, prayed on this maner to God: O Lord, dele with me according to thy wyll, and cō
                  maund my spirit to be receiued in peace. For more expedient were it for me,Eccle. vii. to die thē to liue. The preacher sayeth. The daye of death is better then the day of byrth.Psal. cxvi. For precious and right deare in the sight of the Lorde, is the death of his sainctes.Math. xiii. Our sauiour Christ saith: The righteous shall shyne

as the sunne in the kingdome of theyr father.Math. xix. They shall haue the enheritaunce of euerlasting lyfe.Math. xxv Thei shal haue a kingdom, which was prepared for them from the beginning of the world.Marke. xii Luke. xvi. Iohn. xvi. Thei shal be as the aungels of God. They shall be in the bosome of Abrahā. Thei shal haue such ioy, as no mā shalbe able to plucke it from thē. They shall eate and drinke in the kingdom of God the father.Luke. xxii. They shalbe where Christ is, and see his glory. The holy Apostle S. Paul saith.
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. ii.v The eie hath not seene, and the eare hath not heard, neyther haue entred into the heart of mā, the thinges which God hath prepared for them that loue him. He
                     •
                   saith also,Phil. ii. that if our earthy mansion of this dwelling wer destroy
                     •
                  ed (he meaneth the body) we haue a building of God, an habitation not made with handes, but euerlasting

in heauen. We shalbe with Christ.Thes. iiii. We shalbe with the Lorde for euer. We shalbe vessels vnto honour.ii. Ti. ii.iiii▪ Hebr. xii We shall haue the crown of righteousnes. We shall come to the citie of the liuing God, the celestiall Hierusalem, and to an innumerable sight of Aungels, and to the Congregation of the firste borne sons whiche are written in heauen; and to God the iudge of al, and to the spirits of iust & perfect men, and to Iesus the mediatour of the newe testament.
               We shal receiue the crown of life,Iacob. i. saith S. Iames, which the Lord hath promised to thē yt loue him. Whē Christ ye chief shepherd shall apere (saith S. Peter) ye shall receiue,i. Pet. 
                        •
                     . an incorruptible crowne of glory. We are nowe the Sonnes of God (saith saint Iohn,) and it hath not yet appeared,i. Iohn. lii. what we shall be. We knowe that if it once

appeare, we shalbe like vnto him, for we shal se him as he is. In the Reuelation of S. Iohn, we finde these Sentences, concerning the blessed state of the faithfull after this life.Apoca. ii. To him that ouercommeth I wyll geue to eat of the tre of life, whiche is in the mids of the Paradise of God. Be faithfull vnto the death, and I shall geue thee the crowne of life. Him that ouercommeth will I make a piller in the temple of my God,Apoca. iii. and he shal go no more out. &c. To him that ouercōmeth will I graunt to sit with me in my seat. The .xxiiii. Elders that sate vpon the seates, were clothed in white raiment,Apoca. iiii. & had on their heades, crownes of gold.Apoca. vii. They are in the presence of the seate of God, & serue him daye and night in his Temple, and he that sitteth on the seat, will dwell among them. They shal hōger no

m
                     •
                  re, nether thirst, nether shall ye sonne light on them, neyther anye heat. For the Lambe, which is in the mids of the seat, shall fede thē, and shall lede thē vnto fountains of liuing water, & God shall wine away all teares from their eyes. They follow the Lambe whither soeuer he goeth.Apoc. xiiii. They are without spot before the throne of God. I heard a voice from heauen, saying vnto me: Wryght. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord. Euen so saith the spirite, that they reast from their labors, but their workes folow them. Blessed are they, whiche are called vnto the supper of the Lambes mariage.Apo. xix.xxi. I saw a new heauen and a new earth. For the first heauen, and the first earth were banished awaye▪ and there was no more sea. And I Ihō saw the holy Citie, newe Hierusalem come down from God out of heauen,

prepared as a bride garnished for her husbande. And I heard a great voyce out of heauen, saying: Behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwel with them. And they shalbe his people, and God him selfe shall bee with them,Esay. xxv. and be their God. And God shall wipe awaye all teares from theyr eyes. And there shalbe no more death, neither sorow, 
                     ••
                  ther 
                     ••
                  ying, neither shall there be any more paine, for thold thinges are gone. And he that sat vpon ye seat, sayd▪ Beholde, I make all things now▪
                  Esay. lxii
                        •
                     . And he sayd vnto me: wryte, for these wordes are faith full and true.The descrip
                     
                        •
                     ion of ye new and heauenly Hierusalem. And the Angell caried 
                     〈◊〉
                   way in the spirite, 
                     •
                  o a great 
                     〈◊〉
                   hie mountaine, and he 
                     ••
                  e wed
                     ••
                  e the great Citie holy
                     •
                   Hierusa
                     •••
                   descendinge out of heauen 
                     〈◊〉
                   God, hauing y• brightnes of God. And her shining wa
                     •
                   lyke vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
stone most precious, euē like a Iasper, clere as Christall, & had wals great & hie, & had xii. gates, & at the gates .xii. angels, and names written, whiche are the names of the .xii. Tribes of Israell. On the 
                     •
                  ast side .iii. gates,Appo. xxi. and on ye north side .iii. gates, and towardes the south .iii. gates, & from the weast iii. gates, and the wal of the Citie had .xii. foundations, & in thē the xii. names of the Lābes .xii. Apostles & he that talked with me, had a go
                     •
                  den rede to measure the citie withal & the gates therof, and the wall therof. And ye citie was built iiii▪ square, and the length was as large as the bredth, & he measured the citie with the (golden) rede .xii M. furlonges, & the length, and ye bredth, & the height of it, were equall. And he measured the wall therof, an. C. xliiii. the measure yt the angel had, was after the measure

that mā vseth. And the building of the wall of it, was of Iasper: And the citie was pure gold, like vnto cleare glasse, & the foundations of the wal of the city wer garnished with al maner of precious stones▪ The first foundation was a Iasper, the seconde a Saphir, the third a Calcedony, ye .iiii. an Emerald, the .v. a Sardonix, the .vi. a Sardius, the .vii. a Chrisolite, the .viii. a Berall, the .ix. a Topas, the .x. a Crusoprases, the xi a Iacint, the .xii. an Amathist. The .xii. gates, were .xii. pearles, euery gate was of one pearle, and the streate of the Citie was pure gold, as through shining glasse.. And I sawe no temple therin. For the Lord God almighty, and the Lambe,Esay. lx. are the temple of it. And the citie hath no nede of the sunne nether of the moone to lighten it. For ye brightnes of God did light

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and the Lambe was the light of it. And the people which are sa
                  
                     •
                  ed, shall walke in the light of it. And the kinges of the earth shall bringe their glory (and honoure) vnto it. And ye gates of it, are not shut by daye. For there shalbe no night there. And there shall enter into it, none vncleane thing, neyther whatsoeuer worketh abhomination or maketh lies, but they only, whiche are wrytten in the Lambes booke of life.
               And he shewed me a pure riuer of water of life,Apoc. xx
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                   clere as Christall, proceading out of the seat of God, and of the Lambe. In the mids of the streat of it, and of ether syde of the riuer, was there wood of life, whiche bare .xii. maner of fruites, and gaue fruit euery moneth, and the leaues of the wood, serued to heale the people withall. And ther shalbe no more cursse, but the seat

of God and the Lambe shalbe i
                     •
                   it, and his seruauntes shall seru
                     •
                   him. And they shal se his face, and his name shalbe in their foreheds▪ And there shalbe no night ther
                     ••
                   and they nede no candle 
                     •
                   neythe
                     •
                   lyght of the Sunne: for the Lord
                     •
                   God geueth them lyght, and they shall raigne for euermore. And he sayde vnto me, these thinges are faithfull and true.
            
            
               
                  Ep
                        •
                     
                  
               
               God be praised for that true ioye and singuler comfort, which the faithfull finde in his holy worde. It is not without a cause sayd of the holy Apostle: The eie hath not sens,i. Cor. ii. and the eare hath not heard; neither haue entred into the heart of man 
                     •
                   the thinges, whiche God hath prepared for them that loue hym. My heart is nowe so enflamed with ye desire of those heauenly and blessed treasures, which you haue named to me out of the infallible &

true word of God, yt I most entirely wysh to be losoned frō this life, & to enioy these ioyfull pleasures. Oh, who wold not be glad to chā
                  ge lead for siluer, copper for golde, transitory, mortall and corruptible thinges for certain, immortall & vncorruptible thinges, earth for heauen, sinne for godlines, darkenes for light, fear for securitie, trauel for quietnes, sicknes for helth death for life, the cōpany of men, for ye cōpany of the most hie God, his heauenly Aungels and blessed spirites, the vile pleasures of this worlde, for the inestimable ioyes of the glorious kingdom of God.Psal. xlii. Oh, like as the heart desireth the waterbrokes, so longeth my soule after the, O God. My soule is a thurst for God, yea euen for the liuing God.Psal. lxiii. Oh, when shal I come to appere before ye presence of my God, O God, thou art my god, early

wil I seke thee. My soule thursteth for thee, my flesh also longeth after thee, in a barren and dry lād, where no water is. Thus haue I loked for thee in thy holy place, yt I might beholde thy power and glory. For thy louing kindnes is better then life it selfe: my lippes shal praise thee. As long as I 
                     ••
                  ue wil I magnifie thee on this manner, and lift vp my handes in thy name.
            
            
               Euse.
               We reioyse (good brother Epaphroditus) and geue god most harty thankes, that he hath by his holy Spirite, wroughte so good and glad will in you to die, and to leue this wretched worlde.
            
            
               Epa.
               
                  Philip. 1.I moste hartely wyshe to bee losed from this life, and to be with Christ.Iob. x. It greueth my soule lōger to liue in this mortall body.
                     
                        •
                     ob. iii. And now, O Lord, dele with me according to thy will, and commaunde my spirit to be receiued in peace.

For more expedient were it for me to die then to liue.
            
            
               Chri.
               Sir how do you fele your selfe?
            
            
               Epa.
               In my body weaker and weaker, but I trust, in my soule stronger & stronger. I pray you, lay me vp hier in my bed. For I begin to waxe very faint, and my wynde decreaseth & waxeth shorter. I thanke you, it is wel. Neighbours I am troblesome vnto you, but I trust, I shal not be so long.
            
            
               The.
               It is vnto vs great ioy and comfort, to be with you being so godly mynded. For in you as in a cleare mirrour we beholde our selues, and see what shall become of vs hereafter. Of you as of a liuely scholemaister do we learne, howe we shall behaue our selues, when God layeth the crosse on vs. And we most humblī besech God to geue vs the like pacience and thankfulnes.Mat. xxvi.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               The spirite is willing, but the fleshe is

weake. For in asmuch as I fele in my self present tokens of death, & am not certain how long ye
                  ▪ Lorde will suffer me to liue, or to enioy ye vse of speche, I thinke it conuenient to pray again vnto the lorde my God, and to commend my sinful soul into his merciful handes.
            
            
               Phi.
               Godly forsoth.
            
            
               
                  Ep
                        •
                     .
               
               Lord vouchsafe I most humbly beseche the,The sicke mans praier. Psalm. xiiii. to hear me sinfull creature.
            
            
               Chri.
               The Lorde is nye vnto all them that call on hym, yea that call on him in truthe.
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lorde Iesu Christ, whiche art the only health of all men liuing: and the euerlasting life of them, which die in thy faith: I wretched sinner geue and submit my self wholy to thy moste blessed wil. And I being sure that the thing can not perishe, whiche is committed vnto thy mercye, most humbly besech thee, o Lord, to geue me grace, that I maye

nowe willingly leaue this frayle and wicked flesh, in hope of the resurrection, whiche in better wyse shall restore it to me again, I beseche thee (O most mercifull Iesu Christe) yt thou wilt by thy grace make stronge my soule against all temtations, & that thou wilt couer and defende me with the buckler of thy mercy against al thassaults of the deuill. I see & knowledge, that there is in my selfe no helpe of lyfe and saluation, but all my confidence, hope and trust is in thy moste mercifull goodnes. I haue no merites nor good workes, whiche I may alledge before thee. Of sinnes and euill workes (alas) I se a great heape, but thorow thy mercy I trust to be in the nomber of them, to whome thou wilt not impute their sinnes, but take and accept me for righteous and iuste, and to bee the enheritoure

of euerlasting glory▪ Tho
                     •
                   O moste mercifull Lorde, wast borne for my sake. Thou diddes
                     •
                   suffer both hunger and thirste for my sake. Thou diddest preach and teach, thou diddest pray, & faste fo
                     •
                   my sake. Thou diddest all good workes and deedes for my sake. Thou suffredst most greuous pai
                     •
                  nes and tormentes for my sake. And finally, thou gauest thy most precious body to die, and thy most blessed bloud to be shed on ye crosse for my sake. Now most mercifull sauiour, let all these thinges profit me, whiche thou frely hast geuen me, whiche hast geuen thy selfe for me. Let thy bloud clēse and wash away the spottes and foulnes of my sinnes. Let thy righteousnes hide & couer my vnrighteousnes. Let the merits of thy passion and bloud, bee the satisfaction for my sinnes. Geue me Lorde thy grace,

that my faith and perswasion in thy bloud wauer not in me, but euer be firme and constant, that the hope of thy mercy and life euerlasting neuer decay in me, that charitie waxe not colde in me, finally that the weakenes of my fleshe be not ouercome with the feare of death. Graunt me also (O moste merciful sauiour) that whē death hath shut vp the eies of my body: yet that the eies of my soule may stil behold and loke vpō thee, and that when death hath takē away the vse of my tongue & speche: yet that my heart may cry & say vnto thee: O Lorde, into thy handes I geue and commit my soule. Lord Iesu, take my spirit.
            
            
               The.
               Amen.
            
            
               Eu.
               Sir how is it with you now?
            
            
               Epa.
               Euen as with a ship, whiche is tost with the waues of the sea. I trust shortly to come vnto the heauen, and then shall I be quiet,

and without all daunger. I pray you, pray for me.
            
            
               Phi.
               Most gladly. Let vs knele down neighbors and beseche the Lord our God for his tender mercies, to preserue this our sicke brother from the assaultes of Sathan, & to kepe him constant and stedfast in his faithe vnto his liues ende, that he maye geue vp a good & a faithfull soule into the mercifull handes of God. Geue me hither the flower of godly Prayers,The Flowre of godly prayers. that I in the name of vs al may rede that prayer, which is to be said for them, that lie at ye point of death.
            
            
               The.
               Here is it.
            
            
               Philemon.
               
                  O Moste louing Sauiour, & gentle redemer, whiche camest into this world to call sinners vnto repentaunce, and to seeke vp yt was lost,Math. ix. Luke. ix. thou seest in what case this oure brother lieth here: visited with thy mercifull

hand al weake, feble, sicke, and redy to yealde vp his soule into thy holy hāds. O loke vpō him (moste gentle sauior) with thy mercifull eie, pitie him and be fauorable vnto him. He is thy workemanship, despise not therfore the worke of thine own hands. Thou suffredst thy blessed body, and thy precious bloud to be shed for his sinnes, and to bringe hym vnto the glorye of thy heauenlye father, let it not therefore come to passe, that thou shouldest suffer so great paines for him in vaine. He was baptised in thy name, and gaue him self wholy to be thy seruaunt, forsakynge the deuill, the world, and the flesh, confesse him therefore before thy heauenly father and his blessed Aungels to be thy seruaunt.Prou. xvi. His sinnes, we confesse are great (for who is hable to saye, my heart is clene & I am fre from sin) but thy

mercies,Math. ix. O Lord, are much greater. And thou camest not to cal th
                     •
                   righteous, but sinners vnto repē
                  taunce. To them that are diseased and ouerladen with the burden of sin, doest thou promise ease. Thou art that God,Math. x which willest not ye death of a sinner, but rather that he shuld turne and liue. Thou art the sauiour, whiche wishest all mē to bee saued,i. Thess. ii. and to come to the knowledge of thy truthe. Withdraw not therfore thy mercy from him because of his sinnes, but rather lay vpō him thy sauīg health that thou maiest shewe thy selfe toward him to be a sauior. What greater praise cā there be to a phisition then to heale the sicke? Neither can there be a greater glory, to thee being a sauior, then to saue sinners, saue him therfore, O Lord for thy names sake. Again, let the law be no corsiue to his conscience

but rather geue him grace, euēin this extreme agony and conflicte of death,Roma. x. to be fully perswaded yt thou by thy death hast takē away all his sinnes, fulfilled the lawe for hym, and by this meanes, deliuered him from the cursse of the law,Gala. iii. and paid his raunsome, that he thus beinge fully perswaded may haue a quiet heart, a fre conscience, and a glad will to forsake this wretched world: & to go vnto his lord God. Moreouer thou hast conquered hym that had rule of death,Hebr. vii. euen sathan, suffer him not therfore to exercise his tirāny vpō this our sicke brother,Ose. xiii. nor to disquiet his conscience with the terrours of sinne and paines of hell. Let not Sathan nor his infernall army tempte him further,i. Cpr. xv. then he is hable to beare, but euermore geue him grace euen vnto his last breath, valeantly to fight against

the deuil with strong faith in thy precious bloud, that he may fight a good fight, and finish his course with ioy vnto ye glory of thy name and the healthe of his soule. O Lord, so worke in him by thy holy spirite, that he with all his hearte maye contempne, and despise all worldly things, and set his mind wholly vpon heauenly thynges, hopyng for them with a stronge and vndoubted faithe. Againe: let it not greue him, O swete sauiour to be losoned frō this vile & wretched 
                     •
                  arca
                     •
                  e, which is now so full of sorow, trouble, anguishe, fickenes and paine, but rather let hym haue a bent and ready wyll, thorowe thy goodnes, to put it of, yea and that with this faith, that he at the last day, shall receiue it again in a much better state then it is now,Phil. iii. or euer was frō the daye of his birthe, euen a body vncorruptible,

immortall, & like to thy glorious body. Let his hole heart and mynde be set only vpon thee. Let the remembraunce of ye ioyes of heauē be so feruēt in his brest:ii. Cor. xv. that he may bothe patientlye and thanckfully take his death, and euer wish to be with the in glory. And when the tyme cōmeth, that he shall geue ouer to nature, & depart from this miserable worlde: vouchafe we most hūbly beseeche the, o Lord Iesu, to take his soule into thy handes, and to place it amonge the glorious company of thy holy angels & blessed saintes. and to kepe it vnto that most ioyful day of the generall resurrectiō that both his body & soule thorow thyne almighty power being knit agayn together at yt day, he maye for euer & euer enioy thy glorious kingdom, & sing perpetuall praises to thy blessed name.
            
            
               Chri.
               
                  Amen.Psal. lxvii.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               O God be merciful vnto me and blesse me, shewe me the lighte of thy countenaunce, and deale fauourably with me. Lighten mine eies, that I slepe not in death, least myne ennemy say: I haue preuailed against him. For if I be cast downe,Psal. xii. they that trouble me will reioyse at it. But my trust is in thy mercy, & my heart is ioyfull in thy saluation.
            
            
               Phile.
               Sir how do you?
            
            
               Epa.
               My bodely sight is gone.Iob. i.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               The Lord gaue it you, and the Lorde hath taken it away againe. As it hath pleased the Lord, so is it come to passe, blessed be the name of the Lorde. Now that God hath taken away the sight of your corporal eies, behold the Lord your God with the eies of your faith, and doubte you not, but that shortly you shall see the glorious maiestie of god with the eies of your soule, euen as he

is, face to face, whiche shalbe vnto you suche ioy, and so great cōfort, that no tounge is able to expresse, nor no heart able to thinke it.
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue and am assuredlye perswaded that I shall see the plesures of the Lorde in the lande of the liuing.Psal. xxvii.
               
            
            
               Phile.
               Cōtinue in this faith vnto the end, and you shall surely be saued.
            
            
               Ep.
               As God hath taken away my syght, so do al my other senses decaye.
            
            
               Phi.
               Though by the appointment of God, you lose your bodely speache, yet shall your soule in the heauenly kyngdom sing, prayse and magnify the Lord your God, worldes without end. And all be it the bodely hearing be taken away from you, yet shall your soule in the kingdom of God hear such swete, pleasaunt, & delectable thinges, as neuer mortall man heard, nor may hear the like. Againe, although your going,

and the vse of your whole body be taken away from you, and your body returne vnto the earth from whence it came, yet doubte you not, but your soule being once deliuered out of the prison of your body, shal serue the lord your god perfectly,Apoc. xiii. and ioyfully follow the Lambe Christ. whither so euer he goeth.Psa. cxix.
               
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lorde, deliuer my soul out of the prison of the body, that I maye come vnto thee, and glorify thy holy name.Toby. iii. Cōmaund my spirit to be receaued in peace, for more expedient were it for me to die thē to liue.
            
            
               Phi.
               Be on good comfort sir, God in this your troble and bitter agony of death is present with you, and when he seeth conuenient tyme, he will deliuer you out of all your paynes, take you vnto him,Psa. xxii. and place you in his glorious kingdom.
            
            
               Epa.
               O Lorde, deliuer my soule from the

sweard,Psal. lxxi. my dearling frō the power of the dogge. Saue me from ye Lions mouth. Bow downe thine eare to me, make haste to deliuer me. Be thou my Protectoure, O God, and house of defence, that ye maiest saue me. Be thou my strōg rocke and my castell. Be thou my guide, and leade me for thy names sake. Drawe me oute of the net, thot they haue layde preuely for me, for thou art my strengthe. Into thy handes I commend my spirite, for thou hast redemed me, O Lord thou God of truthe.
            
            
               Phile.
               Fear not brother Epaphroditus, God is your louing father and moste gentle sauiour.
               He hath hearde your humble requestes, and graunted your peticions. He hathe and wyll defend you from all euill euen vnto the end. He will not suffer you to be deuoured of that hellish Lion

and cruel dog ye deuill. He hath sent his holy Angels hether vnto you, euen into this your chambre. They are here presente for youre great cōfort.Psal. xxxiiii. They haue pitched their tents round about you, that they may kepe you harmles and safe from the deuouring tethe of Sathan.Psal. xci. Thei wait vpon you diligently for your defence, and wil neuer depart frō you,Hebr. i. till they receiue your soule, and cary it vp louingly as a most precious relique into the kingdome of heauen: and moste ioyfully present it vnto the glorious throne of gods maiestie. Fixe ye eies of your faith on Christ and Christes merits, on Christes passion and death, on Christes blessed body breakyng, and his moste precious bloud sheddinge, on his triumph and victory ouer sathan & his hellish army, beleue Christe to be your alone sauioure, and all

his works to be your good works and so shall ye not perish, but haue euerlasting lyfe.The sicke mans praier.
               
            
            
               Epaphro.
               Hast the O Lord to deliuer me, for it is hie time. In thee O Lord Christ my most mercifull sauiour, and only redemer, in thee, in the alone is al my trust, let me neuer be confounded. O Iesu. Mercy Iesu mercy▪ O Christ. Mercy Christ mercy. O God the Father, O God the sōne, O God the holy Ghost. O moste blessed Trinitie, thre persons and one God, haue mercy on me. Receiue my soule into thy handes. Place it for thy mercies sake in thy heauēly kingdom among thy holy angels and blessed sainctes. O my good God. O father, O my most merciful father. Mercy, mercy.
            
            
               Phile.
               God the father, whiche made you: blesse you. God ye sonne which redemed you: preserue you. God the holy ghost, which sanctifieth

you, confirme and strengthē you. The blessing▪ defence and sauing health of the allmighty god: the father, the sonne, and the holy ghost preserue you from al euyl and bringe you vnto euerlastinge lyfe.
            
            
               Chr.
               Amen.
            
            
               Eu.
               Me thinck he hath geuē vp the ghost.
            
            
               The.
               No, he is yet a liue. God comfort him. Lord, shewe him the light of thy louing countenaunce.
            
            
               Epa.
               When shall I come to appere before the presence of my God?An exortatiō to the sycke man.
               
            
            
               Phi.
               God be thancked, he yet speaketh, yea he godly speaketh. Brother Epaphroditus, take a good hert vnto you, shrincke not. Fight a good fight. Be not discouraged, nether with the terroures of sathan, nor with ye pains of death. God is on youre syde. God is your graūd captain. You fighte vnder the banner of that most mighty and victorious Emperour Iesus Christ.
               
                  Only continue, as you haue begon, and the daye is yours. Sathā with al his army, like miserable cowardes shalbe put to flight and vanquished. You shall haue a ioyful victory ouer thē. The paine of the battell, is short and lyght, but the glory of your triūphe shal abide for euer & euer.Mat. xxiiii. Heare what your graunde captaine saithe: he that continueth vnto the end shall be saued.Apoca. ii. To him yt ouercommeth I will geue to eate of the tree of life, which is in the middes of the Paradise of God.Apoca. iii. Be faithful vnto the death, and I shall geue the the crowne of life.Apoca. iiii. Him that ouercommeth, will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shal go no more out. Yea to him that ouercommeth, will I graunte to sit with me in my seate. Here see you, what precious and mooste noble rewardes are set forth vnto

you, if you go forth valeauntly to fight against your ennemies, which seke your destruction. Only beleue, only fixe ye eies of your faith on Christ crucified. Only engraue in your heart depely a sure and vndoubted confidence in the mercifull promises of God the father, whiche he hath made vnto you in the precious bloud of his dearly beloued sonne, and our alone sauioure Iesus Christe, and you shall moste certainly haue the victory, and obtain the reward of ioyfull immortalitie. Here what your graund captain Christ saith: God hath so dearly loued ye world that he gaue his onelye begotten sonne, that euery one that beleueth on hym, should not pearyshe, but haue euerlasting life. For god sent not his sonne into the worlde to condempne the world, but that the world shuld be saued by hym.

He yt beleueth on him, is not damned Iohn Baptist saithe. He that beleueth on ye sonne of God, hath euerlasting life.Iohn. 
                        •
                     
                   My shepe saith Christ heare my voyce, & I know them, and they followe me, and I geue them euerlasting life, nether shall they perishe for euer, nor yet shall any man plucke them out of my hand. My father which gaue them to me, is greater then all, & no man can pluck them out of my fathers hande. I and my father, am one.Iohn. xi. Againe, I am the resurrection and life. He that beleueth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he liue. And euery one that liueth and beleueth in me, shall neuer die.Iohn. xiiii. I am the way, ye truthe and the life. Follow Christ, & you cā not erre, nor go out of the way, for he is the waye. Beleue Christ, and you can not be deceiued, for he is the truthe. Abide and remaine

in Christ, and you can not die the death euerlasting, for he is the life. Wherefore (O most dere brother) cleane with strong faithe to these most swete and comfortable promyses of Christe youre Sauiour. Beleue to obtayne, whatsoeuer is promysed. So may you be sure to be Gods sonne, and heyre of his euerlasting kingdome, neuer to perishe, but to haue eternall lyfe.
            
            
               Epa.
               I beleue to haue remission of all my synnes thorowe faithe in Christes bloud. Lorde Iesu take my spirite.Act. vii. O heauenly father. I cōmend my spirit into thy hādes.
            
            
               Ph.
               This faith (deare brother) maketh you the Sonne of God,Luke. xxiii. and heyre of his glorious kingdome, yea it maketh you Christes brother and fellow heyr with him of euerlasting glory. It purchaseth for you fauor at the hand of God, and forgeuenes of al your sinnes.

It bringeth vnto you peace and quietnes of conscience. It maketh a perfect reconciliation and an euerlastinge agremente betwene God and you. It deliuereth you from death, and bringeth you vnto eternall glory. It maketh you a Citezin of the newe & heauenlye Hierusalē, where (if you continue stedfast in this faith) you shall remaine for euer and euer in a most blessed and ioyfull state, hauinge the fruition of Gods glorious maiestie in perfecte glorie, worldes without end vnto your exceading ioy and vnspeakeable comfort.
            
            
               Euse.
               Sir, Behold, the life of this our brother beginneth, to drawe vnto an end.
            
            
               Phi.
               Yea rather, he now begīneth to chaūge a mortal life, for an immortal life. The life that is led in this world, is rather a shadow of a life, then a very life indede. Now brother be strong in

the faithe of Christe. Remember Christ crucified.An exhortatiō to the sick man. Remēber Christe to be your alone sauiour. Remember God ye father to bee your merciful father. Forget not yt all your sinnes are washed away in Christes precious blud, & that by ye vertue of his death & passion, you are made heire of euerlasting saluation. Brother, if you can speake aunswere. If you can not speake, shew some outward signe & token that it may be a testimonye vnto vs of your faith & godly departur.
            
            
               Chr.
               Lo, he holdeth vp his hand.
            
            
               Eu.
               God be thāked.
            
            
               Phi.
               He semeth yet to heare. Perswade your selfe (moste dere brother) yt God euen now calleth you out of this vale of wretchednes, vnto the ioyful enheritance of his euerlasting kingdom, wher you shall not liue miserably wt sinfull men (as you haue done in this world) but you shall

gloriously reigne with that moste mighty God, & with his holy aungels and blessed saincts. Now begins your ioy, your solace, your cō
                  fort. Now begīneth your true life, which shalbe euerlasting. Now is the end of al your sorowes come, & now beginneth your vnfained ioy and true felicitie. Now shal ye se ye glorious maiestie of God face to face. Now shall you behold & perfectly know al ye godly yt haue ben from the beginning of the world, and be mery and reioyse with thē. Now shall you se your sauior and elder brother Christ as he is. Now shall you bee clothed wt the white garments of immortalitie: Nowe shal you haue a crown of gold, set vpon your head. Now shall ye eat of the tree of life, whiche is in the mids of the Paradise of God, and drinke of the fountains of liuing water. Now shall you be a pillare

in the temple of your God, and sit with him on his seat. And these your ioyes shall be euerlasting, & neuer haue end. Unto these ioyes shal you straight waies go, & for euermore enioy them.
            
            
               Th.
               Our brother is euē now departed frō this world, vnto the Lord our God, as you spake these words: vnto these ioyes shal you straightways go, & for euermore enioy them: he gaue vp the ghost,The cōmendation of the man departed and now reasteth in the Lord.
            
            
               Phi.
               The Lord our God be praysed. Our brother hath made a godly end. He hath geuen vp a good spirit, into the hands of the liuing God. He is, I doubt not, of the nomber of them,Psal. cxvi. of whose death it is written: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his sainctes.Appo. xiiii. Blessed are they that die in the Lorde. His life before men was vnrebukeable and blameles. He liued iustly, and vprightly

with his neyghbours. He was frendly to al godly men, and ennemy to no man. He was both a sincere fauourer, and a diligent folower of Gods most holy word. He abhorred all sectes, Papistes Anabaptistes, Libertins. &c. Not withstanding alway praying for their amēdment, that they knowledging theyr errors, might with vs confesse one God, & one truthe in the vnity of the spirit. He was a deare frende to suche as were studious of good letters, to widdowes, to fatherles: children, to pore yonge maides mariages, to yong mē that had not wherwith to set vp theyr occupations, to the prisonners, to those poore people which wer not hable to get theyr liuing, to pore housholders, to the reparing of hie wayes & such like. What a will he made ye knowe. His end also ye know.
            
            
               Chr.
               A christen

and godly end made he. God geue vs al grace to make the like.
            
            
               Phile.
               Of a good life commeth a good death, if the departure of the godly may be called a death, & not rather a passage vnto a better life. Wel, his body now slepeth in the Lorde, and his soule raigneth in glory with God.
            
            
               Euse.
               God graūt him & vs al a ioyfull resurrection.
            
            
               The.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               Neighbours, before we departe, let vs all kneele down & geue God the father thā
                  kes for ye godly departure of this our christen brother.
            
            
               Chri.
               It is conuenient so to do.
            
            
               Phi.
               Geue me hither the Flower of Godly prayers.The Floure of godly prayers. I will rehearse the thankes geuing vnto God for ye departure of the faithfull out of this worlde.
            
            
               Eu.
               Lo here is the boke.
            
            
               Phil.
               The name of the Lord our God be glorified.
            
            
               Chr.
               Both nowe and euer. Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               O how can we (moste

louing father) rendre vnto the sufficient thanckes, for thyne inestimable goodnes toward thy faithful seruants, whome thou calling out of this wretched worlde,Psal. cxv. vouchestsafe to place in thy heauenlye kingdom among the glorious cō
                  pany of thy holy angels and blessed saincts.Dan. xiii. O full precious is the death of thy faithfull in thy sight. Blessed are ye dead that die in thee O Lord: For they are at rest from their painfull trauails & labours. The soules of the righteous ar in thy hand. O God: and the pain of death shal not touche thē.Sap. ii. In the sight of the vnwise they appeare to die,Apoc. xxiii but they are in peace. They shine as the sparckes that runne thorow ye redde bush. They glister as the shining of heauē. They are as ye starres worlde without end. They are as the aungels of God. They are clad wt white garmēts,

& haue goldē crownes vpon their heds. They do seruice day & night before the glorious throne of thy deuine maiesty. They neither hō
                  ger nor thirst anye more, neyther doth the sun or any heat fal vpon them, for the lambe which is in ye mids of ye throne gouerneth thē, and ledeth them vnto the liuinge foūtains of waters. They folowe the lābe whithersoeuer he goeth, They haue such ioyes,Esay. lxiii. i. Cor. iii as eie hath not sene, nor eare hath heard, nether is there any heart hable to thincke them. Infinite and vnspeakeable are the treasures, O Lord, whiche thou haste laide vp for them, that depart in thy faith For these thy fatherly benefites toward the souls of the faithfull, and for that it hathe pleased the to call this our Christen brother from this vale of misery vnto thy heauenly kingdome, we geue vnto

the moste harty thankes, humbly beseching thee, that thou wilt take like care for vs, & so gouerne vs with thy holy spirite, bothe in sickenes and in healthe, that we may liue a good and godly life in this present world, and when soeuer it shalbe thy good pleasure to call vs hence, we may with strong faith in thee, & in thy sonne Christ Iesu our Lorde, commende bothe our bodies & soules into thy merciful hādes, and thorow thy gooddes be placed in thy glorious kingdome, among thy faithfull chosen people, and so for euer and euer prayse and magnifie thee our heauenly father, to whome with thy derely beloued sonne Iesu Christ our Lord and sauiour, and the holy gost that most swete cōfortour, be all glory and honoure, worldes without end.
            
            
               Th.
               Amen.
            
            
               Ph.
               Rise let vs go and cōforte our frendes,

that they doo not to muche sorowe for the departure of this our most deare brother, which now resteth in ioyfull peace. That done, neighbour Christopher, repare you vnto some godly learned man, and desire hym to prepare a Sermon for the buriall of this our brother against to morowe about ye ninth houre.
            
            
               Chr.
               It shalbe done.
            
            
               Phile.
               Neighboure Theophile, & neighbor Eusebius, go ye your waye, & prouide all thinges necessary for the comely furniture of the burial that nothing be wanting, when the tyme commeth.i. Tess▪ v.
               
            
            
               Euse.
               We will do it gladly.
            
            
               Phi.
               The very god of peace sanctify vs thorow out, & so wholy preserue vs both spirit, and soule and bodye, that we may be blamed in nothynge at the comming of our Lord Iesus Christe.i. Thess. ii.
               
            
            
               The.
               Amen.
            
            
               Phi.
               Our Lord Iesus Christ him self, & God our father.

(which hath loued vs, & hath geuen vs euerlasting consolation, & good hope thorow grace) comfort our heartes, and stablish vs in all good saying and doing.
            
            
               Eus.
               Amē.
            
            
               Phi.
               Peace be vnto the brethren & loue with faith from God the father and from the Lorde Iesus Christ. Grace be wt al them, which loue our Lorde Iesus Christ vnfainedly.
            
            
               Chri.
               Amen.
            
            
               Ph.
               Blessing and glory, and wisdome and thankes, and honour, and power, and might. be vnto our God for euermore.
            
            
               Theo.
               Amē. Amen.
            
            
               Gyue the glorie to God alone.
            
         
         
            
            
               
            
            Although death, doth daily draw nere:
            Yet (his sting past) vertue shinth clene.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London, by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate, beneath Saint Martins.
            Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae
            Maiestatis per Septennium.
            ¶These books are to be solde at his shop vnder the Gate.
         
      
   