
      
         
            
            
            THE
NEW ART
OF LYING,
COVERED BY
IESVITES vnder the Vaile of
EQVIVOCATION,
DISCOVERED AND DISPROVED
BY
Henry Mason.
            
            LONDON:
Printed by George Purslowe for Iohn Clarke, and
are to be sold at his Shop vnder Saint Peters
Church in Cornehill. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST REVErend
Father in GOD, the Lord
Arch-bishop of Canterburie his Grace,
Primate of all ENGLAND, and
Metropolitane.
            
               Most Reuerend Father,
            
            
               THe first newes that I heard of the Equiuocating
Arte,
               a Pr
                     •
                  efa
                     •
                   praefixâ Sex Pre
                     •
                  
                  lection. cap. 1. & cap. 1. de Mendac. num. 12, 13, 14. was that which
I learned out of your Graces writings.
And well might this be to mee
the first newes. For, if I mistake
not, you were the first Writer, that published those
trickes in print to the World: though (as beginnings
vse to be) that discouery of this Art was but
briefe in comparison, either because that occasion
did not admit of any long or full discourse, or because,
but little of this mystery could then at the
first be discouered; the professors of that Trade, as
your selfe also signifie, labouring to hide their secrets
from the knowledge of other men. And indeed
it may be obserued, that in managing of the Papacy,
they haue certaine mysteries of State, which the

more they vse, the more they coceale. One of which,
is their power to murder Kings, and blow vp Parliaments,
& kill all that stand in their way, like the
Assassini, who held it a point of great merit to murder
all that were their aduersaries in Religion: but
yet they are not willing that the world should know
that this is any part of their Creede. Another such
policy may be that of their Indices Expurgatorij,
by which they haue circucised the lips of such Writers,
as spoke any word against the Roman Church:
but this they kept as a great mystery among some
few of themselues, till misfortune brought it to
light, full sore against their wils. And for a third
such-like policy, I may reckon also this Art of Equitiocation,
which the Masters thereof did keepe secret
as long, and as much as they could. And therefore
it was no maruell, if your first discouery of
this mystery were but briefe in comparison. But
afterwardD. Morton B. of Lichfield and Couentry, Confutat, of Equiuccation. another Reuerend & learned Prelate,
lighting vpon a more compleate Treatise then formerly
had appeared, penned by a Popish Priest in
defence of this Arte, and approued by the Arch-Priest,
and the Prouinciall of the Iesuits: he pursued
the point more fully according as that Treatise
gaue him iust occasion. The crye of which pursuit
did vnkennell the olde equiuocatingPersons, who by occasion of the Bishopps booke wrote a large Treatise in defence of Equiuoca
                  
                     •
                  on. Foxe, and

hunted him into the open field, there to display
himselfe, and to shew what trickes he could vse, for
sauing his new Art from the infamy of lying. And
here I finding him well chafed, did by the sent follow
after him vnto his Den, to espie if I might, what
he and his Cubs were deuising in the darke. And I
found them very busie in hammering Reseruations
and mentall frauds, vpon euery occasion and
in all kindes of dealing, thereby to catch vs at vnawares,
who being plain and simple men our selues,
could not suspect such frauds and impostures in others.
And in case these things should come abroad,
as in part themselues had discouered them against
their wils: yet so confident and resolute did
I finde them, to maintaine all for good and honest
dealing, as that FatherMitigat. cap. 9. nu. 81. p. 403. 
               Persons maketh a wonder
of it, and thinketh that God should deale worse
with men then hee had done with beasts, if hee
should not grant them equiuocating trickes, and
reserued wiles, as he hath granted to the Hare
and the Foxe, their leapes and turnings, and
windings, and going backe againe in the same
trace they come, to deceiue the Dogges that
pursue them. And yet all this confidence I take to
be but a copie of their countenance. For euen in
their printed Apologies of this Arte, they seeke to

cast mists before the Readers eyes, that hee may
not be able to see the depth of their meaning. These
things when I had found, as I thought, (though I
know I am much short of finding all) I was willing,
according to my abilitie, to impart them vnto wellmeaning
Christians, that they seeing the deepe
frauds of these men, may learne to shun their company
and acquaintance.
            In which indeuour of mine, what seruice I may
haue done for the publique good, I cannot tell: but
sure I am, if there be any good in it, I should in reason
returne it thither, where I first found it. The
consideration whereof, hath made mee to presume
so far vpon your Graces clemency, as to lay downe
at your feete thi
                  •
                poore Treatise, the grounds
whereof I first learned from your owne pen: desiring
(if therein I be not ouer-bold) that it may, vinder
your name and protection, be sent forth into
the world. Which being all, that at this time I haue
to say, I humbly take my leaue, desiring the God of
peace and truth, to preserue you from euery euill
word and worke, that you may maintaine his
truth in this world, and enioy his peace both in this
world, and the World to come.
            
               Your Graces deuoted in all seruice,
HENRIE MASON
            
         
         
            
            TO MY LOVING AND
Dearely beloued Parishioners, the
Inhabitants of S. Andrews vnder-shaft in
London, GRACE and TRVTH in
IESVS CHRIST.
            
               IN the ordinary exercise of my
ministery among you, when I
came to speak of the ninth Cō
               mandement,
the first thing that
I met with to bee considered,
was the matter of Truth and Lying. And considering
hereof, I found two sorts of Lyes
frequent among men: the one, an open and
professed Lye; and the other, a cunning and
artificiall Lye. The former was defended by
the Priscillianists, an old kinde of Heretikes: &
the latter is now defended by the Romanists,
a latter sort of false Prophets. Both of them are
odious to God, who is honoured by Truth;
and pernicious to the societie of men, which
is vpheld by Truth: but the latter is the more

dangerous, because vnder a colour of Truth it
beguileth simple soules, who are otherwise enemies
to Lying. The consideration heereof,
made me to enquire a little further into this
Arte; which the fauourers therof haue sought
to conceile, by calling it by a new name. For
beeing ashamed of the name of Lying, they
haue christened it by the name of Equiuocating:
a name as vnknowne in this meaning,
as the Arte it selfe was vnheard of before these
latter dayes. The mystery and iuggling tricks
of which deuice, I did then and vpon that occasion,
in part discouer vnto you: but briefely
and plainely, the time, and place, and occasion
not admitting of any long or Schoole-like
discourse. But since considering, that together
with the increase of false Prophets in this
Kingdome, this Arte of falsehood hath abounded
also: I thought it a part of my duty, (God
hauing pleased to place mee as a Watch-man
ouer your Soules) to giue you a fresh warning
of this danger, and that in a more ample and
large discourse, then formerly I had done, and
in such a maner and sort, that you might haue
something lying by you, that might aduertise
you of this dangerous deceit, when I could

not haue opportunity to speak vnto you our of
the Pulpit. And this I was moued to vnat this
time the rather; because I haue of late obserued,
that these artificiall Lyers (among their other
deuices and forgeries, which vpon confidence
of this Arte, they take liberty to vse without remorse)
doe instill into the minds of their credulous
followers, an opinion; and doe labour
to spread abroad among others a suspition,
that among our Learned men, many in heart
are of their Church, howsoeuer for the worlds
sake they dissemble their opinion: and that
there are a good number among vs of the
Clergie, who are better perswaded of their Religion,
then of our own. Doctor Sheldon, a man
well acquainted with their dealings, as hauing
liued in their bosome, and taken the Orders
of Priesthood in their Church, doth
write, thatSheldon of the mira
                  
                     •
                  les of Antichrist, ca. 4. pag. 52. 
               whilest hee fed on Romes huskes, hee
often heard of many grieuous imputations laied
vpon some of the greatest Clerkes in the Church
of England, as though in heart they were theirs,
which he then beleeued to be true, as others did;
but since hath found to be much otherwise. And
my selfe haue met with some, (which perswadeth
me, that they abuse others in this kind,

beside our greatest Clerkes) who haue more
then intimated to my selfe, that I knew that
which might iustifie their cause, if I would
speake it. Which might well put mee into a
muse, what had euer slipped frō me, why they
should be perswaded that I had such an opinion
of their Church: sauing that I considered,
that this might well be one of the Iesuires equiuocating
deuices, to instill that opinion cō
               cerning
vs, into their Disciples minds, that so
they might gaine more credit to their cause.
Vpon which occasion, entring a more serious
cōsideration of the point, I perceiued, that besides
this Arte, they vse other deuices also, for
this purpose, which I thought good, for your
better caution and safety, briefely to relate
in this place.
            First then, if they meete with any of our
Clergie, which are of weake braine, and vnsettled
resolution, (as it is possible, wee may haue
some such as well as they) they set vpon such
weaklings, with plausible tales in commendation
of their Church; whose open abominations
practised at home among themselues,
are not so well known to vs, who haue neuer
trauelled into Popish Countreys. And if by

this meanes they chance to peruert a weake and
vnsettled man, then the cry goeth, that such a
Learned man, is become a Catholike, because
euidence of truth forced him to forkake his
old Profession.
            Secondly, if they meete with men, who being
either opinatiue of their own worth, think
their good parts not sufficiently rewarded; or
being indeed of good parts, haue but slender
meanes: they tempt such, as the Deuill did
our Sauiour, with offers of gifts and preferments.
And if by these allurements they can
bribe any man to become their Proselyte, for
filthy lucre sake, then they blaze abroad the
conuersion of such a great and learned Scholar,
who could not withstand the light of truth
shining in the Roman Church.
            Thirdly, if by these, and such like policies,
they preuaile not: (for these deuices fit them
best, because then they bring men ouer to their
side, with their own mouthes to publish their
owne shame; but if thus they preuaile not) yet
one shift they haue behind, which is, to deuise
lyes, of such and such mens conuersion to
their Church, who euer hated it from their
very soules. In which kind of forgerie, they

haue so farre proceeded, that they haue spared
neither liuing nor dead. For, as if they had cast
off all feare of shame, which was sure in the
end to be their reward, they haue in writing
belyed in this maner, the chiefest Doctors in
our Church, who haue suruiued to refute, and
to detest their forgeries in Print. But when
men are dead, then they become more bold:
and of the most constant and zealous Professors
of our Religion, they giue it out to the
world, that such and such men of chiefe esteeme
in the Protestant Church, did recant vpon
their death beds, it being then no time to
dissemble any longer. And when themselues
haue first deuised these tales on their fingers
ends; then they produce them in their serious
bookes of Controuersie, as graue argumēts to
confirme the Roman faith by. The discouery of
which falsehood, I wish it may worke the like
effect in your hearts, that it hath done in mine:
which is, that whereas I vtterly disliked Poperie
before, I do now detest it more then euer.
And for this purpose I was the rather moued
to penne this small Treatise, that you, of
whose soules I knowe my selfe to haue vndertaken
the charge, seeing these forgeries,

may learne to beware of Equiuocating Spirits:
who, though otherwise they professe strictnes
of conscience, & according to the rules of the
Romane Faith, are very deuout and religious;
yet can cozen you with an hundred lying deuices,
and neuer feele the least grudge of conscience
for it. For so Father Persons telleth vs,
thatApologie of Eccles. Subordinat. cap. 12. in the very end. 
               Equiuocations are allowed principally to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of scrupulous conscience, for auoiding of lying. By
which he giueth vs a faire warning, (and I desire
you take notice of it) that if there be any
scrupulous and tender consciences amongst
them (as some no doubt there are) though
they would not tell a lye, if they knew it, for
all the world, yet euen such men may without
any scruple or feare, deceiue vs with equiuocating
reseruations, and mentall deuices. And
hauing thus giuen you this faire warning, now
me thinketh I may speake vnto you, to the
same purpose as our Lord did to his Disciples;Matt. 24. 5, 23, 24.
If they shall say vnto you, Loe heere is Christ,
or loe there, beleeue it not; for there are many
false Prophets arisen, and doe deceiue many. Behold
I haue told you before. And if after all this
warning,Ez
                     •
                  k. 33. 4, 9. any of you shall suffer himselfe to be
deluded by lying Equiuocators, his blood will

bee vpon his owne head, but I haue deliuered mine
owne soule. But I feare not this in you, of whose
constancie and zeale I haue had good experience:Gal. 5. 10.
so that I may rather take vp that saying
of the Apostle, I haue confidence in you through
the Lord, that ye will be no otherwise minded; but
that, if any man shall trouble you, (or seeke to
withdrawe you from your faith) he shall beare
his iudgement, whosoeuer he be. And in assurance
hereof,Gal. 6. 18. I leaue you to Gods grace, in the words
of the same Apostle; Brethren, the Grace of our
Lord Iesus Christ be with your Spirit. Amen.
            
               Yours, the vnworthy Minister
of Iesus Christ, and your seruant
for Iesus sake,
HENRIE MASON.
            
         
         
            
            To the READER.
            
               WHen the Impression of this Treatise was
almost finished, I obtained the sight of
two seuerall papers of Latine Verses,
composed long since, in the yeere 1606.
by two then Students in the Vniuersities,
now Doctors in Diuinitie, and my worthy friends.
Which Verses being (according to the Academicall
custome) made vpon Questions then disputed in both
the Vniuersities, in Publicis Comitijs, and happily
concurring with the subiect of this Treatise, as I
was glad that my selfe had gotten, so I was willing
to impart them to the Reader, presuming that my
two friends, and much-respected brethren, will not
be offended, that I send them their Verses backe againe
in Print.
         
         
            
            Aequivocationis tenebrae pugnant
cum rationis lumine.Quaestio philosophica in Comitis Cantabr.
            
            Ecloga. Cui nomen Pseudolus,
siue Aequiuocator.
            Personae. Simia. Pseudolus.
            
               Sim.
               HOc quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                  Vide passi
                        •
                      Horatij Satyram quintam, & Plauti Pseudolum, cui
                        •
                     ste supp
                        •
                     r. docte Pater, praeter narrata, petēti,
               Pseudole, responde, quibus artibus invia re
                     ••
                  
                  ̄
               
               Essugiam, nostrae propriora pericula Sectae.
               Nonne vides quàm non satis est maria omnia circum
               Romuleae quaesisse diu responsa Cathedrae,
               Vnctos, adrasos, Iesu cognomen adeptos,
               I am revehi in patriam, Româ duce, & auspice Româ!
               Hinc crucis, hinc vrget malus horror carceris; aut nos.
               Explorat densus, capita heu damnata, Satelles.
            
            
               Pseud.
               
                  Sic Blackwellus Archipresbyter in sua ad Cathol
                        •
                     cos Epistola. dat. 7. Nouemb. 1605. Nos nil interea mis
                     •
                  ri, nil tendere contra,
               Nos tantum lachrymas, & nulli auditae Deorum
               Vota damus: vel, si nostra hoc Ecclesia poscat,
               Id
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                  V
                        •
                     nculo cucae obedicnlpe obstringi omnes Iesuitas & no
                     
                        •
                     itios Seminariorum pullos abunde noluin est; Quo tenentur, quidquid Superior imperaverit, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      exequi, Patri (qui nos in Sancta incepta remittit)
               
                  
Praecepisse lubet, bello, sicavè venenovè
               Extinxisse nefas, & gentem abolere nefandam
               Conamur; vel, si zelus slagrantior adsit,
               Forsan sulphureo disperdimus obvia statu.
            
            
               Sim.
               Cuncta piè ac rectè. Pseud. Quid rides? Sim. Simia vester
               Ille ego. Nos inter quasiI
                        •
                     upus Iupus nouit, &c. nos non norimus. Pseud. Euge
               Simia quandoquidem tam sanctè, tam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   seuerè
               Ista rogas, nostram missis ambagibus Artem,
               Artem, quam magnus docuit Pater
                  Arij haeresiarchae sophiticuns & Acquivoc atorium coram Imperatore Constantino iusiurandum recole apud S
                        •
                     
                     cratem Hist Eccles. lib. 1. c. 25. 
                  Arius, Artem,
               Cortinam quae Phoebe tuam, quae te quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Proteu,
               Vinciat, & vincat (paucis adverte)Plautus in Pseudolo Act. 
                        •
                     . Scen. 4. Pseud. Onerab
                        •
                     
                     meis praeceptis Simians Quid agat, ne quid titube
                        •
                     , doctè vt hanc sera
                        •
                      sallaciam. docebo.
               Putide Tiresia. Quicquid loquere aut erit, aut non:
               
               O quàm divinare tibi donavit Apollo.
               Lentū est. Quicquid ego edixo simul ipsum erit, & non.
               
               
                  Aequiuocare mihi Stygius deditApocal. 9. 11. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               Sim.
               
                  Est, & Non semper sibi contradicere dixi,
               Et didici à puero. Si iam haec mutaverit aetas,
               Ausa ratam violare fidem, & convellere prima
               Fundamenta, quibus verorum innititur ordo,
               Submetuo ne nos (quotum venerabile nomen
               Amsanctum populis, & formidabile Sceptris
               Nunc sedet ad primas)Quod olim femplarijs, quid 
                        •
                     i tandem Iesititis accidat! olim, volventibus annis,
               Mutati in peius fastidia publica simus.
               Sed tu perge loqui quorsum haec adeo ardua tendant.
            
            
               Pseud.
               Rectâ ad te, fili. Si te, sub iudice (qualis
               Haereticae nimium est vigil indagatio turbae)
               Contigerit responsa peti, vel dicere causam,
               Accipe quâ ratione queas nec prodere verum,
               Nec male mentiri, nec te obiectare periclo,
               Nec reticere tamen. Captes astutus oportet
               Lucifugam sermonem, & versicoloria dicta.
            
            
               Sim.
               Vt ne vireludam pueri de more Sophistae?
               Praeterea, si quid perplexi subloquar, omnes,
               Evolve,Aristot. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 1. cap. 1. ingeminant. Pseud. Vah nil sapis: vtere verbis
               Ex se perspicuis, sed mente interprete tortis,
               
                  
Mente tua, non mente illa, quae consona voci.
            
            
               Sim.
               Me vero memini primo didicisse Lyaeo
               Sensa animi rerum, sensorum symbols v
                     •
                  ces.
               Scilicet vtibilem linguae articulantis honorem
               Naturam tribuisse patet mortalibus, vt sit
               In quo conueniant, & posint mutna fungi.
               Quinetiam ratio.—Pseud.
                  Act. 2. Sc. 2. Pseud. Tu inventus verò meam qui 
                        〈◊〉
                      fidem? Num tu rationibus audes
               Iniussu certare meo? meminisse decebat,
               Me Patre cum primum nostratū elementa Scholarum
               Imbiberes, in verba manus te nostra dedisse.
               Imperio iam disce meo: ac, dum prosequor, audi.
               Forsitan hoe de te quaeratur, Tune Sac
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     os?
               
               
                  Non 
                        •
                     go Respo le. Sim. Quid? mentiar? Ha
                     •
                  d ita Romae.
            
            
               Pseud.
               Ipse fui Romae; mentiti nefcio. Num tu
               Esse Sacerdotem te credis Apollinis, Orci,
               
               
                  Isidos, aut Cereris? Tu si
                     •
                   intellige.Act. 2. Sc. 3. Pseud. Dy immortales 
                        〈◊〉
                      contra non 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Fraus haec
               Argento contra non chara est, aut ori
                     •
                  halco.
               Sic itidem. Tw
                        •
                      Roman 
                        〈◊〉
                     ? Non ego Romam
               
                  V
                        •
                     quam adii (capite incede s, aut compede vinctus,
               Aut furcam ore gerens, humerove molatile saxum)
               Simia, ne risu te ruperis. Haec ego trado
               Sobrius, ac prudens. Sim.
                  Act. 
                        •
                     . Sc. 8. Nimis 
                        〈◊〉
                      mortalis d
                        ••
                     tus, n
                        •
                     mis 
                        〈◊〉
                     , nimis m
                        •
                     bes O te, Pater alme, ce
                     •
                  ebri
               Foelicem! quàm Dia doces! Haud talia dictant
               Pythagoras,Superavit do
                        ••
                     m Troianum at
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Pseudolus. Anytivè reus, vel dogma Platonis.
            
            
               Pseud.
               Te praestas nobisAct. 2. Sc. 2. Pseud. Hic mihi incusest, procudam ego hodie hine multes delos. incudem Simia: tecum,
               Dum loquor, ipse novas videor producere t
                     •
                  chnas.
               Si,to mule reseruatio
                        •
                     un mentali
                        •
                      Ies
                        •
                     ui
                        •
                      vsitatae. Non no
                        •
                     i i.e. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cui consilii socium te adiunxeris, idem
               Cum suerit Patriae suffossor, pet
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  -duellis,
               Is coràm sistatur, & hunc norisne rogeris?
               Haud te nosse hominem,Non vidi. 
                        〈◊〉
                      c. visione b
                        •
                     ati
                     
                        •
                     ic
                        •
                     i. ptiùs aut vidisse, repone.
               
                  Non nosse (ex auium cantu, 'Boreave susurro,
               Non ex Aethiopum, histori
                     •
                  s, Troiaeve ruinis,
               Non ex notitiâ, quae Demonstratio dicta est.)
               
                  Non vidisse (oculis palpebrae tegmine clausis,Velnon vt dicom tibi.
               
               Non oculis Argùs, non alt
                     •
                  
                  ▪ nostis in vmbris,
               
                  
Non disiunctarum trans saxea septa domorum,
               Non hoc, quem Coelum dabit oli
                     •
                   Patria, visu:
               Denique non, vt rent tibi, Iudex improbe, narren
                     •
                  .)
               Sic non lingua tibi mendax, sed dictio fallax.
               IntereaAct. 2. Sc. 1. Pseud. Ego in m
                        •
                     o pectore ita param c
                        •
                     pias dupli
                        •
                     ts triplicis dolos Posidies, vt vbiet
                        •
                     n
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      hostibus congrediar malorum mcor
                        •
                      Fr
                        •
                     tus virtute dicam mea indust
                        •
                     a & maltitia Fraudulent
                        •
                     a Facil
                        •
                      vt vin
                        ••
                     l, facile vt 
                        •
                     pelicm mcos perducllis me
                        •
                      persidijs. duplicies condens in pectore sensus,
               Viceris, & trbidos praedâ spoliaveris hostes.
            
            
               Sim.
               O Pater; ô nulli quidquam mentite, quid autem,
               Quid si iuratos recta ad responsa lacestant,
               Si tangendae arae, si coelum in vota vocandum,
               Fallemusne fidem? Pseud. Fidei est sine corpore nomen
               Haereticis concessa 
                     •
                  ides. Periuria non sunt,
               Quae varium sumunt ex vocum ambage colorem,
               Aut iniuratae sunt dissona nuncia mentis.
            
            
               Sim.
               Haec super Haeretici iurabunt protinus omnes,
               Papicolis non esse Deum:Act. 1. Sc. 3. Quid ais quanti
                        •
                      terra tegit hominum 
                        〈…〉
                      &c. Bal. fat
                        •
                     or. Cal. nempe conceptis verbis. Bal. 
                        •
                     tiā consultis quoque. Cal. Periurauisti Iudibria Coelo
               Conceptis fieri, consultis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   impia verbis:
               
                  Ibidem. Pseud. Non potest pietate obsisti 
                        •
                     uic, vt res sunt 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Deos quidē, quos maximè aequum est metuere, cos minimini facit. Non posse (vt reliquae cessant hoc nomine lites)
               His pietate malis obsisti. Pseud Simia, quicquid
               Hic nob
                     •
                  s inimica cohors obganniat (vt se
               Ruperit inuidiâ) tu sic, licet vndi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   crescat
               Suspicio, corvum IudesAct. 5. Sc. 4. Pseud. Quid 
                        〈…〉
                      Ch. Anguilla est, el
                        •
                     bitur. elapsus hiantem
               Tortilis in morem anguillae, & nova slumina inibis.
               Deprendi miserum est, vel Apolline iudice vincam.
               Me memini quondam bis tervè his artibus vsum:
               
                  Act. 4. Sc. 6. Bal. Malum & s
                        •
                     clestum, peri
                        ••
                     rum arebant esse me. S. P
                        •
                     l haud mentitu
                        •
                      st. Bal. 
                        〈◊〉
                      iratus fui. Periurum a
                     •
                  ebant. Quid tum? Non hoc mihi bilem
               Moverat. Irascor, quòd non irasceris hosti
               Arcius. Sim. Ipse quidem (sic me rationis egentem
               Dementisse modo fat
                     •
                  or) vix ista putaram
               Digna side▪ Iam me Magnae reuerentia Romae,
               Iam tua me virtus, censura
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nescia falli
               Imperiis egere suis, vt singula credam,
               Et cupiam vt capiam tam sanctae imitamina fraudis:
               Iam liqueo in laqueos, totus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   interfluo rimis:
               Iam me vtinam celebres Romani nominis hostes
               
                  
Exagitent. Sic est. An mecum Pseudolus vnquam
               Verba habuit, quaerunt. Nunquam, respondeo, quicquā
               
               
                  Verborum (virides urentum flatibus ornos,
               Aut animas Erebo, Scopulis, glacieve cientum.
               Non per canalem sonuit, Taurumve Perilli.
               Non Arabum lingua Chaldaeorumve loquutus,
               Non lingua 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Pseud. Quo tendis nnbila supra?
            
            
               Sim.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Pseud. Satis ô satis. Vnde sed ista?
            
            
               Sim.
               Nomina sunt longè populorum vtro
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sub Indo,
               Quos è barbarie nuper sub foedera Christi,
               Pontificis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   iugum nostri misêre Sodales.
            
            
               Pseud.
               
                  Act. 4. Sc. 1. Pseud. O heminem lepidum! It quoque etiam dolis O lepidū, charum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   caput, quàm Pseudolicissas!
               Simia non magis est imitatrix, Simia, quàm tu.
               Te mihi, te servet Romae, ac sibi Iupiter.
            
            
               Sim.
               Atqui
               Pluris adhuc ego sum. Siquando (scilicet haud sunt
               Semper in occulto nostrae mysteria Sectae)
               Suspicio est caecos verbis me affingere sensus,Atque etiā menda
                        ••
                     s. Iupiter te mihi seruet.
               
               Iurabo me non hoc fingere: dum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ita iurem,
               Interea me non quicquam finxisse, negantem
               Fingere, iurabo. Tum tertia, quarta secundis
               Iuramenta superiiciam catus. Omnia falsa,
               Et falsura omnes. Haec Aequiuocatio nomen
               Me tribuente, potest Reflexa autAequiuocatio circularis. Orbica dici.
            
            
               Pseud.
               
                  Act. 4. Sc. 1. Vt ego ob tuam, Simia, perfidiam te amo, et metuo, & magnifacio. Dapsile ob inventū hoc, nequeo, mi Simia, quin te
               Osculer, argutum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   caput demulceam. Abundè
               I am scio te nostris aurem adiecisse lubentem
               Consiliis; &, quae superaddis, facta daturum.
            
            
               Sim.
               Quî verò nosti num non, dum, Pseudole, tecum
               Haec loquor, aequivocè me iam tibi credere fingam,
               Aequivocè tibi pollicear me strenuè in hostes
               Vocibus aequivocis vsurum?
            
            
               Pseud.
               O improba virtus!
            
            
               Sim.
               Dum
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . pullum doceas oculos transfigere, corve
               
                  
Ipse tuis caveas.
            
            
               Pseud.
               
                  Act. 4. Sc. 3. Pseud. Peiorem ego hominem, magis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      versutè malum, Metuo malè,Nunquā aedipol quenquam vidi quàm hic est Simia, ne malus iste,Nimis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ego illum hominem metuo, & formido male, Ne malus item ergame sit, vt ergaillum fuit;
               
               Et nimiùm praecox Patris anticipator,Ne in resecunda mihi obuertat cornua. ab hoste
               Protinùs in nostros obuertat cornua.
            
            
               Sim.
               Nam quid
               Impedit, in Caium qui sit periurus eundum
               In Titiū quo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  —
            
            
               Pseud.
               Sed nostris sermonibus eccùm
               Nescioquis captator adest. Discede.
            
            
               Sim.
               Valeto.
            
            Quid ni igitur
            
               
                  Pseudolus aequivocare docens, & Simia discens,
               Verborum laqueos ambo luant laqueo
                     •
                  
               
            
            THO. GOAD Magister Artium.
            
         
         
            
            An Societati humanae infestiores
sinte vafr Amphibologi,Quaestio philosophico ptoposita in 
                     〈…〉
                  .
quam aperte periuri.Affirm
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Guido Faux. FAuxerebi patriae fax, faex mundi,Garnet les. vnū at habebis
            Patrem flagitii, slagitio parem.
            Herculeas 
                  •
               mbo sceleri posuere columnas,
            
               N
                     •
                  l vltra, hic calamo pessimus, hic manu.
            Nomine qui varius, qui vestibus, ore, colore es
            Vectus trans mare tu? Non (Parenthesis includit mentalem Iesuitae rescruationem. 
               mare mortuum)
            
            Curia Papalis tibi visa est? Non (sine scortis)
            
            Sacris Papa caput? Non (caput aneum)
            
            Num tu mendicans abraso crine Sacerdos?
            
               Non (ritu antipodum; Non (apud inferos)
            Nonne a te binis grauidata est Fuluia natis?
            Non, verum fateor (bimula cum fores.)
            
            Heus laqueo nodos claudas hos ocyus vno,
            Et nodo laqueos, in cruce carnifex.
            Ignare aequiuocae fraudis constringito fauces,
            Garnetto vniuocè guttura frangito.
            Pendeat infoelix, membris truncetur, apertè
            Periuro aequiuocus crimine dirior.
            Pectore diffisso videas, quae mente reseruat;
            
            Evulsi latebras cordis et explices.
            Ancipiti gladio Iesuitica texta secentur:
            Solvi nam nequeunt ancipites doli.
            DAN. FEATLY, Magister Artium.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
NEW ARTE OF
Lying, couered by Iesuites
vnder the Vaile of
Equiuocation.
            
               THeThes. 2. 7. Apostle describing the state
of Antichrist, doth signifie, that
à mysterie of iniquitie should appeare
in the managing of it:
and this doth implie, that in the
kingdome of Antichrist iniquity
should reigne vnder a coue
                  •
               t of
holinesse. And the same Apostle
doth foretell,1. Tim. 4. 1, 2. that in the latter
times (which are the times of Antichrists reigne) men
should speake lies in hypocrisie. And this, though it may
bee extended farther, yet cannot bee more literally vnderstood,
then of such as teach a practise of lying, vnder
a pretence of preseruing trueth. Now of these
Prophecies of the Apostle I may speake in a like manner,
and almost in the same words, as ourLuke 4
                     •
                  1. Lord spake
of the Prophecie of Isai; This day are these Scriptures
fulfilled in our eyes; for now wee see those who exercise
a mystery of iniquity, and speake lies, pretending
thereby to maintaine and preserue the trueth: as (to

omit all further instance) may euidently be seene in a
new-found Arte of Equiuocation. For the Masters and
maintainers thereof doe tell vs,Lequendo cum Arte dissimulationis vitatur peccata, quae comuuiter, committuntur, &c. Rodrique
                        •
                     
                   sumâ, v. menda
                     •
                  . nu. 4. 
               That by speaking according
to this Arte of dissembling, sinnes are auoided,
which, without it, are commonly committed. And that
Acquiuocatio, quam 
                     •
                  citam 
                     〈◊〉
                   omnino ad mendacia 
                     〈◊〉
                  , vitanda consert. Heissias Re
                        •
                     ut. Aphoris. cap. 4. Aphor. 4. nu. 130. 
               Equiuocation altogether serueth, or is of good vse for auoiding
of lyes and periuries. AndSiue recreationis gratiâ, siue quocunque al
                     •
                  o fine, iuret se non fecisse aliquid quod reuera fecit, intell
                     •
                  gendo intra se aliquid aliud &c. reuera non mentitur. San
                        •
                     ho
                        •
                      oper. moral. to 1. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 15. pag. 25. that for what end or
reason soeuer a man sweare, that hee did not doe a thing,
which indeed hee did doe, yet hauing his reseruation within
himselfe, he in very deede telleth no lie. AndPer 
                     〈◊〉
                   doctrinam singularem, postumus euitare innumera peccata, 
                     〈◊〉
                   passim aliquot neg
                     •
                  gentiores admittimus negando vel assumando passim sine aliqua subintellectione, cum qua coniuncta essent vera. Nauar. Commen
                        ••
                     n C. Humanae aur. q. 3. nu. 13. 
               that by
this singular doctrine wee may auoid innumerable sinnes,
which through heedlesnesse diuers of vs doe euery foote commit,
by denying or affirming things vsually, without a reseruation
vnderstood, with which if they were ioyned, they
would bee true. And to this purpose it is, that Father
Proceeding against Traitors. 
                     〈◊〉
                   l. 1. 
               Garnet, a Master of this Arte, when a booke was to be
licenced by him, the title whereof was, A Treatise of
Equiuocation, hee scored out that title, and put this in
the place of it, A Treatise against lying and fraudulent
dissimulation. By all which it may appeare, that these
men, while they teach the Arte of Equiuocation, do professe
notwithstanding, that all which they doe, is with
a religious obseruance and preseruation of the trueth.
But now in the second place I offer to prooue in this
short Treatise, that whatsoeuer shewes they make to
the contrary, yet this deuice of Equiuocation is in truth,
an Arte of falshood and deceit, and such as the Scriptures
doe condemne vnder the name of lying. Which
point if it bee once cleared, then there can be no doubt,
but that the Church of Rome, and her Doctors, are they
which exercise a mystery of iniquity, and speake lies in hypocrisie.
            
            
               
Now for the clearing hereof, and that the world may
see more fully what to thinke of this mystery, there are
fiue things, which I haue thought necessary to be considered
of.

                  1 The name, or what is meant by the word Equiuocation
in this Question.
                  2 The Originall of it, or who be the Authors and
vpholders of it.
                  3 The obiect and matter, or in what cases they allow
it to be lawfull.
                  4 The vse, or rather abuse of it, or for what turnes
it may serue the Patrons of it.
                  5 The Grounds, or what the proofes or reasons are
either for or against it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. 1.
               Of the name, and what is meant by the word Equiuocation
in this Question.
               
                  THat wee may the better vnderstand
what is meant by this word, wee must
note that there are two famous acceptions
and vses of the word Equiuocation
among men. The first is a proper and
ancient vse of it, frequent among all sorts
of writers, but handled and spoken of, especially in Logicke.
The second is an improper and abusiue acception
of it, which was of late yeeres deuised by some writers
and Doctors of the Romane Church. Father Parsons
calleth the forme, verball, and the later, mentall Equiuocation.
And of these hee saith,Mitigat. cap. 8 nu. 10. pa. 314. that the verball is
proper Equiuocation; the mentall is so called, rather by a

certaine similitude, then propriety of speach, and that
Ibid. nu. 15. the verball is onely true and proper Equiuocation, for that
mentall in rigor is none. And againe, thatIbid. nu. 10. 
                  Equiuocation
hath of later yeeres onely been accustomed to bee vsed in this
sense, that is, for mentall Equiuocation. And Heissius another
Iesuite, & Patron of this Art, saith,Refut. Apho
                        •
                     r. cap. 4. Ap
                        •
                     ons. 3. nu. 129. that their mixt
speach (which they call mentall Equiuocation) is not properly
Equiuocation. By which speaches of these Iesuites
(especially seeing the one of them is a man so well
seene in this Arte, and so much exercised in this argument
of Equiuocation) I presume I haue sufficient warrant
to say as I did, without the controll of any of our
punie Iesuites, that the one vse and acception is proper
and ancient, the other vnproper, and of a later growth,
that is, since the mystery of iniquity did open it selfe
more fully to the world, and men did more apparantly
speake lies in hypocrisie. But yet for the distinguishing of
these two kindes, I will rather call the first Logicall Equiuocation,
as being that which Logicke doth onely
acknowledge: and the later I will call Iesuiticall Equiuocation,
as hauing, if not its first deuising, yet at least, its
polishing from men of that Order. The Question in
this place is onely concerning the later, which I call
Iesuiticall Equiuocation. Notwithstanding for the better
clearing of the point in controuersie, somewhat is first
to bee said concerning the former, which I call Logicall.
               
               
                  First then for the Logicall Equiuocation; it is an ambiguous
or doubtfull saying, when one word or speach hath
mo
                     •
                   senses then one, and it hapeneth three wayes.
               
               1. When a word by it selfe hath diuers significations
and meanings; as this word [to know] hath. For sometimes
it signifieth to apprehend and vnderstand the
certainety of some truth:
                     
                        •
                     . Ioh. 3. 20. as when S. Iohn saith; GOD
is greater then our hearts, and knoweth all things. 2. [To
know] is as much as to approue and allow of: as when

                  Dauid saith;Psal. 1. 6. 
                  The Lord knoweth the way of the righteous.
And when Christ saith to the foolish Virgins;Math. 25. 12. 
                  Verily
I say vnto you, I know you not. The meaning is; I doe not
acknowledge you for any of mine. In this, and such like
words as this, there is an Equiuocation; because the
word hath diuers acceptions and vses.
               2. When words, which haue but one signification
of themselues, yet are so ioyned together in some sentence,
as that they may, by reason of the composition,
make and yeeld diuers meanings: or when by reason
of their contexture, they may haue moe meanings than
one:Acts 19. 5. as when S. Luke saith; When they heard this, they
were baptized in the Name of the Lord Iesus: these
words are diuersly construed by the Learned. For
some thinke them to bee the words of S. Paul, and
to haue reference to the speech of Iohn Baptist, immediately
going before: and then the meaning must bee
this; that when those brethren, there spoken of, heard
Iohn so teaching concerning Christ, they were baptized
of Iohn, in the Name of the Lord Iesus. But others thinke
them to be the words of S. Luke, and to haue reference
to the former speech of S. Paul: and then the meaning
must be; that when those brethren had heard Paul discoursing
in this manner of Iohn and his Baptisme, then
They were baptized of Paul, in the Name of Christ. In
this Clause then, there are two senses giuen by the Learned;
and that sheweth that there is an ambiguity; but
that ambiguitie riseth not from the diuersitie of significations
in any of the words, but from the different consideration
of the contexture or composition of the sentence.
               3. When the circumstances of time, place, persons,
&c. are such, as that in reason, and in the iudgement of
sober men, being well and duely considered, they may
limit or restraine the speech to some speciall matter or
subiect; or otherwise alter the meaning of it from that

which it should haue, if it were in some other place, and
vpon some other occasion. As for example: when S.
Paul saith; I haue not shunned to declare vnto you all the
Counsell of God.
                  Acts 20. 27. These words considered by themselues,
doe comprize all the Secrets of God, and all the mysteries
of His Wisedome: but if we consider the circumstances
of the persons, time, place, and occasion; as that
the speaker was Paul, an Apostle, whose office and imployment
was to teach the mysteries of Religion; that
the hearers were the Church of Ephesus, who expected
information in matters of saluation; and that the occasion
of their meeting at this time, and in this place,
was onely for teaching and learning the Word of God,
and the Gospell of Iesus Christ: these circumstances, in
reason, may teach vs, that in this place, those words
[all the Counsell of God] are not to bee extended to all
the secrets and depth of Gods Wisedome; a great part
whereof, is neither reuealed, nor necessarie to bee
knowne of any man; and some part whereof, though it
be reuealed, yet was not pertinent to this occasion; but
rather, that those words are to bee limited and restrained,
according to the present occasion, to signifie and
note, all necessary things for them to know for their
soules health and saluation. Or, to giue a more familiar
example, and such as a Iesuite hath giuen instance in
                     •
                  
wee may suppose, that two men going together in a
iourney; the one of them (his money sayling him) desireth
to borrow ten pound of his fellow; who maketh
answere, that he hath not so much: heere his meaning
must be supposed to be, that he hath not so much in his
purse, or so much in a readinesse about him, though he
had foure times the like value in his Chest at home.
But if the same thing should be desired of him, when he
were at home in his owne house, then the meaning
would be, that he had not such a summe at home. And
the same answere, which was true, beeing giuen to his

fellow. Traueller by the way; would be a lye, if it were
vttered to him in his house. Thus there may arise an
ambiguity in a speech, by reason of the circumstances
of person, place, time, and occasion; where otherwise
there is no ambiguity either in the signification of any
word, or in the composition of the sentence, considered
in and by themselues.
               And in what kind soeuer, of these now specified, there
happeneth an ambiguity; that I call a Logicall Equiuocation;
concerning which our present question is not.
For as the Doctors of the Romane Church, so the learned
of our side doe acknowledge, that there may bee a
lawfull vse of equiuocall speeches in euery of these
kinds, if they be not extended too farre, or mis-applyed
to a wrong cause. For, to speake more particularly, it
is granted.
               1. That we may lawfully vse words, which may indifferently
be taken in diuers acceptions and meanings,
as they are then vsed. And this is plaine, partly because
the Scriptures are full of such speeches; and partly, because
our common conuersation and life cannot bee
without them.
               2. It is not vnlawfull, when some case of further
good doth require it, to vse these ambiguous speeches
in the lesse knowne and common signification, and in
āother meaning then it is likely the hearers wil vnderstand
them for the present. For so, when our Lord said,
Lazarus our friend sleepeth:
                  Ioh. 11. 11. He meant that he was dead,
which was the lesse common and knowne signification;
and therefore the Disciples, according to the more vsuall
meaning, vnderstood him of naturall sleepe. And
he did this for good purpose, and for the profit of the
hearers; that they might heereby learne, either that
death in generall is to Gods children but as a sleepe,
by which they are refreshed, and made the more liuely:
or that this death of Lazarus, was rather to bee called

asleepe, then a death, because hee was so speedily raised
from it againe.
               3 It is not vnlawfull, if there be iust cause for concealing
of a trueth, to vse an ambiguous speach in any
of these kindes, that thereby we may hide some thing
from the hearers, which they should not know. This
assertion hath not so direct proofe from Scripture, as
the others haue; & yet it is not without all proofe from
the Scriptures neither. For there wee finde, that a man
may lawfully vtter one trueth, thereby to hide another
trueth from the hearer. As for example,1. Sam. 16. 1, 2. God appointed
Samuel to goe to Bethleem and anoint one of Iesses
sonnes to bee King; and when Samuel obiected, How
can I goe? If Saul heare it, hee will kill mee. The Lord
said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice
to the Lord. And so Samuel did, as it followeth in
the same Chapter; and by this he cōcealed his purpose
of anointing a new King; which was the speciall intent
of his going to that place. And if it be lawfull and warranted
by Gods own appointment to vtter one trueth,
for the concealing of another: then in reason I thinke it
cannot iustly be condemned for vnlawfull, if a man, vpon
iust occasion, doe vse an ambiguous speech in a true
sense, thereby to hide from the hearer, something which
hee should not knowe. For if in so doing any thing bee
faulty, it must be, as I take it, the one of the two; either
because an ambiguous speach is vsed in another meaning
then it is likely the hearer will take it; and that
to be lawfull, is prooued in the former assertion: or because
this true sense in the ambiguous speach, is vttered
to conceale another thing from the hearer; and that
to be lawfull, is cleare by this example of Samuel. And
therfore I thinke the conclusion may hence be inferred,
that it is not vnlawfull, if there be iust cause for concealing
of a trueth, to vse an ambiguous speach, that thereby
we may conceale some other thing, which is not fit

to be vttered. And hereto agree our learned diuines also
For one, speaking of Equiuocatiō, as it cōsisteth in the
ambiguitie of words vttered, addeth,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         maximè in liber
                           •
                         s
                           •
                        rmone, hoc quidem sensu vti licere nemo dubitat. Abbot Antilog. aduersus Eudaemono loan. cap. 2 fol. 18. 
                  That this kind of
Equiuocation, especially in ordinary speach, no man doubteth
but that it may lawfully be vsed. And,Sit per illam ce
                        •
                     ndus consiligs, tegend is
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      arca
                     
                        ••
                      suuo locus. Ibidem.
                   
                  this Equiuocation
may haue his due place for concealing of Counfe
                        •
                     s, and hiding
of secrets. And againe, speaking to his aduersary,
Tuscias taciturnitates illas, quas narra
                        •
                     , Confessionum & consi
                        ••
                     orum, vbi amphibologijs, & ambiguitatibus consistunt, noble non improbari: damn
                        •
                     ri prors
                        •
                     s à nohis, vt mendacio tegantur: 
                  Knowe (saith he) that those concealements, whether of
Confessions or Counsels, whereof you speake, where they doe
consist of ambiguities in the words, wee dislike not: onely if
they be couered with a lie, that wee doe wholly condemne.
And another learned writer in our Church, speaking of
one, that magnified the vse of Equiuocation, adioineth,
Si appellatione Acquiuocationis, simplicem quandam & modest
                        •
                      reticent
                        •
                     am signisicet, aut dissimulationem consiliorium in hac miscra vita saepe necessariam; planè cum ipso sentio. Casaubon. epi. ad Fronton. Duc. pag. 110. 
                  If by the name of Equiuocation he vnderstand a plaine and
sober concealing and couering of secret counsels, which in this
miserable life is oft times necessary, I am of his opinion too.
This is the opinion and iudgement of our learned men,
concerning the vse of Logicall Equiuocation; and herein
we agree with them of the Church of Rome: or if there
bee any difference among the learned of both sides in
these cases already mentioned, as perhaps about some
circumstances in the vse of those ambiguous speaches
there may be, it is nothing to the present Question in
hand, which is not concerning any of the kindes of
these Logicall Equiuocations, which consist in the ambiguous
acception and meaning of the words vttered.
And therefore when the Equiuocaters of our time doe
labor to confirme their Arte, by the authorized vse of
such speaches, as are ambiguous by reason of the diuers
meanings which the words may receiue, they misse the
marke, beate the ayre, and spend their labour to no
purpose.
               And this being briefly noted, concerning the true
and Logicall Equiuocation, I come now to the improper
and Iesuiticall. And that what it is, I will set downe in
their owne words, who professe to bee Patrons of it.

Father Persons
                  Mitigat. cap. 9. nu. 53. pa. 382 then, a man very laborious in the polishing
of this Arte, defineth it thus; Equiuocation or Amphibologie
in this our Controuersie, is nothing else, but when
a speach is partly vttered in words, and partly reserued in
mind, by which reseruation the sense of the proposition may
be diuers. And again,Mitigat. ca. 12. nu. 3 p. 484. 
                  mentall Equiuocation (saith he)
is, when any speach hath or may haue a double sense, not by
any double signification or composition of the words themselues,
but onely by some reseruation of minde in the speaker,
whereby his meaning is made different from the sense which
the words that are vttered, doe beare or yeeld without that
reseruation. And Sanchez giuing a Rule concerning the
words vsed in this their Equiuocation, saith,Posium abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      mendico 
                        〈◊〉
                      verba vsurpari, etiams
                        •
                      exs
                        ••
                      significatione non suit ambigua, nec eum seasum verum admittant exse, nec ex circumstantijs occurrentibus, sed tantum verum serisum reddant ex aliqo addito mente proferentis retento, q
                        •••
                     eli
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illud sit. Sanch. oper. moral. l. 3 c. 6. nu. 15. 
                  A man
may without telling of a lye, vse those words, although they
be not ambiguous by their signification, and doe not make a
true sense, either by themselues, or by reason of the circumstano
                        •
                     s
then occurring, but doe onely make a true sense by
some addition, kept in the speakers minde, whatsoeuer that
addition bee. Thus they. By which descriptions it appeareth,
that Iesuiticall Equiuocation, is a mixt proposition,
(as Persons also diuers times calleth it) part whereof
is vttered in words, and so taken it hath one sense;
and another part of it is reserued and vnderstood in the
speakers minde, which being added to the words spoken,
maketh another sense; as for example, A Seminarie,
or a Iesuite-Priest being asked by a Magistrate, Are
you a Priest? He answereth, I am no Priest, vnderstanding
and reseruing in his minde this clause, So as I am
bound to tell you, or any other which himselfe pleaseth
to like purpose: here (say they) is but one mixt proposit
                        ••
                     
                  
part whereof is vttered in words, namely, I am
no Priest; and that taken alone as it is vttered, breedeth
a false s
                     •
                  tise, and in this sense they would haue the
Magistrate to conceiue it: & another part of that proposition
is reserued and kept secret and close in the Priests
mind, & that is this, So as I am bound to tell you. And this

secret & mentall reseruation, being added to the words,
maketh this one entire Proposition; I am no Priest, so
as I am bound to tell you: and that being taken all together,
maketh a true sence, and so the Priest vnderstandeth
it. And therefore, if he doe but keepe, or reserue,
or vnderstand that or any such clause in his minde,
though the words which he speaketh bee neuer so false,
yet this man telleth no lye, nor speaketh no vntruth.
Such is the vertue of this new found Arte; and thus
they describe it.
               But that it may yet appeare more fully and more distinctly,
it will not be amisse to set downe the mysterie
of this Art in certaine distinct Propositions, all gathered
from their owne writings, and approued dealings.
               l. That this mixt Proposition of theirs, or this Equiuocation,
as they call it, whether we consider that part
of it which is vttered in words; or the whole Proposition,
as it hath the reseruatiō added to it, which is kept in
the speakers mind; hath in neither respect or consideration,
Mitigat. cap. 8. nu. 10. pag. 313. as F. P. saith, any doubtful sense of speech or words,
by their doubtfull or double signification; but only that it vttereth
not all the whole sense of the speaker; & therfore cannot
be properly called equiuocall, according to Aristotles
meaning & Definition. And againe, These mixt Propositions
(Mitig. cap. 11. nu. 14. pag. 447. saith he) be not properly equiuocall in the sense that
Aristotle did define, &c. for that they doe not of themselues
nor their own natures, signifie equally diuers things; but being
vnderstood wholly, haue a simple and single signification
in the mind and vnderstanding of the speaker: yet, for that
the hearer concerning but 
                        〈…〉
                      thereof, apprehendeth
a different sense from the speaker; they may ab effectu, be
called ambiguous; for that they leaue a different sense in the
hearer & speaker, albeit of themselues they be plaine, cle
                        •
                     re,
and true, &c. Out of which words, considered & ioyned
with that which was formerly cited out of Sanchez
and Parsons, we may note three things. 1. That there

is no ambiguity or doubtfull sense, either in the words
vttered, if they be taken alone; nor in the whole Proposition,
as they compound it of the words vttered, &

                     •
                  he reseruation vnderstood, taken together. 2. That
therefore they call it Equiuocation, or an Equiuocall Proposition
or speech; because they signifie or expresse one
meaning to the hearer, which is false; and retaine or
vnderstand another sense within themselues, which is
true. 3. That the taking of this word Equiuocation in
this meaning, is not proper, and such as Aristotle did
vnderstand and conceiue by it. Hee might haue said,
that it is not proper, nor such as either Aristotle, or
any man either learned or vnlearned, hauing but common
sense in his head, and common honesty in his
heart, did euer acknowledge before this last Age. And
the truth is, they therfore call it an Equiuocatiō, though
the word was neuer known to haue any such meaning
or signification▪ because they are ashamed to call it by
its right name, which is, A Lye. But as the couetous
man, though he practiseth the thing, yet abhorres
the name; and therefore will be called a good husband,
or a thrifty man: And as a thiefe is ashamed of his right
name, and when he meeteth with a Traueller to whom
he would signifie his e
                     •
                  rand; he saith, that he is a Goodfellow
which wanteth money: So the Romanists teach an
Arte of lying; and because they are ashamed of the infamous
name of Lyers, they call themselues Equiuocators:
and that which other men call Lying, they call
Equiuocating.
               
               2. That if a man will vse this benefit of Equiuocating,
he must be warie and carefull, that he reserue some secret
clause in his mind, which being added to the words
vttered, doe make a true speech; or else all is marred,
and he, for want of that clause, become a plaine Lyer.
               
                  To this purpose, Father PersonsMitig. cap. 10. nu. 22. pag. 424 
                  saith, that the Equiuocator
speaketh a trueth in his owne meaning, and in

the sight ef God; which alwaies he must doe, when hee vseth
this Euasion; for that otherwise he should lye, and commit
sinne, if he had not some true sense reserued in his mind,
&c.
               To declare this yet further: Say that two Priests
were questioned by a Magistrate, whether they were
Priests or no; and the one should say, I am no Priest:
and should withall reserue in his mind this clause, So
as I am bound to tell you: and the other should answere
in the very same words, I am no Priest: but should forget
or neglect to frame or imagine in his mind that reseruation,
or some such like: the former, who imagined
that reseruation in his mind, should be an Equiuocator,
                  Risum teneatis, amici?
and speake the truth; but the latter, who had omitted
it, should be a Lyer, and vtter a falshood and
vntruth, though hee speake none but the very same
words; and they haue none but one signification and
meaning.
               This they say, to shew vs, how an Equiuocator doth
differ very much from a Lyer. The truth is; this Equiuocator
and this Lyer doe differ as much as two false
knaues, the one of which is called a Thiefe, and the other,
a Good-fellow that taketh a Purse.
               
               3. That whatsoeuer a man doe say or sweare, be it
otherwise neuer so false and absurd; yet if a man doe imagine
a clause in his mind, which being added to the
words spoken, would make a true meaning; then the
former speech or saying, how false soeuer otherwise becommeth
true, and without all compasse of lying: because
(saith FatherMitigat. cap. 10. nu. 14. pag. 418. 
                  Persons) it is freed from the nature
of a Lye, by the due & iust reseruation in the speakers mind.
By the due and iust reseruation, saith hee. But suppose
the reseruation be not iust and due, but that a man vse
this arte, when he ought not to equiuocate? Why, yet
euen then, he is by this reseruation freed from telling of
a Lye, though not freed from all sinne. For though is

should not be properly the sinne of Lying, nor against the negatiue
Precept of Truth: yet should it be another sinne, against
the publike good of ciuill society, and consequently against
the affirmatiue Precept of Truth, &c. Thus speaketh
FatherMitigat. cap. 10. num. 23. pag. 424 
                  Persons. And to the like purpose Valentia
                  Tom. 3. disp. 5. q. 13. punct. 2. pag. 1136.. But Sanchez more plainely and roundly: If a
man (
                     
                        〈…〉
                      sine propria sponte; sine recreationes gratiâ sitie quocum
                        •
                      alio sine iurets
                        •
                      non secisse aliqurd quod reuera fecit, intelligendo 
                        ••
                     tra se aliquid al
                        ••
                     d, quod nonfecit, velal am diem ab eain qua fecit, vel quodius aliud add
                        ••
                     um verum, reuera non mentitur, &c. Sanchez op. moral. l. 3. cap. 6. num. 15. p. 25. saith he) either alone or before company, either being
asked or of his owne accord, either for recreation sake, or for
any other end, doe sweare that he did not doe something,
which indeed he did do; vnderstanding within himselfe some
other thing then that he did doc; or some other day then that
in which he did doe it, or any other addition that is true;
this man, in very deed, doth neither lye nor forsweare.
               
               Thus they speake, and so must all they that will
maintaine this Arte. For whereas Father Persons, speaking
of the Wife of Ananias, saith;Mitigat. cap. 11. nu. 29. pag. 459. that shee beeing
lawfully demanded by S. Peter in a lawfull cause, touching
her owne vow and promise, no clause of reseruation could
saue her speech from lying: he doth herein not only contradict
himselfe, as Lyers vsually doe, but doth also
thereby ouerthrow the very grounds of this fond Arte.
For if a reseruation in the mind doe free the Equiuocator
from lying; because that beeing added to his words,
both together do make a true Proposition; why should
not a reseruation in this womans mind, saue her speech
from lying, if it were such, as being added to her words,
both together might yeeld a true meaning; which, according
to the rules of this Arte, it had beene easie for
this woman to frame▪
               
               4 That in any case, in which Equiuocation may bee
vsed, a man may frame any reseruation, whatsoeuer
himselfe pleaseth, so it be such, as being added to the
words, doth make the whole compound to bee true.
Mitig c. 10. nu. 22. p. 424. 
                  Persons somtimes seemeth to require, that the reseruatiō
                  
be conformable to the matter, time, and place; & not fained
at randome, as some fondly do imagine. But he doth but

mocke his Reader; making shew of following the former
Schoole-Doctors, whose words these are; when
he hath no such meaning as they had in them. For,
when he speaketh plainely, and so as you may vnderstand
his distinct meaning. them hisMitig. cap. 8. nu. 55. p. 344. words are; I doe
truely and really meane, that I am no Priest, in the sense
that I speake it, which may be any that pleaseth me, or that
I list to frame to my selfe: so as I may meane, that I am no
Priest, such as I should be, such as I desire to be, such as is
worthy of so great an office, and sacred a function; such as
he ought to be, that occupieth the place of God in gouerning
of soules; I am no Priest subiect to the demander, or obliged
to answere his demands; or the like. Thus, and such like,
whatsoeuer he pleaseth, he professeth may be his reseruations,
when he denyeth himselfe to be a Priest: and
what conformity these haue, at least the most of them,
with the Circumstances, I leaue to bee declared by the
Patrons and Masters of this Arte. Sure I am, if such
large scope may be granted, and yet the reseruation bee
conformable to the matter, &c. and not fained at randome,
then it will be an easie matter to keepe within cō
                  passe,
and to obserue the wise rule of this graue Father.
But, let Persons goe with his doubling, and let vs heare
what others say. Sanchez alloweth any words, if they
yeeld a true sense,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      dito, mente proferentis retento quodcunque illud sit. Sanch. op. moral. l. 3 c. 6. nu. 15. pa. 25. 
                  By any addition, reserued in the mind
                        •
                     
of the speaker, whatsoeuer that addition bee. And Iacob 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Graffijs, proposing a Case of one, who being taken by
theeues, doth for feare promise them somwhat with an
oath;Siiste aliud mente cogitauerit, verbi gratia, promitto dare aut sacere, si à Iudiac 
                        •
                     oactus fuero, vel si coelum ruat, aut quid simile, tune à peccato erit immunis. Decis. Aur. par. 1. l. 2. ca. 17. nu. 12. 
                  If (saith he) he doe imagine some other thing in his
minde, for example, I promise to giue this, or do that, if the
Iudgo shal compelme to it, or if the skie shall fall, or the like,
then he shal be cleare from sinne. And Sanchez,
                  Oper. mor. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 26. pag. 28. that a man
may lawfully answere, that he killed not Peter, meaning another
man of the same name, or that he killed him not, antequam
nasceretur, before hee was borne. And Strange
the Iesuite, to show what strange and vnlimited liberty

they doe take in the framing of this fancie, affirme
that he was in the company, reseruing and intending secretly
as added, this word, Not; when hee was questioned before
the Lord Chiefe Iustice of England,
                  Proceeding against Traitors. litt. l. 1. and the Kings
Attourney. These reseruations, and others not much
better, doe they allow and practise in the Arte of Equiuocating,
whereof there is frequent mention in their
Bookes and Treatises of this argument. By all which it
appeareth, that they approoue of any reseruatirn, which
a man can fancie, if the case be such as they allow of, and
the clause such, as may signifie a trueth.
               5. That this Equiuocation of theirs, is lawfull, not
onely in ordinary speach, but in oathes also. This is
plainely auouched by Father Persons, and vpon this
reason,Mitigat. ca. 11. nu. 17. pag. 449. 
                  Because it is a most certaine principle, as well in
reason, as in Diuinitie, that what a man may truely say, hee
may truely also sweare. And againe,Mitig. c. 11. nu. 43. pa. 468. 
                  As all Diuines
held (saith hee) that which may lawfully be said, may also
lawfully be sworne. And to this doe agree others of this
Crue, who commonly handle this question of Equiuocation
in their Treatises of Oathes, and allow it as a
thing very lawfull, and of good vse.
               6. That this Arte was deuised, and so by them is
vsed, that by it they may deceiue the vnderstanding of
the hearer, and make him beleeue an vntrueth, when it
may serue for their turne. To this purpose those words
of Father Persons sound,Mitig. c. 7. nu. 14. pag. 284 
                  Equiuocation must sometime
be practised, when no other euasion can be found for defence
of innocencie, iustice, secrecy, and other like vrgent occasions.
And speaking of some cases of inconuenience,
which hee would haue to bee auoided by Equiuocation,
he demandeth,Cap. 7. nu. 22. pa. 289. 
                  Hath God and Nature, and Law of Iustice
left no lawfull euasion in such cases? And againe,
Cap. 7. nu. 2. pag. 274. 
                  Wee delight not (saith hee) in this Arte or maner of euasion
by Equiuocation. By this it appeareth, that Equiuocation
(to vse the Iesuites owne words) is an Art of

euasion, which cannot bee vnderstood without a meaning
and purpose to deceiue the hearers vnderstanding,
and to make him beleeue an vntrueth. The same Doctor
of this Arte goeth on, and teacheth vs, that this
their Equiuocation is,Mitig c. 12. nu 3. pag. 484. 
                  when any speach hath, or may haue
a double sense, not by any double signification or composition
of the words themselues; but onely by some reseruation of
minde in the speaker, whereby his meaning is made different
from that sense which the words that are vttered, de beare,
or yeeld without that reseruation. And by this is implyed,
that the purpose of this is, to imprint one sense in the
speaker, which they acknowledge to bee false, and to
keepe within themselues another, which they imagine
to bee true. Becanus also, another Iesuite, hauing
first proposed the question, An liceat vti Aequiuocatione:
Whether it may be lawful to vse Equiuocation:
he explaineth the point thus;Sensus est, an
licea
                        •
                      alios fallere, decipere aut cludere per Aequiuocationes. Manual Controu. l. 5. c. 21. pag. 530. 
                  Whether it bee lawfull to
deceiue and beguile others by Equiuocations. In the prosecution
of which question, though he wrangle, & would
gladly shift off from themselues the imputation of this
equiuocating fraud; yea, and flatly denieth it: yet by
explaining the questiō in such sort, he acknowledgeth,
that their meaning who defend it, is to beguile and deceiue
men. And in like sort Tolet saith.Aliquando licet vti aquiuocatione, & fallere audientem. Tolet. Instruct. Sacerd. l. 4. c. 21. nu. 9. 
                  It is sometimes
lawfull to vse Equiuocation, and to deceiue the hearer.
And therefore when Father Persons
                  Mitig. cap. 8 nu. 58. pag. 346 & 347. See also, Sober Reckon. c. 4. nu. 89. pag. 285 saith, that
his intention is not to deceiue in this mentall proposition, but
to defend himselfe, &c. and that the Priest (who denieth
himselfe to bee a Priest) that his principall intent is not
intentio fallendi, an intention of deceiuing; but rather, euadendi
desiderium, a desire to escape and defend himselfe:
he doth either too boldly presume vpon his Readers
simplicitie, or too grossely bewray his owne. For
first, when hee saith, that his principall intent is not to deceiue,
but rather to escape, hee implieth, that an intention
he hath to deceiue, though that be not his principall

intention; and that is enough to prooue (which hee denieth)
that his Equiuocation doth herein agree with the
nature of a lye, that as a lye is said to bee, cum intentione
fallendi, so his Equiuocation cannot be denied to haue
the same purpose and intention in it. And secondly,
where he saith plainely that his intention is not to deceiue,
but to defend, hee speaketh as wisely, and to as
good purpose, as if a thiefe by the high way side should
say, that hee intended not to take away the true mans
purse, but to supplie himselfe with money for his owne
spending. For as the thiefe intendeth to robbe, that
thereby he may supply himselfe; so the Iesuite intendeth
to deceiue, that thereby he may defend himselfe.
               7 That to forbeare the vse of this Equiuocation (vnlesse
where by duety a man is bound to vse it) is better
and more Meritorious then to vse it. To this purpose
speaketh the great Master of this Arte;
                  Mitig. c. 7. nu. 2 pag. 274. Wee delight not
(saith hee) in this Arte or maner of euasion by Equiuocation,
though it be no lye at all; but rather do allow and like
far better of simple, plaine, and resolute speach in all Catholikes,
concerning aswel matters of ordinary conuersation, as
of their conscience, &c. And presently he addeth; Yet for
that perfection is one thing, and obligation is another, wee
may not binde men to more then Gods precept bindeth. By
which speach hee plainely teacheth, that though it bee
not vnlawfull to vse Equiuocation, because it is not forbidden
by any precept; yet it is a worke of perfection,
(such as they vse to cal a worke of supererogation) not
to vse a mans lawfull libertie in this case. And yet
f
                        •
                     rther, It is euident, that albeit good men desirous of perfection,Cap. 7. nu. 5. pag. 276.
and prepared to suffer iniuries, may liue without going
to Law, without swearing, without diuorcing their
wiues, without Equiuocation, &c. yet for all that, men are
not bound to this exactnesse, &c. And yet againe, My wish
is (saith hee) that Catholike people,Cap. 13. nu. 3. pag. 548. but especially Priests,
whose example must instruct the rest, should yeeld also of

their right, for increase of their merit and Crowne in heauen,
and vse all plainnesse and synceritie in speach, and free
discouering, not onely of their religion, but also of their state,
where it is hurtfull to none but themselues.See Persons also in his Sober Reck. ca. 7. nu. 22, & 23. pag. 484, 485. 
                  And in a word,
plainnesse and syncerity of speach, he compareth with virginity,
(which in their esteeme, is a glorious worke of
perfection or supererogation:) and the practice of Equiuocating
to Wedlocke, which is lawful, but not of such
merit.
               
               Now hence I inferre two Conclusions.
               1 That the practice of Protestants in vsing plainnesse
and syncerity in speach, according to their doctrine,
is by the confession of the Iesuite, better and more holy,
then the practice of Papists in vsing Euasions and
Equiuocations, according to the doctrine of the Equiuocators.
               
               2 That according to the doctrine of Popish Equiuocators,
Iesus our Sauiour was not so perfect, nor vsed
not so much exactnesse in his speach, nor merited not so
much, as the Iesuites doe, many of them at least. For
Father Persons saith, that albeit good men desirous of perfection,
may liue without Equiuocating, yet &c. hee meaneth
that though it may bee seene in such men, yet others
are not bound to that exactnesse: and he implieth,
that men desirous of perfection, doe vse to doe so. And
such, I trow, the holy Order of Iesuites is, who for desire
of this perfection, haue by solemne vow abandoned
the world, and all the glory, and profit belonging to it.
Besides, Father Persons graue aduice is, that not onely
Priests, but other Catholikes too, should yeeld of their
right, by forbearing to equiuocate, for the increase of their
merit and Crowne in heauen: and, I trowe, the followers
of IESVS will not bee slacke to performe, what one
of their owne Fathers doth aduise to bee so behoofefull,
not onely for seculars of the Clergie, but for lay
                     •
                  
                  
Catholikes also. But now IESVS our Lord, see how
farre off the Iesuite maketh him to bee from this degree
of perfection. For hee was so frequent in equiuocating,
that Father Persons
                  Sober Reck. Append. nu. 16 pag. 682. 
                  findeth him to haue vsed the same in
one onely Chapter of S. Iohns Gospel, aboue seuen or eight
times at the least. Nay, and thatSober Reck. in append. nu. 24. pag. 687. 
                  more then one Equiuocation
was vsed by our Sauiour in one sentence: and that
eight or nine Equiuocall speaches at the least, are contained
within a piece of one onely Chapter of our Sauiours talke
with the Iewes, Scribes and Pharisees. And indeede hee
hath recited and alleadged nine seuerall examples out
of our Sauiours words, recorded in the latter part of
the eighth Chapter of S. Iohn. And sure, hee that did
equiuocate so often in so little compasse, cannot be imagined
to haue forborne his right in this practice, for the
increase of his merit and Crowne in heauen. Or if they
will say, that notwithstanding this frequent vse of Equiuocation
in so short space, that yet hee did forbeare
his right still, and so increased his merit thereby; then
they will giue vs occasion to thinke, that Iesuites and
Priests, and other Roman Catholikes may attaine this
height of perfection, vnto which Father Persons aduiseth
them, and coozen and deceiue vs silly fellowes with
their Equiuocations seuen, or eight, or nine times in one
houre.
               I leaue it then to bee considered by the wise Reader,
whether Father Persons doe cog with vs all this while,
and make no small vse of this deceitfull Arte, while hee
laboureth to defend it: or, whether in good earnest hee
thinketh that our Lord and Sauiour did not follow so
exact a rule of perfection, as hee aduiseth all his Catholikes
vnto.
               These bee the most speciall properties belonging to
Iesuiticall Equiuocation, as neere as I could gather and
obserue them out of their bookes, which bee the abettors
of this Arte, among whom the principall, Father

                  Persons, must needes bee acknowledged to bee. For
hee hath laboured herein more then they all. Out of
all which obseruations layd together, I leaue it to the
consideration of any vnderstanding man, to iudge, whether
these two things doe not follow.
               1 That the Roman Doctors haue such rare wits, as
that they can by their deuised sleights, transforme the
nature both of words and things, euen as well as Alchymists
can turne lead into gold. For as in matter of
State, they
                     Clerici Rebellio in Regem non est 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      S
                        •
                     . Aphor. v. [Clericus] printed at Antwerp, 1599. and allowed and commended by Silu. Pardo, the Inquisitor. haue found out a mystery; that a Clergieman
of their Church may moue Rebellion against his
Prince, and yet be no Traytor: so in Conferences with
men, they haue found a like mysterie; that any man of
the Romane Church, may speake, and say, and sweare
whatsoeuer himselfe pleaseth, though it bee neuer so
false, and yet be no Lyer. The one they fetch from their
doctrine of Exemption; and the other from their doctrine
of Equiuocation: both dangerous practices to all
humane society. The one whereof should teach Kings
to be aware of their Swords, and the other should teach
all men to beware of their words.
               2 That by their doctrine, a man is at liberty to lye,
without anie grudge in his conscience; and that the
Abettors of this Arte, by a secret iuggling deuice, doe
s
                        •
                     t open a schoole for deceit and periurie;
                  Cuius
                        •
                     cne ficio, qui ad normam men
                        •
                     iatur aut peicret, baud ille periurio aut mend
                        •
                     cioreus c
                        •
                     nsendus sit. 
                  in which they teach
an Arte of Lying; by the helpe whereof, he that can lye &
forsweare by the Rule, shall be free either from lying or
peri
                        •
                     rie: asAbbot. Ant
                        •
                     
                     log. adu. Eudeaemon-Ioann. c. a. in prine. fol. 11. fac. 1. a reuerend and learned Diuine hath noted.
But hereof there will be fitter occasion giuen to say
more hereafter. In the meane while, thus much shall
serue to be said of the first Point.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               Of the Originall of Equiuocation; and who they bee
that vphold it, and giue life vnto it.
               
                  COncerning the Originall of this Arte,
Hospinian. Histor. Iesuit. l. 4. c. 2. p. 228. some learned men referre 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the
Priscillianists, or Arius the Arch-heretike,
who are read to haue vsed fraudulent
and deceitful speech. And such
Heretikes had not beene vnmeete Fathers
for such a deformed child. But this Brat was not
then borne, nor for many Ages after those dayes. For
mine owne part, vnlesse I shall hereafter meete vvith
some thing more cleere then yet I haue seene, I must say
with a iudicious and learned Writer,Quos Autores habuerit, non 
                        〈…〉
                      Casaub. epist. ad 
                        ••
                     ont. Du
                     
                        ••
                     um. pag. 108. 
                  I cannot readily
say who were the first founders of this Arte. Nor is it
maruell, that a thing of this nature, though found out
but yesterday, should appeare to the world without
the name or notice of his Author. For, as the head or
spring of Nilus hath beene long enquired after, and for
ought I know, is yet scarce heard of; and the reason
may bee, because it is supposed that that Riuer doth
rise somewhere in montibus L
                        •
                     nae, in some place of those
great Mountaines, whose greatnes doth hide the place
of the Well-head or Spring: So deuices of State, which
neuer prosper after they are discouered, are commonly
smoothered for a time, and doe vsually appeare without
name; themselues being vnwilling to owne them,
and others being vnable to d
                     •
                  scrie them. And such is
this Arte of Equiuocation, hatched by some rare wit,
who yet had rather lose the glory of the inuention,

then to lay open the mysterie of it: and smoothered by
the Romane State as long as was possible, till misfortune
brought it to light against their wils And yet now,
that the Riuer appear
                     •
                  th with a full st
                     •
                  eame, notwithstanding,
the Spring will hardly bee found. And if any
Rom
                        •
                     nist shall hence inferre, that this Doctrine is therfore
an Apostolicall I
                        •
                     radition, and came from Christ
himselfe; because I cannot tell who was the first Author,
and at what time since it was first hatched; as they
vse to dispute in other cases against vs: I will send him
to find me the head of Nilus, and when he hath found
that, I will goe about to enquire for the Originall of
this Arte. And yet in the meane while, though I cannot
precisely say who was the first Father of this blacke
Arte, yet some things may bee said, not impertinent
to this purpose. And those (as I conceiue them for the
present) I will, lay downe in certaine Propositions or
Assertions. And they be these.
               1 It is certaine that it is a late deuice, and found out
the other day. Persons claimeth Vniuersality, Antiquity▪
and Consent, for the proofe of this Arte,Mitigat. c. 7. nu. 12. & 13. p. 281. & 282. His words are,
that euery man may heare him speak in his own dialect;
Let vs consider (saith he) how this absurd and impious opinion
(if such it be) could come to bee receiued so generally,
both in approbation & practice, doctrine & action, throughout
the Christian world, that is to say; The Doctrine in all
Schooles, Pulpits, Chaires, Vniuersities, where teaching
hath beene vsed, extant also in the Bookes and Workes of all
learned men of what sort soeuer, before Iesuites were borne
or heard of: but especially those haue most treated thereof,
who haue written most tenderly of matters belonging vnto
conscience, whom we call Casuists. Lawiers in like maner,
both Canon and Ciuill; Diuines, both Scholasticall and posi
                        ••
                     ue,
haue approued the same. And as for practice, it
hath in due cases beene receiued in all Courts, in all Countries,
in all Tribunals, and S
                        •
                     ates of iudgement, both ecclesiasticall

and temporall; and neuer refused, condemned, or
controled by any, so it were vsed with the due circumstances,
&c. And alittle after; Was there no man to stand
for truth and reason in any Countrey, in any Prouince or
State? in any place or time for this 400. yeeres, &c?
Where it must be noted, that when he mentioneth 400
yeeres, his meaning is not to limit the approbation of
this Arte to the compasse of those yeeres; but because
he supposeth, but falsely, that his Aduersarie had granted
so much; and so here he disputeth ex Concessis vpon
the Confession of his Aduersarie: but he intendeth and
meaneth the consent of former times also; as himselfe
signifieth in the same Chap.Nu. 16. p. 285. whereof he there promiseth
to speak afterward; & so he doth.cap 9. nu. 17, &c. and repeateth it again
                        •
                      in his Sober Reckon. cap. 7. nu. 26, &c. For he bringeth
the testimonies & practice of the Patriarchs, Prophets,
and Apostles, and Iesus Christ himselfe, and that frequently
declared. Where it may bee noted, that this
Father is as bold to alledge Vniuersality, Antiquity, and
Consent for the proofe of this Arte, as the rest are for the
proofe of their Church. And sure the proofe is as good
and sound in the one, as the other. Onely, Father Persons
affirmeth more boldly, and confirmeth what hee
saith, more weakely. But the reason is alike good in
both cases. But heere I haue onely to deale with Persons,
about his Equiuocation. And against these great
cryes,Da mihi vnum exemni homiuii antiquitate, Ethnica, luda
                        ••
                     a, Christiana; davci vnum, cut Reseruatien
                        •
                     s istae tuae probat
                        •
                      su
                        •
                     t, misi siq
                        •
                     i forte in infamni
                        ••
                      not al
                        •
                     , &c. I oppose the confident and iust challenge of a
Reuerend man; Name me one man (saith he) out of all
antiquity, Heathenish, Iewish, Christian: name but one man,
who euer approued these your Reseruations, vnlesse perhaps
some who were noted with infamy for their paines. I may
adde; Nay, name me one, who defended this Equiuocation,
which Iesuites call a mixt or mentall Proposition,
or by a secret reseruation, in all the time from Adam to
the Trent Councell. I will not say none such can bee named;Abbot Anti. cap. 2. fol. 25.
for who can say or presume, that hee knoweth
the sayings and opinions of all former Ages? but this I

will say, that wheras the Abettors of Equiuocation haue
bin challenged by two learned Doctors in our Church,
to shewe any who in former times haue allowed this
diuelish Arte; hitherto I haue seene no one man produced,
who doth giue any plaine or direct allowance
heereof. For as for the many autorities, which Persons
doth alledge, they be Conclusions of his own, spun out
of other mens sayings, by such consequences as himselfe
fancieth or pleaseth to frame. For where holy or learned
men haue vsed speeches, that may admit diuers interpretations,
either by reason of the words vsed, or
some circumstance occurring, according to which only
former Ages were wont to expound them; he presently
runneth away with an out-cry of mentall reseruation,
or mixt Proposition: as euery man that considereth the
Allegations, may easily perceiue. In a word, Persons
claimeth very boldly, and to speake truth, impudently,
Vniuersality, Antiquity, and Consent, for this nouell,
new-deuised, and vpstart fancie of their owne. Where
I wish the Reader to consider, how farre he may credit
such men, when they lay the like claime to all Antiquity
and Consent of Nations, either for the prouing of
their Church, or for maintaining of any other subordinate
point of Controuersie. For mine owne part, till
they shew me one who approued a mentall Equiuocation
or reseruation, I will thinke and say there is none. And
this is my first assertion; whereof see further proofe in
the next assertion.
               2 My second is, that the latter sort of Schoole-men
and Casuists gaue occasion, and laied grounds for this
ensuing Arte; which at that time themselues, it seemeth,
did not so much as thinke or dreame of. For,
whereas some Cases were then debated, how farre a
Priest might deny the things which hee had heard in
Confession; and in what sort any man that was questioned
by an vnlawfull Iudge, or proceeded against in

an vnlalwfull maner, &c. might deny the things which
he knew to be true: they, considering the circumstances
of the persons, place, and businesse, did allow some hard
Equiuocations, which the words would hardly beare in
any true sense, yet such as they thought might be allowed
and gathered out of those circumstances, and might
well be vnderstood in those words, as there and then
they were vttered. As for exāple; If a Priest were questioned,
whether he knew or had heard any thing of such
or such a matter; he might say, No: if he did not know
or heare it any other way, but onely by Confession. And
the reason of this answere is, because,Voces co modo significant, quo 
                        〈◊〉
                      à populo: populus autem Christianus, 
                        •
                     um audit Sacerdotem iurantem se nii
                        •
                     l scire, nihil intelligit de 
                        〈◊〉
                      quae noiut in Confessione: Qua
                        •
                     e verba illa solum significant nihils
                        •
                      sciire extra confessionem. 
                  Words (saith
Dominicus a Soto) doe so signifie, as they are vnderstood
or taken by the people. Now Christian people, when
they heare a Priest sweare, that he knoweth nothing of such
or such a matter, they vnderstand him not to speake or meane
any thing that he heard in Confession. And therefore those
words (of the Priest) doe onely signifie or import, that▪ hee
knoweth nothing out of Confession. And the like defence
of this answer is giuen by Sepulueda, de Rat. dicendi test.
cap. 3. Againe, it is a further Case, If the Priest be asked
concerning the same thing, whether he know or haue
heard it in Confession; whether may he then say, No,
I heard it not? And the common opinion of the Doctors
was,Soto Relect. de Secreto, mem. 3. q. 3. Concl. 2. § Hi
                        •
                     reto. that in this case, h
                     •
                   
                  may sweare he did not heare it.
                  Relect. de secreto memb. 3. q 3. Cond. 4. § Hactenus opinionem. pa. 312. But Soto, vpon better aduice, disliketh this answere,
because in this Sentence, Nihil audiui in Confessione; I
heard nothing of it in Confession; the Restriction allowed
in the former case, cannot fitly bee vnderstood, to say, I
heard nothing in Confession, to wit, out of Confession. And
therefore he concludeth, that that answere in this case
cannot be excused from being a lye; because the words cannot
haue that construction. Another case is proposed;
Suppose a Tyran should aske of a Priest, whether Peter
(for example) did kill Iohn (which the Priest knew in
Confession only) may the Priest say and sweare, that Peter

did not kill Iohn? Adrian, who afterward was Pope,
and was called Adrian the sixth, he resolued the question,
that he might answere negatiuely, that 
                        •
                     e killed him
not: but Soto againe replyeth, that this which Adrian
said, had no shew of reason; because the words admit no interpretation,
that may excuse them from a Lye. For, saith
he;Ineptisima interpretatio 
                        〈◊〉
                     , non occidit, ut dicam. 
                  It were a most fond interpretation to say, He killed him
not that I may tell you, or (as our Equiuocators vse now
a dayes to speake) He killed him not, so as I may tell you.
And he giueth a further reasō hereof,Quia facta non habent or dinem immediatum ad hoc quod est, dicere; sicut scire & alia verba sensationum. Soto ibid. pag. 314. 
                  because deeds haue
no immediate relation to this word, [that I may tel it] 
                        〈◊〉
                      the
wo
                        •
                     d [I know] and other such words of sense haue. And in
his Booke de Iustit. & Iure, disputing the like question,
whether a man beeing questioned concerning his owne
Act, may by Ambiguity elude the question; hee resolueth,
It
                  Quod liceat ei diceu se nō fecisse, nullatenus est sustentabile. Soto de Ius
                           •
                        it. & Iure, l. 5. q. 6. art. 2. prope finem.
                   
                  can no way be defended, that he may lawfully say,
that he did not doe it: and hereof he giueth this reason;
Quoniam, Non feci, nullo modo amplecti potest sensum, Non seci, ut dica. [facere] enim non habet 
                        〈…〉
                      cum eo, quod est, ut dicam, quaem habet [scire.] 
                  Because this speech [I did not doe it] cannot receiue
this sense; I did not doe it, to tell it, or that I may tell it,
&c. His meaning in more plaine words, is this; that
the Priest might truely say in the case proposed, I know
not that Peter did kill Iohn; because hee might reasonably
vnderstand it thus, or with this restriction, I know
it not out of Confession. And of such a knowledg the Iudge
is supposed to aske, and men do vsually vnderstand the
Priest to speake. But the Priest might not say without
telling a lye. Peter did not kill Iohn; because, this restriction
cannot without absurdity, bee applyed to those
words,. And consequently, these words could not bee
so vnderstood by the hearers. A fourth case may bee
added, and with that I will end. Suppose a guilty person
be against order of Law examined by a Iudge, whether
he haue committed such a crime, which indeede
he hath done, but is not in this case bound to answere
him: suppose (I say) he be inforced to answere, may
he truely say, I did not doe it? And Adrian's resolution

of the doubt, was; that in such a case,
                     Potest secundi
                           •
                         omnes Doctores respondere quòd nihil de sacto ille 
                           〈◊〉
                        , velcertè, quod non 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Adrian. in 4. de Sacr. Cons. 
                        •
                     esp. ad 2. prin. pag. 143. col. 4. 
                  he may truely
answere, according to the opinion of all Schoole-Doctors,
that, he knoweth nothing of that fa
                        •
                     t, or at least, that hee
did not 
                        〈◊〉
                      it. And his reason is, because in this answere,
he is supposed to speakeDescientia, en quatil
                        ••
                      eat reuolare. 
                  of such a knowledge of
the fact, as he may lawfully discouer. But Soto replyeth
againe,
                     Nescio qui s
                           •
                        nt ill
                           •
                         omnes De
                           •
                        tores: fateor me nullum legisse. De Secreto, mem. 3
                        •
                      q. 3. Concl. 4. p. 316 v. etiam de lustit et Iute, l. 5. q. 6. art. 2. 
                  I know not who all those Doctors are, that Adrian
speaketh of: I confesse, I haue read none of that opinion.
And he addeth;Se
                        •
                     sus ille violent
                        •
                     ssimu
                        •
                      est &c. 
                  That meaning, in which Adrian interpreteth
these words, is a most forced and violent sense.
               
               Thus Soto declareth his owne opinion, and the opinion
of other Schoole-Doctors and Casuists of
that time, in these and other cases of like nature.
And the like doth Io. Genesius Sepulueda, another learned
man of the same nation, and about the same time.
For hauing heard some defend some such like Equiuocations
and ambiguities, he vndertaketh to proue, and
that by the testimony of ancient Diuines, that in witnesse-bearing
(for thereof hee doth in particular intreat)
a Witnesse may not, arte vorborum, by cunning words,
deceiue the Iudge; but that he is bound to speak plainely,
and according to the meaning of the Iudge, who asketh
the question. And of the contrary opinion, hee
saith,Nemo veterum & nobilium Theologorum, quod equidem sciam, affirmauit. Sepulu. de rat. dicend. testi
                           •
                        . cap. 17. 
                  None ancient and renowned Diuine that I knowe,
did affirme it to bee lawfull. And in the Preface to that
Booke, hee saith, that while hee was in Rome, hee met
with one, who maintained this opinion, which he calleth
Quorundam iuniorum Theologorum decretis consentan
                        •
                     am. 
                  agreeable to the Determinations of some yong or late
Diuines: and when he came backe againe into Spaine,
that praeter spem, contrary to his expectation, he found
some of their learnedest Diuines, maintaining, and instilling
into their Students hearts and eares,
                     
                        •
                     llam veterum 
                        〈◊〉
                      summorum Theologorum consensu damnatam opinionem. that opinion
which was condemned by the ancient and chiefe
Diuines. And, Chap. 15. hee sheweth who they bee,
whom he calleth ancient Diuines; and that is in his
owne words,Nastrâ & patrii memori
                        •
                      superiores, qual
                        •
                      est Aqui. Thomas.
                   
                  those which liued before our and our Fathers

dayes, such for example sake, as Thomas Aquinas is.
               
               Out of which testimonies and sayings of these two
learned men (the one of which was Confessor to Charles
the fifth, and the other his Historiographer; and the one
flourished about the yeere 1560. as Possouin saith, and
the other died in the yeere 1572. saith the same Posseuin,
out of these their sayings) I gather and obserue
these things.
               1 That in the dayes of these two learned men,
which was about some 60 yeeres agoe, there was little
or no speach of any Equiuocation by mentall reseruation,
or of any such mixt propositions, as the Romanists now
fancie. This I gather, first, because Soto, in oppugning
these ambiguous Answeres and speaches allowed by
some Schoole-Doctors of that time, doth no where (to
my knowledge) charge them with any such opinion,
or euer labour to refute it. Which (considering the argument
that hee had in hand, and the diligence that he
vsed in handling of it, and cleering of all doubts that
belonged vnto it) no man may with reason imagine
that hee would haue for borne to doe, if those times had
giuen occasion of disputing such a question. Secondly,
the same learned man, in oppugning that liberty, which
others did grant, doth still ouerthrowe or confute their
opinion, because the interpretation and the meaning
which they doe allow those answeres to be taken in
by the speaker, are such as doe not agree to the vse and
signification of the words spoken, nor cannot bee applied
to them, without incongruity and absurditie. By
which reason of his, hee implieth, that these Diuines
meant no other ambiguity, or interpretation, or meaning,
in those answeres, then such as they thought,
the words in that case in which they were vttered
might beare. Or els his reason had beene insufficient
and foolish; which yet he supposeth to be such, as that
his aduersaries could not dislike as impertinent, if the

thing which he vrged were true. Thirdly, the same Author
doth still so set down his opinion, that in the cases
proposed, and others of the like nature; he alloweth any
ambiguity or Amphibologie,
                     Quam vsita
                           •
                        us sermo citra mend
                           •
                        cium ferre possit. Soto de lustit, & lure l. 5. q. 6. art. 2. 
                  which the vse of the speach
can beare without a lye, as in expresse words hee explaineth
himselfe, but refuseth and condemneth all
such, as is not noted and implied in the words. Fourthly,
Sepulueda, he also disputeth against those, who think
themselues not bound in the cases propounded to answere
according to the common meaning, and acception
of the words: and confuteth them, who hold it
lawfull simply to denie the crime truely layed to their
charge, although they purposely speake some other thing in
their minde, Which the Iudge, taking their words in the
common meaning, vnderstandeth not: Cap. 17. & throughout
the whole Booke. But yet I haue not obserued in
all that Booke any speach, in which hee mentioneth a
mixt proposition, a mentall Equiuocation, or an ambiguitie
made by a reseruation Against which opinion, (if
there had then appeared any such to the world) hee
might haue disputed with more probabilitie and
shewe of substantiall reason. But he no where (as farre
as I can obserue) either refelleth or mentioneth any
such opinion among these late and punie Diuines.
For wheras in the place last cited, he hath these words,
though purposely he speaketh some other thing in his minde,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ex industria aliud praeter ea mente liquatur.
that maketh nothing, as I thinke, for the mentall reseruation,
which our Equiuocators haue deuised. For he
meaneth nothing else, as I take it, but that the speaker
doth frame in his minde, another sense and meaning of
his words, then they in the common vnderstanding of
men doe make, or then the Iudge according to the
common vnderstauding doth take them in. And therefore
those very Schoole-Diuines, whom hee and Soto
doe refute for going too farre, and allowing too much
liberty, yet goe not so farre as our now Iesuites doe,

who build all vpon a fancied reseruation of their owne
framing, no way included in the words spoken. Fiftly,
say that those Diuines, whom these learned men doe refute,
did maintaine such a mixt proposition, & mentall reseruation
as our Romanists doe striue for: yet Soto saith,
that he had read no Schoole-Doctor, who allowed such
a fancie as Adrain imagined, which yet by a reseruation
of a Iesuite, might easily bee solued. And Sepulueda,
when hee came out of Italy into Spaine, thought it
strange, that hee found Diuines, who contrary to the
meaning of all the Ancients, did allow that opinion,
which he there refuteth. And therefore if we shall say,
that the Diuines against whom these men wrote, did
hold this Equiuocall reseruation, yet it was then a nouell
opinion, lately sprung vp, such as Soto had read in no
Schoole-Doctor of former time, and such as Sepulueda
did maruell to finde set on foote in his owne Countrey,
where he liued. But, as I said, these learned men did
not know of any such opinion risen vp at that time. And
therefore in those dayes either this Arte was not yet
found, or if it were, it was rather whispered in corners,
or taught obscurely, then published in Schooles.
               Secondly, I gather out of these learned mens writings
alleadged before, that Schoole-Doctors about that
time, allowed and gaue liberty for such ambiguities, as
in opinion of these men, and in trueth the words could
not beare: and therefore their interpretations were
forced & violent, and such as could not free their speaches
from being lyes. This without further deduction,
is euident by the words before cited.
               Thirdly, I obserue, that these hard and harsh Equiuocations,
by some Diuines then allowed, and the violent
constructions that they made of the words, were
then newly taken vp, and were vnknowne to the elder
and more iudicious Schoole-men.
               
               And out of all this, I leaue it to the iudgement of

the learned Reader, whether I may not vpon good reason
inferre; that therefore in all probabilitie, the later
sort of Schoole-Doctors, by the hard Equiuocations,
which they allowed, did giue occasion & layd grounds
for this Iesuiticall Art of Equiuocation, though at that
time themselues did not thinke of it. For, may it not
hence be reasonably conceiued, that the progresse and
proceeding to the framing of this Art, was on this
manner? that first of all, and in elder times, there was
nothing, but simplicitie in their Oathes and answers, or
if any ambiguitie was allowed to be vsed, it was but in
some such sense, as the circūstances of the persons, time,
place, and occasion, did put vpon them, and that according
to the intention of publique Lawes, and the reasonable
construction that the Hearers might make of
them: and that afterward they allowed violent constructions,
and such as the words, together with the
circumstances, could not beare, in any reasonable mans
vnderstanding, but such as the speaker, in his minde
did fancie to be agreeable to that businesse and occasion.
And lastly, that this ouer-bold liberty in them,
in framing such a sense, as the words in reason & cōgruitie
could not beare, made way to fine wits following
after, to adde something to the former inuention, and
to frame a sense of words spoken, which they acknowledge
not to be signified by them, but made vp by a
Reseruation in their owne breast, such as themselues
would please to fancie, what euer it were, either pertinent
to the businesse, or as farre different from it, as
the falling of the skie is different from the paying of money.
But this will appeare yet more plainely, if it be
considered, that Nauarre,
                  Nauar. Com. in c. Humanae aures, q. 1. nu. 4. & nu. 8. & 9. who liued at the same
time with Soto, & Sepulueda, but wrote after them, and
when they were dead, doth from the opinion of those
Diuines, and in speciall from the opinion of Soto also,
and from his sayings, labour to inferre and proue the

lawfulnesse of the Iesuiticall Equiuocation; because (as
hee saith) there is the like reason of them both. How
truely he inferreth his Conclusion, from the sayings of
Soto and the rest, I dispute not; I onely note in his
course of disputation, that hee taketh their assertions
for a ground to proue his owne by. And that sheweth
that those former Writers gaue occasion, &c. And thus
I haue declared my second Assertion concerning the originall
of this new Art.
               3. The third is, that whosesoeuer wit deuised it,
yet it seemeth to mee most probable, that it receiued
the first life and credit from the See of Rome, and the
Romane state. My reason is from these grounds.
               1. Doctor Nauarre, who (as Persons saith, Mitig.
cap. 7. nu. 41. pag. 301.) is held to be one of the most liberall
and largest in admitting Equiuocations both in words
and oathes, was thought a fit man to be the Popes Reader
of Cases in Rome. And if I mistake not, hee was
the first that broached this new arte. For hee read at
Rome not long after the time of Soto and Sepulueda,
who (as before was noted) had not yet heard any thing
of this arte. And there he read & framed thatPraefat. ante initium Commentar. in c. Human. aures▪
                   Commentary,
in which he teacheth this mysterie, for the
instruction of the Iesuits Colledge and dedicated the
same vnto Gregorie 13. the present Pope: which may
breede suspition, that the Pope was well pleased with
this new deuice of Nauarre, of whom he made choise
to be his publique Reader of Cases; and who, while he
was imployed in this seruice, did perfect that arte, and
from whose Readings, the very Iesuits themselues may
seeme to haue borrowed the grounds of that Doctrine,
which afterward they polished with great dexteritie
and care.
               Secondly, In Queene Elizabeths time, there was a
Treatise found out, which before was in the secret keeping
of Iesuits or Priests: in which, beside the Resolutions

of Nauarre, were contayned sundry instructions
and directions, giuen by Sixtus Quintus, for the practising
of this mysterie of Equiuocation. Which, if the
Reader be desirous to know more fully, hee may reade
a Relation thereof set downe byG. Abbot in the Preface to his Sixe questions. cap. 1. pag. 7. 8. &c. a most reuerend and
learned Prelate.
               
               Thirdly, I finde that Emm. Sà in his Aphorismes
V. Mendac. had giuen his opinion concerning this Equiuocall
reseruation, in this manner: that in a case,
Quidam dicunt,—posse respondere aliquid subintelligendo, vt non esse, s
                        •
                     z 
                        •
                     ta vt e
                        •
                      dieere teneatur; ve
                        •
                     se non habere, scilicet vt ei d
                        •
                     t. At alij id non admill
                        •
                     nt, & sortè potiori ratione. 
                  Where a man is not bound to reueale the truth according
to the intention of the Demander, some say, that a man may
answere by vnderstanding or reseruing something in his
minde, as that is not so, to wit so, as that hee is bound to
tell him: or that hee hath not such a thing, meaning, that
hee hath it not to giue it vnto him. But others admit not
of this kinde of answere; and perhaps, vpon better ground
and reason. Thus hee gaue his iudgement of this poynt;
and so the Booke passed in the Low Countries, and
with approbation and commendation of Silu. Pardo,
the Inquisitor and Censor there, and was printed at
Antwerpe 1599. But when it came to be perused,
and reuewed at Rome, the Censor there, Io. Maria,
Master of the sacred Palace, he purged the Booke, and
put out the last words, which were,Et sortè potiori ratione. 
                  And perhaps vpon
better reason. In which words Sà had signified, that
hee inclined to their opinion, who disliked this Equiuocating
by reseruation. And hence it appeareth, how
acceptable and welcome this Doctrine of Equiuocation
is in the Popes Palace. For whereas F.Sober Reckon. cap. 4. nu 76. pa. 276. 
                  Persons
saith, that in the last Edition of Sàes Booke at Rome
1607. this whole last sentence was left out, as though hee
had changed his opinion. AndIbid. nu 80. pag. 279. 
                  that it seemeth that Emm.
Sà did afterwards change his opinion; it is but a tricke
of iugling, such as this Father often vseth to delude his
Reader with. For Sà died, asRibaden. Catalogo Scriptotum Soc. Iesu. in 
                        •
                     man. Sa. 
                  Ribadeneira reporteth,
in the yeare 1596. eleuen yeares before this edition

of Rome, and three yeares before the impression of
Antwerpe, being then aboue threescore and ten yeares olde.
And if Sà, after so many yeares deliberation, had
changed his opinion, how came it about that that
change was not seene in the Antwerpe Copy, which
was printed 3. yeares after he was dea
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Besides, the
Edition of Rome, re-printed also at 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , An. 1612.
doth professe, that that Book was purged by Ioan. Maria,
the Master of the Palace, and not that it was corrected
or amended by Sà, the first Author of it. Further,
Persons giueth no one piece of a reason, by which
the Reader may imagine, that Sà did euer change that
point. And therefore, this is but one of Persons vsuall
trickes of fittening, with which his Brethren of the
secular Clergy doe so often charge him.
               Now these considerations layed together, make mee
thinke it very probable, that this Arte receiued its
life from the State and See of Rome. But if any man
can shew mee, whence it might rather haue its first
ground, I will willingly yeeld to him; and be thankefull
to him, that can and will discouer the Spring, or
Well-head, whence first flushed forth this muddy Nylus,
so fertile of Crocodiles, I meane of this sophistique
Crocodilites, whereby vnware men are ouer-reached
and caught.
               4. My fourth Assertion is; It is obserued by learned
men, that whosoeuer was the Author, yet the
Iesuites, especially those of our English Nation, haue
beene the chiefe Abettors, Defenders and Polishers of
this Arte. For proofe of this, I will set downe the
words of some learned men. TheRelation. nu. 33. fol. 36. learned Gentleman,
who wrote the Relation of Religion, speaking of
false newes, frequent at Rome, for aduantage of their
Sect, addeth, that he found by obseruation, and iudgement
of some wise men, that the Iesuites were the Masters of
that Mint, and that all those coynes were of their stamp;
                  
and, that the Iesuites were noted by some of their owne
friends, to be too hardie Equiuocators, and their Equiuocations
too hard. And Hospinian
                  Histor. Iesuit. l. 4. cap. 2. pag. 228. hauing cited many testimonies
of Iesuites for this Arte, concludeth that
therby it is euident, that many Iesuits with great care haue
explained and defended it,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      non immeritò Autores & inuentores eius esse vulgò dicantur. 
                  that not without cause they
are commonly thought to be the Authors and Inuentors of
it. Adde hereto that which the learned Casaubon obserued,
who was well acquainted not onely with the
writings of all sorts of Iesuits, but with the proceedings
and dealings of our English Iesuits also. Hee telleth
Front
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , a learned Iesuit,Constat multos vestri 
                        〈◊〉
                      Theologos—
                        •
                     am 
                        〈◊〉
                      magna cura, & expli
                        •
                     uisse & asseruisse. Sed qui p
                        •
                     aecipnè Acqui
                        •
                     oc catione
                        •
                      ex
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     uerint, 
                        •
                     os video fuisse Anglos. Cas
                           •
                        ub. Epist. ad Front. Ducaeum, pag. 108. 
                  It is a cleare case,
that many Diuines of your Order haue explained and
maintained that Arte: but they which haue especially
polished it, I finde to be English men. Yea and their owne
Brethren, the Secular Priests, lay the ouer-bold vse
of Equiuocation in their dish.Reply to Father Persons Libell, fol. 22. &c 23. 
                  For so famous (say they)
and so notorious are their Equiuocations, and so scandalous,
that the very Protestants take notice thereof, &c.
and, such iugglings, and shiftings of late haue beene vsed
by them, that not onely Protestants, but also Catholickes,
yea Priests can scarse tell when they speake sincerely, when
otherwise. And a little after, Howsoeuer this kinde of
dealing may seeme excusable vnto them, vnder the name of
honest Equiuocation; sure I am that few honest men will
excuse it from dishonest lying. And Master Watson
                  Quodl. 2. art 6. pag. 39. calleth
it the Iesuits rule of swearing and forswearing in a
contrary sense and meaning; andQuodl. 3. art. 4. pag. 66. 
                  a shift, which they
call a lawfull Equiuocation. And againe, heeQuodl. 2. art. 4. pag. 31. calleth
these Equiuocations, their absurd paradoxes of Equiuocation.
And the like speeches may be found in diuers
other places of the Priests bookes. By all which it may
appeare, that learned men on both sides, not onely among
the Protestants, but also among Popish Priests,
haue noted this deuice especially in the Iesuits: which
may be reason enough, (beside that which is to be found

in their owne writings) to make any sober man resolue,
that the Iesuites haue had their fingers chiefly in this
new deuised Arte. And reason may perswade the
same to be most likely; because the Iesuites are an Order
consecrated and deuoted from their very first birth
to the Popes will, to doe what may serue his turne. For
so the Iesuites themselues, who published Sanchez. Morall
worke, doe professe in the Epistle Dedicatorie to
Pope Gregorie 15.Prefixed before the second tome. that their first founderSe suamque Societatem Pontisieijs imperijs more pro
                        •
                     sus nouo mancipauit. 
                  did make
himselfe and his Order or Societie vassals to the Popes commaund,
in a new and vnheard of manner. And therefore
if the See and State of Rome, did (as before I shewed)
giue life, and credit and authoritie to this Arte; then,
in reason it must be conceiued that the Iesuites, who by
their first institution are created the Popes vassals, to
serue at his pleasure, and to doe his will, would be the
most forward in the ranke, to vphold and maintaine
with all their wit, this deare Childe of the Popes
owne breeding. And yet when I conclude that the Iesuits
are the most forward, and the men that haue polished
this Arte, my meaning is not, either to include
all of that Order within this compasse, or to exclude
all others not of that Order from it. For first among
the Iesuites, Becanus doth disclaime it, asManual. Controu. l. 5. cap. 21. & Opusc. Theolog. tom. 1. Opusc. 17. in Respons. ad Aphoris. 13, 14, 15, 16. & tom. 2. Opusc. 1. in Append de fide Haer. seruandâ in exam. 4. propositionis. being not
taught by the Iesuites, and vnlawfull to be practised by any.
Wherein hee saith well, that it is vnlawfull; but
ill, that it is not taught by the Iesuites. For their Doctrine
this way is so cleare, and so open to the view of
all men, that Becanus in denying it, must needes either
vse the Arte of Equiuocation, which himselfe condemneth,
or else tell a flat and downe-right lye, which is
not much better. And the like may be noted in the
writings of some other Iesuites, who deny and renounce
this deuice. But they had best keepe themselues
from Rome; for if they come in the Censors
hands, it is to be feared hee will deale with them, as

he hath done with their felow S
                        •
                     
                   already; that is, circū
                  cise
their lips, and teach their pens to speake the Roman
Language more purely. Secondly, among those that be
no Iesuites, wee haue experience and examples good
store, of them who haue learned this Arte, and maintained
it as stiffely, as the best Iesuite can. In which
number, I may place Doctor Norrice, who beeing apprehended
in Oxford, denyed himselfe to bee a Priest,
and afterward in prison did defend it by this sleight of
Equiuocation, and that he maintained to be lawfull, by
the example of our blessed Sauiour; Mar. 13. 32. But of
that day & houre knoweth no man, neither the Son, &c. and
Ioh. 7. 8. Ego non ascendam, &c. For so he then alledged
the place, as Father Persons also doth, against both the
Greeke, and their owne approued Latine. In expounding,
and applying of which Texts to his purpose, how
weakely he behaued himselfe, he may now bee pleased
to call to his remembrance: that as he braggeth of his
victories ouer other men, so for his humiliation, hee
may sometimes call to mind his owne infirmities. And
that perhaps may stand his soule in as good stead, as the
meritorious forbearing of Equiuocation, when he might
lawfully vse it: which (as Father Persons saith) may increase
his Crowne and merit in heauen.
               But in earnest, he shall doe well, if in the next edition
of his Antidote, he place this question of Equiuocation
among the rest of his Controuersies, and tell vs in
good sadnes, what, after so many yeeres more, he thinketh
of this Point. But in the meane while, the Reader
may vnderstand, that Dr. Norrice is not the only man
that ioyneth with the Iesuites in the practice and maintenance
of this Arte. For in this small Treatise may
be seene diuers testimonies for it, out of other Writers.
And the secular Priests, though they charge & vpbraid
the Iesuites with a nimium, too often and too bold a
practice of it, yet themselues doe allow it, euen when

they shew greatest opposition against the Iesuites. So
Master Watson
                  Quod lib. 3. art. 4. p. 66, 67. speaking of Equiuocation, as a shift
which the Iesuites vse; saith, that though there bee no
question to bee made of it, but that in some sense it may bee
lawfull, &c. In which place, the sum of that, wherein
he sheweth his dissent & dislike of the Iesuites, (for his
owne words are too many to be set down in this place)
is in these two things▪ First, That the Iesuites doe allow
Equiuocation in a case, wherein he thinketh a man
is bound to speake the plaine truth. And secondly, that
they doe hold, that they may not onely to their Aduersaries
(to Protestants) but euen also to any Catholike Magistrate,
yea to the Pope himselfe, answere one way, and meane another.
And to like purpose, the Author of the Replie to
Persons Apologie, beeing to answere for D. Bagshaw,
whom Persons had reprooued, as denying the doctrine
of Equiuocation; saith, that the Doctor,Cap. 17. in the very end pag. 331. 
                  no doubt, knoweth
in what cases doubtfull answeres and Equiuocations are
to be made to curious questions: neither is it to bee thought
(saith he) that he dissallowed thereof, but onely of the liberty,
which is in the Iesuites and their Adherenes, in all their
dealings with other men. By which it may appeare, that
the difference betweene the Secular Priests and the Iesuites
in this point, is not about the equitie & lawfulnes
of this Arte, but about the liberty and large scope
that the Iesuites take, to practise it among their owne
Brethren, and before their owne Magistrates and Superiours,
and in all their dealings. And surely, for our
owne experience, I cannot learne any thing to the contrarie,
but that our Tribunals and places of Iudicature,
our Bishops, Iustices, and other Officers, who haue to
deale in their Examinations, yea and that our common
sort of Christians who conuerse with them, doe find in
their experience, that Secular Priests, and 
                     •
                  ale Papists
of all sorts, doe iumpe with the Iesuites in the practice
of this Arte. Notwithstanding, if any among them,

which call themselues Catholikes, doe renounce and
disclaime it, as well in deedes as in words; I am so far
from fastening any imputation of disgrace vpon them
for this iniquitie of their brethren, as that I wish and
pray they may goe on, to forsake and abandon all other
the abominations and errors of the Roman Church.
But (to draw toward an end in this Point) all things
considered, my Conclusion commeth to this head;
That this mystery of iniqu
                        •
                     ty spreadeth farre and neere
in the Papall Kingdome, hauing receiued authority and
countenance from the very Roman See, and finding entertainement
and acceptance among all inferiour sorts:
but yet the Iesuites are they that haue chiefely polished
it, and most boldly practised it; and among the Iesuites,
our English-men (be it spoken to the credite of our Nation)
doe beare the bell away. And from hence the Reader
may see why our Diuines doe vsually ascribe this
Doctrine to the Iesuites: and consequently what wee
haue to answere to Becanus his question. ForQuaro eur h
                        •
                     nc fallendi artem appelles Aequiuocationem Iesuiticam. to
                           •
                        . 2. Opusc. 1. in Append. in examinatione 
                           •
                        . propos.
                   
                  I desire
to know (saith he) why you call this Arte of deceiuing,
Iesuiticall Equiuocation: and our answere is ready; We
call it Iesuiticall, because men of that order, haue beene
the chiefe Abettors and polishers of that Arte.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               Of the matter or obiect of Equiuocation, or in what
cases it is allowed by the Patrons of it.
               
                  FOr the matter or obiect, about which
this Arte may be exercised, F. Persons
                  Mitigat. cap. 7. nu. 7. pa. 277. & cap. 10. nu. 23. pa. 424. & cap. 11. nu. 31. p. 460. & cap. 13. nu. 2. p. 547. seemeth to except two cases, in
which they hold it vnlawfull to equiuocate
First, In matters of faith: and
secondly, in buying and selling, in common
conuersation and humane traffique,
to the hurt or preiudice of any. But this is but another
tricke of his iuggling, by which hee would bleare the
eyes of his Reader; and make the world beleeue that
they vse no fraud, either in matters of Religion, or in
businesses with their neighboures, so that any body should
be hurt or beguiled by them. For first, where he saith,
that they may not vse Equiuocation in matters of faith,
perhaps in this saying he doth equiuocate with vs; and
meaneth, that we may not so vse Equiuocation, as to deny
any point of faith. But that in handling & dealing about
matters of faith, it may bee lawfull with them to
vse this Arte; there are good proofes from their own
Writings, beside all the experience of their practice.
For F. Persons saith, thatMitig. c
                        •
                     . 11. nu. 23. p. 454. 
                  in matters of Religion, it belongeth
to the faith of the hearer-to seeke out the speakers
reseruation for his better assurance. Which is but a sclender
comfort to a poore Christian, who had as good
seeke a Needle in a bottle of hay, as a reseruation locked
vp in an Equiuocators mind: but hence it followeth,
that he alloweth Equiuocation in matters of Religion. A-Againe,

the same Father Persons telleth vs, thatMitig. cap. 13. nu. 3. p. 548. 
                  no
man can deny, but many facts and cases may fall out concerning
matters of Religion, not tending to Confession (especially
in time of persecution) wherein a man may, or
perhaps also must by obligation vse equiuocall speeches.
Here he granteth, that by their principles, it is an vndoubted
conclusion, that in cases concerning Religion,
a man may equiuocate, so the case be not such, as
tendeth to Confession; 1. as I vnderstand it, if by equiuocating
he doe not seeme to deny the Roman faith,
which at such times, they hold it necessarie for their
Children, without any tergiuersation to confesse. But
elsewhere hee vnfoldeth himselfe a little more plainely,
when he saith of Equiuocation,Sober Reckon. in Append. nu. 25. pag. 687. 
                  that it may not be
vsed in matters of Religion, where Confession of our Faith
is required. For this implyeth, that where Confession
of faith is not required, there it may be lawfull enough
to equiuocate. But euident and cleare it is, that the
Mitigat. cap. 9. num. 25. & seqq. Iesuite maketh our blessed Sauiour to equiuocate in
sundry matters of Religion, and thence would perswade
vs, that by his example, they may doe the like. As for
example, hee did equiuocate, when he said of the day
of Iudgement,Mar. 13. 32. 
                  Of that day and houre knoweth no man,
nor the Sonne, &c. And when hee said of himselfe,Ioh. 8. 15. 
                  I
iudge no man: the Iesuite saith, that this speech without
a mentall reseruation is false, and cannot stand, for that
it should be contrary to many other places of Scripture:
and should imply a deniall of Christs office to be our
Iudge. He proceedeth to other examples, and telleth
vs, that Christ did equiuocate about the Sacrament of
Baptisme, when he said,Mar. 16. 16. 
                  Hee that shall beleeue, and be
baptized, shall be saued: and about eating of the flesh of
Christ,Ioh. 6. 51. 
                  If any man shall eate of this bread, hee shall liue
for euer: and about Prayer, when hee said,Ioh. 16. 23. 
                  If ye shall
aske any thing of my Father in my name, he will giue it you.
Now the points here spoken of, and others of like nature,

in which the Iesuite findeth Equiuocation to
haue beene vsed in Scriptures, are, I trow, matters of
faith and Religion. And hence it followeth, that Equiuocators
must either confesse that they abuse the world
in alledging these and such like Texts, to proue and
vphold Iesuiticall Equiuocation, which is not there
meant; or that they hold their Equiuocations to be
lawfull, and sufficiently warranted, euen in principall
matters of Religion, such as are Christs office of iudging,
the doctrine of the Sacraments, and prayer in Christs
name. In the first place then, when Persons excepteth
matters of faith from the practice of Equiuocation, hee
mocketh his Reader with generall speeches, when hee
meaneth no such thing; but onely that men may not
equiuocate, by denying in words their beliefe of the Roman
faith, or some such like. Secondly, where Persons
saith that they allow not equiuocation in common
conuersation, in buying, &c. it may be obserued that
Nauarre,
                  Comm. in c. Human. aures. q. 3. nu. 1
                        •
                     . the famous Reader in Rome, doth highly
commend this Equiuocation as aPer hanc doctrinam singularem possunius euitare innumera pe
                        •
                     cata, &c. 
                  singular point of
Doctrine, by which wee may auoid innumerable sinnes
which wee commit by denying and affirming without this
mentall reseruation, with which if the words spoken were
ioyned, they would become true. This he explaineth and
confirmeth thus:Passim enim interrogamur, Quò vadimus, quid comedimu
                        •
                     , &c. 
                  We are asked & demanded euery foot,
whither we goe, what we haue eaten, how much money we
haue, or haue borrowed, or haue giuen, what letters and
newes we haue receiued, what wee haue written and related;
what such or such a man said to vs, what wee know
of such or such a one: and many hundred like. To all
which (saith hee) wee might answere without sinne,
Subintelligendo aliqua, quibus fient vera quae annuimu
                        •
                     , vel falsa quae negamus. 
                  by vnderstanding somewhat in our mindes, which may
make that true, which we affirme, and that false, which
wee deny: As for example, when a man asketh of vs, money,
or a Booke, or newes, &c. if wee answere him, I haue
them not, or I know them not; vnderstanding,
                  Ita vt tenear vel conueniat illi praestare, tradere, dicere, &c. 
                  so as I am

bound, or, as it is conuenient to doe it, or giue it, or to speake
and make is knowne. The like is affirmed bySumma v. mendac nu. 4. pag. 385. 
                  Emm.
Rodriquez, who alledging this determination of Nauarre,
and transcribing also some of his words, addeth
in the end, to shew how hee esteemed this deuice,
Quae doctrina deb
                        •
                     t notari. 
                  which Doctrine ought to be marked and obserued. And
Fernandes
                  De praecept. 2. §. 1. nu. 8. p. 49. in his Examen saith, that if a man being requested
to lend a thing to his neighbour,
                  Causam habeat non illam dandi. 
                  haue a cause or
reason, why hee will not grant or giue it, &c. hee may
sweare by Equiuocation, that he hath not such a thing. And
Sanchez,
                  In comm
                        ••
                     n loquutione interrogato de re, quam secretò seruare exp. dit, licitum est dicere, se nescire, intelligendo, ita vt expediat dicere. Sanchez O. per moral l. 3. c. 6. num. 25. 
                  In common talke (saith hee) if a man be asked
of a thing which it behooueth him to keepe secret, it is lawfull
for him to say, that hee knoweth not, vnderstanding so
as that it is expedient to tell it. And Father Persons
                  Mitigat. c. 9. nu. 81. & 83. pag. 403, 404. also thinketh it most iust and necessary, if a man
come to borrow mony, whom we may not deny without
inconuenience, that we may then answere equiuocally
that wee haue it not; vnderstanding, with any
minde to lend it: or that wee haue it not in our purse,
&c. Which instances and examples, if they be not
matters of common life and conuersation, I know not
where to finde any. But it may be said, that Persons,
when he excepteth matters of common conuersation in
buying, &c. hee addeth, to the hurt or preiudice of any;
as if hee meant by that restriction, to leaue a libertie of
equiuocating, euen in buying and selling, and humane traffique;
so it be without the hurt of any man: but then
vtterly to forbid it. And I graunt, hee addeth those
words: but I cannot tell, whether he meant the vulgar
Reader to conceiue that meaning in them. Howsoeuer,
there is a mysterie in those words, whichIn c. Human. 
                        •
                     ures. q. 2. nu. 12. 
                  Nauarre,
(who vseth to deale aboue-boord, and to speake
more plainely) hath vnfolded, when he calleth it,Verum & iniustum damnum. 
                  a
reall and vniust hurt or preiudice; by which hee vnderstandeth
such an hurt, as wee may not doe to another,
without sinne and iniustice. And then, the meaning of

this goodly Exception of Persons, will be this; that
in buying, and selling, and humane traffique, and common
conuersation, wee may not equiuocate, if thereby wee
doe hurt any man vniustly and vnlawfully: but else, if any
of their Catholiques should thinke that the hurt
which redoundeth to one of vs, is lawfull and iust, that
then they may freely delude vs with their amphibologies
and reseruations, in what matter soeuer, and for
what end they please, though it were for massacring of
an assembly, or for murdering of a Prince, or for blowing
vp of a Parliament, or for the inuasion of the Kingdome
by hostile and forraine forces. And so by this
exception we are well freed from the feare of these deluding
and equiuocating spirits. Let vs then dismisse
Persons, with his shifting Exceptions and enquire more
particularly and directly what the cases be, wherein
they doe in sober sadnesse allow their Schollers to vse
the benefit of this Art. And for this purpose I finde
two things said by them. First, that whensoeuer a
man may lawfully keepe silence, and say nothing, or
whensoeuer hee is not bound to reueale and lay open
the truth, then hee may lawfully equiuocate, and vse
this sleight of amphibologie: be it a matter of faith, or
a businesse of commerce and traffique, or a poynt of State,
or what else you will, it mattereth not to this purpose.
For proofe of this, first take the resolution of Father
Garnet. He being prisoner in the Tower, and required
to declare his opinion concerning this point, set downe
his minde in writing, which is yet kept vpon Record:
and it was this,De Aequinocatione ita censio. In rebus moralib. & cōmuni vsa vitae, quando veritas inter amicos requiritur, vti aequ
                        •
                     ocatione haut licet: id enim Societati hominum magno mala cedere
                        •
                     . Quare hoc remedio in istis null
                        ••
                      loc
                        ••
                     . Quoties verò de necessari
                        •
                      defensione agitur, dequs, iniuria aliqua euitanda, aut damno, aut de consequando aliquo non parui. momenti hon
                        •
                     , sine vll
                        •
                      cuiusqua
                        •
                     r periculo, tum luita est. Aequinocati
                        •
                     . Casaub. Ep. ad Fronton, Du
                           •
                        . pag. 1. 1. 
                  Concerning Equiuocation this is mine 
                        ••
                     
                     pinion.
In morall matters and common vse of 
                        〈◊〉
                     ; to haue among friends it is required of a man to speake truth, then
hee may not vse Equiuocation, &c. But as oft as there is
occasion for necessary defence, or for auoyding of some iniury
or damage, or for obtaining some good of weight or moment,
withall the perill of any 
                        〈…〉
                      Equiuocation 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
In which speech, Master Casaubon doth truely note
by the way, that those words, without the perill of any
man, are onely added for a colour, and to blind the simple
with: as I noted the like before, in a like sentence
of Father Pers
                        •
                     ns. But the thing that I now note for
this purpose, is, that he saith; In cōmon vse of life, when
it is required of a man to speake truth, then it is not lawfull
to equiuocate. By which words he implyeth, that where
a man is not of duety bound to speake or reueile the
truth, there he may obscure & hide it by this Arte. The
same Father Garnet, while hee stood at the Barre, in
fewer words, and plainer manner explaineth his
meaning thus;Proceeding against Traytors, lit. u. 4. 
                  No man may equiuocate when he ought
to speake the truth, otherwise he may.
               
               To like purpose Fernandes
                  Ea etiam vti licet, quum iustè quis interrogatur, si datur rationabilis causa non responderdi ad metem Interrogantu. Fernand. Exam. de praec. 2. cap. 5. § 1. nu. 8. p. 49. 
                  A man may lawfully
vse it also, when he is iustly or lawfully demanded, if hee
haue a reasonable cause not to answere according to the
meaning of the Demander. And Heissius the Iesuite,Non solum Qu
                        ••
                      iniuriosa est interrogatio, sed etiam absque culpa interroganti, saepe non tenemur ad mentem eius respondere, quandocunque scilicet Interrogans non habet ius impe
                     
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                      responsionem, & Interrogato id
                        •
                     nea miniineq, leuis illius dene gandae causa suppe
                        •
                     t. Nam cui tacere licet, 
                        〈◊〉
                      praeter quaesita, aliud quid cum Deo Coelitibus, aut sec
                        ••
                     n loqui po
                        •
                     si, seu 
                        •
                     ocall, seu 
                        〈…〉
                      se
                        •
                      mixta, 
                        •
                     i. partim vocali, partim mentali. Heiss. Refut. Aph. c. 4. Aph. 2. nu. 117. p. 191.
                  Not onely (saith hee) when the question is vniust, but also
when it is without fault; we are many times not bound to
answere him that asketh the question, according to his intention
and meaning: and that is, whensoeuer the Demander
hath not right to command an answere; and the Demanded
hath a sufficient and not idle reason to deny it. For he that,
may lawfully hold his pe
                        •
                     ce, 
                        •
                     ay, passing by the things that
are asked him, speake some other thing with God, the heauenly
Spirits, or with himselfe, either by vocall or mentall
speech, or by a mixt, speech, which is partly vocall and partly
mentall. In these two last testimonies, the instance is
in a particular case, when a man is examined or questioned:
but the ground on which they build their determination,
is a generall Rule, that whensoeuer a man
may lawfully say nothing, then he may lawfully equiuocate,
and speake by a mixt Proposition; as appeareth
plainely in the reason of Heissius, now set downe in his
owne words. And in a word, Equiuocators say, that

ifPersons mit. c. 10. nu. 23. pa. 424. Greg. de Valent. tom. 3. Disp. 5. q. 13. punct. 2. §. Ad. 2 Arg. Sanchez moral
                        •
                     . 3. c. 6. nu. 16. p. 26. a man vse Equiuocation with mentall reseruation, he
doth not offend against the negatiue Precept, which for,
b
                     •
                  ddeth a man to lye; because, whatsoeuer he speaketh
in that maner, is a truth: onely hee may offend against
the affirmatiue Precept, if he doe then equiuocate, when
he is bound to vtter and reueile the truth. And hence I
inferre, that whensoeuer a man may lawfully say nothing,
as not being bound to reueile the truth; then in
these mens opinion, he may lawfully speake by Equiuocation.
And this is the first thing that they say for this
purpose.
               The second thing is, thatCausa iusta vtendi his amphibologiis est, quoties id necessarium aut vtile est ad salutem corporis, honore, res samil
                        •
                     ares tuenda, vel ad quemlibet alium virtutis actum: ita vt veritatis occultatio censeatur, tunc expediens ac studiosa. Sanchez op. moral. l. 3. c. 6. num. 19. 
                  there is iust cause for vsing
of Equiuocation, whensoeuer it is necessary or expedient for
preseruing of bodily safety, honor, houshold goods, or for any
other act of vertue; so that the hiding of the truth may
then be thought to bee expedient and honest. So speaketh
Sanchez, meaning this rule of such an Equiuocation as is
ioyned with an oath. For else,Dum Sotus ait non esse culpam Amphibologus uti joco, & in ridiculis, intelligo quando absque iuramento id fieret. Tunc enim honestus ille ludus, recreationis iusta causa exereitus, honc stum redderet amphibologiae vsum. At si iuramentum adesset, est manifesta culpa, propter vanamet indiscretā Diuini Nominis vsurpationem. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 22. if there be no oath vsed,
then honest sport vsed for lawfull recreation, may make
the vse of Equiuocation lawfull. But if there were an oath
added, then it is an euident fault, because of the vaine and
indiscreet vsing of Gods Name. So speaketh the same
Author not long after. From which words of the Iesuite
we may gather two things. 1. That an easie cause
may suffice for iustifying of Equiuocall speeches, in a
simple assertion without an oath. If there bee no other
cause but onely for merriment and recreation, yet that is
reason inough to make the vse of Equiuocation lawfull
and honest. 2. That when other Equiuocators doe require
some kind of necessity or vtility which may draw
men to vse it; they are to be vnderstood of Equiuocation
ioyned with an oath, and not when it is vsed in a
bare and simple affirmation or negation: vnlesse wee
may conceiue, that sport and merriment goeth with
them for a matter of necessite or great moment. And

indeed, this difference giuen by Father Sanchez, betweene
Equiuocation with an oath, and without it, hath
reason in it, if we consider their grounds and principles.
For in affirmations and negations, there are two things
required. 1. That no lye be told: for this is required
by the negatiue precept of truth, as they vse to speake.
And this fault, as they thinke, they auoide by their
arte of Reseruation. And secondly, that men conceale
not a truth, when they are bound to disclose it: for
this is required by the affirmatiue precept of truth.
But in an Oath, besides truth in the speech, there is a
third thing required, and that is, that it be vndertaken
with iudgement, that is to say, aduisedly and with due
discretion. Else, by swearing a truth vnaduisedly, Gods
Name may be prophaned. There is reason then for this
difference which Sanchez maketh. And now by all
this, the Reader may see, that an easie cause is thought
sufficient for the vsing of this Arte. If it be for ease of
the body, safety of a mans goods, preseruing of his credite,
&c. then by their doctrine, a man may equiuocate
with an Oath: but if it be for sport and merriment only,
yet then it may bee lawfull in affirmations and negations
without an Oath: prouided that it be such a case,
in which a man may lawfully hold his peace, and bee
not bound then to disclose the truth.
               
               By this it appeareth in generall, in what cases they
allow the vse of this Arte. But for fuller satisfaction of
the Reader, and for more distinct conceiuing of their
meaning in this point; it will not bee amisse to point
out some speciall and particular Cases, in which they
giue expresse leaue for the practising of this sleight.
And they be these, and such like.
               1 If a Priest, that hath heard another mans Confession,
should be demanded, whether such a one had confessed such a
sinne vnto him, or not;—he may answere directly, that hee
hath not confessed any such thing vnto him, albeit hee had

done so: yea, he may sweare also this answere of his, vnderstanding
and reseruing in his minde, that the Penitent
hath not confessed the same vnto him, so as he may vtter it.
These be Father PersonsMitig. cap. 10. nu. 2. pag. 407, 408. 
                  words. And hee saith, they
be agreeable to the mind of all Schoole-Doctors.
               
               2Vltimò, Deducitur Poenitentem temerè rogatum, an hoc vel illud peccatū fassus sit, posse iurare se non confessum, intelligendo ita vt teneatur illi explicare. Sanchez mor. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 44. If a Penitent be asked without a iust cause, whether
he haue confessed such or such a sinne (which he had confessed
to the Priest) he may sweare he confessed it not, vnderstanding,
so as that he is bound to tell him. So speaketh
Sanchez, and citeth others of the same opinion.
               
               3Si contra iustitiam petit, et iuridice eum non interrogas, potest vti aequiuocatione, et iurare secundum propriam mentem. Tolet. de Instruct. Sa. l. 4. c. 21. num. 10. If a Iudge do against iustice question a Defendant,
and doe not question according to order of Law; the Defendant
may vse Equiuocation, and sweare according to
his owne meaning: that is, by a secret reseruation kept
in his mind. So saith Tolet. And Sanchez saith the like,
Iisdem amphibologijs potest vti Reus, quando Iudex interrogans non est legitimus Interrogati Iudex, aut in hoc casu peculiari, Sanchez l. 3. c. 6. nu. 27. When the Iudge that questioneth, is not the lawfull
Iudge of him that is questioned, or is not his Iudge in
that peculiar case; the Defendant may vse Equiuocation.
And the like he saith, if the Iudge bee an Excommunicate
person. And the like Father Persons doth largely confirme,
Mitig. cap. 10. nu. 11. and in the rest following. 
                  When the Iudge is not lawfull, or not competent at
least in that cause, or proceedeth not lawfully. In these cases,
they thinke that a man questioned before a Magistrate,
may vpon his oath, by an equiuocall reseruation,
deny that which he knoweth to be true.
               4Si quis hominē ignorāter, putans esse feram, occidat, aut in propriam defensionem-potest de eo facto rogatus in iudicio, id negare. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 29. If one doe ignorantly kill a man, thinking him to be a
wild Beast, (a Deere for example) or if he kill a man in
his owne defence; he may being questioned of the fact, denie
it vpon his oath.
               
               5Quando taxa alicutus rei est iniusta, si pluris vendens, aut defraudans in pondere & mensura, ita vt sibi satisfaciat propretij injustitia, & reddat correspondentes merces pretio date; potest hic interrogatus à Iudice, an pluris vendiderit vel desecent in pōdere aut mensura id negare, assacre
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      se pretio taxato vendidisse & integre pondus & mensura
                        ••
                      tradi 
                        •
                     isse, intelligendo haec, ita ut pluris vendens aut deficiens in pondere aut mensura deliquerit. Sanehez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 29. When an vniust taxe is set vpon a commoditie, if a
man sell it for more, or maketh light waight, and scant measure,
so that he make himselfe satisfaction for the wrong of
the Taxe, and yet sell his commodities worth the moeny; he
being examined by a Iudge, whether he sold the commodity

for more, or came short in his waight or measure, hee
may deny it, and say, that he sold it for the price that was
set him, and that he gaue full waight and measure; meaning
so, as that selling for more, or comming short in his waight
or measure, he did commit an offence.
               6Si reperto cadanere, quis interrogatur, an gladius ibi repertus fit suus, vel tali ho
                        ••
                      illaec transierit, quae vera sunt, & petuntur ab eo, tanquam illiu
                        •
                      homi
                        •
                     idiji indi 
                        •
                     ia quod verè no commisa potest negare. Sanch l. c. nu 30. If a man be found slaine, with a Sword lying by him;
and a guiltlesse person should be asked, whether that sword
were his, or whether hee passed that way at such an houre,
(which things are true, and are inquired after as signes of
that murder, which he committed not) he may denie it.
               7Ratione optima docent cum, qui nummos mutuò acceptos soluit, posse a Iudice rogatum de mutuo, iucarese illud non accepisse, intelligendo ita ut teneatur id soluere.—Atque idem credo si tunc non teneretur soluere, eò quod terminus, ad quem matuum datum fuit non est impletus; vel prae paupertate excusatur debit or a tunc soluendo. Sanch l. c. nu. 31. If a man haue borrowed money, and paied it againe,
and be examined of the Iudge, concerning the money that he
borrowed; he may sweare that he borrowed not that money;
vnderstanding so as that he is now bound to pay it. And so
a man may sweare, that he had not such money, which hee
did receiue; if through pouerty he be excused from making
payment, or if he should be vrged to pay it, before the day
that it is due.
               8Nonò, deducitur Creditorem virtute Instrumenti publici exigeteur eoram Iudice debitum,—et si pars illius sunun
                        ••
                      debita s
                        •
                     luta sibi sit. &c. Si Debitor reconcentat eoram Iudice Creditorem, vt iuret an pars illius debiti soluta sit sibi, potest iuarare solutam non esse, intelligendo vt modò non sit tantundem sibi debitum. Sanch. l. c. num 36. If a Creditor haue money owing him vpon Bond,
part whereof is p
                     •
                  yed vnto him, but as much is due vnto
him some other way, for which hee hath no Instrument to
shew: if he be required before a Iudge, to sweare whether
part of that debt were payd him; he may sweare that it was
not paied, vnderstanding, so but that as much is now due to
him, some other way.
               
               9.Vndecimo deducitur, co
                        •
                     ctam aliquam actipere in sponsam, quam ducere non tenetur, posse iurare se accepturum, intelligendo in
                        ••
                     a se, Si teneor vel si postea placuent mihi. Sanchez ibid. num. 39. Tolet. de Instruct Sacerd. l. 4. 21. nu. 11. If a man be forced to promise marriage to a woman,
whom otherwise he is not bound to marrie [the meaning
is, if he be vrged and pressed by a Iudge against
reason, to make that promise] he may sweare, that hee
will marry her, though hee meane it not, vnderstanding

within himselfe, If I be bound to doe so, or, if afterward I
shall like of it.
               10Si vir ab vxore petat an sit
                        •
                     dultera, ista potest dicere, Non sum, squam
                        •
                     is verum fuerit eam adulterium cōmississe) intelligendo, vt tibi reuelem Tolet. Instruct. l. 4. c. 21. nu. 11. Sanch. moral. l. 3. 
                           •
                        6. nu. 41. Persons, mitig. c. 10. nu. 37. pa. 436. If a Woman, that hath played the whore, bee asked
by her husband, whether she haue committed adultery, shee
may sweare that she hath not done it, vnderstanding within
her selfe, so as I may or meane to tell you of it.
               11Contraxit quit matrimonium per verba de praesenti, qua de re postulatus corum Episcopo, potest ad
                        •
                     ibito iuramento respondere, non se contraxisse per verba de praesenti; seruata sibi clausula, ita ut matrimonium fuerit. Treatiso of Equiuocation, allowed by Blackwell and Garnet, cited by D. Abbot Antilog. cap. 2. fol. 13. and Casaub. Epist. ad Front. pag. 115. If a man haue contracted himselfe to a woman, and
afterward make another contract with another, by words
de praesenti: and being called before the Bishop, and there
asked, whether he made such a contract de praesenti with
this later woman, he may sweare hee did not, vnderstanding,
so as that it is a marriage.
               12Decimo quintò deducitur, eum ti quo mutuò pecunia petitur, quam reuera habet, posse iureiurando affirmare se eam non habere, intelligendo intra se, ut det. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. num. 43. & Nauart. Com
                           •
                        n c. Human. aures, q. 3. num 13. Persons mitigall. cap. 9. num. 81. pa. 401, 403. If a man bee requested to lend money, when hee is
not bound to lend it, though he haue the money by him,
yet he may sweare that he hath it not, vnderstanding within
himselfe, so as that he will lend it him.
               13Iondino quis, sauten
                        •
                     e ibi peste, proficiscitur Countriam, qu
                        •
                     m magistratus de vebis suae imolumitate soilicu
                        •
                     , diuersai ìibi non pert
                        •
                     untur, misi prius iuret se Londiat nuper non fuisse, non ende venisse, turare poterit non se venisse Londino, cum hac reseruatien
                        •
                      mentis, ita ut insectus po
                        •
                     le venerim. Treatise of Equiuocation, apud D. Abbot Antilog. c. 2. fol. 13. The like is said by Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. nu. 35. by Tolet. de Instruct. l. 4. c. 21. num. 12. by Nauarre Enchirid. cap. 12. nu. 19. If a man come from London in a time of Infection,
to Couentrie, were he cannot be admitted to ledge, vnlesse he
will sweare, that he came not lately from London; hee may
sweare that he came not from London, reseruing in his mind,
so as that I am infected with the plague, if vpon good reason
he thinke that he is not infected.
               14In communi loqtuitione interrogato de re quam secre
                        •
                     ò seruare expedit 
                        •
                     citum est dicere se nescire, intelligenda, ita vt expediat dicere.—potest estam—uti quauis alia amphibologia &c. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 6. num. 25. If a man in common talke bee asked of any matter
which it behooueth him to keepe secret, he may lawfully say,
that he knoweth not, vnderstanding, so as it is behoouefull

to tell it: or with any other reseruation that he will imagine.
               
                  Lastly,
                  Obseruandum quoties 
                        •
                     icitum est ad se tuendum vti aliqua aequiuocatione, id quoque erit licitum, etsi interrogans vrgeat excludens illam aequiuocationem. and, Quatum cun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      reduplicet iniquus Interrogator, vt inret se nulla aequiuocatione vti, & absque omni prorsus aequiuocaione id intelligere: adhuc id iutare potest intelligendo its vt planè debe at loqui et explicare vel aliquid aliud mente concipiendo, quo verum id reddatur. Sanchez moral. l. 3. c. 
                           •
                         num. 45. and the same is said in the Treatise of Equiuocation apud D. Abbot Antilog. fol. 13. fac. 2. If he that asketh the question, doe exclude the
vse of Equiuocation, and require a man vpon his oath not to
vse any Equiuocation, and that he meaneth what he speaketh
without any Equiuocation at all (as it is in the Oath
of Allegiance) yet he may sweare it still, vnderstanding,
so as he ought to speake plainely; or framing some other reseruation
in his mind, by which it may be made true.
               These and such like be the cases, in which they allow
their Equiuocating fraudes. I could adde more, but I
feare I haue wearied the Reader by too many already.
               Surely, by this that hath beene said, we may learne
two things, which it is requisite all plaine-meaning
Christians should take notice of.
               1 That Equiuocators, and such as are instructed in this
Arte, doe take vnto themselues a large liberty of vsing
this fraudulent deuice. For out of the premises it may
appeare, that whatsoeuer busines or occasiō be offered,
be the matter sacred or ciuill, publike or priuate, in open
Courts of Iustice, or in common practice of life; yet
if they can perswade themselues that they haue any serious
cause to conceale the truth, whether it be for some
good to their soules, or for safety of their bodies, or keeping
of their goods, &c. they may freely sweare the
contrary to that truth, by an Equiuocall or mentall reseruation.
And if they haue any light cause or reason, if
it be but for sport or merriment to recreate themselues,
then they may deceiue vs by an Equiuocation, in a simple
affirmation or negation, hauing no Oath in it.
               And this being so, I desire euery Christian, that would
not be deceiued, to consider with himselfe, whether he
can thinke of any busines that passeth between man and
man, in which hee may promise to himselfe plaine dealing,
or may presume that he shall not bee deceiued by
some mortall deuice or other, if hee haue to doe with
them, who doe professe this Equouicating Arte.
               
               Secondly, we may learne, that there is no limitation,
or exception, or explication, be it neuer so wise or wary,
nor any thing which mans wit can deuise, that may
restraine or keepe backe these Equiuocators, from deluding
vs by their equiuocall speeches; but that say or
doe what a man will or can, they will take libertie to
equiuocate still: so that no Oathes, how warily and
carefully soeuer they be framed, can hold these men,
further then themselues will.Vide intanta astutia quanta sit simplicitat, Quii omnem sec
                        ••
                     ritatem in eo i
                        ••
                     amento sibi statuisset, talam se m
                        •
                     dum iuramenti, tot circumstantijs conne
                        •••
                     isse existim
                        •
                     bat, qui, saluâ conscientiâ, nulla ratione à quoquā dissolui posset. Sed videre non potuit, si Pontifex iuramentum dissoluerit, omnes illius nexus, siue de sidelitate Regi praestanda, siue de dispensatione non admittenda, peritor dissolutos fore. Immo aliud dicam admirabilius. Nosti, credo, iuramentū iniustum, si tale esse euidenter s
                        •
                     tatur, vel aperte declaretur, neminem obligare; Reg
                        •
                      iura mentum iniustū esse, ab ipso Ecclesie Pastore sufficienter declaretam est Barthol. Pacenius, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Epistol. Monit. Iacob. Regis lit. 
                        •
                     . 2. & 3. 
                  Pacenius discoursing of
the Oath of Allegiance, laugheth at the simplicitie (as
hee calleth it) of our King and State, who thought by
that Oath to prouide for their safetie: as hauing hedged
it about with so many circumstances, as that, to their thinking,
no man could winde himselfe out of it with a safe
conscience. But they consider not (saith hee) that if the
Pope shall dissolue this Oath, al the bands of it, either for
performance of fidelitie to the King, or for not admitting a
dispensation from Rome, are shattered in pieces. Nay, I
will say one other thing (saith hee) that is more admirable.
An vniust Oath, when it is declared to be such, bindeth
no man: but that this Oath is vniust, hath beene sufficiently
declared by the Pastor of the Church. Hee meaneth
the Pope. And hereupon hee inferreth in an insulting
manner;Vades igitur tam in sumum ab
                        ••
                     sse Illius obs
                        •
                     
                     gatione; vt vnculii quod à tot sapientibus ferreum putabat
                        ••
                     , manus fit quam stramilie
                        •
                     . 
                  Thou seest now (saith hee) that the
band of that Oath is v
                        •
                     nished into smoak, so that the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
which so many wise men thought to be as strong as Iron,
proueth weaker then straw. Thus this man boasteth, that
by the Popes dispensation, or declaration of the vnlawfulnesse
of it, no Oath in the world is any thing worth.
A great priuiledge sure for them, that can so easily
winde themselues out of bands, euen the strongest that
can be thought of, among men. And yet me thinketh,
aliud admirabilius, the Equiuocators haue found a more
admirable deuice then this of Pacenius is. For he sendeth

a man to Rome, to fetch a dispensation thence, or
to get the Popes declaration of the vnlawfulnesse of the
Oath, and then they may breake all. But our Equiuocators
haue that at home, and within their own brests,
that may free them from all. For if themselues doe but
thinke that the thing is vnlawfull, or that they haue
some reasonable cause, to dissemble, they may take this
or any other Oath whatsoeuer, and by an equiuocall reseruation,
breake the band of that Oath, before they
take it. And if such be the priuiledges of these men,
how great is their danger, that liue and conuerse with
them? God preserue all well-meaning men from such
deceitfull tongues.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of the vse, or rather abuse of Equiuocation, and for
what turnes it may serue.
               
                  
                     EQuiuocation, such as hath beene described
before, may be beneficiall to them
that vse it many wayes, and for diuers
purposes. For in the generall it may
serue them for all turnes, in which by
mis-leading the Hearer, they may make
any aduantage to themselues: and more particularly
it may serue them for these speciall ends and purposes.
               First, in State-businesses, and matters of policie,
it may serue great men, to hide their plots, and
to worke their ends by: and yet to make faire weather
towards all men, and beate them in hand that they
meane nothing but friendship and loue. In this kinde
In c. Human. aur. q. 3. nu. 14. pag. 353. 
                  Nauarre telleth vs of a great Monarch,
                  Monarcha 
                        •
                     um prim
                        •
                      maximu
                        •
                     . who hee

thought had vsed, and did then vse this good art (as he
calleth it) by the benefit whereof, euery man was contented
and pleased, that came to him, or had to deale
with him about great affaires.Creditur enim ita excipere & audire ad se vementes, & sic ijsdem respondendo, significare tam gestu, quàm verbis & factis, vt placeaut eis, cum quibus rem gerit, intellecta secundum intentionem illorum, licet sint in se falsa, &c. 
                  For (saith he) hee is
thought so to entertaine and to heare those that come vnto
him, and in answering, so to expresse and declare himselfe
vnto them with whom hee hath to deale, as well by gesture,
as by words and deedes, that the things being vnderstood
according to their meaning, doe please and content them
                        •
                     ,
though in themselues they be false, but are true according
to the reseruations vnderstood by the Answerer. The
same Nauarre addeth further,Ibid. nu. 15. that he thinketh another
great Monarch meant to teach his sonneHanc doctrinam & artem bonam. 
                  this
doctrine and good arte of Equiuocating, when for some
secret defect, hee drew him backe from the studie of
learning, saying, I would not haue my sonne to haue any
more Latine, then onely that one Apophe he giue,
                  He that knoweth not to dissemble, knoweth not to raigne. 
                  Qui
deseit dissimulare, nescit regnare. Doe they thus instruct
their Catholique Princes, to dissemble and equiuocate?
and call they it a good Arte, by which
they may possesse men with a good opinion of them,
when they meane quite otherwise; that so they may
worke their ends, and bring about their proiects and
plots? Why, then I neede not feare to say, that one
turne, for which the Doctrine of Equiuocation doth
serue them, is in State businesses to hide their plots,
and to worke their ends by it. Which as it is aduantagious
to themselues, so it is dangerous for those that
haue to deale with them.
               Secondly, It may serue them, for a meanes to hide
their mischieuous plots against the State and Religion,
and yet to escape the hand of iustice after all. For
when they haue plotted and acted Treasons, or are about
any vnlawfull businesse, forbidden by the wholesome
Lawes of the Kingdome; Equiuocation serueth to
hide both themselues and their Associats, from the enquiry

of the Magistrate, be hee neuer so vigilant and
carefull. For if one of them be examined or asked,
whether hee haue reconciled such a man to the Pope,
or absolued such a subiect from his bond of Allegiance,
or haue conspired against the life of the King, or haue
beene acquainted with a plot of blowing vp the Parliament;
though all these things be most true, yet hee
may without scruple deny them all vpon his Oath. Or
in case one be detected otherwise, and examined, who
were his Associats, whether such a Priest, or such a Iesuite,
or such a Gentleman were priuy to the thing;
though these men were all of them as deepe in the villany,
as himselfe; yet he may sweare that none of them
all did know the least iote of the matter. And by these
trickes they can worke all mischiefe to Kings, and Nobles,
and People, and Parliaments; and yet wind themselues
and their complices out of the hands of iustice;
vnlesse God doe disclose them, as many times he doth
beyond the prouidence or expectation of man. For rather
then Treasons should goe vnespied, God maketh
Eccles. 10. 20. 
                  the Bird of the ayre to carry the voyce, and that which
hath wings to tell the matter; saith Salomon. This vse
southwell the Iesuite made of this Arte. For, fearing
to be detected,G. Abbot praelect. de mendacio. pa. 50. nu. 13. & R. Abbot Antilog. cap. 2. fol 13. fac. 2. hee instructed a Woman-Disciple of
his, that if shee should be examined, whether himselfe
were or had beene in that house, shee should vpon her
oath vtterly deny it; and so shee might safely doe, vsing
but the helpe of this Arte, though shee had often seene
him there, and knew him to be in the house. And to
like purposeProceeding against Traitors. C
                        •
                     . 2. 
                  Tresham, one of the Gun-powder Traitors,
vpon examination did confesse that Father Garnet
was priuy to the Treason, and had talked with him
about it: but afterward, hauing been better instructed
or confirmed in this rare mystery, when he lay sicke on
his death-bed, and not aboue three or foure houres before
his death, hee protested, and tooke it vpon his Saluation,
                  
and set it downe vnder his hand, that his former
Confession was false, and that hee had not seene
Garnet of sixteene yeeres space before, at the least. And
thus hee died. Which protestation of his, vpon his
oath, was proued not long after, to be most vntrue.
Yea, and Garnet himselfe confessed, that within that
space hee had seene him many times. Whereupon this
graue Father, and grand Equiuocator being demanded
what he then thought of Treshams Testamentall protestation,
hee answered,Proceeding against Traitors. Y. 3. 
                  It may be hee meant to equiuocate.
And this reuerend Father himselfe, who was
Prouinciall of the Iesuits, when after secret conference
betweene him and Hall, another Iesuite in the Tower,
hee was asked before all the Lords Commissioners,
whether Hall and hee had any conference together, and
was desired not to equiuocate; hee stiffely denied it vpon
his Soule, reiterating it with so many detestable execrations,
as wounded their hearts to heare him. And afterward,
when he knew that the thing was knowne, and
that Hall his fellow-Iesuite had confessed it; hee cryed
the Lords mercie, and said hee had offended, if Equiuocation
did not helpe him. And though the Priests accuse
the Iesuites for it, yet when they are examined before
a Magistrate, or Officer, they also say and sweare
and protest all maner of falshoods and vntruths, that so
they may winde either their fellowes or themselues
out of the danger of the Law. And indeede this is the
chiefe and principall turne, for which Equiuocation is
intended to serue them.
               Thirdly, In matters of Religion this good Art may
serue them to auoide arguments and euident reasons
brought against them, which their owne consciences
doe acknowledge to be true. For hereby they can
glosse the Fathers sayings against their meaning, and
deny all sorts of authorities that are alledged against
them. For so themselues professe to their friends in

secret,Quum in Catholicis veteribus alij
                        •
                     , plurim
                        •
                     s feramus c
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     res, & extenuemus, excusemus, excogitato commento persaepe negemus, & commodum ijs sensum offingamus, dum opponuntur in disputationibus aut in constictionibus cū Aduersarijs: non videmus cur non eandem aequit item & diligentem recognitione mereatur Be
                        •
                     tramus. Index Belgic. lit. B. in Bertramo. pag. 12. in 8•.
                   
                  Seeing (say the Belgicke Censurers) in other ancient
Catholiques, wee beare with very many errours, and
doe lessen and excuse them, and very often by some deuised
shift doe deny them, and feine vnto them some commodious
meaning, when they be obiected against vs in disputations
and conflicts with the aduersaries: wee see no reason
why Bertram may not deserue the like equitie or fauourable
dealing, and diligent reuising. This they professe
among their friends (for their meaning was not that
euer it should come to our sight:) and being that they
hold all lying to be so sinfull, that they may not tell
a lye for the sauing of a soule, it were too hard a censure
to thinke, that against the light of their owne consciences,
they would so wilfully thrust themselues on
that danger, and so boldly professe it in the eares of
their friends. But by this fine Arte they can quiet the
murmuring of their consciences, because by it, they
can say any thing, neuer so false, and yet by a reseruation,
make it as true as the Gospell.
               This consideration maketh mee not to maruell,
when in men, that professe such religious strictnesse,
(as Father Persons
                  Mitigat. ca. 7. num. 34. & seqq. saith they doe,) I finde such broad
and vnreasonable expositions and glosses of Fathers and
other Writers, as that no man of vnderstanding who
readeth the places, but will see, that the glosse doth
corrupt the Text, and the expositions doe clearely depraue
the Authors meaning. For I know that an Equiuocator
hath an Arte, by which hee can make all speeches
to become true, if once they doe but come forth
of his mouth.
               Fourthly, It may serue them for deuising and counterfeiting
of strange apparitions, and heauenly visions,
and diuine miracles. This, how frequent it hath
beene heretofore, the wisest and most learned among
their owne Writers doe confesse and bewaile. And of
late yeeres their owneThe Author and the Publishers of the Iesuites Catechisme. Brethren doe say, that the miracles

and visions reported ofL. 1. c. 18. fol. 64. 
                  Ignatius, andL. 1. c. 17. fol. 62. 
                  Iustinian
andIbid. 
                  Xauier, and others of the Iesuiticall straine and
order, are not much better. And what should let vs to
thinke, but they which presume so much in other
things, in ordine ad Deum, and pro bono societatis, in reference
to God, and for the good of their Order; would not
sticke to fitte
                     •
                   and faine and tell of glorious facts, and
admirable wonders which were neuer done, and make
faire shewes without substance, if these may helpe to
aduance the papall dignitie, or the Iesuiticall order, especially
seeing they know how to say and write and
sweare any thing for so great a good, without the least
grudge of conscience?
               Fiftly, It may serue them for forging and diuulging
of false, especially slanderous reports against their aduersaries
and enemies of their profession. A thing so
generally and so boldly practised by the men of this faction,
especially by the Fathers of Ignatius his Order,
thatRelation of Religion, num. 33. Beza Red
                        •••
                     . Epist. ad Gul. Stuck. wise men haue much wondred, when in such politique
persons as Iesuites are, they haue seene and obserued
such a strange liberty in coyning of forged tales,
as that the vntruthes which they haue broached, might
well be called splendida mendacia, transparent lyes, such
as by their owne light bewray themselues, or such as
within a few dayes might and haue appeared to the
world to be loude and lewd lyes, that might shame
their Master. And wee might well wonder, if we knew
not the Iesuites new Arte, that men of any either conscience
or honest minde, could let passe out of their
mouthes, or from their pens, such shamefull and yet
shamelesse fictions. For example (to giue the Reader a
taste of their forgeries and lying slanders) Luther was
a great mawle, that battered their Babel; and of him
they reported, and printed it too, that hee was dead
and buried, which was no great wonder: but (that
which was worth the straining of their wits) when hee

lay a dying, hee tooke order, that his bodie should be layed
on the Altar, and adored as a God. And when hee was
dead, and buried, that there was such a terrible noyse and
tumult about his graue, as if heauen and earth had gone together.
And the night after his buriall, that there was
a much greater and more hideous noyse and shricking then
before. And when, vpon the occasion of this fearefull
noyse, which frighted all the Citizens out of their
sleepe, his graue was opened the next day, there was
neither bodie, nor bones, nor graue-clothes to be seene; but
so hellish a stinke came out of his graue, as with the poyson
of it, it had almost killed the standers by. And all this
while Luther was aliue, and did helpe to demolish their
Babel still; and not long after the same time, published
a book in print, & gaue it this title, Contra Papatū
à diabolo institutum, Against the Papacie sounded by the
Deuill.
               
               This story if any man be desirous to see, he may read
Melch. Adamus, in the booke which he wrote of the
liues of German Diuines.In vita Luther
                        •
                      pag. 152. Where he may also reade
the words of the lying Relation, printed by them in
Italian, and afterward translated into Latine. After
this practice against Luther, they fell vpon Caluin, the
wounds of whose pen were deepe in their sides; and
of him they scattered this newes in the Courts of the
German Princes, and in a generall Assembly in Germany,
that Caluin now was weary of his Religion, had reuolted,
and was turned Papist. And at this very time,
was hee printing his booke of Institutions: and in a
Directed to the Reader. Preface prefixed before this booke, doth make answere
to this slander, and telleth these lying Spirits,
Fallitur cum tota sua caterna diebolus, &c. 
                  The Deuill and all his rowt of lying spirits are deceiued,
if they thinke by lading me with base lyes, to discourage or
hinder mee in my course. In like manner, but with more
shamelesse impudency, they afterward traduced Beza.
Of whom there were not onely false reports scattered

through Italie,See the Iesuits Cate chisme, l. 1. cap. 17. f. 62. Germany, & other Countries, but letters
also were written & diuulged to this purpose; That
Beza
                  Vise morti vicinum sensit, 
                        •
                     oram pleno Sena
                        •
                     u Geneuensi palinodiam 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Beza Red
                           •••
                        . Epist. Coloniâ misaâ, pag. 9. 
                  a little before his death had recanted his Religion
in a ful Assembly of the Senators of Geneua, beseeching them
that if euer they would be saued, they should renounce Caluins
errours, and betake themselues to the profession of the
Romish faith; that for more full testification of his vnfained
Conuersion, after his death hee desired them to send
for and to be aduised and directed by the Iesuites; that
hereupon the Pope had appointed the Bishop of Geneua to
absolue Beza, and other learned men, such as could be had
neere at hand, to goe to Geneua, and consider of the businesse,
and deale with the Inhabitants, if any were more
backeward, about points and Articles of Religion in question.
After which Relation, the Reporter addeth,
that this newes is most certaine and true; as may appeare
by the numberlesse company of letters written to this purpose,
and will (as hee saith) appeare at the next Franckford
Mart, by the store of Bookes which would then flye
abroad in the World, for the witnessing of this thing.
Hee yet goeth on further, and for more abundant
proofe, telleth vs, that Puteanus, the Generall of the Iesuites,
who liued within twelue miles of Geneua, had by
writing related this newes, adding moreouer, that himselfe
was one of those Fathers, whom the Pope had appointed
to goe and instruct the Citizens of Geneua. Yea,
and moreouer, saith the Relator, the Landgraue of Hessen,
being scared with this newes, sent messengers to Geneua,
who after their returne confirmed all this to be true.
This they reported of Beza; without either fear of God
or reuerence of men. For all this while Beza was aliue;
and continued preaching and writing against the superstitions
and idolatries of the Romane Church, for diuers
yeeres after. And for the clearer detection of this
shamelesse lye, he wrote a Booke, the title whereof is
Beza rediuiuus, Beza returned to life againe: Wherein

he hath laid open the Iesuites forgeries, to the shame
of their Order. I could bring more instances of their
abominable forgeries of this kinde, but I am afraide to
cloy the Reader with such vnsauoury fictions. Yet two
examples there are, (both within mine owne knowledge
and experience) which I cannot omit, without
some short rehearsall. The one is, of the famous Diuine,
Doctor Rainolds, President of Corpus Christi Colledge
in Oxford: and the other, of the worthy Prelate
Doctor King, Bishop of London, my euer-honoured
Lord. Of the former, some well-willers to the Romane-Church,
were discouered to haue diuulged reports,
in the time of his long sicknesse, (for hee died
of a lingring consumption) that hee voyded his owne
Ordure vpward by the mouth: (of which lye what
construction ill mindes would frame, any man may easily
conceiue.) This report was brought to him while
he was yet aliue, which made him to send for the partie,
who was said to be the author, or at least a reporter
of this forgerie, and shewed him what the matter was,
that hee vsed to spit out of his mouth, euen the very
same that other such sicke men vse to doe. But these
lyers might haue proceeded perhaps to fowler fictions,
had they not beene preuented by the timely prouidence
of some learned, and his louing and religious
friends. For they remembring and considering the
shamelesse practices of Papists, in scattering false newes
to disgrace the Worthies of our Church, came to him
the day before his death, put him in minde of their
false dealing, and desired him, that for the preuenting
of such slanders after his death, hee would now make
an open confession of his faith, and constant beliefe.
Which he being not able to doe with his owne mouth,
his speech hauing fayled him some dayes before, left
the composing of a forme of Confession to them, to
which hee would subscribe. And they considering his

weakenesse, framed it in generall and few words, in
this manner▪
               
               These are to witnesse vnto all the world, that now in
this my weakenesse, wherein I looke for my dissolution,
and hope shortly to be with my Christ, I die in a constant
beliefe, perswasion, and profession of that holy truth of
God, in defence whereof I haue stood both by writing
and speaking, against the Church of Rome, and what soeuer
other Enemies of Gods truth. And for mine owne
resolution touching mine owne state of Saluation after
this life, I assure my selfe thereof, by the merits of Christ
Iesus onely, into whose hands I commend my spirit, as
vnto my faithfull Redeemer.
               To this he readily subscribed with his owne hand;
               Iohn Rainolds.
               And his friends then present, who had beene eyewitnesses
and eare-witnesses of the whole passage of
this businesse, did by their hands witnesse the truth of
the act to the world, in these words:
               That hee made this Subscription with his owne hand,
with such willingnesse and chearefulnesse, as ministred great
comfort vnto vs, who were then present; wee testifie by this
subscription of our names also hereunto. May 20. 1607.

                     Henrie Airay Vice-Chancelor.
                     
                     Henrie Wilkinson.
                     Edward Rilston.
                     Richard Taylor.
                     Henrie Hindle.
                     Daniel Faireclough.
                     Henrie Mason.
                     Alexander How.
                     Iohn Dewhurst.
                  
               
               The Originall hereof signed with Doctor Rainolds
owne hand, and subscribed by the afore-named parties,
I haue in my custodie: out of which this is a true
and faithfull Transcript here published. Now blessed
be his counsell, and blessed be hee of the Lord, that gaue
this aduise for the stopping of these slandrous mouthes.

For had not this preuention beene vsed afore-hand, we
may feare that such as belied him in his sicknesse, would
not haue spared him after his death. And for want of
some such prouidence and preuention it is, that that
Reuerend and learned Prelate, (whose memory is precious
with all good men that knew him) our late Bishop
of Lo
                        •
                     don I meane, mine euer-honoured Lord
and Patrone: for want, I say, of some such prouidence
afore-hand, this glorious Soule hath beene traduced by
worthlesse pennes, and foule-mouthed fiends (the indignitie
of the thing maketh mee, against my nature
and custome, to giue them that name whereof they
are most worthy) as if hee had made defection to the
Roman Church; to whose errours notwithstanding he
shewed himselfe an Enemy to his dying-day: as those
that knew him inwardly, doe know very well, how
in the very time of his sicknesse, hee spared not vpon
occasion to expresse his zeale that way. But of all
foule-mouthes, that haue slandered that blessed Soule,
hee that wrote the Bishop of Londons Legacie, is the
most shamelesse and impudent lier. The Author of the
Protestants plea is but a milke-sop to this noble Champion:
and Father Persons himselfe must now be forced
to resigne vp to him the Whetstone, which his secular
Brethren bestowed vpon him for his excellency in the
fittening Trade. For they and other of their fellowes,
haue played their prizes well:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . but this L
                     •
                  yer excelleth
them all. He hath made two publications of one indiuiduall
Booke, qualifying, or rather destroying in the
latter, some transparent lyes, which with an Whores
forehead, and without regard of the Worlds censure,
hee had auerred in the former. For, in the yeere
1622. when hee first diuulged this Libell, he made the
worthy Bishop to speake those silly Motiues, which his
worthlesse selfe 
                     •
                  ad deuised. And so hee went masked
vnder the Bishops name: but with such difformitie

and disproportion euery way, as made mee remember
the Asse in the Fable; which presuming to weare the
Lyons skinne, did by his long eares bewray himselfe
to be an Asse notwithstanding. He saith, that the Bishop
himselfe did penne those Motiues, and deliuered
them to this Publisher, this publique Lyer, to be committed
to the Presse. I would the world were worthy
to vnderstand what rare man this is, that had such inward
acquaintance with that learned and wise Bishop,
as to heare from him the secrets of his heart, and to receiue
from him the studied Reasons of his Conuersion,
which were neuer made knowne to any bodie else.
And sure, it were a great honour to see that face, that
could come and goe, and conuerse with the Bishop about
these weightie affaires, and in this serious manner,
without being once seene of any other man; as if
by the vertue of some Gyges his Ring, he had bin transformed
into an inuisible Spirit. But he goeth on, and
saith that the man is knowne that reconciled the Bishop
to the Romane Church. But it is to be feared, he
will neuer make knowne the mans name to the world,
lest if the Reconciler should proue more shamefaste, then
this Publisher is, hee might returne the lye vpon the
Author that deuised it, and spit his shame in his owne
face. And yet say, hee both can and will name the
man, what great mastery is in this? or what great credit
might such a circumstance, comming from an Equiuocator,
gaine to his cause? For did not Puteanus
the Prouinciall of the Iaesuites, name the man that reconciled
Beza to their Church? Yes▪ He said expressely
(not with Ifs and Ands, as this Publisher doth)
that the man was the Bishop of Geneua. And did hee
not name beside, both the man that was sent to catechize
the Citizens of Geneua in the Romane Faith;
and the man that sent messengers to enquire of this
news in Geneua, & found it to be true? Yes. For, for the

one▪ he nameth himselfe, who among others, was going
to Geneua to instruct them. And for the other, hee
nameth the Lantgraue of Hessen, who was a Prince
not farre off, and knew the vndoubted truth of this
newes. Iesuites and Equiuocators are ashamed of nothing.
And yet, I would we might be so much beholding
to this Publisher, as to publish the Reconcilers
name, that performed so great a worke for this great
man. To this purpose this publike Lyer spake in the
first publication of his Booke; which not long after
was suppressed and kept from the view of the world. I
suppose, some of his Superiours more wary then himselfe,
being ashamed of such shining lyes, did call in the
Booke, till some kinde of qualification might temper
those shamelesse and hideons vntruths. And then in
the yeere following 1623. hee made a new publication
of the same worthy Worke, changing onely the
Title-leafe, and the Preface to the Reader. And in this
second publication, hee is contented to owne his owne
abortiue Brat, which in the former hee had without
shame fathered vpon the worthy Bishop: and wisheth
that himselfe may be taken to haue written those motiues, as
a precedent or patterne warranting any Protestant in the
change of his Religion, though by a Poeticall freedome peculiarly
applyed to the Bishop. And whereas throughout
the whole Booke, hee maketh the Bishop speake
what himselfe had forged; hee now giueth his Reader
leaue with his full consent and allowance, to suppose all
these passages to be fictiones personarum, and warranted
by the figure Prosopopeia, that is, a fiction of the
Person. It were some signe of grace, if he had acknowledged
the whole fiction, as hee doth this part of it. But
he goeth on still: and euen in the new altered Preface,
or Aduertisement to the Reader, hee accuseth the Bishop
of defection from his Religion; and by a figuratiue
kinde of Pre
                        •
                     er
                        •
                     tion, hee spareth pere
                        ••
                     p
                        •
                     orily to

affirme, that the Bishop did write and deliuer to others any
Reasons or Motiues of his change in Religion. In
which speech, this Slanderer would haue his Reader to
vnderstand that, which himselfe dareth not speake;
that when it shall appeare to be a shamelesse forgery,
hee may wipe his mouth with the Whore in the Prouerbes,
and say, that hee said it not. But, foule-mouth,
if thou hast any thing to say, spit out: and labour to
giue some satisfaction to the World, to auoid the euidence
of coozening the liuing, and slandering the dead.
For know, that the World already is possessed with
this opinion, that thou must needes be some ignorant
Iesuite▪ (for none else can be imagined to be so Bayardly
bold.) And if now thou forbeare to produce some
proofe, or some probabilitie, or some possibility,
how these things might be; wee shall resolue vpon it,
that Persons his ghost is risen from the dead, and hath
brought with him seuen other spirits worse and more lying
then himselfe▪ and that that is the reason, why
such vast and shamelesse Forgeries doe shew themselues
in this man. But I leaue this Lyer for this time:
and humbly pray the Worthies of our Church, that they
would take these things into their consideration: and
as men that deale with Thornes, doe fence their hands
with thicke Gloues; so seeing they doe liue, and must
die in the middest of such slanderous Tongues, they
would arme themselues against such malice, by an open
profession of their Faith, at such times especially
as they are ready to leaue the World; lest they may
be slandered after their deaths, when they will want
libertie to defend themselues. But heere I stay my
course. For I perceiue I haue in part digressed already;
and yet not so, as that I am gone from the matter
in hand. For I was saying, that Equiuocation did
serue the Masters of it for this turne among others;
that by it they might without scruple of cons
                     •
                  lence,

defame and belye the Worthies of our Church, that so
they might gaine the more credit to their owne. Now
how they vse to defame our learned men, I haue declared
fully by this digression, if the Reader will so esteeme
it: and what vse Equiuocation may stand them
in this practice, will not be hard for any man to conceiue.
For a wonder it might seeme, that men of any
religion or conscience, should endure themselues,
while they broach such broad-faced lyes. But the Arte
of Equiuocation will presently remoue all such scruple
or grudge. For it teacheth how to speake all vntruths,
without telling of the least lye: and so the Equiuocator
needeth not to haue any scruple in that respect.
And this doubt being once remoued, there can be no
further let to hinder their proceeding. For, what
though the Heretiques complaine of wrong and iniustice
done to them in their good name? that skilleth
not. For, in ordine ad Deum, and pro bono Societatis,
that is lawfull enough, or rather very meritorious. For
theReply to Persons Libel. pag. 18. Seculars tell vs, that when a Priest complained
to the Iesuites, or some one among them, of wrong
done to Master Bennet by their defamation, reply was
made, that it was necessary or conuenient hee should be
disgraced, because hee was against their Societie. Where
the Author or Authors of that Booke adde further,
that the Iesuites hold such deuillish Principles, whereby
they may at pleasure defame whom they please. And if
they take such libertie of Conscience against their own
Catholique Brethren; they will out of question make
no bones to slander and disgrace an Heretique. This
then is one turne among the rest, and it is a speciall one
and of great vse for their purpose, that by this Arte of
Equiuocating, they can defame and disgrace, and (as we
plaine-dealers doe call it) belye whom they will, without
any offence or grudge of conscience.
               Sixtly, In ordinary dealings and course of life, Equiuocation

may serue them, for concealing of any truth,
or perswading of any vntruth, if either of them may
make for their aduantage. SoComment. in c. Human. aur. q. 3. nu. 13. 
                  Nauarre telleth vs,
that if wee be asked what wee haue eaten, how much money
wee haue, what wee haue heard, &c. In these and all
such cases as these, if there be aduantage to be gotten
by it, we may by this fine Arte, conceale the truth, or
speake an vntruth, so as by subintell
                        •
                     ction▪
                   or a mentall
reseruation, wee make vp the matter. And theReply to Persons Libel. pag. 23. Seculars
tell vs, that the Iesuites make Equiuocation to
serue their turnes so frequently in this kinde, as, that
their owne Catholique Brethren; nay, their fellow-Priests
can scarce tell when they speake sincerely, when otherwise.
They might haue added, no nor their holy
Father the Pope neither. For, Father Standish coozened
and deluded him also, by Equiuocation, thereby to
oppresse the Secular Priests; asReply to Persons Libel. cap. 3. pag. 57. True Relation pag. 55, 56. Quod
                        •
                     . 3. art. 4. pag. 66. in the Margin. they complaine in
diuers places of their Bookes. And if this Arte can
serue for this turne, when they deale with his Holinesse
himselfe; no maruell if they make the same vse of
it, whensoeuer they haue to deale with 
                     〈…〉
                  
enemies of their R
                     •
                  ligion: as Father 
                     〈…〉
                  
whoAnswere to a Letter of a Iesuited Gentleman, p. 104. 
                  giuing his Faith, in verbo 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  prisoner to the Knight-Marshall, yet did 
                        〈…〉
                     
word and that Oath. But the good Father (say his Secular
Brethren) had perhaps some mentall 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ wherewith
to rescue his Soule, at least from remorse, though not
from the Deuill. As for example, as hee was in that
minde hee would be true prisoner, or for any thing the Keeper
should know to the contrary, till hee were escaped; or
that hee meant not to runne away on his head, but on his
feete; or that hee would not breake away so long as the
Knight-Marshall or his Deputie stood by and looked on;
or that hee wo
                        •
                     ld not breake away as a Priest, but is a Iesuite;
or that hee would not 
                        〈◊〉
                      with a minde euer to
come againe with his will 
                        〈◊〉
                      that null
                     •
                   fides s
                     •
                  uanda

Haereticis; or, how many Ors might I make vpon this point?
saith the Author of that Booke. But the point is plaine,
and as well proued to be true, of all sorts, as heere it is
affirmed of the Iesuites; though I will not denie these
Fathers the precedencie in this practice. Equiuocation
then serueth for many singular turnes, and for vses of
great consequence and moment: and therefore it is no
maruell that they doe so hugge and embrace it, as a
dearling of great worth.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               Of the Grounds and Arguments, either for or against
Equiuocation.
               
                  IN setting down the Reasons on either
side, I shall not neede to be long; because
I haue beene large already in
vn
                     •
                  olding the nature and conditions
of this Art, in the points hitherto
spoken of: and the discouery of
such a monstrous deuice is argumēt
inough to disproue it. It may then be sufficient for this
place, first, to answere the chiefe Arguments, which
are brought in defence of it; and then in the second
place, to set downe some fewe Reasons, that may refute
it.
               And first, for their Arguments, they are many in
particular; for Father Persons findeth 8 or 9 at least, in
one piece of a Chapter: & how many then might he haue
found, if he had sought all the Chapters of the Bible,
in the like maner? But the Wren hath moe birds then
the Eagle: and errors doe more vsually abound with

their rotten proofes, then Truths doe with sound and
substantiall Reasons. And it is no maruell. For a false
Conclusion hath no direct or good proofe at all: and
Cauils and impertinent flourishes for euery thing, may
bee infinite and without number. And so it is in this
case. For such proofes, as the 8 or 9 are, which Father
Persons findeth in one Chapter, he might haue found
8 or 900 in the compasse of the Bible. But howsoeuer
the particular allegations be so many; yet all of them
may easily be reduced to some few heads: and so many
of them together may be cut off at one blowe.
               The Heads then, to which the substance of all that
they say, may be reduced, are these three. 1. Examples
of holy men. 2. Examples of God himselfe. And 3.
Examples of Iesus Christ our blessed 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               And first, for Examples of holy men, they being in,
the Patriarches and Prophets,Gen. 20. 
                        •
                     . and other Saints of God.
For Abraham, say they, did equiuoca
                     •
                  e, when he said
of Sarah,
                  Gen. 27. 19. that she was his Sister: and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , when hee
said,Exod. 5. 1. & 8. 27. 
                  I am thy first-borne Esau
                        •
                     
                   and Moses, when he said
to Pharaoh, that they would 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  the Wildernes, but meant to go to 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and Samuel,
when he said,1. Sam. 16. 1, 2. he went to offer 
                        〈◊〉
                     , but principally
intēded to annoint Dauid to be King of Israel: and Dauid,
                  1. Sam. 21. 2.
when he told
Ahimelech▪ The King 
                        〈…〉
                      a businesse, &c. and Ieremie, when 
                     •
                  o question of the
Nobles, who demanded of him, What saidst thou to
the King,Ier. 38. 25, &c. &c. He answered, I presented my supplication
to the King, that he would not cause me to returne to Ionathans
house, to 
                        〈◊〉
                      there: whereas hee talked with 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
concerning his yeelding vp to the King of Babylon.
               
               For answere to these and the like, I note 
                     〈◊〉
                   things, by
way of preamble. 1. That the old Hereticks, th
                     •
                   
                  Priscillianists,
who defended the lawfulnesse of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , as
now the Papists doe of Equi
                        ••
                     cating, did alledge 
                     〈◊〉
                  
same places and examples, at least m
                     •
                  ny of them, for

proofe of their heresie; which our Iesuites doe for confirmation
of their opinion. And they had better shew
of reason then these men haue; for diuers of those Instances
were either direct and culpable vntruthes, or
seemed at least to border too neere vpon such obliquity:
but as for this new found Equiuocation by mentall reseruation,
it hath no shew nor semblance of probability, to
be gathered from them. 2. That neither S. Augustin,
who most diligently confuted those Heretikes, nor any
other ancient Writer, for answering of these obiections,
did euer flee to this Arte of Equiuocation; or once
say, that those Fathers and holy men did not lye in any
of those speeches, for that they spoke the truth by a mentall
reseruation. Which answere, if it had bin true, had
beene most pertinent and easie; as our late, Equiuocators
doe not only confesse, but bragge of it too. ForComm
                        •
                     n C. Human. aures q. 3. nu. 7. 
                  Nauarre
saith; that from his doctrine of Equiuocatiō, there
ariseth, or may bee gathered, nouus modus excusandi à
mendacio Patriarchas, a new way to excuse the Pa
                        •
                     riarches
from lying. Where, when he saith that it is a new
way, he acknowledgeth that it was not knowne to St.
Augustin, or those other Worthies, who in former
times did beate downe these Errours of the Heretikes.
And when he saith, that this way ariseth out of his doctrine,
he intimateth, that if the Fathers had knowne
this, they might easily haue answered the Priscillianists,
by interpreting those Texts after his new way. Now
from hence it followeth, that the Ancients did not vnderstand
these passages of Scripture, as making any
thing for Equiuocation. And therefore, when Equiuocators
alledge S. Augustin, and some others of the Fathers,
for their interpretation, they abuse both their
Readers, and the ancient Fathers.
               These things being first noted, I come to giue a more
direct answere to the obiections; and it is this; As they
affirme, so I deny, that these or any of these sayings alledged,

were meant, or are to bee vnderstood and construed
with any Equiuocall reseruation.
               
               Yes, say they, that they are. For if they bee not so
construed, they are apparent lyes, which may not be supposed
of those holy men.
               
                  Answ. 1. If they be not vnderstood and made true
by mentall reseruation, they are apparent Lyes, say they.
If this doe not follow, then our Equiuocators doe great
wrong to those ancient Worthies. And plaine it is,
for diuers of them, that they doe so. For when Abraham
said of Sarah, She is my Sister; and when Moses
said to Pharaoh, We must goe three dayes &c. and when
Samuel said to the Elders of Bethleem, I am come to sacrifice
vnto the Lord—; and when Ieremie said, I presented
my supplication &c. these speeches were all of
them true, in the words as they lye, and according to
the common acception and meaning of them. And
therefore there is in them no Iesuiticall Equiuocation, in
which the words are false, till a secret thought doth
make them true. And in this sence, and to this purpose,
Abraham doth interpret his owne meaning, and
explaine his words. For when Abimelech challenged
him for concealing his wife, and asked, What sawest
thou, that thou hast done this thing? he answered for himselfe,Gen. 20. 11, 12.
                  Because I thought, Surely, the feare of God is not its
this place, &c. and yet indeed she is my Sister; she is the
daughter of my Father, but not the daughter of my Mother.
In which answere we may note three things. 1.
He sheweth the reason which moued him to conceale
her to be his wife; Because I thought the feare of God,
&c. 2 He defendeth his speech to be true as the words
doe sound; and yet indeed she is my Sister. q. d. That which
I said is very true. And hereby it appeareth, that Abraham
did not equiuocate; because Abrahams words in
their vsuall signification, and as they were vttered by
him, were true: but the words of an Equiuocator, as

they are vttered, are false, till an inward reseruation do
patch them vp, and make a truth of them. And it further
hereby appeareth also, that F. Persons did not only
belye Abraham, but Almighty God himselfe, when
he saith, thatApologie for Eccles. Subo
                        •
                     d. c. 12. in the end fol. 202. 
                  both Abraham and Sarah said, that shee
was not his Wife, but his Sister: and that this was one among
diuers sayings and speeches in Scripture allowed by
the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, Abraham explaineth his
words, or rather sheweth how they were true and vnfaigned,
and that is, because sheSo S. Aug. interpreteth this place, lib. contra mendac. cap. 10. was his neere kinswoman
on the Fathers side, and such women in the vsuall
language of those Countries, were called their Sisters.
Abraham then sheweth that his speech was true,
because the thing was so, as his words did sound; and
not because he had some secret reseruation in his minde,
by additiō wherof they became true▪ And this sheweth
againe, that in these words of Abraham, there was no
Equiuocation, such as our new Doctros doe imagine.
And Abrahams example in interpreting his owne
words, may serue vs for a patterne to interpret the rest
by. And so; as he said, Indeed she is my Sister, as I said:
so we may say of them, Indeed, and intruth the things
were so, as they said. Only in these examples, though
all that was said, was true: yet something that was
true, was concealed; which we grant to bee lawfull:
nor doth it any way helpe the Iesuites, or fauour their
imaginary fiction.
               
                  Answ. 2. When they say, If the speeches be not vnderstood
with mentall reseruation, then those men told
a Lye: I answere, that that may be granted of some of
them, without any absurdity, or wrong of those
worthy men. For if we be forced to confesse, that Dauid
did commit murder, why should we bee afrayd to
confesse that he told a Lye, if he vttered any such words
as had not a true meaning, as our Equiuocators say that
he did? And if we grant it in Dauid, what harme is

there, to acknowledge it in others of Gods best seruants,
if by the Text and their owne speeches, any such
thing doe appeare? If then any of these holy men did
speake words which were vntrue, wee may without
inconuenience grant, that as they did sinne in other
things, so they might in this: and therefore herein we
must not take example by them, to doe as they haue
done before vs. This answere S. Augustin maketh to
the Priscillianists, when they alledged the example of
ancient men and women, to prooue that Lying was
lawfull. ForHaec quando in Scripturis sancti
                        •
                      legimus, non ideo quia facta credimus, etiam faciend
                        •
                      cred
                        •
                     mus, ne violem
                        ••
                      praecepta, dum passim s
                        •
                     ctamur exempla. Aug. contra menda
                           •
                        . c. 9. p. 18. A.
                   
                  when we reade of these things in the Scriptures
(saith he) we must not therefore thinke that wee may
doe them, because we know that they did doe them; lest we
violate Commandements, while without choice wee follow
examples. Say then, that the words of some of those holy
men cannot haue a good meaning or true construction,
in themselues considered; it will be no inconuenience,
to grant that such good men did therein doe amisse,
and made a Lye. And (to speake more particularly
to the point) so I thinke Iacob did, when hee said,
I am thy first-borne Esa
                        •
                     : and Dauid, when hee said,
that hee had made a rode against the South of Iudah, &c.
1. Sam. 27. 10. And so wee may say of Rahab, and the
Mid-wiues of Aegypt, and some others.
               
                  Obiect. But S. Augustin
                  Contra mendac. cap. 10. doth excuse those words
of Iacob, from being a lye.
               
                  Answ. 1. Be it so. Yet S. Augustin doth not interpret
them to be vnderstood and made true by any reseruation
in the mind. And this doth no way helpe our
Equiuocators at all.
               2. Say that S. Augustin doe giue vnto those words
a more fauourable construction; yet Cornelius à Lapide
disliketh that, and preferreth the other opinion, which
granteth that Iacob did lye,
                  in Gen. 27. 19. before this of S. Augustin.
And for that interpretation, he citeth S. Chrysostome,
Lyra, Caietan, Lippoman, Pererius, and others.
               
                  
3. Dominicus Soto,Relect. de Secreto memb. 3. q. 3. Conclus. 7. pag. 3
                        •
                     1. 
                  a learned Frier, doth defend or
excuse both Saint Augustine & Iacob in this manner;
It may be (quod puto sentit Augustinus, Which I thinke
was Augustines meaning) that those words of Iacob, were
vsed in that Countrey, in that signification and meaning
that they might be vttered by him, without telling a lye.
               But howsoeuer it be, Iacob was so plaine a man,
(saith à Lapide) that it is not to be supposed that hee
did vse equiuocation in his speech: nor doth any of former
time so vnderstand his words.
               2. The second head of Arguments, containeth the
example of Almightie God, the God of Truth. But
what hath this iust God, this God of Truth done or
said, for which hee should be thought to equiuocate,
that is, to keepe one meaning to himselfe, and to deliuer
another to his people, and by a double-sensed proposition
to deceiue them, whom he professeth to teach?
Yes, say these men, he said to Niniueh, Yet forty daies
and Niniueh shall be ouerthrowne, Ion. 3. 4. And he said
to Ezekias, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die
and not liue. I
                        •
                     . 38. 1. And yet neither of these came
to passe, according to these words spoken. And therefore
they are not true, vnlesse they be helped by some
inward reseruation, seeing in the sence that the words
yeeld, they were not fulfilled.
               
                  Answ. These and other such speeches of God, are
words of Commination and threatning. Now words
of Commination in Scripture, are meant by Almightie
God that spoke them, and are vnderstood by men
that heare them, with exception of repentance and amendment,
or some such conditions in the persons against
whom they are vttered, as may moue GOD
to reuoke the sentence. For God himselfe hath declared
his owne meaning to be so, in such like sentences
and speeches.Ier. 18. 7, 8. 
                  At what instant (saith he) I shall speake
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdome, to pluck

vp and to pull downe, and to destroy it: if that Nation
against whom I haue pronounced, turne from their euill, I
will repent of the euill, that I thought to doe vnto them.
AndEzek. 33. 13. 
                  when I shall say to the Righteous, &c. And when I
say to the Wicked, Thou shalt surely die: if he turne from
his sinne, &c. none of his sinnes, that he hath committed,
shall be mentioned vnto him▪ &c. And according to this
plaine Rule giuen by God himselfe concerning his own
words, we are to vnderstand Gods threatnings, with
some such exception. As for example, yet fortie daies,
and 
                        〈◊〉
                     , &c. that is, vnlesse Nineu
                        •
                     h repent, and
obtaine Gods fauour for their preseruation. And, Thou
shalt die, &c. that is, vnlesse thou by prayer and humiliation
obtaine Gods fauour, to lengthen thy life beyond
the ordinary course, or such like. And these exceptions
are not secret reseruations, kept in Gods owne
brest, and concealed from the hearers, as the Iesuites
reseruations are; but they are conceiued and euer haue
beene vnderstood by men acquainted with Gods language,
to be meant by the very words. And therefore
when God had threatned the Iewes, yet the Prophet
exhorteth them to repentance, that so they might
moue God to stay his iudgements,Ioel 2. 14. 
                  Who knoweth
(saith hee) if hee will returne and repent, and leaue a blessing
behinde him? And Daniel, when he had told Nebuchaduezzar
of Gods Decree against him, yet hee giueth
him counsellDan. 4. 27. 
                  to breake off his sinnes by righteousnesse,
and his iniquitie by shewing mercy to the poore, that
this might be a meanes to lengthen his tranquillitie. Yea,
and in the very examples alledged to the contrarie,
when Ionas pronounced, yet fortie dayes, &c. the men
of Nineu
                        •
                     h, as either hauing had some aduertisement
thereof by Scriptures, or by some of Gods people, or
conceiuing so much by the common light of reason,
they did vnderstand these words of the Prophet as a
threatning, that implyed an exception of repentance.
               
                  
And therefore the King with his Nobles proclaimeth
a Decree,Ionah 3. 8, 9. 
                  Let Man and Beast be couered with sackcloth,
and cry mightily vnto God, &c. For, who can tell
if God will turne and repent, and turne away from his fierce
anger, that wee perish not? And when God had threatned
Ezekiah, Set thine house, &c. yet Ezekiah
                  Isai. 38. 2. 
                  turned
his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord, &c. Where
his prayer for freedome, sheweth that hee vnderstood
not Gods threatning to be meant without exception.
And thus the people of God haue euer beene wont to
vnderstand such like speeches, till our late Doctors of
Rome haue made God to be an Equiuocator, that they
might alledge him for a patrone of their sinne.
               The third head of Arguments, containeth the example
of our blessed Sauiour; who though hee were the
Truth it selfe, and that there was neuer any guile found
in his mouth, yet these men will needes draw him in, to
be a fauourer and ring-leader of their falshoods and vntruthes.
And so did their Predecessors, the Priscillianists
doe before them. For they (asContra Mē
                     dac. cap. 2. pag. 14. A. Saint Augustine
saith of them) for defence of their Doctrine of lying,
brought testimonies out of Scriptures, and encouraged
their Schollers by the examples of Patriarchs, and Prophets,
and Apostles, and Angels, non dubitantes addere
etiam ipsum Dominum Christum, making no scruple
to adioyne also our Lord Iesus Christ, as a patterne of
their lyes. And right so for all the world, doe our Equiuocators
deale now-a-dayes. They bring examples
of Patriarchs, and Prophets, and Apostles, and blessed
Angels, not fearing to draw in God himselfe, and Iesus
Christ his blessed Sonne, to be Abettors of their frauds.
               But of God wee haue heard what they say already:
let vs now heare what they say of Iesus Christ: and
how, and when, and wherein hee vsed this Arte of Equiuocation.
Yes, say they, he did equiuocate, when
being with two of his Disciples,Luk. 24. 28. 
                  hee made as though

hee would goe further: and when speaking of the day
of Iudgement, he said,Mar. 13. 3
                        •
                     . 
                  But of that day and that houre
knoweth no man—, nor the Son, but the Father onely: and
when hee said to his Brethren,Ioh. 7. 8. Persons Mitig. c. 7. num. 29. pag. 293. 
                  Ego non ascendam,
&c. I will not goe vp to Ierusalem to this Feast, and yet
hee meant to goe vp, and so went; and diuers other
times.
               
                  Ans. Neither in these, nor in any other place, was
our Lord, the spotlesse Lambe of God, euer found to equiuocate,
according to the rules of this new Arte.
               Not in the first place, Luke 24. 28. For first, there
our Lord is said to doe something; hee made as though
hee would goe further: but he is not said there to haue
said any thing in which this supposed reseruation might
be vnderstood.
               
                  Ob. Yes, but deedes also may signifie as well as
words.
               
                  Ans. Deedes sometimes are equiualent to words,
and doe signifie as well as words doe: and that is,
when as words, so they doe declare our meaning, ex
instituto, or by some kinde of compact and agreement
among men. And that may be done two wayes. First,
expressely, when some words ioyned with the deedes,
doe declare that to be the meaning and purpose of him
that vseth them. As when Iudas kissed his Master:
this signified that hee was Iesus, whom they came to
apprehend, because before hee had giuen them this
signe,Matt. 26. 48. 
                  Whomsoeuer I shall kisse, that same is hee. And
when Iesus gaue a sop to Iudas, that signified that hee
was the Traitor, because hee had told them before,
Ioh. 13. 26. 
                  Hee it is, to whom I shall giue a sop, when I haue dipped
it. And so, when an oath is ministred or tendred
vnto vs, if wee lay the hand vpon the Booke, and kisse
it, this signifieth that wee consent to the taking of the
Oath, because that is appointed and required for this
purpose. Secondly, deedes may bee equiualent to

words, when by some outward circumstances wee doe
declare, that we intend them as signes of our meaning,
and doe referre and vse them to that purpose. In this
kinde, wee may see a man, who is borne deafe and
dumbe, to talke and conferre with his neighbours.
And in this kinde a shrugge of the shoulder, (if as Persons
saith, it be so meant and taken in Italie) may be a signe,
and haue the signification of a Negation or deniall.
And when a man openeth his mouth, and sheweth a
defect in his tongue, and maketh a gabbling noyse and
vndistinct sound, this is a signifying deede, and doth
import that that man is dumbe. In either of these
kindes, deedes and gestures are equiualent to words,
and may containe truth or falshood in them, as well as
words doe. But else, deedes and gestures, if in some
such manner, ex instituto, by appointment and agreement
among men,Facta nihil huc auin
                        ••
                     , nisi certam & expectatam 
                        〈◊〉
                      altera parte sine siga
                        •
                      ficat
                        •
                     onem si
                        •
                     e quasi respension
                        •
                      contra 
                        〈◊〉
                      de
                     
                        •••
                     u. Abbat. Antilog. c. 2. Pag. 26. And againe, Otio
                        •
                     è totum hoc de shategemets vs
                        ••
                     satcy quia nulla ibi consiliorum Communicatio, nulla signorum intercessio, quae mentibus nostris inui
                        •
                     em aperiendis constituta sunt. Ibid. pag. 26. they be not referred and intended
for signification of our minde, though they may
carry shew, and men may gather some meaning from
them, yet they are not equiualent to words; neither
is there any lye contained in it, though the shew be not
answerable to the thing. And such a deede as this, was
that of our Sauiour, when hee shewed by his gesture, a
purpose of going further: and therefore this needeth
no reseruation to make it true; seeing without any reseruation
it hath no false or lying signification, such as
words haue. And thus Lucas Brugensis, a learned Diuine
of the Roman Church, doth vnderstand and interpret
this place. His words (that the Reader may iudge
of his meaning the better) are these,Non magis in 
                        •
                     oc facto video inendacij specie, quam in eo quod simulauit se peregrinum seu 
                        ••
                     ator
                        •
                     m. Lucas B
                           •
                        ugens. in hunc locum.
                   
                  I see 
                        •
                     o more shew
of a lye in this fact of Christ, then when before he seemed to
be a stranger or a way-faring man. And he giueth his reason,
why hee thinketh there is no vntruth in this deed
and gesture,Magaum discrimen est inter voba & opera
                        •
                      verba exp
                        ••
                     ma iustitutione, significandi vim habent; non item opera. 
                  for there is a great difference betweene
words and deedes. For words by their first institution haue
the power or vse of signifying; but so haue not deedes. And

hence he inferreth that deedes, actions, and gestures,
though oftentimes they be, yet they are not alwaies
signes either of some ensuing action to follow, or of
our present purpose and meaning; nor haue they the
nature of a lye in them, etiamsi ad decipiendum aliquando
siunt, though they be sometimes done, to deceiue the vnderstanding
of the beholder, and to make him beleeue
that which is not true. So that if our Lord did make
shew of going further, and intended it not, as Father
Persons saith; yet in this learned mans iudgement,
there was no lye in it: and consequently there needeth
no mentall reseruation to saue it from being a
lye.
               Secondly, and more agreeably to our Sauiours mind,
wee may answere and say, that our Lord made as if he
would goe further: yea, and meant it too, if their intreaties
and importunitie had not stayed him. Therefore
the Text saith, They constrained him; that is, they
importuned him to stay; and he, ouercome by their
intreatie, stayed with them. The clearer meaning of
which words, we may the better conceiue and vnderstand
by a like speech, Luke 9. 53. For there it is said,
The Samaritans receiued him not, because his face was
as though hee would goe to Ierusalem; that is, by his
behauiour it seemed that hee meant to goe thither:
and so hee did meane it indeed. And so in this place,
when it is said, that hee made as though hee would goe
fur
                        •••
                     r; the meaning is, that hee tooke his leaue, and
bad them farewell, or vsed some other such like behauiour,
which made it seeme, that hee meant to goe
further. Yea, and so hee meant indeede, sauing that at
their request hee was contented to abide with them.
And thus Barradius, and Ribera, two famous Iesuites,
doe interpret this place. Wee may answere saith the
one of them,Barrad. to. 4. l. 8. c. 1
                        •
                     . pag. 356. 2. 
                  Dominū voluisse vlteriùs progredi, si non
retineretur à Discipulis, &c. That our Lord indeed would

haue gone further, had hee not beene detained by his Disciples,
and that there was no vntruth in this shew. And
the other,Ribera in Amos 2. nu. 21. pag. 344. 
                  Nihil veritas fingii, Christ who is the Truth
doth not feine any thing. But the common sort might
thinke that hee did feine, but it was no fiction or
counterfeiting;Si enim eum non 
                        〈◊〉
                     , tra
                        •••
                     sset sine dubio, & iss
                        •
                     t lo
                        •
                     gi
                        •
                     s. 
                  For if they had not detayned him, he
out of doubt had passed by, and had gone on further. Thus
not onely the euidence of truth, but the authoritie of
Romish Doctors and Iesuites doe vindicate this place
from that false glosse that Persons putteth vpon it; and
doe free our Lord Iesus from that slanderous imputation,
which the Iesuite doth lay vpon him, whenMitig. cap. 9. nu. 58. pa. 386. he
saith that Christ in this place did equiuocate: and when
Mitig. cap. 9. nu. 72. pa. 397. hee calleth this dealing of his, The dissimulation and
fiction of our Sauiour.
               
               
                  The second place mentioned, and produced for Equiuocation,
is that speech of our Sauiour, Mar. 13.
Of that day, and that houre, &c. This pr
                     •
                  position (saith
                  Mitig ca. 9. nu. 45. pa. 378. Persons) had some reseruation of mind, for that otherwise
it had beene false.
               
                  Ans. Not so▪ Nay this inference of the Iesuite is
false and foolish too: for our Sauiour, according to
his wonted manner elsewhere, speaketh of himselfe,
as he was reputed and knowne to be, that is, as he was
man. And in that sense, the words haue an vsuall and
cleare construction and signification; which is, that as
he was man, he knew not of that day. This interpretation
(asMitig. cap. 9. num 48. 
                  Persons doth acknowledge) is giuen
by ancient Fathers in great number. Nor is this a
mentall reseruation, as Persons would haue his ignorant
Reader to beleeue: but an interpretation vsually meant
and vnderstood by Christians, in these and such like
speeches as these. And therefore our Sauiour in this sē
                  tence
did not keepe one secret sence to himselfe in his
inward minde, and signifie another to his Disciples in
the words vttered.
               
                  
But if it be an Equiuocation, such as they fancy,
what then shall the reseruation be? Persons, knowing
that no man before the late inuention of this new Art,
did euer thinke of secret reseruations, or mentall imaginations
in our Sauiours words; calleth euery Exposition
that any good Author giueth, by the name of reseruation,
and reckoneth that Author, for a fauourer of
his, like the mad man in Athenaeus, who when any
ship came to the Hauē, put it in his Tables as one of his
owne.I. c. nu. 49. But that which carrieth most shew of a reseruation,
is this; The Sonne doth not know the day of
iudgement, meaning that hee knew it not so, as hee
would discouer it vnto them. For this explicatiō is giuen
by Saint Augustine, and other Fathers, saith Persons;
and hee addeth, (as triumphing in so plaine a
proofe) that this exposition expresseth the very same reseruation
in Christs words, which they talke of in their
mixt and equiuocall propositions.
               
                  Ans. To this I answere two things: First, That
the Exposition giuen by those Fathers, doth not imply
any equiuocall reseruation. Secondly, That it doth
not giue the true sence or meaning of the place.
               First, It containeth not any Iesuiticall reseruation.
For those Fathers which giue that interpretation, The
Sonne knoweth not; that is, not to make you know it: or
rather, the Sonne knoweth it not; that is, hee doth not
make you to know it; doe fetch and gather this exposition,
not from any secret conceit reserued in our Sauiours
minde, but from the vse and acception and signification
of the word, as it is vsed in Scripture. For
so, say they, this word, scio or noui, is often vsed. As
when God said to Abraham,
                  Gen. 22. 12. 
                  Now I know that thou
feare
                        ••
                      God:
                  Deut. 13. 3. and to the Israelites, The Lord your God
proueth you, that hee may know, whether yee loue the
Lord, &c. the meaning is, that hee may make you to
know. And from this vse of the word scio, to know,

frequent, as they say, in Scriptures; they thinke they
may be the like reason, keeping the same proportion
of speech, interpret the word Nescit, knoweth not the
day; that is, hee doth not make you to know it. Concerning
which meaning of the Fathers exposition, if the
learned Reader desire any further proofe,Rob. Abbot An
                        ••
                     l. cap. 2. pag. 22, & 23. he may haue
enough to satisfie his minde, in that reuerend and
learned Bishop who wrote against Eudaemon-Ioannes.
Now this interpretation of the word, being drawne
from the vsuall acception of it in Scripture, is nothing
at all to the Iesuites purpose, who fancieth a secret
clause kept in the minde, but no way included in the
vse of the word.
               Secondly, This interpretation, The Sonne knoweth
no
                        •
                     ; that is, hee doth not reueale or make it knowne to you,
as it maketh nothing for the Iesuites Equiuocation, so
it is not greatly to our Sauiours meaning. My reasons
are two. First, If that were the meaning, then it
would follow, that the Father did so know the day of
iudgement, as that hee did reueale it vnto them. For
that which this sentence doth deny of the Sonne, it
doth by vertue of the exceptiue particle adioyned, affirme
of the Father; No man, no nor the Sonne doth
know it, but the Father. Where, if wee fill vp the construction,
and make the sentence perfect, the whole
speech must be this; No man, nor Angell, neither the
Sonne, doth know it, but the Father hee doth know it. Now
in this speech take the word [know] in the sense of
those Fathers, hee knoweth; that is, hee maketh to know,
and then the sentence thus expounded, in plaine words
will be this, No man, nor the Angels, neither the Sonne,
doth make you to know the day of iudgement: but the Father
hee doth make you to know it. But this is not true
of the Father; and therefore that is not the true interpretation
or meaning of the word.
               My second reason is, Our Sauiour in these words,

                  No man—knoweth; meant to shew how secret and vnknowne
the day and houre of Gods iudgement was;
but take the word in this sence, hee knoweth not; that
is, hee reuealeth not, or doth not make you to know: and
then this sentence doth not imply or inferre or signifie
any secrecie of that day. For, if thousands knew it, yet
it might be said of them all, They know it not; that is,
they doe not reueale it, or make you to know it. And
consequently, this interpretation doth crosse our Sauiours
meaning, and ouerthrow that, for which hee intended
it. Now, lay these together, and then there is
lesse then nothing in our Sauiours speech for the Iesuites
purpose: both because the word cannot beare that
sense in this place, which onely might seeme to fauour
them; and because, that sense, as it was vnderstood
by the Fathers, was not meant to include any such reseruation.
And so I haue done with this second place,
which is the one of the places, that Doctor Norrice
did defend his Equiuocation by.
               Onely, lest some Popish Cauiller, according to their
vsuall manner, should raise clamours after mee, that I
doe deny and gain-say the exposition of the Fathers:
let the Reader remember, that the other interpretation,
which I follow, is confessed by Father Persons to
be giuen by other Fathers in great number. And againe,
if any shall quarrell with mee for leauing an exposition
of some Fathers, where I haue so good reason
for it; let him know, that I can produce diuers of
their owne Writers, who doe reiect as great a number,
and perhaps vpon lesser reason.
               Thirdly, The third testimony is from the words of
our Sauiour, Iohn 7. 8. which Father Persons and other
Equiuocators recite thus, Ego non ascendam ad diem
festū istum, I will not goe vp to Ierusalem to this Feast;
and yet (say they) he meant to go
                     •
                   vp, and so he went.
And therefore here he had a secret reseruation.
               
               
                  
                  Asw. They corrupt the Text two waies, 1 by altering
the words. 2 by peruerting the sense.
               1. By altering the words. For the Originall Greeke
is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, I doe not yet goe vp. And their
authentick Latin, Ego non ascendo, I doe not goe vp. And
whereas some Copies had corruptly read it, non ascendam,
I will not goe;
                  Roman. Correct. Ioh. 7. 8. 
                  Lucas Bragensis, lest any man might
afterward mistake, hath giuen admonition, that according
to the Roman Correction of their Bible, set forth
by the Popes authority, they may not change ascendo
into ascendam. Yea, and their Rhemists reade it in
their English Translation, I goe not vp to this Festiuall
day. Which was true in the very Letter, & meant
by our Sauiour according to the expresse words. For
he did not meane then to goe vp, but afterward when
time serued. And yet our Equiuocators, to gaine some
shew from our Sauiours words, doe corrupt not onely
the Originall and truely authentic
                     •
                   Greeke, but their
owne Latine Text too. But it is no maruell: for such
a false Arte could neuer be vpheld by true dealing.
               2. By peruerting the sence. For say the words had
beene, I will not goe vp, as Persons and Doctor Norice,
and others would fame haue it: yet the circumstances
of the Text doe shew, that that could not be meant
of the whole time during the feast, or that hee would
not go vp at all; because it followeth in the next words
by way of reason, because my time is not yet accōplished, as
the Rhemists trāslate it; or because my time is not yet fully
come, as it is more plainly in our Translation. Which
words doe plainely shew his meaning to be this, that
he would not then goe, when they would haue him:
but would goe when he saw his owne time. And this
he might both doe and meane, according to the plaine
sense of the words spoken. By which it may appeare,
that it is want of proofe, and weakenes of their cause,
that made them to drawe in this Text, which is so

cleere against them. And so, it is the very same reason
also, that forceth them (for necessity hath no law) to produce
the many other speeches of our Sauiour, which
haue as much affinitie with Popish Equiuocation, as
there is agreement betweene Christ and Belial, or betweene
Christ and Antichrist: as I could easily shew,
if it were conueniēt to stand vpon all their friuolous &
idle allegations. But I thinke it not worth the while,
either to tire the Reader, or to trouble my selfe with
such fond Cauils. Only for a generall answere to them
all, let this be remembred; that there is neuer a Text
produced by them for this purpose, but that learned expositers,
both ancient and moderne, as well of their
Church, as of ours, do interpret and expound it in some
determinate sense, which they gather or obserue either
from the signification of the words, or the vse & application
of them in the Scriptures, or from some circumstances
or considerations in the Text it selfe. And therfore
such Texts, in the iudgement of all such Interpreters,
are not to be expounded or vnderstood of any Popish
reseruations, kept secret in the Speakers minde. For
such reseruation as I shewed before, may be any that
themselues will fancie. Insomuch, that the Priests do
frame seuen seuerall and distinct reseruations, all alike
fit for Father Listers Equiuocation, when he deceiued
his Keeper; and doe intimate that they might haue
framed many moe, and all to as good purpose. And no
doubt, as they imagined those seuen, they might haue
inuented seuentie moe, that would haue serued the
turne. In all which it is not possible, for the Hearer or
Reader of such a speech, to imagine, what the Speakers
reseruation is; it beeing not such as the signification
of the words, or any circumstances of the businesse
doe yeeld, but as the minde of the Equiuocator will
fancie within his deceitfull heart. Nor do they in their
Equiuocations meane, that the Hearer should know
                     •
                  
                  
their reseruations. For their intent is, to reserue one
sense in their owne breast, and to imprint another in
the Hearers minde. This only short note being obserued,
it will be easie for euery Christian, that will open
his eyes, to see that no place produced by them out of
the Bible, doth include their secret and hidden reseruations.
Or if any Equiuocator will cauill, or can say,
that there is any testimony of theirs, which may not
receiue satisfaction by this generall Rule, and is in his
opinion worth the standing vpon; let him produce it:
and I will promise him either a solution of his reason,
or a recantation of mine opinion. And thus much shal
serue to be said concerning the Grounds and Reasons
which Equiuocators doe build vpon.
               Now I proceede to set downe some few reasons against
this new-found Arte, and fond deuice of Equiuocation.
And those for this time shall be these fiue.
               
                  1. Because this late doctrine of Equiuocation destroyeth
the true nature of Equiuocation, whose name it beareth.
                  2. Because it maintaineth a practice of lying, vnder
a colour of Truth.
                  3. Because it disturbeth humane society, and hindereth
mutuall commerce.
                  4. Because it impeacheth God of folly, in making
his Lawes against Lying.
                  5. Because it freeth the Deuill from all iust imputation
of being a Lyer.
               
               
                  Arg. 1. The Iesuiticall doctrine of Equiuocation,
doth destroy the true nature of Equiuocation, which
hitherto hath beene receiued of all men, and now (for
ought I know) is not reiected of any. This I prooue
thus; Equiuocation, in the true nature thereof, is, when
a word or speech hath moe senses than one. This the word
doth import. For Aequiuocum, by the very notation
of the name, is vox aequi plura significans, a word indifferently

betokening moe things. And in some such manner
as this, doe Writers of all sorts explaine and describe
Equiuocation. But in this new-deuised Equiuocation,
there is no word, nor no sentence, or saying, that hath
moe significatious or senses than one. For in their mentall
equiuocall Proposition, which they fancie, neither
the words taken by themselues, nor the whole saying
and sentence intended by the speaker, haue any Ambiguity
or doubtfulnes of signification, or any moe senses
then one; as I haue shewedCap. 1. p. 1
                        •
                     . before, out of the Equiuocators
own Rules. And hence I may inferre, that either
their reserued Proposition, is not an Equiuocall and
double-sensed Proposition, as they call it without reason,
and consequently, that they doe not by Equiuocation
speake truth in one sense, and mis-leade the Hearer
with another sence: or else, if notwithstanding this,
that Proposition bee Equiuocall and double-sensed still,
then we must say, that there may bee an Equiuocation,
where there is but one single sense and meaning. And
that destroyeth the true nature of Equiuocation.
               
               
                  To this reason, first their confession is, that
                  Pers. mitig. cap. 8. num. 8. verball
Equiuocation, which is, when a word or speech signifieth
diuers things equally,Pers. ibid. num. 15. indeed is onely true and proper Equiuocation,
and agreeth onely to the Defiuition of Equiuocation,
deliuered not onely by Philosophers, but Orators
also: and thatPers. ibid. num 8. it is properly called Equiuocation, when
a speech or word signifieth diuers things equally, if we consider
the proper nature of Equiuocation: and,ibid. num. 15 that mentall
Equiuocation in rigor is none.
               2. Their answere is notwithstanding, that their
mixt Proposition may bePers. mitig. cap. 8. num. 10. pag. 313. 
                  called Eq
                        ••
                     uocation, in a more
large and ample signification, as Equiuocall may signifie an
amphibologicall, doubtfull or double-sensed Proposition, in
respect of the Speaker and Hearer, whereof the one vnderstandeth
the same in one sense, and the other in another. And
the cause why it is so called, is rather by a certaine similitude,

then propriety of speech: to wit, that euen as Equiuocation
properly by communitie of name in things of different
natures, by variety of significations in the selfe-same
words or speech, by custome of phrase and composition of
sundry sorts, doth make different and doubtfull senses and
meaning to the Hearer: so in this case, by mentall reseruation
of some part of the foresaid mixt Proposition, the like
effect of doubtfulnes is bred in the Hearers vnderstanding.
For more ready vnderstanding of which perplexed
speech, I note that there are three things said by this
doubling Equiuocator. 1. That it is onely true and proper
Equiuocation, & such as is comprised in the Definitions
giuen both by Philosophers & Orators, when there
are diuers senses and significations in the words. 2.
That Equiuocation as they meane it in this question,
hath no such propertie in it, nor is comprised in the
Definition, that Philosophers and Orators haue described
Equiuocation by. 3. That notwithstanding all this, yet
it may rightly be called Equiuocation, because as true Equiuocation
breedeth diuers senses to the Hearer, by the
Ambiguity that is in the words; so this new-deuised Equiuocatiō
may breed diuers senses, one in the Hearer,
and another in the Speaker, by reason of the secret reseruatiō
that the Speaker imagineth in his own mind.
And this may seeme not so vnreasonable, because words
doe signifie ad placitum, and may be changed euery day.
And therefore it is no such fault, to frame a new meaning
and another signification in this word, then euer
any body did thinke of heretofore.
               
                  Rep. This answere doth not weaken mine Argument,
it confirmeth and strengtheneth it rather. For
first, I doe not except so much against their new signification
of the word, as against the new explication
and description of it. For they say, that they call it Equiuocall,
because it is a double-sensed Proposition; and
a double-sensed Proposition there fore they call it, because

by it they signifie one sense to the Hearer, and imagine
another to themselues. But this doth vtterly
destroy the very essence & entity of true Equiuocation.
For true Equiuocation cannot be conceiued to be without
a diuersitie of meanings in the speech: nor was it
euer heard of, that a Proposition could be double-sensed,
which had none but one single meaning: nor is it imaginable
that that saying should be ambiguous, which
the Hearet can take or construe but one way.
               Secondly, Their change and alteration of the word,
to another different meaning, as it is by them here vsed▪
doth conuince them of false and naughty dealing;
such as we may obserue Thieues to vse, when they haue
purloyned other mens goods. For Thieues (saithVt reliqui 
                        •
                     ures, carum rerum quas cepericat, signa commutan
                        •
                     : sic illi—nomina, tanquam rerum notas, mutaucrunt, Cic. de finib. bon. & mal. l. 5. nu. 74. pag. 111. 
                  Tullie)
when they haue taken away other mens goods, doe
change the markes of them, that it may not be knowne
whose they are, or to whom they belong. And right
so doe our Equiuocators deale in this case. For they
change the names, which are true markes of things; that
hereby they may conceile and hide the nature and propertie
of the things themselues. I grant then, that
names may change with times; nor is it any fault to
alter the vse of a word, so there bee no wrong done to
the thing, by the misse-applying of the word: as likewise
it is no fault neither, to change the markes of
goods, when there is no fraud intended by it. But if
the markes of goods be changed, that the propertie of
them may be conceiled, that is a plaine tricke of thieuerie.
And so, if names be changed, that the nature of
the things may be peruerted or obscured, that is a trick
of iugling, not inferior to that cousonage of the Thiefe.
And so it appeareth to be in this case. For this mungrill
Proposition of theirs, if it should be censured by Philosophers,
Orators, or other learned men, no man but
would iudge it at the first sight to be a lye: and so hither
to all men haue euer called such speeches. But now

our new Artificers haue found another name for their
new Arte: they call it, Equiuocation. And this they
doe for a colourable shew, that it may be thought that
there is no vntruth, but onely an Ambiguity in the
speech: and that they in deceiuing men by mentall
reseruations, doe nothing but what honest men are
wont to doe, when they vtter sentences, that may haue
diuers meanings. Thus, while they change the names,
they doe also confound the things, and destroy their
true nature, which wise men, and Aristotle among the
rest, haue euer acknowledged to agree vnto them.
               Obiect. Nay, saith Father
                  Mitig. cap. 8. num. 16. pag. 310. Persoons, but if Aristotle
did not comprize this our reserued Proposition vnder

                     〈◊〉
                   of the three sorts of Logicall Equiuocation, mentioned
by him in his Elenchs, then he erred grossely in making an
insufficient Diuision, which comprehendeth not all the parts
of the thing deuided. For if the said mixt Proposition (saith
he) be an Equiuocation, (as Iesuites say it is, in spite of
all reason, and against the doctrine of all ages) then must
it haue place among some of these three kindes; or else the
Diuision should be insufficient.
               
                  Rep. A ridiculous conce it: whereto I know no example,
that may be paralell; but I will imagine one as
neere as I can. Suppose then, a Father deuideth his
Lands among his owne Children, and a Conie catcher
there by steppeth in, and layeth claime to a share among
them: and when the matter commeth to be debated,
in the Court, the Iudge parteth the Lands among
the Brethren, to whom onely they belonged,
and shutteth out the Conie-catcher for a wrangler,
that layeth claime where he hath no right. What if in
this case, the Conie-catcher should complaine of the
Iudge, for partiall dealing, and reason against him, as
Persons doth against Aristotle, that if this Conie-catcher
haue a right, and a share in those Lands, as himselfe saith
he hath, then the Iudge erred grossely, that had excluded

him? Would not euery Boy kicke such a wrangling
foole or knaue shall I call him? out of the Court?
And such a ridiculous wrangler, is Father Persons, who
accuseth Aristotle of a grosse errour, for not rancking among
his kinds of Equiuocation, this of the Iesuites,
neuer heard of in the world before; and which the
wrangler himselfe doth else-where acknowledge not
to be true Equiuocation.
               
                  Arg. 2. This doctrine of Equiuocation doth maintaine
a practice of lying, because hee whom they call an
Equiuocator, is in truth a Lyer, and that which they
call an Equiuocall Proposition, is a lying assertion. I
proue it thus. He that speaketh to another that which
himselfe knoweth to be false, is a Lyer, and a lye it is,
whensoeuer there isAug. conta mendac. c. 12. 
                  falsa significatio cum voluntate fallendi,
a false signification with a mind to deceiue the Hearer.
Or, to speake in a Iesuites words,Tolet Instr. l. 8. c. 54. A Lye is verbum
falsum, cum intentione fallendi, a false speech, with an
intention to deceiue. Which description of a Lye, so far
as concerneth this purpose, he explaineth thus. A false
speech is heere ment, when aNon est mendacium, dicere quod nou ita est, sed dicere aliter quàm homo putat. Tolet. ibid.
                   man speaketh otherwise,
then himselfe thinketh: and it is said to be with intention
to deceiue, becauseQui aliter qu
                        ••
                      sentit proloquitur, alterū fallit, et fallere intendit. Non etenim sic profert, nisi vt diuersam opinionem in animo alterius generet. Hoc autem est fallere. Tolet. ibid.
                   
                  Hee that speaketh otherwise
then himselfe thinketh, doth deceiue another, and intendeth
to deceiue him. For he would not so speake, but that thereby
he may engender a contrarie opinion in another mans mind:
and this is to deceiue. Thus the Iesuite describeth a Lye,
and that agreeably to the receiued Doctrine of the
Schooles. But this which is said to containe the nature
of a Lye, is all of it found in the new-deuised Equiuocall
Proposition. For first, that which the Equiuocator
vttereth, is false, and so he knoweth it to be: for
Pers. mitig. c. 12. num. 2. pag. 484. & cap. 10. num. 22. p. 424. 
                  it may seeme (saith Persons) to haue salsitie in it; and
sometimes also hath indeed, in respe
                        •
                     t of the words onely, or
vnderstanding of the Hearer. And the case is cleere, that
the words vttered by the Equinocator, containe an

vntruth and a falshood: for else they could not serue
him for euasion. But the words vttered are all that the
Equiuocator speaketh: and therefore that which hee
speaketh, is verbum falsum, a false word or speech. And
secondly, that he vttereth this falshood with minde and
purpose to deceiue the Hearer, in the sence that Tolet
here explaineth it, I haueCap. 1. pag. 16. num. 6. shewed and proued out
of their owne writings: nor can it stand with common
sence, to conceiue it otherwise. And hence it followeth
that the Equiuocator is a plaine lyer.
               
                  Ans. Their answere is, that though the words considered
by themselues, and as they are vnderstood by
the Hearer, be false: yet as they are meant by the Equiuocator,
and as they are ioyned with the reseruation
kept in his minde, they are true. The summe is,
they are false of themselues, but they are made true
by the imagined reseruation.
               
               
                  Re. This is a weak answer, & an impertinent shift;
because their mentall reseruation hath nothing to doe
either with Truth or Lying; as may appeare by this
reason. Truth as it is heere meant, and Lying which
is the contrary to it, are morall acts contained in the
second Table of the Decalogue or Tenne Commandements:
and therefore doe include a respect to our
Neighbours, nor can they be vnderstood without reference
and relation vnto other men: so that lying consisteth
in a signification of falshood vnto others, and
truth in signifying or vttering of that which is true;
and without such signification, either performed by
outward signes, or meant and intended to be performed,
if occasion should be offered, Lying and Truth
morally taken, can haue no place. Vpon this ground,
which hath cleare euidence in it, Bannes a learned
Schoole-man doth refute their opinion, who thinke
that there may be a lye, where there is no purpose to deceiue.
                  Mihi vsque ad
                        •
                     o videtur ille animus fallendi necessarius ad rationem mendacij; quòd sine illo mendacium esse non possit. Vt v. g. fi Petrus absque aliqu
                        •
                      teste proferat propositionem, qu
                        •
                      scit esse falsam; ille non mentitur, quamuis dicat folsum in voce. Similit
                        •
                     r si Petrus dicat 
                        •
                     oann
                        •
                     ; Tu 
                        〈◊〉
                      es Ioctnes: 
                        〈◊〉
                      non mentitur, quamuis dicat falsum, quia illud non potest dicere animo fallendi ipsum Ioannem. Huius ratio esse potest, quia mendacium est fiotio quaeda, quae est in voluntate, propterca quòd est ad alteris per quam intendit homo, vt alius credat aliter, quam sentit ille, qui fiugit, & mentitur. Quòd autem menda
                        ••
                     ū sit ad alterum, patet. Nam 
                        〈◊〉
                      veracitas, quae est virtus oppofila, est ad àtterum, quum sit pa
                        •
                     s iustiti
                        •
                     ; vt ai
                        •
                      S. Tho. Dominic. Baunes to. 3. in 2. 2. q. 1. art. 3. Dub. 1. § Pro decisione. pag. 16. 
                  I thinke (saith he that a minde to deceiue, is so

necessary in a lye, as that without it, a lye cannot exist.
This hee declareth thus: If Peter, no man being within
hearing, should vtter a speech, which hee knoweth to be
false, yet hee should not lye, though hee should speake an vntruth
in the words. In like sort, if Peter should say to
Iohn, Thou art not Iohn, doubtlesse hee should not lye,
though hee spake an vntruth, because hee cannot speake
that with purpose to deceiue Iohn himselfe. And hereof
hee giueth this reason, Because a lye is a kinde of fiction
or faining, which is in the will, with reference to another,
by which a man intendeth that another man may beleeue
otherwise than himselfe, who telleth the lye, doth thinke.
And that a lye doth include such respect and refirence to
another, is plaine (saith hee) because that veracirie, or
the vertue of speaking truth, which is opposite to lying,
doth consist also in relation to another, because it is a part
of iustice. Thus reasoneth this learned Frier. In this
discourse of his wee may note two things. First, His
Conclusion, which is, that both lying and truth morally
taken, which hee calleth veracitie, doe consist in
a relation and reference to others; so that no words
vttered, without respect of signifying somewhat to
some other by them, can be either the sinne of lying, or
the vertue of true-speaking. Secondly, wee may note
his reason for proofe of this Conclusion; which is,
that veracitie, or the vertue of speaking truth, is a
part of iustice: and iustice hath a respect to some other,
to whom it giueth that which is his due. This reason
I take to be vnanswerable; and then his Conclusion
must needs be vndeniable. It is proued then that truth
morally meant, for a vertue or act of speaking truth,
which is a part of iustice, and a dutie which wee owe
to our neighbours; doth include a reference and respect
to others, which respect consisteth in signifying
or declaring our meaning to them, truely and sincerely.
But now in the mentall reseruation, shut vp in the

Equiuocators breast, there is no such reference or relation,
nor doth it admit of any intendment, to signifie
or declare his meaning to others. Nay, it is therefore
suppressed, and broken off from the speech which
is vttered in words, that nothing thereby may be signified
to the Hearer. It followeth then, that this reseruation
hath no point nor piece of morall truth in it.
And therefore, if that part of the Equiuocators proposition,
which hee vttereth in words, were a false and
lying speech before; it must needes remaine a lye still,
for any helpe that this Reseruation can yeeld it.
               
                  Arg. 3. The Doctrine of Equmocation doth disturbe
humane societie, and destroyeth that mutuall
commerce that one man should haue with another. I
proue it thus. This societie and commerce must needs
be disturbed, when men in wisedome may not beleeue
one another, vpon their words or oathes: but if this
Doctrine of Equiuocation be receiued, men may not
beleeue one another, either vpon their words or
oaths. This is prooued thus. The Equiuocator professeth
to equiuocate, whensoeuer hee may lawfully
hold his peace; and if it be for any aduantage of
weight, vpon his Oath too. Which how farre it may
extend, I haue declared in part already, and euery man
may easily conceiue by himselfe: but sure in what businesse
soeuer I haue to deale with such a man, I cannot
tell, but that he may thinke it lawfull to conceale
the truth, and consequently to equiuocate with mee.
And in case his conscience will permit him to equiuocate
with mee, (as in what case it will not permit him,
I know not) then am I as sure to be deceiued, and ouerreached
by him, if I doe beleeue him, as if I beleeued
a plaine and downe-right lyer. For, my credence
or beleefe can reach no futher then to the words vttered;
nor can I learne any thing from the Equiuocator,
but that which I can gather from his words:

but all that is false and lying; as hath beene shewed
by their owne Confession. And therefore if I beleeue
a man, when hee doth equiuocate, I am sure to be deceiued.
I declare this yet further by a familiar example.
Say, two Priests haue layed a plot of Inuasion for
the Kingdome, and being questioned vpon their oaths
concerning the plot, they both deny it. And the one,
hee saith, I neuer meant or intended any such thing, vnderstanding
within himself, so as I meane to tell you of it:
and the other, hee answereth in the very same words,
but hath forgotten to frame a reseruation in his minde:
the one of these by their Doctrine is a lyer, and the other
an Equiuocator▪ But in respect of being deceiued
by them, what difference is there betweene them?
Shall I not as soone be deceiued by the Equiuocator,
as by the Lyer? Yes certainely, it is no more safe to
beleeue an Equiuocating Iesuite, then a lying Deuill.
And if this be so; then where men teach and professe
the Arte of equiuocation, there in wisdome men may
not beleeue one another: and consequently, they cannot
haue that commerce and societie that men should
haue among themselues. I conclude this argument against
Equiuocators, in the very same manner, as Saint
Augustine did against Lyers, onely putting the name
of Equiuocator, where he did the name of Lyer.Aut non est credendum bonis; aut credendum est ijs, quos credimus debere aliquando mentiri; aut non est credendum bonos aliquando 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Horum trium primum pernici
                        •
                     
                     sum est secund
                        ••
                      stultum. Restat 
                        •
                     rgo, vt nunquam ment
                        •
                     antur boni. Augustin. de Mendac. cap. 8. pag. 6. f.
                   
                  Either
(saith hee) wee must not beleeue honest men; or wee
must beleeue them, who wee thinke ought sometimes to tell
a lye; or else, wee must beleeue that honest men will not at
any time tell a lye. The first of these three is pernicious,
(and ouerthroweth societie.) The second is folish, (and
exposeth a man to the mercy of euery cheating companion.)
It remayneth therefore to say, that an honest man
will neuer tell a lye. Thus that learned Father: by whose
example I may reason against Equiuocators in the very
same manner. Either wee must not beleeue honest

men on their words or oathes: or wee must beleeue
them, who wee thinke may equiuocate with vs both
in words and in oathes: or else, wee must beleeue that
an honest man will not equiuocate. The first is pernicious,
the second is foolish: and therefore wee must resolue
vpon the third, which is, that an honest man will
not equiuocate.
               
               
                  Arg. 4. This Doctrine of Equiuocation defeateth
all Lawes made against lying▪ and doth by consequence
impeach God of folly for making any such Lawes. I
proue it thus. It is a folly to make such Lawes, as are
vnauaileable, and cannot reach to the ends, for which
they were made. But if Equiuocation be admitted,
Lawes against lying cannot serue for the purpose, to
which they are intended. This appeareth by two
things. First, Gods Lawes and precepts against lying
were made for this purpose, to restraine mens tongues
from speaking of falshoods and vntruthes. But by the
Arte of Equiuocation a man may speake any and all
falshoods that hee will, and yet these precepts against
lying shall neuer take hold of him: because by a mentall
reseruation warranted by this Doctrine, hee may
make any falshood to become true. And therefore the
Equiuocator, notwithstanding all Lawes of God and
men against lying, yet is at his libertie to vtter what
vntruths hee will, without the least transgression of
any of those Lawes. Secondly, Lawes against lying
doe intend preuention of hurt and deceit to be vsed against
our neighbour. But admit once of this new doctrine
of Equiuocation, and no deceit toward our
neighbour can be preuented by any Lawes against lying.
For if this Doctrine be warrantable, then all
Lawes against lying must be meant onely against such
as doe not keepe a reseruation in their mindes, to
make true the falshoods that they vtter in their

words. And so, for example, when Moses saith,
Leuitie. 19. 11. 
                  Yee shall not lye one to another: and when Saint Paul
saith,Ephes. 4. 25. 
                  Put away lying, and speake truth euery man with
his neighbour; the meaning of these Precepts must be
to this purpose▪ 
                  Speake no vntruth, nor vtter no falshoods
to your neighbours, vnlesse yee haue some secret reseruation
kept in your minde, which if it be added, will make them
to become true. For, by the Equiuocators Doctrine, if
such reseruations be kept in the minde, then all their
words become true: and therefore they are no way
included within these Precepts against lying. But if
this interpretation of such Lawes may be admitted,
and such libertie of speech may be granted, without any
breach of these Lawes: then these Lawes doe no
way preuent the least danger of deceit and dammage
that may come to our Neighbour by vntrue and false
speeches; because I can deceiue him as much by this
equiuocall reseruation, as by a formall lye: as hath been
proued already. And from these considerations it followeth,
that Precepts against lying are vaine, if the
practice of Equiuocation be lawfull.
               
                  Arg. 5. If the Doctrine of Equiuocation be true,
then neither men nor Deuils can be conuinced of lying.
First, men cannot. For though they speake neuer
so vast and apparent falshoods, yet who can say
but that they haue some reseruation in their minde,
that may free their words from being lyes? And yet
all sorts of men, when they heare euident vntruthes
vttered, doe without controll of any, charge the
speakers with falshoods and lying. Which sheweth
that all men iudge of lying and truth, by the
words vttered, and not by fancies reserued in the
minde. As for example, the Secular Priests doe
charge Father Persons with a continuall practice of
lying, so thatD Ely in his Notes vpon the Apologie. cap. 9. pag. 311. D. Bagshaw in his Answ. to Persons Apologie, pag. 42. Reply to a briefe Apologie, cap. 2. pag. 11. they giue him the Whetstone, and leaue

it with him too, as if they thought there were no such
a bold and impudent lyer in the World, that could
winne it from him. But how did the Priests know,
but that Persons spake with some equiuocall reseruations?
And if so, then they broke the rule of charitie,
in censuring him for a lyer, when hee was but an Equiuocator.
And againe, Father Persons chargeth the
Seculars withApologie for Subord. cap. 12. in the latter end. 
                  infinite number of vntruthes, lyes, slanders,
and open falshoods vttered without scruple of conscience;
so that the vse of Equiuocations was little needfull
for them; because they could take libertie enough
without it. But how doth Father Persons know, that
his Secular Brethren did not vse Equiuocation in all
these vntrue speeches: and so made them true by
some reseruation? Thus all men, when they finde apparent
vntruthes vttered, sticke not to charge the
speakers with lying. But if the Doctrine of Equiuocation
be true, no man can be conuinced of the least
lye, vnlesse himselfe will confesse it.
               Secondly, The Deuill himselfe, if this Doctrine be
true, cannot be conuinced to be a lyer. For who can
say, but when he telleth vs most palpable vntruthes,
yet hee may reserue within himselfe some clause to
helpe all? Nay, if this Doctrine be true, it cannot
be supposed with any reason, that the Deuill euer
would or euer did tell any lye at all. For, whatsoeuer
he hath spoken at any time, be it otherwise neuer so
false and lying; yet it might be made true by a reseruation:
and hee neither wanted wit to deuise such
reseruations, nor will, by such or any other meanes
to free himselfe from the imputation of lying. First,
hee wanteth not wit. I shall not neede to proue this;
because, as I suppose, it will be confessed, that hee
is as quicke and nimble at such deuices, as the finest
witted Iesuite in the packe. But, if any man

shall question it, I will engage my selfe to proue it.
Secondly, hee wanteth not will, by this or any other
tricke to saue his credit, and to auoid the imputation
of lying. For, hee knoweth that the greatest hinderance
to his proceedings, is, because the World esteemeth
him for a lyer, and the Father of lyes: and if
he could once but gaine to be accounted a true and honest
dealer, (as by vsing Equiuocation, he might as well
proue himselfe to be no lyer, as any Iesuite can:) then
hee might finde more credit in the World. For which
cause,2 Corin. 11. 14. the Apostle saith that hee transformeth himselfe
into an Angell of light. And an ancient Writer
telleth of a Monke, who was a strict and religious liuer,
that the Deuill,Quum volens eum consuetudine visionum, ad credulitatem futurae deceptionis illicere, verissima quaque multo tempore, Diabolu
                        •
                     , velut veritatatis nuncius, reuclasset: ad 
                        •
                     x
                     
                        ••
                     emum, &c. Cassian. Collat. 2. cap. 8. 
                  purposing by a custome of Visions
to winne him to the beliefe of a futur
                        •
                      illusion
which hee intended for him, did for a lo
                        •
                     g time, as a
messenger of truth, shew him all true Visions. And
when by this meanes▪ hee had gained credit to be beleeued▪
then by another Vision, hee perswaded him to
renounce Christ, and to become a Iew. And it is an
vsuall obseruation among Christians, that the Deuill
will tell some truthes, that hee may gaine afterward
the more credit to his lyes. And therefore it can be
no doubt, but that the Deuill desireth not to be reputed
a lyer; and would gladly put off from him all
such imputation, if by any trickes hee could deuise
how to effect it. Now lay these two positions together:
first, That the Deuill wanteth no wit to deuise
reseruations; and secondly, That hee wanteth no will,
by this or any other such deuice, to auoid the discredit
of a lyer: and then it will follow, that in reason
wee cannot imagine, that the Deuill euer would or
did tell a lye, if by an equiuocall reseruation hee could
cleare himselfe. And hence againe it may be deduced,
that as our Equiuocators doe challenge vs for

slandering them; because wee call them lyers, when
they sweare falshoods by imagined reseruations: so the
Deuill himselfe might challenge GOD (be it spoken
with reuerence to his Maiestie) for iniustice and slander,
because hee hath branded him with the note of
a lyer, and calleth him the Father of lyes. But these
consequents are most absurd: and therefore the Doctrine
of Equiuocation, from whence they follow, is
most false.
               Thus, by Gods grace, I haue declared, and I trust,
in some measure also cleared the poynts propounded
in the beginning. Now, for conclusion, I will onely
commend one Caueat to the well-meaning Christian;
and that is, to beware of trusting them, whose profession
is to equiuocate. For such men are both more
impious and more dangerous than any other sort of
lyers, that I know beside.
               First, They are more impious, because among men
of other Religions, though there may be vicious persons,
that make too common a practice of lying deceits;
yet that is the fault of the men, and not of their
Doctrine. But in the Church of Rome, their great
Doctors doe not onely practise this deceit, but praise
it too: and commend it to their Disciples, as a good
Arte; very fit fo
                        •
                      scrupulous consciences. Which doctrine
cannot be conceiued to be without great dishonour
to God, and much disgrace to Religion.
               Secondly, They are more dangerous then any other
sort of Lyers, because they come masked vnder a vizard
of truth, & armed with resolution to protest, and
sweare, and pawn their soules and saluations, vpon the
truth of that which they say, notwithstanding that for
so much as they vtter, and for all that you can heare or
gather by them, all is most false, which they speake.
From the consideration whereof, I inferred before, that

it was not safe to beleeue a Iesuite, or any of his fellowes
or schollers; for that a man may as soone be deceiued
by an Equiuocating Iesuite, as by a lying Deuill.
Now I adde, therefore wise Christians must beware
of them; and if wee will not be decei
                     •
                  ed, wee
must not beleeue either their words or oathes, in what
businesse soeuer wee haue to doe with them. This Caueat,
that it may the b
                     •
                  tter appeare how farre it is to
be extended; I will, for example sake, set downe
some speciall cases of ordinarie vse, in which it will

                     〈…〉
                   to beleeue them.
               1. 
                     •
                  irst then we may not safely beleeue them, when
they are disputing▪ and arguing for their Religion, and
deliuering points of their faith. For they tell vs, that
Iesus our Lord did equiuocate, when hee preached of
Prayer and Sacraments, and of his office of iudging the
World, &c. And I trow, Iesuites will be ready to imitate
the example of Iesus, whose name they beare. But
we need not doubt of their meaning in this case; for
they therefore alledge the example of Christ; that they
may defend and make good their owne practice. And
therefore when I heare a Priest or a Iesuite telling of
Popes Pardons, and preaching of S. Patricks Purgat
                     •
                  
                  rie,
&c. and when for these, he telleth me, of the consent
of the ancient Church, and alledgeth many Fathers
to confirme his Assertion; how can I be sure, that hee
doth not equiuocate with mee in that case? or what
reason haue I to thinke, but that he speaketh against
his knowledge, and conscience? or how can I, without
a note of rashnes and temeritie, beleeue that he
                     •
                  
doth not wilfully belye the Fathers, and other Authors
to serue his owne turne? and when he hath done all,
make vp all with a secret Reseruation, that I neuer
dreamed on?
               Secondly, Wee may not beleeue them, when they

giue Answers, or beare witnesse in a Court of Iustice,
or before a Magistrate; no, not though they sweare
what they say, and take it vpon their soules and saluations.
For they professe to equiuocate in such cases, if
either the Iudge be incompetent, or if he proceed incompetently.
And when I heare one of them speake and
sweare before any of our Gouernors or Rulers, either
Ecclesiasticall or Ciuill, what can I tell, but hee may
thinke either the Iudge, or his proceedings to bee incompetent,
and vniust? Nay sure, in most cases, in
which they haue to doe before our Gouernors, they
are knowne to hold, either the Iudge, or the proceeding,
or both, to bee incompetent▪ And therefore I
cannot see how wee may safely beleeue them, when
they make answere, or giue euidence vpon their
oath.
               Thirdly, Wee may not beleeue them, when they
tell of great wonders and Miracles, done by men of
their Order and profussion; and by Saints and Images
of their owne making. For they professe to equiuocate,
when it may bee for some good to themselues, and
therefore much more when it may proue so great a
good to their Order, to their Church, and to their Religion.
And therefore, when they tell mee of many
great miracles don
                     •
                   by their men in the Indies, and by
the Ladies of Lauretto and Hall; how can I tell, that
they doe not fitten and deuise all that vpon their fingers
end, to gaine credite to their profession?
               Fourthly, We may not beleeue them, when they
publish and disperse disgracefull tales and reports against
the professors and Doctors of our Church. For
the disgracing of these men, may breede great aduantage
to their Religion: and beside, it is an Axiom of
theirs, He must bee disgraced, because he is an Enemy to
their order. And therefore, when they tell mee of Luther,
                  
and Caluin and Beza and Bucer and such others,
that they either despaired, or recanted, or renounced
their Religion; how may I beleeue them, that they
doe not Equiuocate? Nay it is certaine, that in the
forging of these reports, they did either lye, or Equiuocate,
or both. And therefore when they now tell vs,
that many of our Reuerend Bishops, and learned Preachers
and Schollers, are of their opinion, and thinke
them to be in the right, but that for the worlds sake,
they dissemble their iudgement; how can I giue credit
to their words, or to their writings? And when they
tell vs, that such a Doctor, vpon his death-bed; and such
a Bishop toward his latter end, turned Papist, and renounced
in their eare, what he had taught in the Pulpit,
and was reconciled to the Church of Rome, by
one that came and went inuisibly; shall wee beleeue
them to speake as they thinke? Nay, wee should rather
spit in the Lyers faces, that presume vs to bee so
simple, as to beleeue an Equiuocator in a case so auaileable
for his Order, and in a thing so vnlikely and
absurde in it selfe; that the narration of such a
thing, might call in question the truth of a knowne honest
man.
               Fiftly, We may not beleeue Equiuocators in matters
of common life, and ciuill conuersation. For they
professe to equiuocate in most cases of common practice,
and in all cases in which they are not bound to
reueile the Truth, if the thing may be for their aduantage.
And therefore if one of them should contract
to marry a mans daughter amongst vs, how can any
of vs tell, that th
                     •
                   Equiuocator thinketh himselfe
bound to lay op
                     •
                  n his heart, and to speake the
truth in this case; and that therefore in his opinion
he may not equiuo
                     •
                  ate and deceiue vs? And if he promise
to pay me a summe of money, how can I tell that

he keepeth not a reseruation behind, that may disanull
his promise aforehand; as that he will pay it, if himselfe
shall thinke it necessary, or if he shall haue so much
to spare, or if hee haue nothing else to doe with his
money? &c. And so, if he vndertake to be my Sollicitor
for my Law-businesses, or my Physitian for my body,
or my Counsellor in any doubtfull case, &c. how
shall I be assured that I may beleeue his word, and that
he doth not for some secret reasō kept to himselfe, think
it lawfull to cheate me by a mental reseruation? Surely,
for mine own part, if I may know him that professeth
the Art of Equiuocation, I wil trust
him no further then I would doe a
common and noted Lyer, that
is no further then I
do see him.
(⸫)
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   