
      
         
            
            
            ARTICLES OF THE PEACE agreed vpon, between the Archduke Mathias, on the Emperours part, and the Deputies of the Lord Botzkay, and of other Lords of Hungarie on the other partie.
            
               In like manner, the Articles, and Conditions of Truce, ſet downe betweene the Emperour and the great Turke, for 15. yeares.
            
            All beeing faithfully tranſlated out of high Dutch into French, and out of the ſame into Engliſh.
            LONDON Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1607.
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
               The Articles of the peace of Hungarie, conuented and accorded vpon, betvveene the Archduke Mathias, on the Emperours behalfe, and the Deputies of the Lorde of Botzkay and of other Hungarian Lords.
               In like manner, the conditions, and Artickles of the truce, betweene the Emperour and the Turke.
               
                  1. 
                  FIrſt, that ſuch degrees as were heretofore made, touching the defence and exerciſe of any other, then the Romaine Religion, without there conſent, ſhall at this preſent bee reuoked and annulled, and that from henceforward, al Lords Gentlemen, Townes, or other eſtates holding of

the Crowne of Hungarie, as in like manner, all men of warre, vpon the Frontires, ſhall be permitted to exerciſe and profeſſe whether of theſe three Religions they doe make choiſe of, the Romaine, Lutheran, or Caluiniſtical, excepted alwayes without any Infringement or preiudice, to the rites, reuenewes, and profits, of the Catholike, or Romaine Churches, as alſo ſuch goods ſhall bee reſtored vnto them againe, which were taken from them during the troubles paſt.
               
                  2. That there ſhall bee a Treatie of peace with the Turke.
               
                  3. That it ſhall bee lawfull, and permitted them, to chuſe a Count Palatine, according to the cuſtome heretofore in vſe, and with thoſe dignities, prerogatiues, and requiſite authoritie. But becauſe his Imperiall Maieſtie, for many other important Chriſtian affaires, can not be perſonally in Hungarie, or vpon the Confines, and ſo on the other ſide it would be very inconuenient for thoſe of his Kingdom, to follow his Maieſtie, and vpon all occaſions to trauaile to his Court, hee hath reeſtabliſhed the ſame generall authoritie, & power which before times ſeemed neceſſary, in the Archduke Mathias his Brother, to bee his

Lieftenant Generall in the ſame Countrie, it being his Maieſties pleaſure, that in all affaires of importante, conceiuing ye aduancements and benefit of the Crowne, that he bee heard, and abſolutely obeyed, as his owne proper imperiall perſon.
               
                  4. That when the Realme ſhall be in peace, and free from the dangers which now threaten it, his Maieſtie will be content, to tranſferre his Court to Presbourg vppon Danubius in Hungarie.
               
               
                  5. That the Lord high Treaſurer General, ſhall be an Hungarian, whoſe charge ſhal extend, but to the treaſurie, and reuenewes, without medling any wayes in matters of State: as alſo in like manner the Receiuers generall, and particular, ſhall be men natiuelie borne in the Countrie, and choſen by the eſtates thereof, & for the differences betweene the Biſhoppes of Clan, and Varandine, they are referred to the cenſure of the Eſtates of the Realme
               
               
                  6. Becauſe his Maieſties royall authoritie, may no wayes be infringed by any thing aboue mentioned, hee ſhall bee free, to nominate, and elect, ſuch as hee pleaſeth to bee Biſhops, onely with this prouiſo and condition, that they bee Nobles, and naturally borne in the Countrie, without augmenting vpon this occaſion, the number of Counſellours of Eſtate.
               
                  7. That Eccleſiaſticall reuenewes, ſhall remaine in their preſent State, and if any plea, or ſutes growe vpon them, they ſhal I bee adiudged by the Eſtates.
               
                  8. That the Ieſuites ſhall haue no proprietie of their owne, nor may not acquire, or purchaſe any ſucceſſion, or inheritance within the Realme, onely they ſhall be permitted to enioy ſuch donations, as his Maieſtie doth beſtow vpon them.
               
                  9. That his Maieſtie ſhall depute vnto the Offices of the Realme (as to thoſe of the neighbour Countries of Slauonia) Dalmatia,
                  
and Croatia, Naturall Hungars.
               
                  10. All ciuill cauſes, and whatſoeuer depend thereupon, ſhall bee decided according to the cuſtome of the Realme.
               
                  11. That Helias Hary, and the other Lord alſo, which made a complaint of their particular greefes, ſhall be heard, and contented, and that all inmunities and priuilidges, ſhall be granted vnto the Towne of Caſlonia, which it heretofore obteined from the King of Hungarie.
               
               
                  12. In that it is impoſſible, to reſtore all ſuch loſſe and damage, as hath beene procured by the laſt troubles, it is thought fit to ſurceaſe, all ſute, and proſequution thereof.
               
                  13. Such Donations, as were made, by the Lord Botzkay, ſhall bee renewed by the Eſtates, and thoſe that are but reaſonable allowed of: but all Contracts, and leuies of money, morgages, or tranſferments made ouer, as well by the Lords, as by Helias Hary, ſhall be confirmed, and ſtand good til redēption bee made of them by the Proprietaries, and they by them ennobled, ſo they be originally borne of the Countrie, and of qualitie, ſhall be confirmed by the Eſtates, & enrolled.
               
               
                  14. Lordſhips, and lands morgaged, ſhall remaine likewiſe in their due valew, till their redēption and releaſe, which ſhall be permitted to ye prōprietaries, according to order, and modera
                     •
                  ion, ſet downe by the Eſtates.
               As for the particular matter, of the ſaide Botzkay, hee ſhal bee allowed the Title, and dignitie, of a Prince of the Empire in Tranſiluania, Count of Cicles, and Lord of the parts of high Hungary, with the reuenewes of the ſame Landes, as alſo he ſhall hold the Caſtle of Touay, and two generalities depending on the ſame, as well on this ſide, as beyond the riuer of Tubiſque the Fortreſſe of Iacmar, and the two townes called Hereuenture, and Torreualy, togither with the Tenthes of Erlan, and whatſoeuer before ſpecified for him ſelfe, and his heires males, diſcending of him, without that, in default of ſuch iſſue, any of his other kinſmen, may pretend any right, or ſucceſſion thereunto but if hee leaue one, or more daughters they ſhalbe kept, and maintained, according as his Maieſtie hath couenanted with the ſaid Lord.
               
                  16. Whatſoeuer hath bin attempted and atted, both by the one part, and the other ſhall bee committed to vtter obliuion.
               An end of the preſent Articles aboue mentioned.
            
            
               
               Articles and Conditions of the Truce made betweene the Emperour, and the Turke, tranſlated out of high Dutch.
               
                  1. 
                  THat euery one ſhal be permitted, to reedifie their houſes foretreſſes, or any other buildings, and to repaire and reſettle them in the ſame eſtate, wherein they were before the wars, and moreouer to builde newe, as they ſhall thinke good.
               
                  2. That the Embaſſadors, both of the one and other ſide, ſhall attribute vnto their maſters, the title of Father and Sonne: which is to ſay, the one of ſonne, to the great Turke, and the other of father to the Emperour: and that one reciprocally demanding any thing of the other, by letters, it ſhall quickly be diſpatched, and agreed vnto: and that writing

reſpectiuely one vnto the other, they ſhal vſ the title of Emperour, and not of King.
               
                  3. That the Tartars alſo ſhall bee comprehended within this Truce, with an iniunction, and inhibition vnto them, to doe no kind of dammage, or make any incurſions vpon the Chriſtians.
               
                  4. That the truce ſhal continue, for the ſpace of fifteene yeares.
               
                  5. That all the Lands, Kingdomes, and Lordſhips, belonging to the houſe of Auſtriche, ſhall bee comprehended within this truce, and if he determine to make peace with the Spaniard, that he may herein no waies bee hindered, but rather aſſiſted, & furthered by the Emperour.
               
                  6. That Incurſions, and Inroads, as well of the one part, as the other be prohibited, & if any one of the ſeuerall parties, doe not obſerue this, the tranſgreſſors ſhall be impriſoned, and puniſhed with exemplare iuſtice, as well on the one ſide, as on the other, making reſtitution of dammages.
               
               
                  7. That no man be permitted either openly, or ſecretly, to betray, or ſurpriſe, either foretreſſe, towne, or houſe, to take any priſoner of the one or other part, nor to entertaine, be it the one, or the other, any ſpies, principally in Hungary and that no kind of reuenge be pretended, for matters before time euill carried.
               
                  8. That Merchants, and all tran̄quants, may freely, and ſecurely trauell, & that they may be ſafe conducted by Captains, or other Commanders, to the borders and confines of countries: and that places be nominated, and ordained of ſet purpoſe, for Faires, reſpectiuely fowre or fiue times in the yeare.
               
                  9. That the Gouernors of Raab, and Baſha of Offen, may haue full authoritie, to appeaſe all partialities, and diuiſions, which may peraduenture occurre vpon the Confines: and the affaire beeing of great importance, that it be determined by Mediators, towards the Emperour or the great Turke.
               
                  10. That all priſoners, conformable to their

dignity, and place, bee ſet at libertie, by way of Counterchange.
               
                  11. That according to the Agreement paſſed, and concluded hertofore within Buda, by Caeſar Gallo, an Embaſſador be ſent by the Emperour to the great Turke with a preſent: & that in like manner, conformable to the accord ſet down by the Viſio Baſha, that an Imbaſſador be ſent from the Turke to the Emperour with a preſent of horſe, armes, rich raiment, or ſome ſuch like things.
               
                  12. That this truce be firme, and indiſſoluble for fifteene yeares, and that without all faile, there be Embaſſadors appointed euery three yeres, of like condition, and quality, with requiſite and conuenient preſents, without any waies ſpecifying of them, but it being referred to the diſcretion of him which ſhall ſend them.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   