
      
         
            
            A MIRROVR FOR MERCHANTS.
            WITH 
                  •
               N EXACT TABLE, To diſcouer the exceſſiue taking of Vſurie, againſt the Lawes manifeſted in this Treatiſe of REASONS ACADEMY.
            Set forth by R. MASON of Lincolnes Inne Gent.
            Vitet cenſura furorem.
            LONDON Printed for Iohn Browne, and are to be ſold at his Shop in Saint Dunſtanes Church-yard in Fleeteſtreete. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               VNderſtand mee louing Reader, as well for my purpoſe, as my paines. In the one, I meane not to confront great Schoole men, but leaue both themſelues, and their worthy Sciences, to happy ſucceſſe; and the other I freely beſtow on ſuch, as ſhall bee content to giue the ſame peruſall. As in the whole, I preſume there is nothing hurtfull; ſo in ſome parts I hope there may be ſome thing auaileable. Herein one principal Marke I ayme at, is, to diſcouer the abuſe of Vſe, or rather the abuſed vſe of Vſurie, ſo entertained in this Kingdom, that according to Seneca his ſpeech, Caepit licitum eſſe, quia publicum est. In late ages, Diuines haue defied it, vnmasked her foule viſage, and brought her to arraignement

and conuiction, for her vncleane, vnhallowed and vnlawfull products, the Lawes of this Kingdome, euer eſte
                  •
               med and adiudged it damnable; and the holy 
                  •
               ooke of God, ſet an eternall Curſe there
                  •
               n. The Iewes in this Kingdome, caried then markes of ſeparation, from ciuill, and honeſt company, and the Vſurers generall
                  •
                forbidden Chriſtian Buriall; and d
                  •
               ſabled▪ to diſpoſe by their Wil
                  •
               , of thing ſo wickedly gotten. Sed tempore mutantur, but obſerve the mutation of time. In this our Age (when God is moſt taught, and ſhould be moſt obeyed) the old Serpent hath not onely perſwaded the taſting, but ſurfetting on this forbidden fruit: The Takers haue loſt their eſtates, and broken their hearts with penurie; and the Lenders filled their bagges, and through cruelty brought their ſoules to perdition: This viperous poyſon hath infected the Court, and the Country, the Laity and Ciuilians, the Church and the Chancell, the Prieſts and the people, in ſo much, that Vſurie is ſet vp as an vniuerſall Trade▪ This is the cauſe,

that Charitie groweth cold louing affection betweene friends and alies, turned into hatred, hoſpitalitie decayed, and the ſeruice of God deſpiſed: Hinc illae lachrymae; This is the cauſe, that the almes to the poore are neglected, the diſh of neighbourly hoſpitalitie not prouided, the ordinary and neceſſary ſeruants turned off, and the gate of pitie and compaſsion faſt locked and ſealed vp.
            One thing I muſt explaine in this place concerning the foure firſt Sections▪ and the Table herein placed.
            The Sections I haue wri
                  •
               ten, to expreſſe the care power, and prouidence of God, who hath left nothing vnmade needfull for the vſe of man, and for the preſeruation and increaſe of all things, hath ordained and appointed a certaine number of things to bee ingendered: a time when, and a place where, they ſhould be produced, and hath limitted each of theſe to their certaine bounds, quas vltra, citra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nequit conſiſt
                     •
                  re rectum: but the policie of man hath paſt the limits of them all, by inuenting a new kind of production, that money, being

taken out of the bowels of the earth her natural place, in a certaine time limitted at their pleaſure, ſhould produce the increaſe of money, by deliuering the ſame vpon Vſurie, and ſo abuſe both number, time, and place, againſt the Law of God, Nature, and Nations.
            The Table diſcouereth, that the generall taking of money, being for leſſe time then a whole yeere, is within the compaſſe, both of the prohibiting, and Penall law of this Kingdom, becauſe it exceedeth the rate often for an hundreth, for one whole yeere: and for the vnderſtanding thereof, I haue explayned in what ſort the ignorant Arithmeticians haue abuſed their Art, by miſtaking the Divident and Diuiſor. Vſe taken according to the rate of the firſt Table, is ſubiect to the penall Law: Vſe taken according to the ſecond Table, is free from ſuch puniſhment, though the taking it ſelfe bee not approued by any Law of God, or man. All which I leaue to thy conſiderate peruſall, and thy ſelfe to the fauour of God.
            
               Robert Maſon.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            REASONS Academie.
            
               Of Nomber.
               
                  AS I purpoſe not to diſcourſe of al the deepe points therof, for that wold require a large treatiſe; yet becauſe it is a needefull part to be known in the vnderſtanding of Reaſons exerciſe, I will make bold briefly to touch the ſame.
               Nomber doth cōſiſt of diuerſe things, either of one, or ſeuerall denominations: and without nomber there can bee no true definition, demonſtration, manifeſtation, nor vnderſtanding of any thing: for if all things were but one, then were there no nomber or order: wherefore one

is ſaid to be no nomber, Sed ſcala de vni
                        ••
                     
                     te, the beginning of nomber. In the God-head, being before all time, the maker of time, and all things that increaſe in time, there is number: The Trinity of perſons and vnity of God-head do declare as much. For although god be a moſt ſingular Diuine eſſence in himſelfe, yet hath he proportioned number in himſelfe, vnſeperably vnited in his God-head: which the diuines call the Father, Son, and holy Ghoſt. And the ancient Philoſophers cal three inbeings, The Father, the actiue, or inworking vertue, power & nature: The Son, they cal the word, ſpeech, or reaſon.
               The holy Ghoſt, Loue. Theſe Philoſophers haue ſtriued wonderfully in this labor, wherin they haue waded exceding deep. Amelius the diſciple of Plotin, is ſaid to name the trinity, three things, or three vnderſtandings. The Beer, the Hauer, and the Seer. The Trinity is expreſſed in theſe words, Power, vnderſtanding, & wil: which Trinity maketh a full number of things belonging to a mind:
                     Plotin. En. 5. Lib. 1. which the Philoſophers eſteeme to be the Godhead. But to

leaue off this kind of deſcriptiō, I cōclude with Plotinus; There are ſaith he, three chiefe Inbeings: The one, or the God. 2. The vnderſtāding or wit. 3. The ſoule of the world. And of theſe three, ſaith he, it is not for any man to ſpeake, without praying vnto god: And without ſetling his mind afore vnto quietnes. And if it be demanded (ſaith he) how one of them begetteth an other; it is to be conſidered, that we ſpeak of euerlaſting things: & therefore we muſt not imagine any temporall begetting: for this begetting which we ſpeake of, ſaith he, betokeneth but onely cauſe and order.
               
               This Trinitie and firſt, and euerlaſting number, hath proportioned & appointed, other numbers, & in them a miraculous order. If any aske a reaſon hereof, I anſwere: It was the power, the wiſdome, vnderſtanding, & wil of God, to expreſſe himſelfe in this compleat number of perſōs, in one vnity of godhead. By this nū
                  ber three, was the whole world created, & al things innumerable: whoſe mouers are only known to the creator himſelf. In that number three, is expreſſed the wōder of ye
                   world: ye
                   taking vp of Henock & Elias: &

the Aſcention of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Ionas three dayes in the Whales belly, and Chriſt three dayes in the graue: So that in the nomber of three, is manifeſted the eternall Trinitie of the God-head: the creation of the world, and of man: the life, the death, and the reſurection. There cōſented to the deſtruction of man, The Serpent, the woman, and the man. There haue repaired that downfal; The Father, the giuer: the Sonne the gift, and the holy Ghoſt the comforter. In the num- of three, is a perfect concluſion of all things. Much may be ſaid of the nomber and orders made by this trinitie; As fire, water, ayre, and earth: to make the world, the Spring, Somer, Autum, Winter: to make the yeare, Eaſt, Weſt, North, South: to quarter the world Creatures, going, creeping, flying, ſwung, with infinit miliōs of celeſtial & tereſtial bodies, which he keepeth, preſerueth, boundeth in, & holdeth within this Trinity. And briefly to wind vp this point concerning nomber, I hold it the original & moſt worthy part of the three. I mean, that number is of higher cō
                  ſideratiō thē place or time: for God himſelf

                  yt
                   can by no meāes ſtoope to be known to the capacity of man, neither can be cō
                  tained within any place, nor limited to any time, in reſpect of his ompotent greatneſſe, and eternall eſſence, before and without reſpect of time, yet hath hee vouchſafed to bring himſelfe within the compaſſe of number: And therein, & by the power therof, to create man in a bleſſed and happy eſtate.
               Thus hauing in ſom meaſure diſcouered the nature & worthines of original number: deſir
                     •
                  ng by al meanes to auoyd tediouſnes, I leaue to be conſidered, that theſe and diuers other auncient writers, that haue left behind them learned workes, had no other meanes to vnderſtand any thing of the duty and eternity of the God-head, or immortality of the ſoule, but the vſe and helpe of Reaſon, only proper and peculiar to man. And ſo I proceed to the reſt.
            
            
               Of place.
               IN reſpect of God, before the creation of the world, & beginning of time, All

was Place. And yet in reſpect of his greatneſſe, there was no place: for he cannot be cōtained in any thing,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                      of God but in himſelfe. If any be curious to demaund how ſpacious, large, or ample this place was, let him take his anſwere with Cato of Vtica: who would needs know of God why Caeſar ouercame Pompey. It is as if the meaneſt vaſſal in a kingdome ſhould require ye
                   king to giue a reaſō for all things he doth, or cōmandeth. Porpherius being much encumbred with vnderſtanding of ſupernaturall cauſes, breaketh out into theſe words: Seeing that God did by skill, diſpoſe and ouerrule all things, and ordereth them by incomparable propriete of vertue: And on the contrary part, mans reaſon being very ſmal, is ignorant of moſt things, how skilfull ſoeuer it ſeeme to be of the truth▪ Surely we may thē cal it (meaning Reaſon) wiſe, whē it is not curious in ſearching ſuch doubtfull and hard matters, as are matched with danger of blaſphemie, but rather graunteth, that the things which are done, are very well as they be: for ſaith he, what can our weak reaſō find fault with, or reproue in that great Reaſō
                     
(meaning of the deitie) As if he ſhuld haue ſaid, The waies, the works, & the place of God, and Eternity, are not to be ſearched nor enquired after by any creature whatſoeuer. If we deſcend but to the diuerſitie of the condtion and nature of Creatures confined vnto place: and their vnderſtanding of matters, not deſigned, nor prouided for their eſtates & conditions, we ſhal haue ſufficient cauſe to ſay, that Place was ſuch, & ſo much as it pleaſed the purpoſe, prouidēce, power, & wiſdō of God.
               Before there was a creation of things, and a beginning of time, Place was infinit & indefinit: in deuiſible, without ſpace or diſtance: without being repaired vnto, or departed frō: neither containing nor contained, wt
                  out Center, Circōferiēce, rule, or diameter, conſiſting neither of matter, ſubſtāce, nor whatſoeuer ſtuffe. Euery thing hath his point, his Center, his place, and beginning. Only ye
                   diuine eſcēce, place & nature of god hath none: as euery mā that wil ſeriouſly looke into his own ſelf, ſhall be enforced to cōfeſſe. In nature, the greater, can neuer be cōprehended by ye
                   leſſer.

But God in his nature, place, and eſſence, is greater then man. Therefore cannot God his incomprehenſible place and nature, be comprehended by the reaſon or vnderſtāding of man: nature is a thing wrought by God: Now, no worke how great ſoeuer, can perfectly expreſſe the cauſe or worker thereof. Therefore nature cānot vnderſtand the diuine eſſence, place, and nature of God. The reaſonable ſoule, is the admirable nature of man: Now, whoſoeuer ſhall come to know his owne ſoule, and the place thereof, meerly by the power & worke of itſelfe, ſhall confeſſe himſelf to be abſolutely ignorāt thereof. Therfore if nature & reaſon, with the powers & affects of the ſoule & reaſon, commeth ſhort to know it ſelf; much more muſt it come ſhort, to diſcouer or vnderſtand the incircumſcriptible nature, eſſence and place of the holy Trinitie. We ſee in the courſ of the greatnes of God, as well tereſtrial, as celeſtial, cōtinual mouings frō place to place, & all thoſe moued by their Creator, the firſt mouer, which argueth ſubiectiō & obedience in

the creatures to the Creator: and out of a ceſſarie conſequent of the contrarie, it diſcouereth that God the mouer, is neither moued, nor doth moue; top, or from any place. For to ſay, he is here, or there, it is all one, for he is euery where: as it is authentically prooued: If I clime vp to heauen, thou art there: If I goe downe to hell, thou art there alſo. If I take the wings of the morning, and remaine in the vtmoſt part of the ſea, euen there alſo ſhall thy hand leade me: and thy right hand ſhall hold me: for the heauen is his ſeate, and the earth is his foote-ſtole. To conclude this point, we ſee and confeſſe, that God made, and knoweth all things: and hath appointed their natures, beings, times, and places. Now, if he had in him the nature of any of his creatures, that is, to be limited vnto one, contained in place, or conſiſting of any materiall ſubſtance, the ſame would incomber his diuine eſſence: for hee doth not come within the compaſſe of their limited nature, place, nor number: for by that meanes, wee ſhould derogate from his holy and diuine Deitie, and eſſence of a Creator, Seeing therefore, that God is

not compounded of material ſubſtance, he can not be a bodie. And ſeeing hee is not a bodie, he can not bee contained in place, neither wholly, nor in part; wherof it may properly be ſaid, that hee is no where: namely, that no part of him is limited within any place to be pointed at, or deſcribed. For like as hee made all things by the power of his beeing; So doth the ſame power enter into al things: fill all things: & containe all things. And for ſo much as the ſame being & power is indiuiſible, it is whole in all, and whole in euery part. So likewiſe, is he himſelfe whole throughout, in whome all things haue their being: howbeit, he is not definitely, nor determinatly in any thing, nor in any particular place. Vpon which reaſon Ariſtotle made this definition of the ſoule of man: which commeth neereſt to the nature of God. Anima (ſaith he) eſt totum in toto, & totum in qualibit parte. The neereſt beholding of this, is in our owne minds. By the powers & working of the minde, we contemplate, behold, diſcerne, vnderſtand, and iudge of things that are far remote from vs, & yet ouer ſelues neuer

moue. The mind in this caſe doth not entermingle truth, nor participate with the nature, ſubſtance, nor condition of the the things it entereth into. Iudge but of the reaſon thereof, which is breifly thus: Theſe things are of leſſe conditiō, nature, & qualitie, thē the reaſonable ſoules that poſſeſſe theſe mindes. God is ſaid by the Philoſophers to be vnmoueable, vnchangeable, beginning leſſe, endles, bodileſſe, infinit, incomprehenſible, &c. Al which declare not what God is, but yt
                   hee is not as his creatures are, locall: nor his creatures mixed, or intermingled with him: nor with his power, or eſſence. For by theſe negatiues all other things are diſcouered, to haue beginning, to bee made, to determine, to be changeable, weake, materiall▪ corruptible: And to depend vpō an other being then themſelues. And that God onely hath his being and place, in, and by himſelfe. And the the more deeply any man will enter into conſideration of theſe things, the more infinite and inſcrutable ſhall he find thē. For when he ſhal haue takē all the paines he can poſſible, he will confeſſe he hath learned no more, thē to be ignorāt of the

want of his owne knowledge in ye
                   behalf.
               Thus holding it neceſſary, to diſcouer that there is no place in reſpect of God, as the moſt readieſt way to explane what place is in reſpect of his creatures, and the worthineſſe thereof; I proceede, deſiring to be vnderſtood, that my meaning is, for opening the point of my maine argument,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the 
                        •
                     atures. 
                        •••
                     ernatural 
                        •••
                     urall. 
                        ••
                     naturall. by the way as I goe, to diſcouer, How ſupernaturall, naturall, and vnnaturall things, haue their operations and workings: and the monſtrous products that ſome things againſt nature are enforced to bring forth.
               
               There is nothing created, but hath his ſpeciall vſe: be it materiall, or immaterial, number ſerueth to make known to man his own weakenes: that thoſe things that are moſt certainly knowen by number to the Creator, are notwithſtanding, innumerable, to the capacitie, reaſon, and vnderſtanding of men: yea, much more, then the fantaſie, conceipt, or imagination of men, can by any meanes come neere vnto, or conceiue. All theſe thus made of nothing, maketh the more wonderfull the power of the maker, and the

order and worthineſſe of nomber, within which cōdition euery creature is contained. To euery, and to the very leaſt of theſe innumerable creatures, there is appointed a ſeuerall, diſtinct, particular, and locall place; diuided, ſeuered, and ſundered from the reſt: which ſheweth what congruence there is, between number & place: that nomber being neuer ſo infinite, yet nothing wanteth his place. And place being neuer ſo ſpatious and large, yet there is Nullum vacum, no void place: which declareth, how the workes of God do depend one of an other, in an admirable propotion & order, one in true vſe, ſeruing the turne of another. For how could the creatures be, if they wanted place? Or, to what purpoſe ſerued place, if there were not creatures to ſupply them? This ſheweth that God made nothing in vaine: & therefore his workes ought not to be lightly eſteemed, much leſſe abuſed.
               The firſt Creation wee reade of, is of Angels: They were made in number:Place diui
                        •
                     ed. They attended their Maker in Heauen: There was their place: & although they

were ſpirits and incorporall, yea ſtanding vnder the law, obedience, and command of their Maker: they had ſuch ſeuerall places as befitted creatures of ſuch worthines: & vnder ſuch conditions as they were enioyned vnto. Their diſobedience, and fall, & thruſting & remoouing out of that bleſſed place, to another place of accurſedneſſe, ſhew that there were ſeueuerall places, euen for the ſpirites themſelues: as likewiſe ſeuerall numbers appointed for theſe places. So hitherto nū
                  ber & place go together, as neceſſary attendants on the prouidence, purpoſe, and will of God. But if any ſhall aske either nūber or place, of the bleſſed, or damned ſpirits, the time of their creation, or fall, or the reaſon why it is not diſcouered vnto men: Let thoſe men know, that they neither be within the number, creation, nor place of any thoſe angels or ſpirits, but in another ranke of Gods creatures, a little inferior to the Angels. And therefore they muſt 
                     •
                  aue them, their creation, number and place, to their Maker: as matters inſcrutable and forbidden, that men ſhould haue to meddle withall.

The next creation is of the world: which conſiſteth of things, in number & place: The earth, the water, the Elements, the Sun, the Moon, the ſtars, the beaſts, birds, fiſhes; and laſtly man: as is ſaid in holy Writ, Male and female, made he thē. In all theſe there is number: in reſpect of theſe diuers creatures that were made, there is number in the reaſonable creatures, male & female. Place in worthines & dignity▪ and the ſeuerall & diuers places, their ſeuerall bodies were contained in, or did ſupply. Beſides, what the diuine ſpirit of God hath reuealed, to holy men of the old ages, concerning theſe places: reaſon hath ſearched out diuers diuiſions, and ſubdiuiſions of places; done, conceiued, and vnderſtood by number, & diſtance: which alwayes go together in what action ſoeuer: As relatiues, that depend one vpon anothers being. The Mathematitians, in reſpect of the heigth of the Heauens from the earth, haue diuided this great ſpacious place, into ten Heauens: which, who ſo is skilled in their deſcribed Spheres, may eaſily & readily vnderſtād.
               
                  This is done, in reſpect of the large vaught and ſcope, that is betweene heauen and earth: and the creatures therein placed. They conceiue aboue theſe ten Heauens, to bee the place, and ſeate of God the Creator, and that all the creatures (except the holy Angels) are bound downe by this Primum mobile, vnder their Maker, not to approach his admirable preſence. Heere is ſtill number & place: In their diuiſion, they haue appointed ſeuen ſeueral Planets: wherof we haue warrant to ſpeak of the Sun and Moone, by holy writ. And of the other Starres there is great experience: and very profitable learning, hath bin collected and drawne from them. Vnder the loweſt of theſe, being the Moone, is affirmed to be a fierie Region, keeping all other Creatures vnder, that they may not mount aboue, nor exceed their bounds. The like fierie Region, is conceiued to bee aboue the tenth Heauen, to keepe down the creatures in that mighty ſcope and compaſſe. So here goeth ſtill together, number & place. Vnder the moones

Orbe, they place the ayre to exiſt, which may not mount aboue the fierie Region. With this aire, we haue mere familiar acquaintance then with the reſt, becauſe it partaketh with our nature. And vnder the ayre, the earth and water. And ſo of fire, water, ayre, and earth, they hold the bodies of man to be compoſed: wherein ſtill number and place, partake together in all occaſions. If I ſhould ſpeak at large of the infinite numbers of ioynts, ſinews, arteries, muſcles, vaines, organs, inſtruments, matter, and things, whereof a perfect man doth conſiſt: beſide his immortall ſoule, it would be as admirable, as the whole frame and hoſte of heauen and earth, and all wherewith they are repleniſhed. But if I ſhould diſcourſe of the reaſonable and immortall ſoule, and minde of man, the qualities, affects, effects, condition, ſtate, attribute, & faculties of the ſoule and minde. It would farre ſurmount all the creatures that euer God made: and all in number, place, and time, which is the next point to be handled.
               
                  Then gentle friend, I leaue thee a ſpectacle in thy ſelfe, to behold all theſe 3. excellent things; number, place, and time: with ye
                   ſtuffe, ſubſtance, matter, and eſſence, wherof thou art compoſed; much exceeding all the reſt, if they were all compared with thee: Abuſe neither of them, leaſt time turne thee, in ſtead of a better place, from the number of the bleſſed, to a place of damnation, among the number of the damned ſpirites. So that whether thou ſeeke heauen, earth, or hell, thou ſhalt finde all things to conſiſt of number, and place: therefore make account of them, as of their worthineſſe.
               Much might be ſaid, of the number and place of the fixed, and mouing Starres; Of the number of Monarkes, Kings, Emperors, and their Countries: the vegitatiue and ſenſitiue creatures, and of the things that haue onely being, without ſenſe or growing. But becauſe I am to ſpeake in the next place of Time, and of the vſe thereof, I ceaſe further to enlarge this point: with this concluſion, that the exerciſe of reaſon, euen amongſt

the heathen and prophane men, hath waded farre into this matter.
            
            
               Of Time.
               IN this diſcourſe of Time, there is an other way to diſcouer the truth thereof, then is vſed in handling the former. For in number and place, there is neither prioritie nor poſteritie: For though in the Deitie there be three diſtinct perſons in number, yet in reputation of place, greatneſſe, or number, none is greater or leſſe then another: and in reſpect of Time, none is before or after an other: But the whole three perſons are coequall together, and coeternall.
               The Philoſophers of auncient time, found in the reaſon of their ſoules, that there was a certaine nature and eſſence, in which they alleage to bee three in-beings as is aforeſaid. And that this great and eternall nature and eſſence, doe make the beginning of all other natures, which are contained in Time.
               
               And beſides among many opinions,

There were of theſe Philoſophers, that did maintaine, and vphold two beginnings, which in all likely-hood they were induced vnto, out of the two ſeuerall diſpoſitions and inclinations of the ſame in men; one to vertue, the other to vice. To theſe beginnings they giue ſeuerall names. The one good, which they call Oram
                        •
                     ſes.
                  
                     
                        ••
                     utarche in 
                        〈◊〉
                      life of 
                        〈◊〉
                      and 
                        ••
                     is. The other euill, and that they call Arimarius. This opinion is furthered by ſome, to haue his beginning from Zoroaſtres, the grand child of Noa: and from him, by tradition to the Perſians: and from the Perſians, to the Manachies. Their meaning & vnderſtanding, in this behalfe is, that the Elements, the Plants, the herbs, the trees, beaſtes, men, and Spirits, were diuided between theſe two Gods, holding one to bee Creator of the good, and the other, of the euil. To the one, they allotted light: to the other darkneſſe: to the one, Sommer: to the other winter, &c. The ſins, the wickedneſſe, & corruptions which they ſaw in the natures of men, differing from the perfection of a righteous Creator, drew

them into theſe abſurd opinions, becauſe they held their corruptions and euils in time and qualitie, to be in the creation of thoſe euill creatures. Which opinion, hath come neare to ſome in theſe Ages: who entering into conſideration of the euill thing
                     •
                   will not ſticke, if not to affirme, 
                     〈…〉
                   leaſt to demaund, whether God be the author of euil?
               Theſe opinions may be anſwered thus. That making, or creating, are referred to natures and ſubſtances: and that all originall natures & ſubſtances are good; And therefore that God, who is al good, is the Creator, and maker of them. Now euill, is neither a nature, nor a ſubſtance: but an income, which is fallen into natures, and ſubſtances: And therefore not in the time of creation, but is come in ſince, by a colaterall meanes. Euill, is a breathing, or diminiſhing of the foure good qualities & effects: which natures and ſubſtances ought naturally to haue.
               Hereby wee ſee, that euen in time it ſelfe, good was before euill: and in place ſhall be farre preferred aboue it.
               
                  I conclude therefore, that Euill, being neither nature nor ſubſtance, hath not, nor can haue, any being in it ſelfe, but in the thing, that of his originall nature, or ſtuffe is good. Euill, is not an effect, but a default;
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   not a production, but a corruption. Plato, and Plotin, hold opinion, that euill is not a thing of it ſelfe, nor can bee imagined, but in the abſence of goodneſſe; as a depriuation of the good, which ought to bee naturally in euery thing. And that euil is a certaine kinde of nothing; hauing no abiding, but in the the good: whereof it is a fault, or diminiſhing of perfectiō. By which they conceiue, that theſe things which haue their being, nature, and ſubſtance, onely temporary, and are finite with time, tending to the matter whereof they were firſt created: that is, to an vnbeing of that it formerly was: or to not beeing at all, as were the things whereof they were created: and vnto which, creatures haue ſtill a certaine inclination, whereby they may fall frō their goodneſſe. By theſe & many other reaſons, may bee concluded, that

there was not two beginnings, but one beginning of creatures and time. But the euill is crept in ſince, in the default, decay, or abſence of the good, which in the originall creatiō, was in the ſame natures & ſubſtances, that are now become euil.
               Many ſuppoſals, imaginations, and opinions, haue beene holden of euerlaſtingneſſe, eternitie, & of the world, and of Time, by old writers; that had no other meanes to reach vnto the ſame, but the ſcope of their owne weake reaſons. But omitting the reſt, I will come ſhortly to the point. Plotinus in his booke of Eternity, and of Time, ſaith;Plotinus Enead. 3. Lib. 2. Cha 1. That Eternitie and Time differ in this reſpect; That Eternity is verified, only of the euerlaſting nature: (meaning the Creator:) But Time, is to be verified of the things that are created. So as Eternitie is, and abideth in God alone: which hee calleth the world; that is, to be conceiued but in minde and vnderſtanding. And Time, hee intendeth to abide in the world; that is, ſubiect to the ſenſes. Adding further, that the world was not made in Time, but together with Time. Which opinion

the Diuines themſelues do hold.
               The ſame Author, hauing taken wonderfull paines in that point, and hauing ſearched out the definitions of time, made by the former Phyloſophers, knitting vp the knot of his whole learning thus. We muſt needes (ſaith he) come backe to the firſt nature; which I affirmed to be in Eternitie: I meane, the vnmoueable nature, which is wholy all at once, the infinite and endleſſe life; and which conſiſteth wholy in one, and tendeth vnto one. But as yet ſayth he, there was no time at all▪ or at leaſt wiſe, it was not among the natures that conſiſt in vnderſtanding: but was to come afterward, by a certaine kinde of poſterioritie. Out of which hee concludeth, that, before ſuch time as fore-neſſe iſſued out, and had neede of after
                        •
                     neſſe: Time, which as then was not, reſted in God, with the reſidue of all things that nowe are. But (ſaith hee) a certaine nature bent to many doings, that is to wit, the ſoule of the world, being deſirous to haue more then the preſent, began to mooue it ſelf. And ſo from thence iſſued time which paſſeth on continually, and is neuer the ſelf ſame.
               
               
                  By theſe concluſions, It is manifeſt, that the wiſdome and prouidence of God, for ſpeciall purpoſes and occaſions, hath made and ordained theſe three numbers, time, and place: not that they are any things, natures, nor ſuſtenāces, in reſpect of them ſelues; but in regard of the vſe and employment thereof: for the numbering, placing, and conueying of things according to their qualities, natures, and effects. And for the beginning, diſpoſing, and furniſhing thereof.
               Time properly of it ſelfe, is neither actiue nor paſſiue: It is neither eſcence nor ſubſtance, and ſcarcely can be ſaid to haue exiſtence. And albeit time paſſe faſter then imagination, yet of it ſelfe, hath it no power to moue at all. And the beſt deſcriptiō thereof is, ye 
                     Time
                   is a certaine meaſure of mouing, or progreſſion from one point to an other: of things corruptible, finiſhing, ending▪ and ceaſing to be, as time it ſelfe is: And is exerciſed altogether and alone in reſpect of corruptible things. In this appeareth the reaſon wherefore the worthy vnderſtanding of

number, place, and time, is onely known to man, and not to the other Creatures, is by the ſpirituall, immateriall, and mortall eſſence and vnderſtanding of the reaſonable ſoule, which being created to endure when time ſhall be finiſhed, hath power and facultie to diſcerne betweene things cōmencing▪ and tranſitorie things, mortal, & immortal: and ſo out of a greater worthineſſe then time, or any corruptible ſubſtance, cōtained within the meaſure of time, to diſcern, the vſe, ſcope, end, & purpoſe of al theſe les worthy & meaner things. And out of an infallible reaſō, to conclude, that the true vnderſtanding of number, place, and time, 'their mixtures, diuiſions, purpoſes, and ends, are knowne to men: And the vſe thereof belongeth only vnto them. And that in this number, place, & time, the Creator hath made ſufficient ſubſtance, ſtuffe and matter, to nouriſh, defend, and preſerue the whole race of man-kind, wtout any other artificiall or vnnaturall workings. And vpon that ground, let this ſuffice for a concluſion, that whoſoeuer goeth about

by policie, art, or vnnaturall meanes, to erect, ſet vp, or maintaine any courſe or way, by proportioning of time, place, or number, for the benefit, reliefe, or ſuſtentation of mandinde; then God himſelfe hath ſet downe and prouided, in the making and preſeruing of his creatures: goeth about as much as in him lieth, to reproue his creator for ſome defect or wāt: and to become himſelfe in the nature of a God, to ſupply, ſuccor, and make good that want, or defect. Wherefore I aduiſe, great warines to be taken, how men preſume too much of their owne wiſdomes: and to cōtaine themſelues within al humble obedience, to take what God hath prouided; and not to erect, maintaine, or depend vpon vnnaturall, falſe and miſconceiued ſupployments: All which I chuſe, to manifeſt by examples, that haue proceeded frō heathen men, which they only foūd out by reaſon: deſiring chriſtians that haue all the bleſſings of God reuealed vnto them, to exceed, or at leaſt, not to come ſhort of the reaſons of theſe prophane men.
            
            
               
               The knitting together of number place, and time: and their neceſſarie vſes, which cannot be wanting.
               IT may ſeeme to ſome vnderſtandings, that in theſe diſcourſes, I make much adoe about little: or that I am tedious, and vſe many preambles, circumſtances, and illuſions. Let me anſwere in a word, and giue ſome reaſon of my doing, and of my feare and carefulneſſe: not raſhly or ſodēly to conclude ſo waighty a cauſe, Firſt, I finde the way I am to take in this matters (how eaſie ſoeuer it ſeeme to others) to be full of briers, brambles, cragged rockes, ambuſhes, vneuen ground, pits, and many incombrances throwne in by the inuention of many: which muſt bee cut down, made plaine, or remoued▪ beſide the marke and ſcope I ayme at can be made apparant. To deſcend therefore to the point, there is diſcouered by learning,A double life in man. to be in man, a double life. The one in this world, in reſpect of his meere ſenſitiue parts: the ſecond, in another world,

in regard of his reaſonable ſoul. The firſt dying, finiſhing, & ceaſing to be: The ſecond immortall, and neuer finiſhing, nor ending. And in reſpect of theſe two lawes▪ man hath two ſeuerall ſortes of prouiſion. For the ſenſitiue life, the vſe and benefit of the tranſitorie things of this corruptible world. For the reaſonable ſoule, a prouiſiō in an endleſſe world like to mortality it ſelfe. In the creation, God made ſundrie creatures: in the generall number whereof, man is.
               Among the number of things, that haue either being, ſence, or mouing, man is. But beſides this, man hath a certaine Genus, or kind ſpecular alone by himſelf: and ſo is among the number of the reaſonable creatures. A kinde and number, peculiar and alone proper vnto his nature and kind. And out of that reaſon, iſſueth two other concluſions, place, and time, in this world, amongſt the other creatures, ſo long as the ſenſitiue parts remaine in life. And after that, place and endleſſe continuing in an other world. And in reſpect of immortalitie, man is

either in number, place, & time, amongſt the elect: or, number, place, and time, among the reprobates. Now, for that I ſo generally finde, that reaſonable and immortall part, to bee ſo vniuerſally caried away, ſeduced, and ouer-ruled by the meere ſenſitiue powers, entertaining the euill and forbidden things, and refuſing the good, allowable and lawfull: I haue made thus bolde to diſtinguiſh betweene theſe two times, and to giue this cauiat to the poſſeſſers thereof, that they ſtriue not ouermuch, to poſſeſſe or entertaine the number, place, and time, of theſe tranſitorie and corruptible bleſſings, as that thereby they looſe, and faile to bee of the number, place, and time, of the elect: and bee caſt amongſt the number of the damned, into the place of vtter perdition. For aſſuredly, whoſoeuer preferreth the pleaſures of this world, before, or equall with the other; abuſeth both his Creator, and creatures; All the ſhifts, policies, arts & deuices, that are vſed to croſſe the ordinance and order of God, to erect,

eſtabliſh, or ſet vp any other way, or courſe of happineſſe, either terene, or immortall, more, or other, then God himſelfe, hath prouided, ordained, & appoined, are no leſſe dangerous, then the eating of the forbidden fruit. Theſe notes I thought fit to let drop by the way, in regard that I ſhall after in an other place, treate of a vſe generally exerciſed, which I take, doth neither proceed from God, nor nature. Into this diſeaſe, I feare many thouſands are fallen, ſo vnrecouerably ſicke, that with the ſicke man at the point of death, they fall to bite the ſheetes, and pull the threeds of the couerlet, not knowing that they are ſicke at all, feeling no paine of their infection. And ſo much the more daungerous is the ſickneſſe.
               To come neerer to this point. It is plaine by ſundry places of the holy Bible, that God alone, numbreth, weigheth, & diuideth: he meaſureth times, places, and ſeaſons: Therefore let him ſtand for the numberer, placer, diſpoſer, and appointer of all creatures, their places,

times, ſeaſons, their beginings, continuings, finiſhings, chaungings, or ordainings. And let all his creatures be then numbered, placed, and limited, according to their creations, nature, qualities, and eſtates, not ſtriuing againſt the purpoſe of his diuine prouidence, or adding, or diminiſhing, too, or from, what hee hath appoindted or created.
               To diſcouer this, I muſt diſtinguiſh betweene man and the other creatures, and the cauſes and markes they tend too, and ayme at: together, with the admirable bleſſing of reaſon: and to what meaſure the capacity of man thereby extendeth, for the ſearching out the natures, qualities, times, ſeaſons, places, and vſes of the other creatures, which could not bee, but out of a kind of immortall Nature, aboue all other creatures.
               It cannot be denied, but that God hath created all things, firſt for his owne glory and honour, wherein he appointeth ſeuerall vſes and ſeruices: And within the compaſſe of this dutie, are all creatures, as well men and Angels, as the other

inferiour things. And on this behalf, God is ſatisfied with the ſeruice hee hath appointed to himſelfe; ſo his ordinance and will be obeyed.
               From thence, let vs come to things that are next vnto the ſeruice of God, & prouided to ſerue the vſe of men: And therin will appeare what an excellent creature man is, in reſpect of his originall nature and reaſon. And what wonderfull, admirable, and aboundant bleſſings and ſtores, are prouided to ſerue his turne for both his liues; The true conſideration whereof, may ſatiſfie any tempered ſpirit to be contented with his Creators owne workes; and not to 
                     •
                  oyſt in, or endeuor any other meanes of augmenting his happineſſe. And to this purpoſe, let vs ſuruey in order the Creatures which ſerue for the vſe and preſeruatiō of the life of man, and take them by degrees from the meaneſt to the greateſt: And it will make any man wonder at the admirable greatneſſe, plenty, and waightineſſe thereof: Let vs conſider them by degrees: The loweſt & the meaneſt which is the earth, therin behold the ſtuffe or matter wherewith this

huge bale is filled, to make her ſwelling ſides ſtiffe, ſtrong, and full ſtuffed, that it ſhrinke not. Let vs conſider the mettals, mines and ſtore of gold, ſiluer, and other mineralls, incloſed in her wombe. The miraculous hanging thereof in the ayre, without ſupport: The vaines, conducts, fountaines, ſprings, and riuers of water, that paſſe throgh her intralls: The hearbs plants, trees, graſſe, and fruite of ſundrie ſorts, that proceede and growe out of the richneſſe and fatneſſe therof. The rayne and deawes that water and moiſten the ſame: The waters & deepes ſeuered from the earth, bounded and limitted within a compaſſe, vpon the ſuperficies of ſome parte of the ſame earth, as it were in a great veſſell, by the ſide of this great garden, ready at all times to be taken vp for the watering thereof, as pleaſeth the maſter Gardener: ſmall riuers & brooks that iſſue from fountaines innumerably, ſeruing the turnes of men, beaſts, fiſhes, and fowles of the ayre.
                     
                        •
                     hen I ſay 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ I meane 
                        •••
                     ording to 
                        〈◊〉
                      capacity 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Then behold the ſenſitiue creatures, their ſundry kinds, & their vnknowne multitudes. The beaſts of the field, and the varietie of their natures, imployments & vſes: together with multitudes

of fiſhes, & their exceeding many ſorts. Conſider all theſe well, & we ſhall find their creation was not to ſerue their own turnes, but only & alone for the vſe of man, whoſe they are to be diſpoſed of by the direct bountie & gift of the Creator. But how? To be vſed as he hath appointed and limitted for the preſeruation & benefit of all mankind▪ not to the deſtructiō of any. Theſe things, neither know themſelues, nor the ends wherefore they were made, & yet they vnknown to thē
                  ſelues, ſerue the vſe & benefit of mā. The leane and barren haſtening their owne deaths, by how much they take pleaſure to make themſelues more ſpeedily fat. If there were no more but this, is not here a wonderful bleſſing, and is not here ſufficient & plentiful prouiſion for al the race of mankind, diſpearſed vpon ye
                   whole face of the earth? In which is not to be forgotten, that theſe creatures ceaſe not in any inſtant of time, to yeelde increaſe for this prouiſion. But let vs proeede a little further, and beholde the other two Elements, Fire and Ayre: The one warming the ſenſitiue parts, and the other maintaining the ſpirit that keepeth

life: neither of theſe know what they are, nor the end they were made for. The very Ayre it ſelfe, ſuſtaineth, and in a ſort, preſerueth ye
                   flying fowles, in her concaue and hollow Region. Let vs goe further; theſe foure Elements, though there bee contrarietie in their ſeuerall natures, yet there is a Simpathy and a ioynt working together by the appointmēt of the chiefe work-maſter; for the making, growing, cheriſhing, and maintaining of the life of man: as well by their incorparation in the body of man, as by the vſe and fruition of theſe other Creatures. Will you not think theſe ſufficient, yea admirable bleſſings? The earth to bring forth fruite, and hearbs, ſo vniuerſally, & cōtinually; ſome for the foode of man, and others for the foode of beaſtes, to perpare them to be mans meate. The ſheepe to bring both lambe for meat, & fleece for clothing: the beaſt, to bring the calfe, milke, butter, cheeſe, to be eaten and to bee worne: the fowle, to bring firſt egs, then chickens: & laſtly, feathers for eaſie lodging: the fiſhes firſt ſpawn, & then frie. The trees to erect

houſes, and make the fire. The earth that produceth graſſe, ſerueth for tile to couer the houſes: The ſtrawe that yeeldeth the corne, ſerueth other purpoſes▪ The timber that buildeth at land, ſerueth for nauigation at ſea: Out of the line or flax that maketh the great Cable, to bee drawne, the threeds that make the fine & curious linnen: from the ſauage wilde beaſts, their warm furs: from the hearbs & plants, rich and eſtimable vertues▪ & from the poore ſilke-worme, the coſtly apparell, of ſilkes and vellets. It were a world to recite the ſeueral benefits that are drawn from theſe creatures: And I am perſwaded, no creature can reduce thē to a Catalogue: Excellent wines, oyles, grapes, ſpices, perfumes, gummes, pearle, Balmes, elixors, ſpirits, vertues, and quinteſſence. Out of the earth, are drawn metals, of gold, ſiluer, copper, braſſe, tinne, leade, yron, ſteele, and ſuch like. Beholde how one benefit followeth and haſteneth in the necke of an other: the ſeuerall courſe of trying theſe mettalls, and the vſe thereof, which thēſelues know not: Are not theſe inf
                     ••••
                   bleſſings, ſufficient for men to content

themſelues with all? but they muſt needs goe further. Ouer all theſe, man, and onely man, hath a power and dominion: the cōmand & vſe but limited, not to be abuſed, or exerciſed to other purpoſes then the Creator ordained. Beholde, what an inſearchable reaſō is this one thing in the nature of man, by fire to trie out theſe mettals, and to ſeaſon and apply them to their ſeuerall, neceſſarie, and cōmodious vſes. But take heed of the abuſe. Among many other hād vſes of mettals; Of yron and ſteele, they make kniues to cut meat: but it is not intended to cut mens throats: they make ſickles and ſithes to cut down corne and graſſe, without intent to cut mens legs. The like may be concluded of the other mettals, and the vſe of them. Wherefore to finiſh that point, gold and ſiluer being the fineſt mettals of the reſt, are ſearched out, refined, & propotioned to paſſe betweene men at a value and rate, for the prouiding of victuall, apparell, and other neceſſaries to defend the bodie, from heate, colde, and hunger: not that of themſelues, ſimply by themſelues, they are either diet, apparell, or prouiſiont

to defende winters colde, or ſommers heate, but rather an incomberment, then comfort, if men be enforced to weare or vſe them next their naked bodies, or to feede of their ſolide ſubſtances. It ſhall be neceſſarie therefore, that wee doe not diſpoſe or employ the ſame, to generall creatures bege: or bring forth any new creature, cōtrary & againſt his own nature: or to make it valuable with the leaſt humaine and reaſonable Creature that euer was, or ſhall be borne.
               Let vs looke further, & ſee whether we can find any other benefits, if theſe be not ſufficient to ſatiſfie vs. And as we began at the loweſt, ſo let vs aſcend vpwards. Aboue the Ayrie Region, The Moone which lighteneth the night, gouerneth the ſea, tempereth the heate, & comfortteth the vital powers, made by the prouidence & cōmand of the creator, hath her ſeuerall world or Orbe, wherin ſhe moueth. The like is holden of the other mouing ſtars, ye
                   fixed ſtars, the very Cope of heauē, wherin they are placed. The glorious Sunne it ſelfe, placed in the middeſt

of the heauens. Behold and looke vpon them, their innumerable company, their admirable beauty, their ſeuerall employments, courſes and vertues: They all are ignorant of their owne natures, vertues, vigors▪ places, beauties, ſtatelineſſe, and diſpoſes. They are the admirable workes of God, ſhewing forth his glorie vnto men. Al theſe alſo ſerue only to the benefit and vſe of men, and none other. The Sun to viſit & comfort all the corners of the earth, in one yeare: neuer ceaſing nor ſtanding ſtill, vnleſſe it were to make the work admirable, & the workmaſter and cōmander more wonderfull, it ſtood ſtill in the time of Ioſua.
               
               They mooue once in thirty daies, making her reuolutiō, & al ye
                   reſt of thoſe celeſtial creatures, in their times, order, nū
                  bers, & places, mouing with ſuch harmony, conſent, and agreemēt, to deuide the yeare into Somer, & Winter, Spring and fall: as wel to chaſten the earth to make it fruitfull, as to comfort the hearbes and graſſe, to make them growe: as well to ripen and gather the fruites of the earth,

as to ſowe ſeeds, and ſet plants: to diuide the day and the night, and to proportion the times and ſeaſon. They all keeping their own natures in their certaine number, their motions within the limits of an appointed place: And their courſes and reuolutions, iuſt at their appointed time. So that in all this whole hoſt of heauen, there is no manner of ſtirring, ſtaggering, mouing, or diſordering, to the point of a pin, in reſpect of place; nor to the leaſt inſtant, in regard of Time: after they were once placed, & ſet to take their ſpacious iournies.
               By the comfort and vertue of theſe, are all the inferiour bodyes, comforted, cheriſhed, relieued, ſuccoured, and made able to performe their ſeuerall duties. All theſe benefits hath God made to ſupply and ſerue the turne, and vſe of man. Behold, and looke vpon them with admiration! conſider whether they bee not aboue the conceite of all capacitie. Will any mā affirme, that theſe are not enough and ſufficient, to nouriſh, feede, ſuccour, and preſerue al the race of mankinde: yea

euery one, as well the meaneſt as the greateſt.
               Surely none, neither can nor will deny this to be true: And yet we ſee dayly many thouſands want, famiſh, and pine to death, for wāt of theſe earthly neceſſaries.
                     
                        ••
                     aſon 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . There muſt needs bee a fault in diſtribution & diſpoſing of theſe benefits, or els none ſhuld not wāt: for God in his diuine wiſedome, in the creation, hath not appointed any ſuch place of ſcarcitie, nor any number ſo to periſh: no
                     •
                   any time when any ſuch miſerie ſhould befall. This Extremities muſt needs then proceed of ſome wrong courſe, order, or diſpoſition amongſt men, in the diſtribution of his benefits: for al the reſt of his creatures haue not departed one iote frō the worthineſſe of their firſt creatiō.
               Well, to proceed, there is a greater benefite then all theſe; and that is the reaſon, vnderſtanding, and witte of man; whereby hee knoweth all theſe things, their vertues and effects: and thereby of his owne proprietie and right, hee commandeth, diſpoſeth, ordereth, and enioyeth,

theſe lower creatures, as it ſerueth beſt for his turne and vſe.
               What is it to bee of neuer ſo great prower, value, vigor, or worthineſſe, to ſuch a ſubiect, as neither vnderſtandeth what it is of it ſelfe, nor what vertue is in it ſelfe: nor to what turne it ſerueth? labouring ſtill for others, and taking no pleaſure therein it ſelfe.
               This is the condition of the Sunne, the Moone, the Firmament, and all the whole garniſhed and rich decked skies, with infinite numbers of Starres. And of all the creatures in this Sphere of Elements, they are: and yet they know not, neither what, nor whereof, nor to what purpoſe they are: what then auaileth this glorious richneſſe vnto themſelues? Surely nothing.
               This doth wonderfully exalt the creation, worthineſſe, and eſtimation of man, and of his reaſonable ſoule: yea, of the meaneſt of all the race of man, aboue all theſe creatures, either Coeleſtiall or tereſtriall; in that he: vnderſtandeth them all,

and enioyeth the vſe, benefite, and profite of them all. May not this ſerue for for a concluſion, and moue the hearts of men to be very carefull, how they either vſe, or abuſe the bleſſings and benefits of God? leaſt in gathering too much, it turn to wormes, as Manna did in the wilderneſſe: or to Quayles, and it become the deſtruction of the eaters thereof, in ſtead of nouriſhment.
               Theſe benefites God hath beſtowed on Man, principally & chiefely to ſerue his turne, and to inſtruct and teach him, in this firſt life, which ſhall finiſh and ende. Behold, there are further matters, and benefits beſtowed and prouided for Man beſides theſe;
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſecond the meaneſt, farre exceeding the greateſt of theſe: They are ſuch, as I dare not define or treate of; and therefore with reuerence leaue them to the Readers conſideration, with ſuch deſcriptions as they are left to me. They are ſuch, As the eye hath not ſeene, the eare heard, nor the heart of man can conceiue.
               
               Oh, ineſtimable riches, peace, plentie, ioy, fulneſſes, which God hath prouided

for this immortall, reaſonable ſoule, if it vary not from the direction of the Creator. And are not theſe yet ſufficient? but man muſt needes be medling with himſelfe, patching, and playing the tinker, or botcher, vpon ſome imagination of his owne, and ſo marre all: which the the auncient Philoſophers hold to be the reaſon, that man was caſt out of the company of the Gods, into this lower, baſe, and corruptible Sphere of the Elements.
               This is not all, I ſay, that God hath done for man: for beſide his creation, he doth ſtill by his holy hand, vphold and ſupport him, he hath receiued him to fauour, being abiected for vſing the creatures of God contrary to his ordinance: he hath ſet his holy Angels ſo preſerue & defend him: his only Son to looſe his life to redeeme him: his moſt gratious holy ſpirit to be his comfort and conſolation. A fulneſſe of all benefites in this life: and eternall ioyes in heauen &c.
               Prouided alwayes, that wee doe not vſe his creatures, to vnnatural, vnlawfull, or forbidden vſes, or employments. This

is the happie eſtate of reaſonable man, if he containe himſelfe within his bounds: All the worlde will confeſſe no benefite or bleſſing can be added vnto it.
               Let vs not therefore ſecke to alter, change, charge, or incomber, the courſe and way, the Almightie power hath appointed in theſe things: leaſt it turne to our vtter confuſion. Let vs not wrong our reaſonable ſoules, therefore: but ſchoole and inſtruct them, in ſuch rudiments as may preſerue their worthineſſe.
            
            
               Reaſon is the Founder of Arts.
               BY the precedent Circumſtances, it appeareth, that among all the creatures vnder Heauen, (man onely excepted) nothing is ſeene to bee made for it ſelfe: nor man onely for himſelfe, but for the ſeruice of God. The Sunne ſhineth and heateth, but not for it ſelfe. The Earth beareth, and yet hath no benefite thereby. The Windes blowe, and yet they ſayle not. The Fire burneth, and yet feeleth not his owne force.

The Water beareth the ſhippes, and yet knoweth not the waight thereof. Al theſe ſerue onely to the glory of God, and benefit of man. Behold therfore, how neere God hath placed man vnto himſelfe: nay, what plentifull prouiſion hee hath made for ſuſtentation of this ſenſitiue life, and the neceſſarie vſe thereof. The Sunne warmeth the earth▪ the earth nouriſheth the Plants: the Plants ſeede the beaſts, and the beaſts ſerue man. So that the nobleſt creatures haue neede of the baſeſt, and the baſeſt are ſerued by the moſt noble▪ And all theſe by the diuine prouidence of God: wherein as there can bee nothing wanting, ſo thereunto there may be nothing added.
               Now for the better diſcouerie of what dignitie, honour, aduancement, benefite, and ſupply this ſenſitiue life hath, by the vſe and imployment of Rea
                     
                        •
                     on, which is an inſeperable qualitie of the immortall Soule, let vs diſcend a litle into the Arts, whereby Reaſon doth ſupply the defects & miſeries, which otherwiſe this life muſt abide
                     •
                  which in reaſon

ſhould moue the hearts of men to vſe theſe temporall bleſſings, in ſuch a temporall meaſure, as they might ſupply and ſerue the turnes and vſes of all the race of Mankinde. As I meane not to euery one a like, ſo it is no equall ſharing, that ſome ſhould haue all, and others want. If wee conſider but this one thing, that by the admirable reaſon of man in his firſt creation, he did ſodainely giue all the creatures of God ſeuerall names, and ſtill retained the memory of them when he had neuer ſeene them before, here began the Arte, Memoratiue, and all other Artes, which afterwards had almoſt periſhed, and beene confounded.
               
                  Hermes taking conſideration of theſ
                     •
                   things, ſaith; The Sun-beames of God ar
                        •
                      his actions: the Sun-beames of the worlde are the natures of things: And the Sun-beames of man, are his arts and ſciences. Whence ſhould he learne, teach, or vnderſtand this, but out of that reaſon which then remained, though imperfect and impayred. By which reaſon, he was led to acknowledge the diuinite and omnipotencie

of God, being more then many men wil at this day acknowledge. But to proceede to the Arts, albeit they are well knowne, yet let me recite ſome particulars. By Reaſon, firſt the generall knowledge is attained. Then Reaſō hath proportioned things into diuers parts: Firſt, in conſideration of their natures, & worthineſſe: ſecondly, in cōſideration of their numbers and places: thirdly, in regard of their vſes and employments. So hath Reaſō left nothing vnproportioned which ſhe hath ſet down, and concluded by Arts & Sciences. By Grāmer, ye
                   courſe of true ſpeaking: by Retoricke the māne
                     •
                   of perſwaſion: by Logicke, the true proportion of reaſoning: by Muſicke, true conſent of Harmony: by Arithmaticke, the proportion of numbering, adding, diminiſhing, augmenting, and diuiding. By Geometry, the manner of euen & infalible proportioning: all theſe come of Reaſon. The petty, nay rather the great helpes towards the effecting of theſe things. The inuenting, the making, and faſhioning, of the tooles, inſtruments, and

preparations that ſerue to theſe vſes. The making of pen, inke, paper, letters, ſillables, words, edge-tooles, notes of muſick, flat, &c. cards, wheels, loomes, milles, the mecanicall Arts, of Weauers, Tuckers, Spinſters, Tailors, Smiths, carpēters, ſawyers, ioyners, wt
                   diuers other of ye
                   like quality. All theſe and many others, haue bene drawn, takē out, & proportiōed by ye
                   noble & famous arts of arithmatike, & geometrie: which are neither ſo highly eſteemed nor vnderſtood, as they deſerue: for the more neerer reaſon (with a reuerend care of ye
                   creator) ſearcheth into theſe cauſes, the more neerer doth it bring the ſoule of man to the principal Artifex and maker of them. Let vs proceed a little further: By the motion of the Sun, which ſurroundeth the world in 24 hours, they haue proportioned the circumference of the world, to be 360. degrees: they diuide euery degree, into 60. miles: with many other ſuch diuiſiōs, which I omit. By theſe Arts, they haue found that the ſun in the whole yeare, maketh her furtheſt point, both toward the North, and South pole: and thereupon they haue diuided that

time into xii. monethes. To euery of theſe twelue monethes, they proportion an appointed number of daies; to euery day, 24 hours: to euery houre 60. minutes. And ſo reducing theſe learnings to one point or head, they proportiō as wel Latitude and Longitude of place, as motion & paſſage of time: together with the influence and aſpects of the planets and ſtarres; in ſuch ſort, as if this miſtery were vnknown in any mans vnderſtanding, it were impoſſible to be found out. And becauſe the ſun paſſeth alwaies frō the Eaſt, to the Weſt, and neuer fully reacheth to ye
                   point of the North, or South, they haue determined, & diuided the world into 5. ſeueral zones. The 2. remote parts of North, & South, they call the cold parts: ye
                   middle, they cal the hot or burning zone: the other two, are the temperate parts. To this they haue likewiſe added a girdle, that goeth ouerthwart the hot & two temperat zones: diuiding the ſame into 12. equal parts, aſcribing a ſeueral Lord, or Gouernor of theſe houſes: limiting the ſun 30. daies trauel, to paſſe throgh euery of theſe ſame: wt
                   many other admirable & neceſſary lernings

And out of theſe Arts, it is well knowne, they haue truely ſet down the Eclipſes of the Sunne and Moone, the reuolution of the Starres, ſtabilitie of the North, and South poles, & the motion of the others: by which, all nauigation is maintained: the compaſſe, carde, & needle, proportioned: nay the ſhip it ſelfe, and all other buildings, both of land and ſea, deuiſed, framed, & faſhioned: Al coūtries known and ſeuered, and euery mans poſſeſſion diuided, one from an other: Aſtronomy, and Aſtrologie, haue taken their foundation there. And how much the Phyſitians knowledges are increaſed thereby, or what defects they would finde by the want therof, let themſelues iudge. But to be ſhort: Theſe Arts are the onely and true directors of the whole courſe of mens liues, as wel in gouernment, as obedience: in diſtribution, as well as in receiuing: for there being diuerſitie of honours, places, dignities, and worthineſſe, ſo ought there to be a meaſure and indifferency, in proportioning their contributions: Many thouſands of admirable

bleſſings would follow Reaſō, if meaſure and proportion were truely kept. For then ſhould the King haue the ſupreme place: The magiſtrates, their due honour. The ſubiects true and equall iuſtice: and euery man his owne right, without controuerſie, checke, or controlment. But Originall reaſon is ſo weakened and impaired, that theſe things are not to be looked for: mens natures are preuaricated, and intemperate diſires ſo bent to diſorder; that poore Queene Reaſon hath little place, and her proportions little eſteemed, and leſſe vſed. Reaſon of it ſelfe diſcerneth, and concludeth, that the heauens are imbowed like a vault about the lower parts. And the lower parts, circumualated and incompaſſed within the heauens conuexitie. The earth, as the flower or planckes to goe vpon, and retaine the maſſie bodies of men, and the mighty inuolued numbers of Creatures, there on reſiding: And the heauens as the wide drawne, and large extended Canopie, to couer all theſe, with many included eſſences and beings: all ſeruing to exerciſe

Reaſon withall: the more fully to apprehend the incomprehenſible greatneſſe, goodneſſe, & bountie of the Creator, and the worthineſſe of mans originall Creation. But as is before diſcouered, this perfection of Reaſon, & innocencie is loſt: corruptiō is crept in, and taken vp right and true Reaſons roome: and had ſo much impaired, blemiſhed, darkened, & obſcured, Reaſons faculties, that euen the arts themſelues, were almoſt forgottē, & put to obliuion: & great labour hath bene vſed to reuiue, recontinue, and vphold, or make knowne theſe former Arts and Sciences.
               Concerning this point: Let vs take a ſhort viewe of the beginnings of creatures. All things had a kinde of perfectiō, yet ſubiect to imperfectiōs. As creatures, to a Creators command. Then the firſt declination & laps, after the Creation, which hath ouerthrowne the ſincere pureneſſe of Reaſō The feare of puniſhment, for that offence, hath exerciſed mans reaſon with many incomberments, and cauſed a kind of deciſting, to continue the rememberance of ſuch parts of

reaſon as then remained not vtterly ouerthrowne. Vnto which, I adde two other decaies: the ouerthrow of ye
                   world by the floud, & accurſedneſſe of the earth at that time. And the confuſion of languages at the ouerthrowe of the Tower of Babel, being in māner Arts deſtruction. For after this time in many parts of the world, Arts & Sciences were almoſt vtterly vnknown: & ther dequired a new time, firſt to learne & vnderſtād languages before Arts could be taught: & few remained in life, that had the Science of teaching: or at the leaſt, for the diſpercing of arts, for that there was then no ſuch common vſe of letters, as of later time, for that reaſon had not then diſcouered the Art of printing: beſides, the amazednes of that cōfuſiō of tongues, cauſed the inhabitāts of the earth to diſpoſe thēſelues into coūtries vnfurniſhed, with other fruits, then ſuch as ye
                   earth of her owne accurſed nature did produce (none ſuch as were in the original Creation) & ſo men had enough to doe to prouide thēſelues food & apparell for many hundreth yeers: ſo as beſides the forgetting of

the vſe of Arts, there ſcarce remained ſo much, as the vſe of tillage and manuring of the earth, to ſuccour and defend mens liues: by which meanes Arts remained raked vp, as fire vnder aſhes, not cleane extinct, yet ſeeming not to bee: In ſo much as it is reported of thoſe parts of the world, wherein as well the Greekes and other nations liue, that Philoſophie was firſt diſcouered by Pithagoras: long after whoſe time the Romanes are holden to be ignorant thereof. Seneca ſaith, Philoſophie was not found out aboue one thouſand yeares before his time. Socrates is ſaid to be the firſt, that brought it from ſtudie to practice: which is not much aboue two thouſand yeares ſince: for which he is ſo holden in admiration, as he is ſaid to haue brought it from heauen to earth: and thereby to haue taught men how to gouerne themſelues,
                     
                        •••
                     tarch in 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Oſiris 
                        〈…〉
                     . 1. and others: yet theſe learnings had their Originalls before, though they attributed thē to Pithagoras, as the beginner thereof: arguing their owne ignorance: for Pithagoras learned his skil from Gonchedie, and

of the Iewes: Plato of Sechnuphis: Endoxus, of Conuphis: and al theſe of the diſciples of Triſmegeſtus: who out of his own bookes manifeſteth, that he learned it of Moſes.
                  Learcus i
                        •
                      the life of Thales. Thales in his epiſtle Phorecid
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  Thales is ſaid to be the firſt that taught in Aſtronomy to the Greekes: It appeareth as wel by his own as other mens workes, that it was taught him by the Egyptians: & to the Egyptiās, by the Caldeans. And if Belus as Plini reporteth, were the finder out thereof, yet hee hath the ſame from Abraham, in whoſe time he liued: wherin I obſerue, that many contentions haue bene about the beginning thereof, to aduaunce the honour of their owne Countries. But howſoeuer, it is moſt true, that the perfection of thoſe Sciences and Arts were loſt, & in manner put to abſolute obſcuritie and obliuion. For it is ſaid that Clearchus, who liued a thouſand yeares after Moſes, did viſibly and with his eyes, ſee the Iew of whō 
                  Ariſtotle learned his Philoſophy. And it is reported, Phythagoras and Plato had their learning from Mercuries Pillars. So that the knowledge of theſe Arts, Sciencies, and

learnings, haue bene long diſcōtinued in the world,
                     
                        •
                     . lib. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                      in life of 
                        〈…〉
                     . 2. before they were receiued: and ſpecially to theſe latter parts of the world: for it is ſaide, that for the obſeruation of the Eclipſes of the Sun & Moone. Anaxxagoras was put in priſon, and Protagoras was baniſhed Athens. Nay, it was ſo obſcured, that Thales is ſaid to be the firſt that obſerued the North ſtarre: and that Phythagoras, firſt diſcouered the morning and euening ſtarre to be all one: and the deſcribing of the Zodiacke to go a skew. And that Solon, firſt found out the Moons reuolution to be within xxx. dayes: and that Archimedes out of many obſeruations, made the firſt deſcription of the Spheres: and that the obſeruation of the Planets, was not diſcouered in many yeares after. In ſo much that it is ſaid, that the very account of the yeare was vncertain and confuſed, in thoſe parts where he raigned and was Emperour: which is well knowne to be ouer the moſt part of Chriſtendom. And it is abſolutely reſolued, that within much leſſe then two thouſand yeares, none of theſe partes of

the world had any Quadrant dyal: or diſtinction of houres, times, or places; vpon any methode of learning: all which may very ſufficiently ſhew, that the vnderſtanding and Arts, were in maner forgotten and left in obliuion: and yet notwithſtanding alwaies remaining in it ſelf, though blemiſhed & obſcured. And for the Arts of Arithmaticke and Geometrie, they are fathered vpō 
                  Pythagoras, Endoxus, & Euclides: who wrote but in late time, in reſpect of Moſes or Treſmegiſtes: but yet the ſame learning wil conclude, yt
                   though the arts were obſcured, yet they remained from auncient times, long before: and euen from the firſt Creation. And as for Rome, with his great antiquity, they had no knowledge in Phyſicke, vntill the Cōſulſhip of Lucius Aemilius, and Marcus Liuius. At which time, Archagatus the Grecian, was made free of the Cittie of Rome. Which ſheweth that theſe barbarous partes of the world, had not till that time recontinued or reuiued the worthie knowledge of honorable Arts.About
                        •
                      yeares b
                        ••
                     fore 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   But endeuouring to reduce my purpoſe, to as ſhort

a concluſion as I may, I will omit further to dilate, concerning the original worthineſſe of arts, and ſciences, and their neceſſary vſes and emploiments; and haſt to the next point, that offereth it ſelfe to bee handled: holding this opinion, that the reaſon, depth, and neceſſarie knowledge of theſe arts, are knowne to fewe in theſe parts of our world. And that many haue an apparance of knowledge, and yet faile of the ſubſtance which hath ſeduced and miſled many men, and ſundry matters, to the great wrong of right and true reaſon. Therefore giue me leaue to diſtinguiſh betweene things aboue nature, things naturall, and things againſt nature, which will giue great light to the point of this argumēt: and deſire that mē wil not attribute to thēſelues, that knowledge of arts, whereof they are ignorant: And that the ignorant will not condemne the Arts which they know not: for it is truely ſaid; Scientia non habet, inimicum niſi Ignorantium.
               
            
            
               
               Things aboue Nature, and naturall.
               BEſides the former reaſons, that it was long before this part of the world had the vnderſtāding & vſe of Arts, which are the contriuers of ciuill gouernment & order, as reaſon hath compoſed, & diſpoſed them. Caeſar, in his Cōmentaries ſaith, That in his time Germany was continually a Forreſt, wherein a man might haue gone fiftie dayes iourney, before he could ſee any end of it: and that the people thereof were ſauage & beaſtly, offering their children in ſacrifice to their imagined Gods. Which cauſed that the Romanes in many yeeres after, durſt not aduenture farre ouer into that Countery: Wherevpon it is conceiued, that all the auncient Townes and Cities, which ſtood vpon the Riuer of Rheine and Danowe, toward France and Italie, were erected and built for defence againſt the Germanes. For euen in the time of Tacitus, liuing in the time of Nero,
                  
and ſithēs the Germanes were a rude, ignorant, and vngouerned people. As theſe parts of the world were vnskilfull of the Arts, ſo ſuch as trauelled to vnderſtand them, and were able to teach them, liued ſo farre as France, Italie, Spaine, Germany: And theſe North partes were ſcarcely knowne to them, as appeareth by Ephorus, the moſt diligent Hiſtoriographer of thoſe Ages. For he ſpeaking of Spaine, or Iberia, writeth thereof, but as if it were one Towne: which argueth he had ſlender knowledge thereof. It is written, that Orpheus drewe the Greekes out of their Forreſts and Fiens,
                     
                        •
                     eucidides 
                        •
                     . 1. 
                        ••
                     pheus in 
                        〈…〉
                     . about the time Troy was beſieged. This worthy and famous ſeruice did Orpheus performe, by the arts, ſciences, and skill he learned amongſt the Egyptians: whereby firſt hee laid aſide his owne ſauageneſſe, and after vndertooke to direct & gouerne others: which doth much aduaunce the eſtimation of theſe noble Artes. It would require a long diſcourſe, to ſet downe the diuers opinions of the diſpearcing of Arts, Sciences, & gouernments.
               
                  Some affirme, Abraham firſt taught Letters or Characters. Others, father it vpon Moſes, or at leaſt, that hee firſt taught the Grāmer. If it were diſcouered, to what perfection theſe things grewe, or how yong or greene they were, in the time of Zoroaſtres, Scyonians, Ogyges, Ninus, Amoſes, Calliſthenes, Ptolomie, the Hebrewes, the Chaldeans, Egyptians, Aſſirians, Medes, Perſians, and Phenicians; It would not much ſerue to excuſe the Countries, in thoſe arts and ſciences. For they not knowing our parts of ye
                   world, could hardly informe them in their learnings, by reaſon of their vnknowne and remote parts.
               Beſides, it ſeemeth they were but in the beginning of the diſcouery of theſe Arts: they vnraked the aſhes, and opened the fire, and by the light which they tooke, many haue ſince lighted their candles. For it ſeemeth, their meanes of ſpreading abroad their learnings, was very hard, in that they were enforced to write their minds by Characters: made vpon leaues, barkes, ryndes of Trees, and Stones: In ſo

much, as it is written; That in Babilon certaine obſeruations of ſtars, were written in Tiles or Bricks. By theſe it ſeemeth, that Reaſon depriued of her ornaments, hath ſtriued to ſet vp, and erect Schooles and Vniuerſities, for the reuiuing, and recontinuing of theſe loſt, or obſcured ſciences, and worthy knowledges: for the well ordering of men, families, kingdoms, countries, & nations, which in time by trauell, hath bene brought amongſt vs, from the Center or firſt place, where they were taught, being by coniecture of the learned, in Meſopotamia, the Mount Taure, or in the Wilderneſſe of Semar, where the Arke firſt reſted, & Noah firſt landed, and inhabited.
               It is ſaide by Viues, that Politian, did ſpend his whole life, part in ſcanning whether he ſhould pronounce Vergilius, or Virgilius: Carthaginences, or Carthaginiences. Primus, or Preimus. And deſpiſing all worthy ſciences, and orderly courſe of gouernmēt or rudimēts, he ſpent the reſt of his time, in making filthy Epigrams. I feare there is much time beſtowed in

this age, in as vaine & idle courſes, which might be beſtowed to the learning of better arts and ſciences, more commendable for themſelues, & more profitable for the common wealth. For if it be well obſerued, what honourable exployts and famous Acts haue bene brought to paſſe in the order of wars, in the gouernment of countries, and ciuill courſes of life,Cicero in his firſt booke of Inuention, and in his firſt booke of Oratory appeaſing of controuerſies by theſe eſtimable Sciences and Arts, which the moſt wiſe haue euer had in admiration, as Tully concludeth. That man ſaith he, that firſt gathered together diſperſed men, was ſurely a great perſonage. So was he (ſaith Pythagoras) which firſt gaue names to things, and which compounded within a certaine number of letters, the ſounds of mens voices, which ſeemed to be infinit; and which marked the courſes and proceedings of the wandering ſtars: & which firſt found out corne, cloth, buildings, defences againſt wild beaſts, and the reſt of the things that make our liues the more ciuill. Theſe things may be attributed to

the nature of mans reaſon, and reaſon of mans nature.
                     
                        •
                     hings a
                     
                        •
                     oue the 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ure o
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     eaſon o
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     an. But to make and Create of nothing, ſo worthy a Creature as man is aboue nature: which Cicero conſidered, when he ſaid: There was a certaine might or power, which had a care of mankinde, and which would not haue begotten him, to fall into the miſchiefe of endleſſe death, after he hath outworne the great and innumerable aduerſities and toyles of the world: For, ſaith he, We be not created by hazarde. Which ſheweth directly, that Cicero did reach into an vnderſtanding; that there was a greater bleſſing and perfection in the creation, then remained in the nature of man: for he cō
                  ceiueth, that neither miſery in this world, nor the miſchiefe of an endles death, were the ends vnto which ſuch worthy Creatures were firſt made. His Reaſon could extend to vnderſtand a Creating Nature aboue nature. For he that maketh, cannot be the ſame thing he maketh: nor of the ſame quality:Things na
                     
                        •
                     urall. but of a farre more worthy. And ſo will I leaue to ſpeake of this ſupernaturall

cauſe, as the maker of the reſt: and ſteppe lower to the next point, of things naturall.
               To bee briefe in this point, becauſe the natures of things are in ſome ſorte before diſcouered; I wil only touch ſome fewe points.
               This great worke-maſter and Creator of things and natures, hath appointed their kindes, natures, conditions, and effects: their increaſes, generations, and propagations; for hauing ſet the Heauens in motion, they continually moue without ceaſing: but in this, there is noe increaſe, nor generation.
               There is ſtill but one Sunne, and one Moone: notwithſtanding all the coniunctions ſince the worldes beginning.
               There are no more Starres then were made at one inſtant.
               And ſo theſe bodies were ordained to continue their firſt numbers, places, and motiōs, wto
                     ••
                   increaſe: according to their true natures. And theſe motions proceed

of nature it ſelfe. The earth bringeth forth the vegitatiue things, but not by generation. The ſenſitiue things increaſe by generation, all cōmencing from a beginning of things of their owne natures: which ſheweth the worthineſſe of this Creation, and the admirable worke that ſo infinite numbers of things ſhould bee made of nothing: and ſo admirably compoſed, and put in order by a worke-maſter, that had neither matter, ſtuffe, inſtrument, model, nor patterne for the doing thereof.
            
            
               Things againſt nature.
               
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ings a
                     
                        ••
                     inſt natureI Mind not to ſpeak of the miracles that haue bene done in the times of the Patriarks and Prophets. The incarnation of Chriſt, his faſting, & other the works of God, in the old & new Teſtament, which are aboue our nature. But to touch theſe things that Reaſon may deſcend into; It were againſt the nature of the Sunne, to leaue his motion, or looſe his light: or of the Moone, to bring forth ſons or daughters:

The earth cannot be metamorphoſed, or turned into an incorporiall ſubſtance, neither is it her nature to produce or bring forth beaſts or men: for creation hath appointed euery kindes a ſeuerall manner of increaſe. The Fowles of the Ayre doe not bring forth ſwine, nor the Tyger ingender Doues, nor men beget Bears or Lyon: men cānot be Gods. It is imposſible for the ſoule of man to ceaſe or giue off his being, & to be of the ſame nature. The Hynd cānot bring forth egs, nor the Oſtridge be the Dam of the Roe Bucke. Euery thing hath his appointed nature, which it can ne
                     •
                  ther change nor leaue. And becauſe we haue ſpoken before, of number, place, and time, let vs in this place conſider what they are, or at leaſt what they are not. The better to diſcouer their employments, they are not as is before recited, any matters, ſubſtances, natures, nor eſſences, in reſpect of themſelues: neither haue they power to procreate or bring forth any thing. They are onely the veſſels, engines, mouldes, frames or organs, wherein

things are caſt, faſhioned, placed, ſorted, and ordered.
               Out of theſe, in reſpect of nature, can proceede nothing: no not ſo much as themſelues, iſſue not, nor come not of themſelues: but are reſpected, according to the motions, courſe, order, or number of creatures, that paſſe in, by and through them. If a man ſhall offer to bring vp the Foxe whelpe, among the ſheep, euen from the firſt time of his littering: It is neither the placing him among theſe creatures, nor the vſe of time, will qualifie his greedy nature of deuouring his fellowes. The like may bee ſaide of all other Creatures, and their kindes and natures.
               It is againſt nature, for Creatures of one kind, to deſtroy one an other: which is a great argument of preuarication of the nature and reaſon of man: in that they ceaſe not continually and againſt nature, to worke one an others confuſion. Let vs proceed a little further: & ſet theſe three, number, place, and time, to work ſimply of themſelues: they neither ingender, nor

bring forth any things: albeit, in them, and by them, that is, in their moulds, infinit numbers are generated and brought forth. Let vs ſprinckle a fewe holy conſidera
                     •
                  ions in theſe cauſes, to make them the more ſauery; leaſt ſtriuing to ſet our corrupt reaſon ouer high, we caſt it to the duſt. As in the firſt Creation, it was againſt nature, that there ſhould be any imperfectiō, or foule matter, or defect, created in mans nature: So now, nature being corrupted, & altogether polluted by diſobedience, It is both againſt, & aboue this corrupt nature, that any perfection ſhould remaine in man: Albeit, there are that maintaine a ſparke or remnant of perfection, of the firſt originall nature, to remaine: whereby it may againe worke his former perfectiō. This is againſt corrupt nature: as much as to ſunder & take apart wine from water, after it is once mingled: for no polluted thing entred into the ſubſtāce, can afterwards be clenſed from this polutiō: as ye dye wil neuer be taken cleane out of the white cloath. It is to be obſerued, that Chriſt in miniſtring

the Sacrament of his bleſſed bodie and blood; Firſt he brake the bread, and they eate it: and then hee gaue the cuppe, and all was done, whilſt he was really and perſonally amongſt them.
               It is vnnaturally holden, that they did really and naturally eate his very fleſh, and drink his very blood: This is againſt nature.
               Firſt, it is againſt the nature of a Sacrament, to be the thing which it repreſenteth: or for the thing ſignified, to be the ſignifier, or betokener of that which is ſignified. Then it is againſt nature, that Chriſt as he was very man, being preſent and personally among them, performing this office himſelfe, ſhould at one inſtant be, & not be. For, as he was mā, ſo was he local. Now to deliuer himſelf, & to be eaten, and yet remaine in the ſame ſubſtāce, of and by himſelfe, at the ſame inſtant, is againſt nature. Beſides, that he ſhould ſo exhauſt or drawe his moſt precious blood, that whē the bread (which they intēd to be his real & māly body) was eatē,

there ſhould bee therein no parte of his bloud: and more, that himſelfe ſhould be at one inſtant abſolute man, & at the ſame inſtant, ſee himſelfe viſibly eaten with the teeth of men, in diſtinct and ſeuerall places. This is againſt the nature of the manhoode, and ſo againſt both. For Sacraments are not miracles, nor natures to bee changed. Beſides, in miracles, things did not at one, and the ſame inſtant, containe two ſeuerall natures: nor one nature in two ſeuerall places: as in the miracle at the mariage: as long as the water remained water, it was not wine: and after it became wine, it was no longer water: neither was it wine and water, all at one inſtant, though turned in leſſe then a moment: neither was it water in two ſeuerall places, nor wine in two places, otherwiſe then by diuiding it into ſeuerall cupps or veſſells. I make bolde to giue a touch of this miſterie, which I holde to be of deeper conſideretion then mans reaſon can reach into: which being a matter of ſpirit, cannot be apprehended but by the eye of the ſame ſpirit, hauing regard to the ſecōd life before ſpoken of. Herein I obſerue, if men

be ſo bold to rack and ſtraine theſe great matters, what is it that they will leaue vntempted in the leſſe & meaner cauſes? In the caſes of Alchemy there is ſome reaſon (though the opinion thereof hath ouerthrowne many men) for that they propone ſome matter to worke,
                     
                        ••
                     hemy. and ſome courſe of natures for incorporating and increaſing. But ſuch as will graffe on a dead ſtocke, long ſeperated frō the earth, a quicke graffe or impe, and expect that the ſame ſhall prooue a tree, is deceiued, for it is againſt nature. Likewiſe, If any man will ſowe egges in the ground, or ſet corne vnder a hen, hee will hardly finde either Chickens, or harueſt. In ſuch ſort are the natures of things tied to their particular ſorts, and meanes of increaſe, that neceſſitie will enforce nature to vſe her owne meanes, and manner of increaſe or generation.
            
            
               An example of an vnnaturall product.
               Let vs proceed to an example. There is an opiniō, that the earth would in time, bring forth all the mettals that are in her

bowels, fully refined and pure, without Pheſies or droſſe: But either the curſe hath ſo weakened her naturall heate, or els ſhe is not permitted her time of bringing forth her brood, which hath cauſed Arts to trie concluſions. If this be admitted, what will follow of the next queſtion? In this caſe, though time bee not agent, nor the paſſiue part thereof, yet you muſt giue this great bellied Lumpe, time to worke to perfection, and bring forth her great litter, brood, or ſpawne. But it will be anſwered, that Reaſon and Art, hath found a meanes, how to helpe Nature in this cauſe, and to ſupply the defect of heate by fire, for ſeparating of the purer mettal from the droſſe. Admit this, yet it muſt bee yeelded, that theſe Mines were ſubſtātially in the bowels of the earth: who in time as is affirmed, wold haue brought thē forth: ſo as Reaſon and Art, had to work vpon. And in this caſe, you muſt likewiſe giue Art and Reaſon, time to worke their effect, and that by degrees and meanes: ſo that Reaſon nor Art cannot worke, but vpon ſubſtances,

and by meanes, which in the enſuing example is not allowed. Ther is great difference betweene the Theoricke & Practicke part of any thing: or between matter of bare imagination and conceipt, and matters of ſubſtance and truth: betweene words and actions: for a man by contemplation may behold many thouſand places in a moment, and ſet down a thouſand proportions in his minde in ſhorte time: conceiue a iourney of ten thouſand miles by Sea, with all the bowings and turnings: But come to action, and you ſhall finde another worke and labour to performe it. A man may by conceipt and in figures, ſet down ten thouſand milliōs, to be deuided betweene a hundreth thouſand men: but hee that ſhall come to action, muſt haue mony in his purſe; words will buy no meate in the market: neither will fantaſie build Churches, although it ſet down the proportion & modell. Contemplation, conceit, and art, may plot & ſet downe, how or what to doe: but ſubſtance, matter and art, muſt performe the action. Theſe words, A thouſand pounds

written, wil not pay one penny: although Art hath found a way by letters to ſignifie or demonſtrate ſuch or any other ſum: Arte hath founde out by bills, bonds and ſpecialties, to giue aſſurance for money: but when it commeth to payment, there muſt bee materiallie money, or valuable matter, to make ſatiſfaction. It belongeth to Art onely, to proportion, but eſſentiall money muſt make ſatiſfaction. By theſe it appeareth, that God hath prouided ſubſtantial matters to paſſe from man to man, or to be vſed by man. And Reaſon hath found out Arts, to proportion & rate the ſame. Beſides this: by the obſeruations before remembred, ther are ſufficient things created to ſerue the turne of men, in ſuch liberall and plentiful ſort, as they ſhal not need any new inuention, to create or raiſe benefite by fantaſie, imagination, or any new ſought deuiſe, which wil deceiue like dreames: they are like witchcrafts & enchantments, ſeeming good, & yet in truth abhominable. Let vs in this poynt, conſider one maine & principal vſage, which nature nor Art, can make to cohere with

Reaſon.
                     
                        
                           •
                        his is the 
                           •
                        ine point 
                           ••
                        ainſt Na
                        
                           •
                        e.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ow mony 
                           ••
                        ould pro
                        
                           ••
                        ce monie.
                   And that is, that money ſhould produce and increaſe money: I would in this caſe willingly know, the father and mother of this newe increaſe. Firſt, let vs goe to the nature of the mettal, bee it either ſiluer, or gold, and drawe from thence, what reaſons we may.
               After that the mettal is taken out of the earths belly, it can be no longer her child, neither can ſhe nouriſh or make it grow. And being once ripened, purified, and brought to perfection by Art, that is, by fire: It can then neuer come againe, to be nouriſhed by the earth: for that the mother, which is the Sulphere, is drawne from it: And if you would put it againe into the earth, you cannot giue it ſuch a mixture of Elements, as to make it growe.
               If the Alchimiſt can doe any thing with it, let him take the benefit for his labour: But I would not haue ignorant men troubled therewith. It is an Art vnfit for them, and mee to deale with all.
               But to come neerer to the point: there

is a deuiſe that Time ſhould cauſe money to yeeld increaſe: wherein they are driuen to vſe the helpe and labour of man.
               This will not ſerue the turne,Vſurie. that alſo it is vnnaturall: for albeit, the labour of man may obtaine benefit: yet▪ 
                  Revera, there is no increaſe of the qualitie, quantitie, or nature of the gold or ſiluer: But the vſe that a man hath thereof, muſt make ſomething deerer, and of more value, then nature or Arte hath made it. For though Art hath refined it, yet cannot Art increaſe it: but here is the fallacie, a man is driuen thereby to purchaſe his owne labour, a very vnnaturall thing.
               For by Natu
                     ••
                   and Reaſon, euery mans trauell ſho
                     ••
                   bee imployed, for the ſeruing of his owne neceſſarie turne.
               This is one of the caſes I ſpake of before: that men not contented with the things of Gods creation, according to their owne values, will ſet God to learne, as if hee knew not what hee had done: and willl adde further prouiſions

and meanes then euer was ordained of God. Out of theſe reaſōs, it may be concluded, that the rayſing of increaſe vpon bare mony, is vnnaturall: and the meanes vſed to raiſe benefit thereby, is an other courſe then was originally appointed by God, and ſo directly againſt nature. The conſideration whereof, ought not to be ſlightly regarded, becauſe God hath left nothing vnprouided that is requiſite for the vſe of man.
               But there are, that ſpare not to lay a very reproachfull ignomie on this kingdome,
                     
                        •
                      Lawe 
                        •
                     nged of the vſe of employing, and diſpoſing of mony, to benefit and great increaſe, aboue the principall, by the way of vſurie. And that the lawes of this kingdome, either alone, or at the leaſt tolarate ſuch taking of vſurie. See how reaſon and truth is wronged. In whoſe defence I am occaſioned a little to digreſſe, & borrow leaue for a fewe words, touching that point. Caeſar forbad▪ that an Vſurer ſhould be accounted a good or honeſt man. This vnderſtanding in all likely-hood continued a thouſand yeares after that. For Glanuile,
                  
chiefe Iuſtice of England, one of the ancienſt Writers we haue, in the time of king Henry the ſecond, cenſured the goods of an Vſurer, at the time of his death, to be confiſtcate to the King: the name hath beene ſo odious, that they were not admitted ciuill ſocietie or Chriſtian buriall.
               I meane not to inſiſt much vpon this point, and therefore I referre the Reader for his ſatisfaction,Statut. de Iu
                        •
                     da
                        •
                     ſmo. 37. H. 8.9. 13. Eliza. 8. 35. Eliza. 7. to peruſe the margined Statutes: wherein he ſhall finde the trade, to be holden accurſed and damnable. The Trader is odious, and the vſe therof vtterly forbidden, by all the lawes that euer were made in this Kingdome, concerning that matter. And whoſoeuer will enter into true vnderſtanding of the reaſon, whether it doth benefit or annoy, ſhall be driuen to confeſſe, a great devaſting of the ſubiects eſtate therby: which in this place I meane not to handle. Yet ſeeing it is ſo repugnant vnto nature and reaſon, let me craue pardon to goe a little further in this matter: and vnder reformation, to expreſſe ſuch reaſons for confutation of an error, which I hold to bee maintained in this point, and furthered,

and ſuccoured vnder the ſhadow of a clauſe in the law: In which behalfe, becauſe demonſtrations are very fit courſes to diſcouer the reaſons, as well of actuall, as intellectuall things; I haue compoſed 2. Tables: The firſt, diſcouering the fallaſie: and the ſecond the truth: Which courſe I take, for that I finde falſhood will euer vaniſh, when truth commeth in place. The point is this. It is holden that the Lender vppon Vſurie, may take at one months end his principall, and a twelfth part for the vſe, being the higheſt rate he might haue taken,
                     
                        •
                     he like for 
                        •
                     .6. or 9. Moneths, 
                        •
                     pportio
                     
                        •
                     ing the vſe, 
                        〈◊〉
                      if thoſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      per
                     
                        •
                     ect times to 
                        •
                     iuide by. if he had forborne his princiall and vſe money a whole yeare: and ſo for more or leſſe time; ſo he take not his vſe before the principall: and his contract be not to continue after the taking of his vſe. As the point is hard to be diſcouered, ſo can I hardly admit my ſelfe to meddle therewith: whereby to open the way into this ſeeming Labyrinth, which notwtſtāding I hold to be plaine. Before I come to the Table, let me ſet downe the words that they build vpon.
                     
                        •
                     7. He
                        •
                     . 8 7. 
                  No man ſhall take aboue 10. for the forbearance of 100. for one

whole yeare, and ſo after the rate and not aboue: of, or for a more or leſſe ſumme, or for longer or ſhorter time: And no more greater gaine or ſumme thereupon to bee had. Although I meane not to handle this cauſe by the courſe of a Law argument, yet let me craue leaue, to ſee how Reaſon and Art will conclude in one truth. The law being to take conſtruction moſt ſtrongly and ſtraightly for repreſſing or Vſury.
               The law it ſelfe is a prohibiting law, in no iote giuing libertie, but repreſſing. So are the wordes Negatiue, and forbidding. And vpon that reaſon, none of theſe words can be ſtained to make any tolleration. Theſe wordes in the cloſe of the ſentence: And no more greater gaine, or ſumme thereupon to be had; Do ſufficiently explaine, that by no meanes 100. li. by any courſe to be put out, may yeeld aboue the gaine of 10. li. for a whole yeare: But 100. li. put out for 3.6.9. months, and the money and vſe taken at that time, being within the yeare, may and doth yeeld a greater gaine then the rate of 10. li. for a whole yeare.
               The Reaſon is, the Lender may

again diſpoſe the ſame principal and vſe, for more gaine within the ſame yeare: and ſo not ſaued by the words nor meaning of the Lawe.
               Let vs ſee how Reaſon can bring the former words to this concluſion. And ſo after that rate and not aboue: of, or for a more or leſſe ſumme: or for ſhorter or longer time. Theſe words being in body of the clauſe, haue referēce to a rate: which rate is before expreſſed; that the forbearing of 100. ſhall not raiſe aboue 10. pounds, for one whole yeare.
               In this behalfe, the borrower is not reſpected, but the Lender: for the words are; No man ſhall take aboue 10 pounds &c. Whereby appeareth, that as the Lawe is made onely againſt the t
                     •
                  ker, ſo is there no libertie for him to take any thing, that may exceed ye
                   rate of 10. for a whole year. Otherwiſe, this miſchiefe wou
                     •
                  d enſue: the Lender would depart with his monie, for one, two, or three moneths, to one man, and then receiue his mony and vſe, and deliuer the ſame to an other debtor: and ſo monthly, or quarterly, or at his pleaſure, raiſe his benifite vpon the vſe of

his vſe mony within the yeare, contrary to the meaning of the Lawe: by often receiuing & placing it within one yeare: which vnder correctiō, can by no means be conſtrued to bee ſaued by the wordes of the Lawe.
               A word or two, concerning the rate which I take to be double. A rate of mony, and a rate of time. Theſe two, are ſpecially to be conſidered: for ſeeing Nature cannot worke this matter, you muſt permit Time to doe what office it is enioyned to performe. To this purpoſe thē, whether there be one, or more takers, at one or more times, within the yeare, is not material: but ye
                   reſpect is, ſeeing they haue nothing to raiſe this rate of money, but their induſtry, imployment, and labour, with a limitation of a rated time for the vſe thereof: that they may haue the fulneſſe of all theſe without abatements. For the eye of Reaſon in this behalf, doth not regard how often the mony be letten within the yeare, nor to how many or fewe perſons: but that the forbearing of 100. li. for a whole yeare, ſhall yeeld the Lender no more or greater gaine 10. li.

And in this behalfe, is ſpecially to be obſerued, the ſeuerall offices of the Lender and Borrower. The Lender departeth with his money vpon time, to raiſe his benefite: the Borrower, beſtoweth his labour by merchandiſing the money, with diligence, in time to raiſe the increaſe vpon the vſe of the money: If the Lender will take away any part of the time, limitted in the ſtatute, he doth not then allow the Borrower his full rate of time: and therefore of a conſequent, hee ought to abate it out of the rate of his vſe mony: for in this cauſe, thoſe two, that is, the rate of time, for which the vſe of time is forborne, and the rate of money taken for vſe, muſt euer iumpe, to make the reckoning euen. And common and ordinary reaſon yeeldeth, that no man will giue ſo much for any thing to bee payed at the end of one moneth, as hee would, if his payment were forborne a whole yeare. Such is the plaine caſe, as it is now commonly vnderſtood: that the Lender, for one Moneth will take as much at the Moneths ende, as if he had forborne his vſe a whole yeare. But I take it, this error

hath grown out of a fallaſie or miſtaking in Art, by ſome Arithmatitian,Art ab
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   that hath calculated this proportion by a wrong rule: not fully fitting; this purpoſe. for I conceiue, it hath proceeded onely by the rule of diuiſion: when it ſhould haue beene wrought, partly by diuiſion, and partly by addition: as the true conſideration of the Tables will manifeſtly expreſſe.
               Wherefore, in a word or two, let me remember againe the difference betweene contemplation and action. Any that worketh barely by cōceit, may practiſe by conceite: but hee that will performe any act indeed, muſt haue matter and ſtuffe: figures and cyphers, make no ſummes of money. Therefore if the Lender will haue conſideration, he muſt diſpoſe of his money and time: that hee, who wil haue mony & time, may the better giue conſideration. In this cauſe therfore, the matter of Art, & the point from whence I conceiue ye
                   error to ariſe, is to be looked into. It ſeemeth the Arithmatitiās hath wrought only by diuiſiō. In the firſt

part of diuiſion, there are two requiſite things, a Diuidende, & Deuiſor, which in this caſe muſt be eſſenciall & ſubſtāciall, and not by conceit and imagination. Let vs ſee, mony muſt needs be the Diuidend, and time the Deuiſor. Put the caſe a man lēdeth a 100▪ li. for one month, what may the Lender take? The Arithmatition ſaith, a whole yeere will yeeld 10. li. then he diuideth time, by time: One yeere into 12. parts: ſo that here time is both the Diuidend and Deuiſor: then he diuideth mony by time: that is 10. li. by 12 months, & he findeth the 12. part of 10. li. to be 16. s. 8. d. which he allotteth to one moneth. The rule is true, but not to be vſed in this caſe: for Reaſon the founder of Art, will ſhew, that he hath no warrant to meaſure by this rule: in that he hath no eſſentiall Deuiſor: for if you marke it, hee wanteth 11. months of his yeare,
                     
                        ••
                     aſon and 
                        〈…〉
                      with 
                        〈◊〉
                     . at the time of his diuiſion. And ſo he worketh a ſubſtantial Diuidend, of 10. li. by an imagined Deuiſor, of 12. moneths, when there is but one occurred: but his courſe ſhould be, as in the caſe of contribution: the ſhorter

time of forbearance of the vſe, ſhould not haue ſo large allowance as the longer.
               And on this point, doth Reaſon and Art conclude, which are more plainly expreſſed in theſe enſuing Tables: the falſe being reproued by the exceſſe, and the true, raiſed from leſſe to more, as the rate of time, and vſe of the mony giueth occaſion.
               
                  I haue drawn theſe Tables, as patterns or Modells to ſhewe and diſcouer, the truth from the falſe, and to manifeſt how truth and Art ſtill drawe to one Period. I the more inſiſt vppon this for my ſole example, becauſe it is a matter ſo directly againſt nature: and ſophiſtically brought into the danger and ouerthrowe of mens eſtate: for all the world muſt confeſſe, that in this caſe, as hauing regard to matter of ſubſtance, nothing is enforced to produce ſome thing. And though I meant not to fill this place with law arguments, yet let me borrow a word for further explanation of my meaning. Let vs ſee what the lender muſt doe, to rayſe ten of his hundreth, hee muſt contribute towards the rayſing thereof, a proportion of money, and a proportion of time. Of mony a hundreth to rayſe ten:
                     
                        ••
                     ntributi
                     
                        ••
                     
                   of time, one whole yeare. In this caſe as I ſaid before, there is no reſpect of the borrower: well, then the lender is tied to both theſe contributions: ſo ſtill the rate of his gaine muſt not exceed ten for the rate of a whole yeare of time. In this caſe the lender is tyed to his

certainty. Then it followeth, hee can haue no election,Election. differing from that rate of time which is the maine point. Let vs ſee what the borrower is to receiue and performe. In which is to be obſerued, ſuch a proportion of mony and time as may performe a ratable allowance: that the vſe mony may not exceed tenne for a hundreth for a whole yeare: which performed, he is to render backe the mony borrowed: & as for vſe, the law alloweth non. Let vs examine this by the rule of reaſon▪ In all natural cauſes, time muſt be abiddē, for ye
                   working & perfecting of al increaſe & growing: the beaſts by nature knoweth the time of bringing forth their yong: the birds keepe their egs vnder their feathers, til an appointed time to produce chickēs; the trees & herbs according to their ſorts, require, time for ye
                   ripening of their fruits. The Sun in the ſpheare of heauen, laboreth a whole yeare to bring himſelf to his reuolution. If all theſe, with many thouſands of other things, ſtay their time by their naturall courſe, why ſhould not the lender premit the full occurrency of

time, for the raiſing of his benefit vpon a barren, fruitleſſe, and vnnaturall ſubiect. Though many things offer themſelues,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſold 
                        〈…〉
                      want 
                        〈…〉
                      value 
                        〈…〉
                      be. yet I ſtriue to be briefe. Obſerue therefore theſe reſemblances. In all manner of eateable fleſhe, The tender lambe will not yeelde ſo much as the well growne ſheepe: the yong veale, not ſo much as the full growne oxe. The young chick, late out of the ſhel, not ſo much as the henne or capon: and ſo of many other things that time cauſeth to increaſe, both in growth and price. Now if the owner will ſell any of theſe in their tenderneſſe, hee muſt bee contented to abate of that he would require, if the ſame things were growne to more greatneſſe. If this be ſo, then in reaſon there is more cauſe the lender ſhuld forbeare his whole time before hee receiue his conſideration, howſoeuer hee doth his principall.
               Let vs touch a little the exceeding reaſon and vſe the Lawe hath, in ſome particular cauſes of time. Eſtates for yeares, muſt haue a certaine beginning and ending. Inheritances haue commencements

vppon time: and limitted to the ende of time. So the firſt eſtates, determine in time: and the ſecond being reall eſtates, onely with time: and not before the ending of time. Approbations and elections are concluded in time: things voideable, relye onely vpon time. All conditions are tyed vnto time. In the caſes of Cui in vita dum fuit infra etatem, dum non fuit compos mentis; ſpecial reſpect is of the time. All caſes of entries vpō diſſiſors, to take away entries, are tyed vnto time. The caſes that require continuall claime, are bound vnto time, with many others. But among the reſt, let mee conclude with one or two, to diſcouer what time, ioyned with ſome other matter, doth both enable & diſable: I meane not to vouch any caſe. It is not vnknown that one attainted by act of Parliament, part of his lands ſold: time and the act of Parliament made the ſale good. But this attainder being taken off by another acte of Parliament, and the former act made voide; Time and the act of Parliament, did reſtore both the blood and lands of the attainted: & made their eſtates voide,

which formerly were not. The lawe hath cleane takē away the time that was in the Feoffe; & put the ſame wholly into ceſte q. vſe: and ſo wrought vppon inſtants, that there is now no inſtant at all in the Feoff, which before had the whole eſtate. Such a ſeruant is time; vnto the law, & ſo aſſured is the law vnto time; That what contract ſoeuer it maketh therewith, ſhall be aſſuredly performed. In the caſe of inrolments, there is ſpeciall prouiſion of time: wherein I make this ſhort obſeruation; that time doth worke, and vnworke, one and the ſame thing in nature according as time is employed. The Kings tenant acknowledgeth a bargaine and ſale of land, held in capi
                     •
                  e to an other and his heires: before the deede be enrolled, the bargainer dieth, his ſon within age. In this caſe, the ſonne of this bargainor is ward. But the barganie alſo dieth within the ſix moneths, &c. his ſon within age, & within the 6. moneths the bargaine & ſale is inrolled. In this caſe, the ſon of the bargainer ſhall be out of ward, & the ſon of the barganie ſhall be in ward, by relation

to time. I put theſe caſes, onely to make knowne how flexible time doth turne and wind according to the employment it ſerueth, and how ſtoute and ſtiffe it is in ſome other caſes, as the rules of law doth gouerne and direct it: and though this reſemble not the caſe in all points, yet it ſheweth, that in this behalfe, time is not to be diſpoſed at ye
                   election or choyce of any, but according to the true conſtructiō, ſcope & meaning of the law: which in this caſe is to be cōſtrued moſt ſtrongly againſt the lender.
               A word or two concerning this diuiſion of the mony & time. As I ſaid before, in actuall things there muſt be a ſubſtantiall, naturall, and preſent Diuidend and Diuiſor, Numerator, and Denominator, as in theſe examples are apparant. A piece of timber is to be made into boords: In this caſe the timber is the Diuidend, and the Sawe is the Deuiſor. And of neceſsitie it followeth, that there muſt be actually and eſſencially, timber, and a Saw, or elſe there can be no boords.
               
                  There is a garment to be made, In that caſe, the cloath is the Diuidend, and the ſheeres the Deuiſor. But for the performing of the worke, there muſt eſſencially be both cloath & ſheers. There is a great piece of meate to bee diuided betweene many men; the meate is the Diuidend, the knife is the inſtrument diuiding. There is a neceſſitie, both theſe ſhould be preſent, though I know there be other Diuiſors in theſe caſes: yet I make theſe reſemblances, to make plaine my demonſtration of the neceſsitie of an eſſenciall Diuidend and Diuiſor, at the time of the diuiſion. To reſemble this; The Lender at the end of one, 3.6. or 9. moneths, hath not an eſſenſial Diuiſor of twelue moneths, to warrant his diuiſiō: And ſo diuiding ſubſtantiall mony by imaginarie time, doth erre in the ground of his Art: and ſo hath proportioned a rate that is not warranted, either by Nature, Reaſon, Lawe, nor Art.
            
            
               
               Reaſon ſheweth, this life is but an apprentiſhip.
               THere are many other vſages whereof there can bee no account giuen, that they ſhould proceed either of nature or vncorrupted reaſon. God is Truth, and hee hath made all things in, and by Truth: and appointed them to continue in truth, according to their Creation: All the Creatures ſauing man, continue this originall perfection. Reaſon doth diſcerne and know, though it cannot correct the euaſions and errors in the courſe of mens liues, different from truth: which mens conſciences not voide of reaſon cannot deny. Caine though he would not denie the killing of his brother Abel, yet hee had learned to ſhift it and put it off, by asking whether he were keeper of his brother: his reaſon was corrupt, and his conſcience did accuſe him. Such as were ſent with Ioſua and Caleb, againſt their own knowledges, did finde fault with the country which they ſought; diſſwading their companions to enterpriſe the obtayning thereof.
               The whole number of the Iſraelites felt

the puniſhment of their credulouſneſſe, in following theſe falſe perſwaſions. Againſt falſe witneſſes and corrupt iudgement, the ſtorie of Suſanna hath left ſufficient teſtimony. Againſt hypocriſie, the text of Ananias and Saphira. Againſt Periurie and Subornation, The ſtorie of Ieſabell, Achab and Naboth. Againſt treaſon, the ſtorie of Corah, Dathan, & Abiram. Againſt rewards and bribes, the ſtorie of Gehaſie. Againſt fained excuſes, the deniall of Peter. Againſt preſumption, the ſtorie of the Tempter. Againſt diſpaire, the example of Iudas
                  ▪ Againſt witchcraft, the ſtorie of Saule; cōcerning the viſiō of Samuel. Againſt inceſt, the exāple of one of the Patriarkes. Againſt rigor, and violence, the ſtorie of Nimrod. Againſt deceit, the ſtorie of the vniuſt ſteward. Againſt mercileſneſſe, the text of the wounded man, and the Samariain. Againſt couetouſneſſe, the ſtate of Diues and Lazarus. Againſt Inchantmēts, Symon Magus. Againſt vndutifulneſſe to parents, the curſe of Cain, for diſcouering his fathers nakednes. Againſt miſtruſt, or fearfulneſſe, the ſtorie of Lots wife. Againſt

diſobedience to God, the foure firſt commandements. Againſt vſury, & vnnatural rayſing of mony and encreaſe, by the way of lone, more then a hundreth expreſſe places of cōmandemēt forbidding it in the holy Bible: accu
                     •
                  ſing the vſers thereof: & bleſſing thoſe that forbeare & eſchue it. And as for Whore-mongers, & Adulterers, the text is plaine; God will iudge them. The oppreſſors of the poore and vncharitable, are not left out of the number of thoſe that ſhal receiue puniſhmēt. Moſes, the prophets, & ye
                   Decalogue haue left ſufficient teſtimony what is like to become of theſe kind of people. And as for the vnbelieuers, if they eſcape vnpuniſhed, let the text it ſelfe diſcouer. The hypocrites, I am ſure ſhall haue their reward among the vniuſt. Why ſhould I particular any more? we are all contained vnder ſin; And iniquity hath gotten the vpper hand. Why ſhould we by inuētion, raiſe a new kind of ſupply, more thā God or nature hath ordained, thereby to reproue his diuine prouidēce or imperfection. Now then, to drawe to an end of this work, let vs compare the beginning with the end.
               
                  Reaſon I ſaide, is an eſſenciall part of the ſoule: The ſoule is immortall. Therfore Reaſō wil haue cōtinuance after this ſenſitiue life ſhall finiſh; and is one of the principall parts that will diſcouer, take knowledge, and participate either of beatitude or miſery: of hell, or heauen: of ſaluation, or perdition. Is it not high time then, that Reaſon, which is in euery mans ſoule, and that euery ſoule being endued with Reaſon: ſeeing ſuch huge corruptions in the world, as are in manner vnſpeakable, ſhould now beginne to looke about to preuent theſe miſchiefes, and imminent miſeries, that daily & hourely are like to worke his deſtruction.
               Is it not time ſhe ſhould erect a ſchoole, get Schoole-maſters, and Huſhers, to teach the daunger theſe creatures partakers of reaſō are run into; & vnder which they are like to periſh? Hath ſhe not good cauſe to diſcouer the difference between the ſenſitiue life; and the immortall reaſonable ſoule? the ſhortneſſe of theſe pleaſures, & the euerlaſting ioyes of heauen? The differences of the Creatures, hauing reaſon, and thoſe wanting?

And the vſes of them all: which no creature voyd of reaſon can looke into. Is it not time ſhe ſhould go about to ſubdue & keepe vnder, all the ſenſitiues powers, paſſions, affections, perturbations, inuentions, fantaſies, and counterfeite ſeeming pleaſures of theſe her ſubiects, to make them know themſelues? leſt by their ſtubbornneſſe, ſhe be pulled out of her better kingdom, wherof ſhe is heire apparant: appointed to raigne with her elder brother, euen the Sonne of God, Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe: the onely poſſeſſor and owner, of true, perfect, and vncorrupt Reaſon.
               
               What a worlde is this, to make more account of the iourney and trauel, then of the manſion and dwelling houſe? Well, giue Queene Reaſon leaue to conclude, with the ſolution of this one queſtion.
               A yong man is at his choyce, whether he will be bound to ſerue certaine yeares, and then to bee free: or elſe to bee f
                     •
                  ee for certaine yeares, and euer after to be a bondman, and in thraldom and miſery. I know this queſtion will readily be

anſwered: It is better to ſmart once, then ake euer: and as long as there is hope of amendment, ſo long the paines are not very bitter: But when hope is paſt, then the heart is broken.
               Such is the ſtate of man: And ſuch doth diuine Reaſon diſcouer, to bee the ſtate of euery man, in reſpect of his double life: man hath but a kinde of ſeruitude or apprentiſhip in this temporal, or ſenſitiue life; tyed to couenants, ſeruices, precepts, conditions, and commandements. Which if he be carefull to obſerue and keepe, he ſhall doe more then marry his maiſters daughter: according to the phraſe, & beſt preferment of merchants. For he ſhall be then ioynt inheritor with his Maiſters ſonne: and haue the fulneſſe of freedome, felicitie and happineſſe in a hauen, and harbour where no cuſtome is to be payed: no impoſition, no giuing nor taking of money vpon credite: no bad n
                     •
                  r deſperate debts: no aſſurance for money, nor fraught of Ships: no caſting into priſon, chaines, and yrons, diſquietneſſe, nor diſcontentment.
               
                  But on the contrary ſide, if this preſent life bee ſpent, in vaine, vnhoneſt, lewd, & vngodly execiſes; practiſes, employments, without reſpect of performance of couenants, commandements, and bonds: Then ſurely, as the immortall life is much more precious, then the mortall, or more ſenſitiue: ſo are the puniſhmēts more grieuous then the other: And ſo much ye
                   more grieuous, becauſe Reaſon vnderſtādeth there is a felicitie, otherwiſe the torments of hell were nothing.
               And for theſe cauſes, doth Queene Reaſon perſwade and intreat euery reaſonable ſoule, to enter into the cloſet of his owne conſcience and heart, to ſchoole, informe, and inſtruct himſelfe, concerning his owne good, & to be ſo charitable as to informe others thereof: which ſhe holdeth to be an office of charitable dutie. And ſo to conclude, if euery man will be his owne Schoole-maiſter & inſtructor, which ſhe deſireth, her Academie will bee wonderfull large: But principally, ſhee aduiſeth the learning and inſtruction of her Creator,

to be taught, followed, & put in practiſe: for thereby the number of Gods Saints will be increaſed, his glorie adaunced, and his Triumphant kingdome repleniſhed, with the company of holy and reaſonable ſoules, after the ſenſitiue life ended, which God grant, for his mercie.
            
         
         
            
            Reaſons moane.
            
               WHen I peruſe heauens auncient written ſtorie,
               part left in bookes, and part in contemplation▪
               
               I finde Creation tended to Gods glory:
               but when I looke vpon the foule euaſion,
               Loe then I cry, I howle▪ I weepe, I moane,
               and ſeeke for truth, but truth alas is gone.
            
            
               Whilom of old before the earth was founded,
               or hearhs, or trees, or plants, or beaſts, had being,
               Or that the mightie Canopie of heauē ſurrounded
               theſe lower Creatures, ere that the eye had ſeeing
               Then reaſon was within the mind of loue,
               
               embracing only, amitie and loue.
            
            
               
               The bleſſed Angels formes and admirable natures,
               their happie ſtates, their liues, and high perfectiōs:
               Immortall eſſence, and vnmeaſured ſtatures,
               the more make known their falls & low directiōs.
               Theſe things when Reaſon doth peruſe,
               She finds her errors, which ſhe would excuſe.
            
            
               But out alas, ſhe ſees ſtrife is all in vaine,
               It bootes not to contend, or ſtand in this defence:
               death, ſorow, grief, hell & tormēts, are her gaine,
               And endleſſe burning fire, becomes our recompence.
               Oh heauie moane! Oh endleſſe ſorrowes anguiſh,
               Neuer to ceaſe, but euer ſtill to languiſh.
            
            
               
               When I peruſe the ſtate of prime, Created man,
               His wealth, his dignitie, and reaſon:
               His power, his pleaſure, his greatneſſe when I ſcan▪
               
               I doe admire, and wonder, that in ſo ſhort a ſeaſon,
               Theſe noble parts, ſhould haue ſo ſhort concluſion:
               and man himſelfe, be brought to ſuch confuſion.
            
            
               In ſeeking countries far beyond the ſeas, I finde,
               Euen where faire Edens pleaſant garden ſtood:
               And all the Coaſts vnto the ſame confinde,
               Gall to cruell wars, mens hands embru'd in blood,
               In cutting throats, and murders, men delight,
               So from theſe places, Reaſon's baniſht quite.
            
            
               
               O Ieruſalem, that thou ſhouldſt now turne Turke,
               And Sions hil, where holy Rites of yore were vs'd,
               Oh, that within that Holy place ſhould lurke
               Such ſacriledge: whereby Ioues name's abuſde.
               What famous Greece, farewel: thou canſt not boſt
               thy great renowme: thy wit, thy learning's loſt.
            
            
               The further ſearch I make, the worſe effect I finde,
               All Aſia ſwarmes with huge impietie:
               All Affrick's bent vnto a bloody minde:
               All Treachers gainst Ioue, & his great deitie.
               Let vs returne to famous Brittons King,
               
               whoſe worthy praiſe; let all the world goe ſing.
            
            
               
               Great Tetragramaton out of thy bountious loue,
               Let all the world and Nations truely know,
               That he plants peace, and quarrell doth remoue:
               Let him be great'ſt on all the earth belowe.
               Long may he liue, and all the world admire,
               that peace is wrought, as they themſelues deſire.
            
            
               What Vnion he hath brought to late perfection,
               Twixt Nations that hath ſo long contended:
               Their warres, and enuies by him receiue correction,
               And in his royal Perſon all their iars are ended.
               And ſo in briefe conclude, ought all that liue,
               giue thanks to him for ioy, that Peace doth giue.
            
            
               
               By power and will of this our mightie King,
               
               
                  Reaſon doth ſhewe it, that God wrought a wonder:
               Countries diſtract he doth to Vnion bring,
               And ioynes together States▪ which others ſunder.
               God grant him life till Shiloes comming be,
               In heauens high ſeate, he may enthronized be.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   