
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE
HEROYK LIFE
And
DEPLORABLE DEATH
Of
The most Christian King
HENRY the fourth.
                  
                  Adressed to his Immortall Memory;
By
P: MATHIEV,
Counceller and Historiographer of France.
                  
                  
                     TRANSLATED
By
Ed: Grimeston, Esquire.
                  LONDON
Printed by GEORGE ELD▪
                     
1612.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE RIGHT
Honourable the Lord
Viscont Cranborn.
                  
                     MY good Lord: I haue presumed
to offer this discourse vnto your
view, not for that you vnderstand
it not in the Originall, or
to instruct your knowledge, the
French tongue beeing familiar
vnto you, and the subiect, with all the Circumstances,
as well knowne as to any; but to make you
Censor of the worke, and of the Authors integritie,
hauing remained in that Court, and receiued
fauours from that great King, liuing in the height
of worldly felicity, and with all beene an eye witnesse
of that sad and mournfull spectacle, and of
the generall consternation of the French, lamenting
the Tragicall and sodaine death of their King,
to their ir-reparable losse.
                  This worke may happily seeme to some vnseasonable,
when as his death is in a manner forgotten,
there hauing also beene so many Pamphlets, and
petty discourses published of that subiect. But as
my Authors excuse is, That time can prescribe no
bounds to their sorrow, nor reason moderate their
griefe, which renues with time, and therefore neuer
vnseasonable to lament so great a losse. So I
finding it written by an eloquent Pen, and by his
owne Historiographer, who attended on him daily,
to record both his words and Actions, and who

both could and hath written many particularities
vpon this Accident, which were vnknowne to others,
haue thought it as worthy the knowledge of
our Nation as any of the rest, and I hope will giue
the Reader more content.
                  I haue presumed to make your Lordship Patron
of my labour, both for that you can Iudge if
there bee any thing defectiue, and in respect of my
owne priuate obligation, hauing receiued many
fauours from your Lordship during my aboade
in France, with that hopefull Gentleman Maister
Henry Howard: Vouchsafe it my good Lord your
countenance, and accept it as a poore testimonie
of his thankfulnesse, who is and will be
                  
                     Alwayes ready to
do you seruice:
Ed: Grimeston.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Author to the
Queene Regent.
                  
                     MAdam this worke is dedicated
to the publike weale, whether
all Histories goe; to the Kings
seruice, whereat all affections
should ayme; to the immortall
reputation of Henry the Great, whether all
my thoughtes shall tend, and presenting it to
your Maiesty as to the Gouernesse of the
realme, to the mother of my king, to the widdow
of my maister, I discharge my selfe of that
which I owe to the Instruction of Posterity, to
the glory of the Sonne, to the memorie of the
Father, and to the honor of your commandements.
I am sorry that it could not adde the
praise of diligence to the merit of my obedience,
but his slacknesse makes it not vnseasonable;
the subiect is Immortall, the world will neuer

cease to admire so glorious a life, nor to lament
so tragicall and sodaine a death. This fatal day
of the 14. of May, which should haue beene the
period of your mourning, hath been the renewing
of it, and hath reuiued your sorrowes with such
passion as the spirits could hardly bee stayed
from following your teares. Our greefes shall neuer
be so old, but they shall still find new causes
to lament. It is true (Madame) that they are
much eased by the happy effects of your regency
which hath preserued those that held themselues
lost, hath maintained the lawes of the state, raised
vp the subiects hope, let the world see that
in a Queenes hart you carry the courage
of a King, and that Italy hath brought forth a
Blanch to Lewis the 13. as Spain did to Lewis
the 9. you make that great Prince to liue againe,
for whose departure the Earth weeps, and Heauen
reioyceth at his returne, he raignes in the
King his sonne, he triumphs in the restauration
of France and in the renowne of his vertues,
which liues in you Madam, he breathes in
your sighes, hee is reuerenced in your authority,

he hath left you the force of his iudgement, the
respects of his maiesty, the felicity of his raigne,
the wills of all his subiects, whereof you dispose
in such sort as it seemes the time present hath no
cause to feare the future, nor to greeue for that
is past.
                  
                     P. Mathieu.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
                     THis was that Man of Men, whose Cradle sprung
                     With Happy Lawrells (that to Heauen aspir'd)
                     Whose Youth with Worth of all the Worthies rung,
                     Whose Aged Glories all the World admir'd:
                     His Countries Father; Others Arbitrer:
                     
                     The Mercury of Peace, the Mars of Warre.
                  
                  
                     This Prince of Prowesse and of Policy,
                     
                     Arming to ayd the Rightfull Heire of Cleue,
                     
                     Step-Mother Rome (Mother of Trechery)
                     Did of his Life with bloody Knife bereaue;
                     Step-Mother Rome; well may we call thee so,
                     That now hast kild two Sonnes, two Kings arow.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE
Deplorable death of Henry the
fourth, the French King.
                  
                     IF PEACE MAKE
Kingdomes and Estates
happy, France, which hath
enioyed it twelue yeares
vnder the shadow of her
Kings palme and lawrell-branches, may
say, that heauen could adde nothing to
her felicitie but Constancy, which is more
desired then enioyed in humaine affaires.
The seeds of diuision are rooted out, distrust
doth no more trouble mens mindes,
there is no cause of factions and alterations,
and priuate miseries are couered with
publike prosperities.
                  
                     
Neuer Prince was more beloued nor
better obeyed at home, none more re-doubted
nor admired abroade. The Princes
of Christendome seeke and respect his
allyance, he gouernes the courages of the
greatest, and the willes of the meanest at
his pleasure: his affaires are freed from the
iniuries of necessitie or confusion. Hee
hath seene treasons against his Estate, as
soone preuented as conceiued, these furious
torrents are crept into the earth,
which they would haue swallowed vp: he
demands nothing from heauen but hee
obtaines it: his neighbours dare not refuse
him any thing. What feares hee? and of
whom is he not feared?
                  In the middest of these contents, he prepares
a mighty army, the which the first
day seems to promise victory, and to sing
the triumph: euery man desires to vnderstand
whether it goes, his friends growe
iealous, and his enimies tremble. They see
the sword drawn, which threatens to haue

reason of them that will not doe it, but no
man knowes to whom it speakes; force
and valour are ready to charge, but we see
no enemy; there is no peace broken, no
warre proclaimed.
                  The restitution of Iuliers, the liberty of
Germany, the new alliance with the duke
of Sauoy, were the apparant causes of this
arming, few men knew his secret intentions.
If it bee lawfull to iudge of the greatnesse
of a desseigne by the preparation,
wee must of force say that France could
not but hope for great & glorious effects,
and that hauing not of long time made a
greater preparation, he had not attempted
any thing of greater moment.
                  The Arsenal of Paris had within 25. years
seene foure great prouisions, but this last
was mightier & more then any of the rest:
the Duke of Suylly did shew by demonstration,
that the first of this equipage
should bee at Chalons, when as the last
should goe out of Saint Martins suburbes

at Paris. The brauest resolutions came as
to an Accademie of valour and vertue.
The Princes of Germanie brought both
their swords and hopes. Count Maurice,
who hath euer cōmanded, came thether
to obay, and the King without doubt did
adde vnto those glorious titles of Restorer
of France, and Protector of the quiet of Christendom,
that of Arbitrator of the Empire.
                  The Rendezuous for the Armie was in
Champagne; the Duke of Neuers, as Gouernor
of the Prouince, and supplying the
place of Collonell of the light horse of
France, commanding it: It was fortified
with 6000. Suisses, well appointed and
well armed, of the which the Duke of
Rohan was Colonel; The Kings arriuall
might haue augmented it with 4000. gentlemen,
and the regiment of his gardes. It
strooke such a terror and amazement into
his neighbours, as these words were
publikely spoken at Colen. It were a
madnesse to thinke to resist a Prince which

hath these great quallities, of Valiant, Powerfull
and Fortunate. Many doubted that it
would trouble the peace of Christendom,
and that the succours which hee had
promised to a Protestant Prince, would be
a scandall to religion. The King told the
Popes Nuncio, That hee informed himselfe
onely, whether they that demanded
succours were his firme friends, and if
their cause were iust, as for Religion it
should be no way wronged. Time, and
the Capitulation of Iuliers haue verified
this promise.
                  The indiscreet and burning zeale of
many, transported mens minds with these
strange apprehensions. Hee told one of
the bad offices which his enemies did
him in blemishing the integritie of his
thoughts towards Religion, and withdrawing
the fidelitie of his subiects from
his seruice. Hauing vsed great words vpon
this subiect, which would be as orient
Pearles in his History, if hee had not forbidden

them to bee published; hee ended
with these words. The first thing whereof I
haue spoken, is for the assurance of the Catholike
religion in the country of Cleues. I will
neuer endure, that it complaine neither of my
armies, nor of my intentions. I told the Duke of
Suylly the other day that if all the Princes of
Germany were resolued to make a protestant
Emperour, I would hinder it.
                  
                  He had a great desire to see his armie,
and nothing stayed him but the Queenes
Coronation, the only action which wanted
in the prosperities of peace, and the
wishes of France. This duty had beene
neglected ten yeares, by them that should
do it, and by her that should receiue it.
France, thinking she could performe nothing
equall to the merrits of this Princesse,
confest, that disability made her
vnthankfull: The Queene had her spirits
glutted with so many other sorts of content;
her Pietie entertained her so sweetly
with the hope of crownes which are

giuen in heauen, as shee cared not for
any earthly one, although her courage
thought it selfe wronged, to be exempted
from an honor which had beene common
to the Queenes of France.
                  That which other Kings had giuen
vnto them by way of ceremony, this
King was bound to yeeld vnto her, who
did crowne all the graces which hee receiued
from heauen, and did eternize the
Flowers de Luz in her Royall posteritie:
Hee granted it sooner then shee made
shew to desire it, and presently commanded
the Citty of Paris to thinke vpon
the honors which were done vnto him
at his entry presently after his Coronation.
They set 800. men on worke about the
preparation of this pompe, they imploied
many excellent wits, to giue life vnto their
statues and marble: If the triumph had bin
ended, Europe had not seene any thing to
equall it. And to iudge of the whole by a
part, the cloth of gold & siluer which was

distributed came to a hundred and fiftie
thousand crownes. It seemed they had
gathered together all the Pearle of the Indies,
and all the treasures of Asia vpon
this occasion; but as desseignes, prest forward
with diuerse passions, worke powerfully
in the mindes of men, the King languishing
on the one side with a desire to
goe vnto his Armie, and not willing to
part before the Queenes Coronation, it
held his will and affection in suspence.
                  It was propounded to deferre this ceremonie
vntill September; Sanguin, a councellor
of the court of Parliament, and
Prouost of Marchants at Paris, gaue him
to vnderstand, that this delay would make
the charge vnprofitable, and that what
was done would no more serue, if it stood
long exposed to the ayre. VVherevpon
the King said to the Duke of Guise, That
hee lamented the time which was lost in this
expectation: Nothing is performed with
dilligence in their opinions which desire

and attend. The Duke of Guise seeming
to haue no other ambition, then not to be
last that came vnto the feast, said that hee
did languish vntill he were in the Armie,
that he would serue him better there then
at the Queenes Coronation; that he was
the meanest Captaine, but the best soldier
of his realme.
                  On the Monday, the King was hunting
at Saint Germaine, and disposing of
the dayes which hee meant to spend at
Paris, hee said:King disposeth of the time. On twesday I will goe,
and lye at Saint Denis on wednesday; thursday
I will returne: on Friday I will dispose of
my affaires; Saterday I will runne; on Sonday
shall bee my wiues entrie; Monday the marriage
of my daughter of Vendosme; Tuesday the
feast, and Wednesday to horse. And although
hee knew well, both by the reasons of his
Iudgement, and by those of his beliefe,
that the time past was no more his, and
that of the present hee had but an instant,
yet his thoughts and cogitations extended

to future things, saying, that He prepared
woorke for Me to augment his History: and
beeing on the Twesday at masse, the
Dauphin deliuering him a Crowne for
his offring, he said vnto the Marshall of
Feruaques, and to Saint Geran, Gouernour
of Bourbonois. My Sonne doth now
carry a Crowne, I hope within six yeares he
will carry a sword after me.
                  
                  He was much troubled to resolue all difficulties
touching the rankes,Difficulties for precedence. places and
honours of the coronation. D'Rhodes
master of the ceremony, did often present
vnto him the order that was obserued at
the Coronation of Queene Elenor, wife to
Francis 1. of Katherine wife to Henry 2. of
Elizabeth wife to Charles 9. but in euery
thing his will did serue for a rule and law.
There was some difficulty for the ornaments
of mantles: The same differences
which they giue in the Armes of Princes
howses, to distinguish the elder from the
younger, are obserued in the ornaments
which are giuen at mariages and funerals.

For we haue seen vpon the mantles of Orleance
the Lambeaux gueles with the flowers
de Luce. Vpon those of Arthois, the
Lambeaux castelled or, vpon those of Aniou
Lambeaux moouing in cheefe: in like
maner they of Valois, of Berry, of Alençō,
haue caried borders either plain or engrailed,
or charged with besans: they of Eureux
bastons Or and Argent, and they of
Bourbon bastons gueles.
                  The Queenes Mantle was pouldered
with flowers de Luce,Description of the Queenes Mantle. without number, as
meerly royall & belonging soly vnto Maiesty.
The Kings daughter and Queene
Marguerite had 4. flower de luces pure vpon
the border of their mantles. The Princesses
of the bloud, demanded three, with
the differences of armes, to the end that as
there was a destinctiō of the Kings daughters
mantle from theirs, so should there be
of theirs from those of other Princesses.
The Earle of Soison said, that the flowers
de luce were the markes of their house, that
their marriages and funeralls were honored

therewith, that the Princesses of the bloud had
alwayes carried them, with the differences of
the branches and royall families from whence
they were descended. The Princesse of Conde
at the entrie of Queene Elizabeth; The Lady
Douager, Mother to the Princesse of Conde,
at his mariage. The Princesse his mother, and
the Duke of Montpensier at their Interments,
as honors and prerogatiues inseperable from
the quality of their birth; without the which
the Princesses of the bloud should not bee distinguished
from the rest. But finding that
this distinction was not pleasing vnto the
King,Eatle of Soissons retires himselfe discontented. hee retired himselfe to his house at
Montigny, and the Countesse of Soisson
came not to the ceremonie. This departure
did afflict him, and this affliction appeared
in his countenance, on Twesday
the xi. of May, and in the words which he
spake vpon that subiect, to his most confident
seruants. At the end of his dinner he
was aduertised, that some troupes of horse
which were in the armie, came and liued

at discretion, and did not obey the Duke
of Neuers; hee was offended with the
Captaines, and told them they should bee
with their charges; Then directing his
speech to the Constable and other Noblemen,
hee said. When my subiects shall bee ruined,
who shall feed mee? who shall pay you your
pensions and entertainments? They that serue
mee must rest satisfied with what I giue them.
I haue taken an order to deduct that out of the
taxes which the people hath giuen vnto the
men of warre, and to account vpon the souldiers
musters what they haue receiued of the people.
This equality beeing obserued, the discipline
which they thinke so difficult, shall bee
kept in despight of the most insolent and incorrigible.
The Captaines should preuent these
disorders, if they were in the army, but they
will see Coronations and Triumphes; Curiosity
should not make them remisse and carelesse of
their duties. I would goe a hundred leagues to
a battell, but I assure you I would not steppe a
foote for this; & if it were not necessary, they

should not see mee there.
                  
                  All difficulties were determined with so
great toile & contention,King and Queene came to S. Denis. as if the Queene
had beene at the beginning of this enterprize,
she would haue bin distasted, & lost
all desire to pursue it; Their Maiesties
came on wednesday being the 12. Of May
to S. Denis. The King at his arriuall remembred
that he had not bin in the Abbey
since his conuersion, and this remembrance
made him to speake these words.
The last time I was heere I had no heire, and
did not looke to haue any, I thanke God now
for that which hee hath giuen mee.
                  
                  The Queenes chiefest care was to prepare
hir selfe to receiue the grace which
shee expected the next day. The King seeing
hir enter into hir deuotions to confession,
he retired himself, and kissing hir, he
said, My loue, make a confession for vs both.
Vitry being then in quarter, as Captaine of
the gard of the Kings person, had caused
the doores of S. Denis church to be walled

vp, reseruing onely one which did not open
but to such as had a ticket from him,
or were well knowne. It was opened presently
after mid-night, euery one beeing
placed at ease to see, or to bee seene: the
scaffolds being built after that manner, as
notwithstanding that the assembly were
of seauen or eight thousand persons, yet
the last were no way hindred by them
that were before them. Nothing did trouble
the beholders sight, nor the officers
who appointed what should be done.
                  The Kings Oratory being on the side of
the Altar towards Dagoberts tombe,Preparation of S. Denis church. the
founder of that Church, had two doores,
one to the Altar, the other to the Queenes
Theater. He came thether presently after
dinner, & it seemed he had laid aside maiesty
for that day, & had resigned it wholy
vnto the Queene, to haue but the remainder
of the honors which were done her.
He made a turne about the Church, vntill
she were ready, giuing order for all things

necessary. His iudgement did determine
the difficultie betwixt the two Captaines
of the hundred Gentlemen, and that
which fell out betwixt the Archers of the
garde of the Kings body, and the hundred
Gentlemen. Hee aduised the last to looke
vnto themselues, saying, That hee had neuer
seene but in such ceremonies one would outstrip
another. All that serued for the pompe
and state of this action, marching before
the Queene, about two of the clock shee
was conducted to the Church,Manner of the Queene going to her Coronation. and did
ascend the great Theater: The Dauphin,
the Duke of Aniou, (by reason of the indisposition
of the Duke of Orleans) and
for them Souvray and Bethunes their gouernours
carried the folds of her Mantle.
The Cardinals of Gondy and Sourdy led
her, the Prince of Conty carried the
Crowne, the duke of Vendosme the Scepter,
the Cheualier of Vendosme the hand
of Iustice. The Lady Elisabeth the Kings
daughter, & Queene Marguerite followed

the Queene; the Princesse of Conde, the
Princesse of Conty, and the Duchesse of
Monpensier carried the traine of her royall
mantle, Chasteauvieux, her knight of
honour did helpe to support it, by her
Maiesties expresse commandement
                  The beauty of this pompe was admirable
to all men: Queene Marguerite carried
an ornament, as shee whose mother had
beene crowned vpon the same Theater.
The Marguerites of France come after
the flower de luce of florence. Marguerite
of Valois did serue Katherine de Medicis
in the like occasion. Other Queenes haue
affected solitarines, to conceale their
greefes and complaints for the change of
their condition. She came to Court to
let the world see the contentment which
shee receiues in the iustice of that which
hath beene prosecuted at her intreaty, aduanced
with her desires, and followed
with her quiet. Shee yeelds all honours
and respect to this Queene: Shee doth

acknowledge so many merits and perfections
to bee in her, as she doth not thinke
one crown sufficient for so many vertues.
                  We must confesse that there was neuer
seene, neither could there be seene any
thing that did equall the order, the beauty,
and maiesty of this action. They were
amazed at such a silence in so great a
multitude, at so great reuerence done to
holy misteries among men of different
religions: so great order and constancy
among spirits whose patience is presently
spent, and cannot force themselues to
ceremonies of long expectation, some
being there from the beginning of the
night, others from the breake of day.
When as the King saw the Queene approach,
he sayed that he had neuer seene her
so beautyfull. And although it seemed that
the care of rising early, and the troble of
so forced and ceremonious a day should
haue bene preiudiciall, yet her complexion
was neuer cleerer nor more fresh.
                  
                     
I did carefully obserue all the Kings discourse;Kings carriage at the Ceremony
the quicknes and viuacity of his
spirit did worke more actiuely then his
eies, & did peirce into things which they
must diuine. At the same instant he carried
his eies vpon one, and did iudge of the
actions of another being farre off. The
Duke of Espernon saied vnto him, Sir,
Doe you not see the Popes Nuncio who laughs
at the countnance of his neighbor? No (said the
king) it is to see la Force & father Cotton in
discourse. It was true he did iudge of their
thoughts and words, by their eies & countenance,
and sodenly he did obserue a Lady
in one place & a nobleman in another,
& did let the farthest of them vnderstand
that he knew them. Euery motion was an
action, he spake to the noblemē that were
about him, to the Archbi. of Rheims, the
Duke of Espernon Montbason & Rais, to
Bellegard maister of his horse, to the lords
of Pralin, la Force, du Bellay & de Vic; he
commanded the Marquis of Vernueill to

obserue what was done, he spake to them
that were below; hee pittied the Cardinall
of Ioyeuse for that they kept him so
long fasting, and Queene Margueret for
that shee had risen too soone; hee did presently
answere all difficulties which grew
for precedence. His spirit was euery
where, and yet no where but in himselfe.
                  They had prepared a chaire for him,
but the ioy which hee conceiued made
him to leaue it, and to lay by both hatte
and cloake, still changing his place, and
alwaies speaking eyther of that which he
saw, or of what was done. He was very
attentiue to the Coronation, the which
hee would haue performed with all
reuerence and silence: hee was sorry to
see the glasse of the winddowes (which
the Duke of Montbason brake, to haue a
more free veiw) fall vppon the Prelats
which were set at the foote of his Oratorie
before the Altar. I obserue this to stop
their mouthes which haue said, that it

was done by his commandement.
                  The Queene was brought before the
Altar, there to be crowned. The forme of
Coronations requires, that the Inferior be
crowned by the superior. Augustus gaue
the Diadem to Herod, Tiberius to Tigranes
King of Armenia; Nero to Tiridates, Domitian
to Decebalus, and Traian to Parthania;
Princes which acknowledge no superior,
receiue it from God by the hands of their
Ministers; and Queenes, which haue no
light but from the beames of Kings their
orient Sunne, should bee crowned by
Kings. Esther was crowned by Assuerus.
Ptolomee, marrying his sister, did set a
Crowne vpon her head in the face of the
armie. Mitridates gaue it to Milesia, Heraclius
to Eudoxia. Constantin the yonger to
Theodora, Phocas to Leontia, and in our
dayes Christina of Lorraine was crowned
by Ferdinand great Duke of Tuscane. But
the pietie of the house of France, to shew
that her Kings and Queenes haue no maiestie

but what comes from God, bindes
them to receiue the Crowne by his Ministers,
and before his Altars, confessing
that these supreme honors depend meerly
of his grace. Kings haue beene present
at the Coronation of Queenes, as Lewis
the yong at that of Isabell of Henault, and
Philip Augustus at that of Alix of Blois,
not to authorise, but to adorne the action;
the onely presence of God, by that of his
seruants, beeing necessary. Crownes are
equall, there is no disparitie, Iupiter hath
no more beames in his then Iuno. That
wherewith the Queene is crowned, is the
same the King receiues at his annointing.
Reason, which makes of two hearts one,
and the persons consorts of one life, to diuide
equally their crosses & cōforts, doth
neither allow of the difference of crowns
obserued at the coronation of the Empres
of Constantinople, nor the forme of crowning
them, the Emperor receiuing the
crowne from the Patriarke, the which he
sets vpon his wiues head.
                  
                     
The Queene then being before the Altar,
kneeling,Coronation of the Queene. her hands ioyned, and her
head humbled, they made a prayer, that it
would please God to blesse that action of
the Ministery, and humility of his Ministers,
and poure vpon her the effects of
his grace and vertue. The Bishop of Paris
hauing beene appointed to present the sacred
oyles, the Queenes head and brest
was annointed. The Bishop of Beziers,
chiefe Almoner to the Queene, by reason
of the indisposition of Cardinall du Peron,
chiefe Almoner of France, presented the
crowne, which the Cardinall of Ioyeuse
did set vpon hir Maiesties head. The Prelats
presented the honors, the Scepter, the
hand of Iustice, and the Ring; The kisse,
whereof women are dispenced in homages
ended this mistery, and the generall silence
made it more venerable and stately.
The Queene returning from the Altar to
the Throne, the crowne of Stones which
was set on in the place of the greater, had

almost fallen off, but she staied it presently
with her hand, and set it fast. A prediction
of good fortune which her wisedome
and gouernment should bring vnto our
miseries. It seemed that her heart was not
pleased with so great ioy, honor, and contentment
as that day did giue her, for shee
was sad and troubled, as a Prophetesse of
some disaster. During this melancholy,
she spake these words. I consider that I can
receiue but two honors in this Church, this is
the first, the other shall be at my funerall, when
it pleaseth God.
                  
                  This great Queene did imitate the Emperors
of Constantinople, who on the day
of their Coronations did choose Marble
& Porphery for their tombes. This was to
haue the spirit toucht with the same motions
of that great light of the Easterne
Church, who commanded his friends to
put him in mind to finish his tombe, when
they should see him most ioyfull. Shee remembred
her whose name shee beares,

who paied vnto her sonne the great vsurie
of the ioy, which shee had had at his
birth, who did not apprehend so great
glory to be exalted aboue the Thrones of
Angels, as shee felt griefe and sorrow to
see him tied vpon the Grosse betwixt two
theeues.
                  The King hauing obserued all this ceremony,
said, That it was a great marke of the
dignitie of the Church, for that it had particular
formes and ceremonies to honor a royaltie,
where as other Religions had not any thing
like to anoynt their Kings, nor ministers appointed
to that end. Some one said vnto
him, that vnder the barke of ceremonies they
found great mysteries; that the simplest and
lightest had their reasons and grounds, that
euen the smoake on Incense bad hirs, representing
the prayers and intentions of the faithfull
sent vp to heauen. This caused him to remember
an excellent discourse which
Cardinall du Perron had made vnto him
vpon that subiect, speaking as all the East

hath spoken of the writings of Gregorie
Nazianzen, whose authority was so great,
as they were neuer reprehended nor contradicted.
Hee also tooke great delight in
the discourse which Father Cotton made
to the Marquis of la Force, vpon the explication
of the ceremonies of the masse
and the Coronation.
                  This being ended, he setled himselfe to
heare the rest of the seruice, and setting
him downe in his chaire, hee came to his
first admiration, why the Ambassador of
Spaine did not vncouer himselfe. Cicogne
told him that the deceased King of Spaine
did but mooue his hat at the eleuation,
and put it on presently againe, as if he had
saluted a very meane Gentleman. Wherevpon
the King said, If wee had that feeling
of Religion which wee should haue, we would
doe more reuerence to those mysteries, for wee
must beleeue, that after the words of consecration
pronounced vntill the Communion, Iesus
Christ is alwayes present vpon the Altar.
                     
These were his very words, there wants
nothing but the grace and zeale wherewith
he deliuered them. I obserued them
curiously for the beautifying of his History,
and the honor of his pietie. In acts
of religion, humility is no lesse requisite
in Princes then in subiects. Deuotion doth
no wrong to Maiesty. That which seemes
vnfitting for grauity, is honorable in religion.
Dauid danced among the rest before
the Arke, and did not disdaine to acknowledge,
among them all, him that
had aduanced him aboue all. The most
fruitfull and necessary lesson for Kings, is
humility; their birth and quality makes
them disposed to pride. Humilitie is the
true caracter of grace. All vertues are
commendable in great Princes, but humility
is necessary: many are aduised, but
this is commanded.
                  Hee that hath not all may saue himselfe,
but hee that hath not this is vndone.
                  
                     
With this humility the Queene receiued
the booke of the Gospell and kist it, acknoledging
that it is the rule of saluation,
the compasse of faith, the Doctrine of
eternall wisdome, which makes Kings
to raigne. That which it teacheth is truth
without deceyte, that which it commandeth
is bounty without mallice, and that
which it promiseth is felicity without
misery,. But when shee did rise from her
throne to come vnto the offering, humility
retyred vnto her heart, and left nothing
but sweetnesse in her eyes: Maiesty
appeared vppon her, and about her,
after a stately and reuerent manner, so as
in marching shee seemed, not a Queene,
but a Goddesse, and then it was that the
King said, that this was rightly to play the
Queene.
                  
                  All things were answerable. She came
in the same order that she had beene conducted
to the Coronation;Queene goes to the offring. the offrings
beeing carried vppon rich cushions with

towels of white damaske fringed with
gold. She receiued them from the hands
of the Princesses of Conty, of Montpensier
and of Guise, and offered them herselfe
vppon the Altar; the wine in two
little barrils of siluer and guilt, a loafe
of siluer, and a loafe of gold, with a purse
and thirteene peeces of gold, euery peece
beeing worth thirteene crownes.
                  The preface beeing begonne, the King
followed the Cardinall of Ioyeuzes voice
who was at the Altar. It is an ancient
marke of piety in the Kings of France, to
mingle their vowes and voyces with the
Ministers of God. Charlemaigne, Robert,
and St. Lewis did sing in the Church, and
King Charles the 9. had beene heard sing.
Hee carried so great reuerence and respect
to holy Mysteries, as his eyes discouered
the zeale of his heart. The Popes
Nuncio obseruing this feruency, and
these pure and free motions of his spirit,
reioyced with the the other Prelates,

saying that the Pope would receiue great
contentment therewith.
                  
                  To al this dayes honors, which were the
greatest that the earth could produce, it
was fit to adde the perfection of all the
graces which we can receiue from heauen,
the full summe of all benefits, the abridgment
of wonders, the eternall gage
of the loue of God; wherefore the Queen
was led the third time toward the Altar,
where she did kneele downe vpon a Cushon
which the Duke of Elbeuf presented
to her, and receiued the holy Sacrament,
hauing, for greater reuerence, set by the
Crowne which she had vpon her head. A
sollemne declaration that the Crownes
of Princes submit themselues to our Sauiours
Crowne of thornes, that all their
maiesty depends of his power, their
greatnesse hath no brightnesse but
from that light, and it seemes like vnto
the Enamell which doth not shew
about a Pidgeons neck, if the Sunne

doth not shine vppon it.
                  The Ceremony ended, about 4. of the
Clocke the Heralds cast a largesse vnto
the people of a great number of peeces
of gold and siluer. All the Church
did sound againe with cryes and acclamations
of ioy and happinesse.
                  I haue not described it so perticularlye
and exactlie as some may wish:
This is a History, not a Ceremoniall.
                  If the Noblemen which serued in
this action take it ill that they haue
beene forgotten in this discourse, they
must remember that their names are
written else-where, and that the hazards
of battells, and not the pompes
of Ceremonies are their ture Theaters.
                  The Queene was conducted backe againe
to her Chamber by the Duke
of Guise, and the Cheualier of Guise
his brother: The King receiued her in

the presence Chamber, and in that incounter
the great feruencie of his heart
did euaporate it selfe by the teares of his
eyes, with such tendernesse and affection,
as one would haue thought he had giuen
his last imbrasing. Hee told her that she was
to thanke God, for that all things had past so
well: That neuer any thing had beene performed
with more order and honor; and seeing
her to haue more desire to rest then to
dine, hee commanded euery one to depart
the Chamber.
                  He was so well pleased with her royall
Mantle, as he presently told Sancerre, Controwler
generall of his plate, and maister
of the Queenes roabes, that hee would
haue a Cassock of the same fashion, besides
three others of diuerse coullers, imbrodered
and inricht with diuers Ciphers,
to carry vpon his armes; and for that hee
could not haue them before his departure,
hee commanded him to follow in
post, and to bring it as soone as it should

bee made, recommending the solliciting
thereof vnto the Queene.
                  Hee supt at Saint Denis, and they told
him during supper, that the Ambassadors
of Spaine and Venice had a quarrell.
Hee had foreseene it, and knowing that
their spirits were altered by the forgetting
of some complement which the one
thought should haue beene done by the
other, they might discouer their discontents
vpon the first occasion, hee recommended
it to the Popes Nuncio, to haue
a care least they should do anything vnworthy
the respect which was due to that
occasion. This was handled so discreetly,
as the solemnitie was not troubled.
The Ambassador of Venice did sometimes
cast forth words to draw on others.
The Ambassador of Spaine who had
promised that hee would not offend him,
if hee were not first offended, fore-seeing
that if in this discourse, he gaue him siegneurie
or Lordship, insteed of Excellency,

(termes which were the onely cause of the
iarre which was betwixt them) hee should
be forced to breake out into some passionate
speech, hee remained silent, and kept
his grauity, hauing much paine to command
him-selfe, so as his countenance
could not dissemble the trouble and perturbation
of his mind; At the returne
from the Ceremony they did accompany
the Nuncio, and did attend vntill he was
entred into his Caroch to returne to Paris.
At the very instant of his departure
they fell to words and then to blowes.
The King would needes see the keeper
of the house and his wife, to vnderstand
the manner, the aduantage, and
the issue of this Combate.
                  After supper hee sent Chasteauvieux
to tell the Queene that if shee had a will
to goe to Paris hee would stay for her; who
answered, that shee was readie. They
came backe together in one Caroche,
and the King made a discourse vnto

her of this quarrell, with the discriptions
and exaggerations, which he
could enrich exceeding well, and the
ioy wherein hee was gaue it much
grace. Two leasters of the Court, to
entertayne him in this humor fell to
words and blowes before him vpon
the way. The enseigne of his gard
seeing this sport on horse-backe and
with swords drawne to bee too neere
his Carroche, hee caused them to retyre,
but the King commanded them
to let them alone, for that hee tooke
delight in it.
                  All that euening hee spake of nothing
but of that which hee had seene
and obserued, and could not sufficiently
admire the Maiestie, grace, and royall
behauiour of the Queene. Here-vpon
La Brosse a learned Phisition and Mathematician,
sayd vnto the Duke of
Vendosme, after a long discourse,
that if the King could auoyde an accident

which did threaten him, he might liue yet thirty
yeares.
                     Predictions of the kings death. No man is willing to let Kings
vnderstand that which may troble them;
the Duke of vendosme thinking it more
conuenient that la Brosse should be the reporter
of this aduise, besought the King
to heare him; the king demanded what he
would. At these words the Duke of Vendosme
held his peace, his silence made
the King more desirous to know it, he
prest him, and hee excused himselfe,
in the end the Kings commandement
drew from him that which la Brosse had
spoken: You are a foole, said the King
you beleeue it; Sir answered the Duke
of Vendosme, in these matters beleefe is
forbidden, but not feare; your maiesties
preseruation binds all the world, and me
more then all men not to contemne any thing:
I beseech you most humbly to be pleased to
beare him; the King would not, but forbad
him to speake of it. I cannot, said the
Duke, doe lesse then aduertize the Queene.
                     
The King replied twise, that if he spake
of it he would neuer loue him; And so la
Brosse was sent away. This discourse I
had word by word from the Duke of
Vendosme.
                  At the same time the Queene did rest at
an other prediction, which did assure her
that she should not passe those dayes of
ioy and triumph without some wonderfull
crosse and afliction. At her returne
from Saint Denis she saw him that had
told her, whom she let vnderstand that
all things had succeeded hapily at her Coronation,
and that there was more likelyhood
to hope for good then to feare
any euill. Madame, said he, your entry is
made, if I haue not spoken the truth, I will
burne my Bookes.
                  
                  It is true that she had beene long before
aduertized that in May 1610. she should
haue a great Crosse. But as she is as little
curious of these obseruations, as any Princesse
of Europe, so there is not any one

liuing that doth contemne them more,
not that giues them lesse credit. Shee did
noe more esteeme this Prediction, then
the threats of the Astrologians, who said,
that shee should dye vpon the deliuery of the
Lady Christina her second daughter.
                  
                  At that time they spake generally of
some great accident that should happen.
They called to minde many predictions
vpon Commets, the Eclypses and Coniunction
of superiour Planets. Leouicius
had coniured all Kings that were borne
vnder Aries and Libra, to haue a care of
themselues.
                  The Starre which was seene the yeare
before at noone-day, had beene considered
by the Mathematicians as a signe of
some sinister effect, The riuer of Loire
had ouer-flowed with the like furie at the
time of the violent deaths of Henry the
second, and Henry the third. The seasons
peruerted the extreame cold, the violent
heat, and those mountaines of Ice which

were seene vpon the riuers of Loire and
Saone filled mens heads with like apprehensions.
They had divulged about Paris
verses of the Samaritaine vppon the
new bridge, in imitation of Nostradamus,
which spake plainly of the Kings
death.
                  It is a great rashnesse to presume to foretell
that which no man but God knowes.
The knowledge of future things is ouercast
with darknesse, so as humaine iudgements
cannot pierce into it. If future
things might bee knowne by the starres,
men had no need of Prophets to foretell
before so many ages, of their Redemption,
of the estate of the Church,
and of the latter day.
                  But for my part I hold, that if the starres
giue not some knowledge of these great
disasters which fall vpon Princes, it were
a folly for priuate men to consult vppon
their influences, and to diuine what shall
happen.
                  
                     
The religious contempt which this
Prince made of all these obseruations, is
so much the more commendable in him,
for that curiositie doth insensibly settle a
beliefe in the spirits of great men, by the
incounter of some truth, as it is impossible
that in ayming still at one marke, they
should not sometimes hit it. The Court,
which hath alwayes idlenesse to make
mens minds delicate, and vanity to make
them curious is the element of these diuiners,
they adore them when they speake
truth, and they excuse them when they
are mistaken, they remember if they
haue deliuered any thing truly, and forget
their lyes. God doth also suffer a mischief
to fall vpon him that did beleeue it, not to
giue countenance and authority to the
Impostor, but to punish his lightnesse
that gaue eare to the Impostor.
                  Hee was told in the beginning of his
raigne, that hee should bee interred eight
or ten dayes after King Henry the third,

whose hearse was laid in deposito, at Compeigne:
That hee should bee slaine in the
57. yeare of his age, and that this mischief
should happen at a great ceremonie, with
a hundred other fantasies, which hee regarded
not, saying alwayes, That God only
knew the accoumpt, and could number the daies
of man. And although that by the euents
of that which they had foretold him of
his greatest aduentures, yea of his comming
to the Crowne, his beliefe should
haue bin tempted to hearken to such predictions,
yet it remained alwaies constant
in the contempt which he had made.
                  In Germany they had made his Horoscope,
the which ended his life in the 57.
yeare of his age, by a violent blow: Bumbaste
a great Mathematician had published
by the trumpet of the Imperiall
Knight, that this Prince went happily and
triumphantly to the Monarchie of Europe,
if a terrible accident which did threaten
him in the middest of his great & glorious

desseignes did not hinder him.
                  He that had fore-told the Duke of Guise
of the issue of the estates of Blois, and the
Duke of Mayenne, the losse of the battle
of Yury, had said, he should dye this yeare of
a violent death. A great Preacher told the
Duke of Guise and his mother, that this ioy
should be troubled with great sorrow and heauinesse.
They had found vpon an Altar at
Montargis, a prediction of this disastrous
day. An Image they said, had cast forth
teares at Bolleyn; many other signes
more curious then considerable. The
Marshall of Raiz wife hath bin heard say,
that Queene Katherine beeing desirous to
know what should become of her children,
and who should succeed them, the
party which vndertooke to assure her, let
her see a glasse, representing a hall, in the
which either of them made so many turns
as he should raigne yeares, & that K. Henry
the 3. making his, the Duke of Guise crost
him like a flash of lightning, after which

the Prince of Nauarre presented himselfe,
and made 22. turnes, and then vanished.
                  Whilest they made all things ready for
the Coronation, they shewed him a Prediction
come out of Spaine, telling that a
great King which had beene prisoner in his
youth, should dye in the moneth of May, but he
said, that that was the pollicy of the Spaniard
to trouble that coronation, and that they should
send the ball back with the like aduise. It semed
that he himself was the Sybile of his owne
misfortune: he told the duke of Suylly that
he had something lying at his heart, so as hee
could not bee merry, and that hee apprehended
some accident. Hee said often, that he should
not continue long, and that good men should
want him. They told him that by reason of
the continual rain in the spring, the streets
of Paris were all couered with mire, and
that if they were not clensed, the Queenes
entry would bee very incommodious for
the Noblemen that were appointed to
attend about her Litter, whereto hee

answered, It concernes not mee, I shall not
see it. The tree planted in the Court of the
Lovure fel of it selfe the first day of May,
without any force or violence, and beyond
all apparence the head towards the
lesser stayrs▪ 
                     Bossompiere seeing this,
tould the Duke of Guise, with whome hee
leaned vpon the barres of iron of the little
walke before the Queenes Chamber, that
in Germanie and Italy they would hold the fall
of this tree to bee ominous, whose shadow did
serue all the world. The King supposing
they had some other talke, leaning his
head easely vnto theirs, heard all this discourse,
and sayd vnto them, My eares haue
beene filled these twenty yeares with these Predictions,
but there shall nothing happen but
what pleaseth God.
                  
                  On Saterday the eight of May he came
to see the Queene, being set at dinner, asking
her if the Coronation should be on Twesday,
but shee held her peace, for that her
answer could not satisfie his desire. Then

he said vnto her, Why? you speake nothing
vnto me. I would be glad (said the Queene)
it were tomorrow, but Sancerre tells me it
cannot be before Thursday; where-vpon he
sent for Sancerre, and grew in choller at
these delaies, lamenting more the losse of
time and occasions then two hundred
thousand crownes which this stay did
cost him, and therevpon he said vnto the
Queene, My loue, if it be not on Thursday, I
assure you that Fryday once past you shall see
mee noe more. The Queene smyling, you
will be glad (said she) to see the entry. No (answered
the King) On Fryday I will bid
you far-well. Man speakes words after his
owne sence, and the destynies makes
them to bee vnderstood, and to fall out
after an other manner.
                  Walking at the Tuilleries on the Wednes-day,
he sayd vnto Montigny and Cicongne,
I would I weere dead; And when
as they tould him that hee had noe cause
to wish for death,He wisheth him selfe dead. his life being full of all

prosperity and content, hee answered,
you are more happy then I am, which words
hee spake often and to many. His seruants
were afflicted, for that hee did afflict
him-selfe without subiect, for at that
time hee had so great prosperity in his affaiers,
so much reputation in his desseines,
as nothing did oppose it selfe against
his wil, but to augment the glory of
his power. He had so many blessings in his
house, as he might like to that wise King
of Egypt,His great blessing & happines. shew the Queene his wife, and
the Princes his children, as his treasors,
and the greatest graces which fauorable
heauen may giue vnto a great Prince.
                  In matters that were most declyning
and in a manner desperat, God did alwaies
assist him with great courrage, and
with an inuincible constancy, which bred
admiration in his seruants and amazement
in his enemies, who saw him recouer
new force like Anteus when as they
thought he had beene quite vanquished,

but in the dissentions and quarrells of his
Court, hee could not but shew his disquietnesse
and impatience, at the motion
whereof hee did some-times wish to
change his condition, hee commended
sollitarinesse, wherein hee found the true
tranquillity of the mind. There is nothing
wanting; Manna falls there, the rauens
bring bread from Heauen. If the waters
be bitter, there is wood to sweeten them.
If the combat of Amalec and Edom be ther,
the triumph of Moses and Iosua is likewise
there. But this kind of life is not fit for Princes,
who are not borne for them-selues,
but for their Estates, and for the people
ouer whom they are set. In this sea ther is
no other hauen but the graue, and they
must die in action.
                  When as his cheese seruants, who could
not yeeld vnto a lie, nor dissemble the
truth, did acquaint him with any disorder
in his affaiers, and that vsing the
power which hee had giuen them, they

did lay open with all freedome and sinceritie,
the things that were not generally
liked of: hee promised to take a time to
reforme them, gaue his reasons, represented
inconueniences, and consequences,
there concluding, coldly, without any alteration
of choller, which is ordinarie in
Princes that are contradicted, hee said,
When I am dead they shal then know my worth.
Desiring that the Queene should bee informed
of affaires; hee did often instruct
her, and aduised her to know them whom
hee did most trust, saying, That shee might
one day haue need of them, and seeing her
estrange her thoughts from that businesse,
hee added, that by the order and course of nature
hee should goe first, and that hee would
leaue her France in that estate, and all things
so well setled and assured, as shee should not bee
troubled like other Queenes to maintaine
them.
                  
                  A little before the Queenes coronation,
passing with her from her Chamber to the

Cabinet, hee stayed at the doore to speake
to one, and seeing her stay vntill hee had
done, he said smiling vnto her, Passe on,
passe on Lady Regent. Hee did then allow
that which the heauens had resolued to
doe, and men haue since confirmed, that
which God and the King had ordained.
Hee had neuer called the Dauphin King.
It is the last word that Kings speake; the
iealousie of Soueraigne command doth
not pronounce it, but in extremity, and I
remember that a Nobleman saying vnto
him, that he wisht that my Lord the Dauphin
had a dozen of his yeares, hee answered; I
would not that hee bad one. And the day of
the coronation, as if God would that in
so great an assembly hee should make the
last disposition of his estate: he said vnto
his Garde; Behold your King.
                  
                  Going on a time out of his Carroch, he
told the Prince of Conde and the Baron
of Saint Chaumont, that hee had beene
aduertised he should die in a Carroch of a

violent death. The last time he came from
Monceaux, hee past by Saint Maur des
Fossez to see the Dauphin, going from
thence after supper to Paris to his bed:
Beeing aduised by some to take his horse,
and that it was dangerous to go by night
in a Carroche, hee answered, If any
one should feare it is I, for I haue beene
told I should dye in a Carroche. Hee had
escaped great dangers in Carroch, which
should haue made him apprehend the
truth of this prediction. France shall neuer
remember the ouer-throwing of the
Carroch into the riuer of Seine at Port de
Neuilly, and of that which was in it, but
she will acknowledge her selfe bound to
praise God, who preserued the King, and
retired the Queene from out the middest
of the shaddows of death, and saued her
from this shipwrack, to saue France at
need. Wee haue spoken it before, and
wee will say againe in the continuance
of the History, that the deepe waters

were not able to quench the liuely and
eternall flames of loue which shee bare
vnto the King; for the first words shee
pronounced were, Where is the King? A
Mathematician did aduertise him at the
siege of la Fere, that hee should not passe
such a day without danger of his life; In
despight of these dreames, he shewed himselfe
vnto the walles, and to the enemies
Cannon, and supping that night at Trauessy,
hee praised GOD for that the day
which had beene noted vnto him to bee
vnfortunate, had past happily. Hee did
accompany the Duchesse of Beaufort to
Mouy, where she was lodged by Torchelight,
the horses stumbled in a bad passage,
and drew the Carroche after them into a
precipice or downe-fall, all that were in it
were in great danger, the Carroche was
torn in peeces, & the horses slain or lamed.
This accident following presently after
the threat, should haue beene of force to
make him leaue the vse of Carroches,

but hee made a iest at it, and would neuer
beleeue that this was an effect of the Mathematicians
Prediction.
                  It is true, there is no worse lodging for a
Prince which goes in publike then a Carroche.
The King of Chyna goes in one,
but besides his ordinary gards, which are
about him, hee hath alwayes fiue or sixe
attired like himselfe, to the end he should
not be distinguished nor knowne. When
as they propounded vnto the Earle of Fuentes
a desseigne to trouble France, and to
kindle a new ciuill warre, hee said, it was
impossible whilest the King liued, and that
first of all bee must be made away. When as
he that did manage this businesse, did represent
vnto him the difficulty therof, the
Earle answered, that ther was nothing more
easie, seeing that he went often in a Carroche.
                  
                  Wee must neither beleeue confidently
nor wholy neglect all kindes of dreames.
Those of great Princes are not vaine
vppon great resolutions, after which

we find that they haue beene diuinely inspired.
Few great accidents haue happned
vnto the Queene without some precedent
dreame.The Queens dreames. She drempt of the death of
Pope Leo the tenth, and that Cardinall
Aldobrandino said vnto her, that his successor
should be noe lesse affected to her house.
She saw the death of the great Duke Fernand
her vnkle in a dreame, and the next
day sending for his Agent, she demanded
what newes he had last receiued. To whom
he answered; that he had none but good; then
shee replied, that the first hee should receiue
should not be so.
                  
                  Some few daies before this fatall accident
shee had two dreames, the which
were true predictions, when as the Iewelers
and Lapidaries prepared her crowne
she drempt that the great diamonds and
all the goodly stones which shee had giuen
them to inrich it were turned into
Pearles, the which the interpreters of
dreames take for teares. The second

dreame made her to start as one terrified;
where at the King did wonder, and asked
her what she ayled, the which at the first she
would not discouer, saying onely, that
dreames were lies, and that she gaue no credit
to them: neither doe I, said the King, but
what was your dreame? being prest and intreated;
I drempt, said shee, that one stabd
you with a knife vpon the little staires. God be
thanked, answered the King, it is but a
dreame: she asked if she should call vp Renouilliere,
who was the first woman of her
Chamber, but the king tould her ther was
no need and so fell presently a sleepe. He
was a Prince of so good a constitution, as
he had two things equally at his disposition,
to sleepe & wake when it pleased him.
                  Many things were obserued at S. Denis
and taken for a bad presage: the King and
Queene said that their sleepes had beene interuped
by a Scrike oule, a night bird which
betokens funerals, which had made a croking
all night at their Chamber window.
The stone which lies vppon the vault

whereas the Kings are intered was found
open. Curiosity, which obserues euery
slight circumstance, tooke it for an il figne
that the Queenes taper went out of it self,
and that if shee had not layed hand to her
Crowne, it had fallen twise. I know not
what to thinke when as the same day this
Prince, beholding the Theaters so well
peopled and in so good order, said; that it
made him remember the day of iudgement, and
that they would bee much amazed to see the
iudge come. This yeare before this accident
two Gentlemen, the one of Bearne, the other
of Condome of diuers relligions, yet
both seruants to the king, brought two visions
which did aduertise him of this latter
day, he of Condome, had seen nothing
but in a dreame; the other said, that walking
a great man had appered vnto him,
carrying the kings picture vpon his hart,
and had said vnto him; Goe vnto Fontainbleau
whereas the King shall enter euen
as thou shalt arriue, tell him this and
that on the behalfe of God. Hee obayed

and theking heard him, who remembring
that many cossenors had couered their
deceits with the like aduertisments to get
mony, and seeing this gentleman refuse
three hundred crownes which he had appointed
for his Iorney, saying that hee had
noe other desseine therein but to obey God, and
to serue the King, hee did not contemne
this aduice, and was well conceited of it.
                  Many after the blow will say that they
had spoken well, euery man will deale
with diuining, and say that Cassandra hath
spoken truly, but shee was vnfortunate,
noe man beleeued her, wee will not goe
farre, to morrow wee will confesse that
all these predictions were too true. The
King came to see the Queene, who supt
in her secret Cabinet, and was atended on
by her women. He talked vnto her, and
drank twise the remainders of that which
she had left in her glasse, more for pleasure
then for any thirst, and then he went presently
to his bed, And as his army was the

continuall obiect of his thoughts, being
in his great Cabinet ready to goe to his
rest, he tooke Pralin by the arme, and leaning
vpon him, hee spake these words;
Many thinke ill of my voiage, but by the grace
of God, from a cause which in their opinions is
bad, and in my iudgement most iust, wee will
draw good effects.
                  
                  The Queene was still in her Cabinet
when hee went to bed, where shee remayned
long, entertayning her selfe with that
which was done, and that which was to
be done. Her good seruants were bound
for many respects to remember that day,
but she would haue the remembrance of
her Coronation accompanied with that
of her affection, and therefore she sent vnto
them in particular Medalles, of peeces
of gold and siluer, which the largesse had
made publike at Saint Denis, and commanded
Dargouge, her Tresorer, to giue
them vnto all the officers of her household:
these peeces had on the one side her

picture wonderfully well cut, and on the
other a great Crowne, out of the which
sprong three branches, a Lawrell, a Palme
and an Oliue, with this Inscription after
an Antike manner, appointed by the
Chancellor; Seculi Felicitas. Shee also
disposed of many things that might serue
for the finishing of her entry. Wee may
well speake now for to morrow at this
time wee shall speake no more of this.
Wee might haue seene Arcades, Theaters,
Arbors and Statues set vp to this
end, with the goodly troupes of horse
and foote of the Citty. But that which
remained to bee seene, was such, as they
might vse the like words vnto the beholders,
as they did vnto such as were inuited
vnto the secular games; Come and see that
which was neuer seene, and which no man liuing
shall euer see.
                  
                  Of all the ceremonies of the house of
France, the goodliest and most sumptuous
are at the Coronations and entry of

Queenes. The Ornaments, the long habits,
the sexe, adde particular graces and
beauty to the Pompe, and hold the eyes,
hearts, and spirits of men suspended, betwixt
ioy and admiration.
                  We should haue seene the Queene in hir
litter,Description of the Queenes entry. made like a triumphant Chariot,
couered both within and without with
cloth of tissue of gold & siluer, the chaire,
pillers, and euery part of it, with the canopie
ouer it of the same; the Daulphin on
horseback, the Lady Elizabeth & Queene
Marguerite also in a litter, ten Princesses or
Duchesses, attired after a royall manner,
with crownes on their heads, vpon white
horses with saddle-clothes of cloth of siluer,
the traines of their mantles being carried
vp by Squiers; the Lady of honor, &
the Dame d'Atour, with the chiefe Ladies
of the Court in gownes of cloth of tissue,
gold and siluer, with double traines vpon
white hackneys; twelue of the Queenes
Maides attyred in cloth of siluer, in

three Chariots couered with cloth of gold
and siluer, the Knights of the Order, the
Noblemen of the Court, the Knight of
honor, the Maister of her Horse, foure
Squires, foure Gentlemen seruants, hee
that carried the cloake-bag, ten Pages,
foureteene footmen, fiue horses of shew,
a horse which caried the casket of Iewels,
the Queenes hackney, her double gelding,
and with all this a great number of
men richly appointed, to answer the excellencie
of the equipage. The Queene
had giuen liueries to the Captaines of the
gardes, to the foure companies, to the
hundred Suisses, to the great Prouost, and
to the Captaine of the Port, to their Archers,
to the vshers of the Chamber carrying
Maces, to the Herald at Armes,
Trumpets, Houbois, Drums and Phifes.
                  They had erected a Theater at Saint
Lazare, where the Queene should haue
receiued the reuerences, homages, and
orations which should haue beene made

vnto her, in the behalfe of the body, and
all the orders of the citty, of the Soueraigne
companies, and the faculties of the
Vniuersity. And to that end the Chancellor
was appointed to bee neere vnto her
Maiestie, attired in a roabe of tawnie veluet
in graine, lined with vnshorne veluet,
his cassock of satten of the same coulour,
and his hatt of tawnie veluet. His predecessors
at such ceremonies were attired in
cloth of tissue, gold and siluer, but hee
would go more modestly.
                  All this was ready for Sonday, there
was no delay, nothing wanting: the
Queene was wonderfully well pleased
that the King had no more cause to bee
discontented for the stay of his voyage.
Nothing could hinder the perfecting of
this ioy, but that which no man thought
could happen. But the thoughts of men
are but winde, their resolutions but Chimera's,
their contents but illusions, Princes
are often-times entertained with

fables when they watch, they tell them
tales to make them sleepe, and some
thing must bee said whilst they sleepe
to reuiue their seruants, whome a
continuall care afflicts, least this great
ioy should bee crost with great sorrow.
                  
                     Iupiter commanded Pleasure to retyre
to Heauen, for that hee was so
well followed and serued by men, as
hee did no more care to leaue the earth.
To returne more purely, hee disrobed
him-selfe. Greefe, who all the time of
his aboad on earth had beene banished,
found those cloathes and disguised
him-selfe. Since shee hath alwaies
deceiued the world, which vnder
the shewes of ioy incounters sorrow:
the greatest ioyes beeing but
meere vexations couered with little pleasure.
                  Behold the fourteenth day of May
which had beene so famous in the tryumphes

of France for the happie victory
which King Lewis the twelfth
obtayned on that day in the yeare one
thousand fiue hundreth and nine,
at Ghiradadda, is now so tragicall
and lamentable in the memorie of the
French, as the yeares of many ages
shall neuer bring it about, but it shall
renewe in their hearts the immortall
wounds where-with it hath galled
them.
                  The King did ryse early to end the
day betimes,The Kings actions the day of his death. and past into his priuat Cabinet
to apparrell him-selfe. I will note
many small circumstances; I will obserue
all his words curiously; I will report
all his actions diligently; both for that
they were his last, and the last duties
which the History oweth him; as also
to represent them all together as in a
table, whereas mens iudgements shall
find diuers obiects to busie them-selues
withall. Being in his Cabinet he sent for

                     Rambure, who was arriued the night before,
and whome he would imploy in his
army about the Duke of Vendosme; hee
spake to de Barraut touching the quarrell
betwixt the Ambassadors of Spaine and
Venice. About sixe of the clocke he went
to bed againe, to giue him-selfe more liberty
to doe the homage of his heart vnto
God, and to spend some time in the exercises
of piety, the which noe occasions,
noe not in alarmes could make him neglect.
Hearing some one at the doore, he
said, It is Mounsieur de Villeroy, for hee had
sent for him by la Varenne. He discoursed
much with him of affaires, and referring
the rest vnto the Tuilleries, he commanded
him to draw the curtaine, and so
continued his prayers, staying for his
clothes.
                  He did long to see the Noblemen which
had not beene at Saint Denis, to make
them partakers of the contentment which
he had receiued. Such a contentment as

might bee that of a triumphant King, of
a most happy husband, and of a ioyfull
father; hauing seene vpon the theater of
glory, that which hee held most deere in
this world, & in a word his wife crowned,
serued, and followed by his children. But
this content did no wayes with-draw him
from his affaires; he caused that morning
the expeditions to bee sealed for all that
which he had granted to the Duke of Sauoy,
making it knowne that he was very
well pleased, that his will had beene followed
and effected at Brussoles, where as
the Marshall d'Esdiquieres had seene that
Prince vpon the cleering of his desseignes,
and of the meanes to execute them. The
Duke of Bouillon Councellor of State, hauing
made three iourneys into Piedmont
about that businesse, had brought the articles
of the league, offensiue and defensiue,
signed in that conference.
                  The ioy he had conceiued thereof, sate
on his face all that morning, as he walked

in the Tuilleries, whether my lord the Dauphin
came to see him. He spake to the Cardinall
Ioyeuse, & to diuers other Lords, &
related the excellency & beauty of the coronation.
He was carefull to appease the
strife betwixt the ambassadors of Spain &
Venice. This spirit which in war would be
euery where, & in peace did execute all the
offices of his subiects, would needs know
of the harbingers, what order was taken in
S. Denis street, the number of those who
were to be lodged, & what lets were made
by perticular persons, and where his own
lodging was; it was appointed neere to S.
Iames his hospitall. He went to the monastery
of the Fueillans, and heard out masse
without any interruption. The antient order
of Gods seruice in the house of the
French Kings, forbiddeth any man to vndertake
to speake to the King concerning
businesse when he is hearing masse. He is
only to be enterteined with discourses of
piety. His custome was to cause the gospel

for that day to be expounded to him.
                  When hee came thether after none, his
Maiesty vsed some excuses to the Prelats,
saying; Businesses haue made our deuotions
slow: It is true, that when I labor for the common-wealth,
I pray, and by reason thereof I doe
some times on working dayes loose masse. This
is to leaue God, for God. In the same church
he saw the Chappell which the family of
Bassompierre had builded, and reading this
verse of the Psalme, which was set down
for an Emblem, Quid retribuam Domino pro
omnibus quae retribuit mihi? he said, Bassompierre
as a Germaine should haue added, Calicem
accipiam. This so sharpe and ready reply,
drawne from the thing it self, was admired,
and the Duke of Guyse therevpon
hauing broken a witty iest, the King added,
You know me not: when you shal misse me,
then you will know me, and that will be shortly.
                  
                  Before he would sit down to meat, he did
in his Cabinet heare D'escures concerning
the iourny he made by his comandement,

to discouer the passage of the riuer Semoy.
By his report hee was assured of that
which others held doubtfull; hee did represent
it easie, safe, and commodious,
thorow the countrey of Castle-Renaud,
which belongeth in soueraignty to the
Princesse of Conty at the foord of Fillouer
a little beneath Linchamp.
                  He was much pleased with this resolution,
for it was told him that the Marquis
Spinola had seazed on those places to stop
his passage. His content was augmented,
when as hee certified him of the state and
goodly disposition of his Armie, of the
Swisses arriuall, of the equipage of the artillery,
and of the good order which the
Duke of Neuers did there obserue, of the
ioy which the forraine troopes conceiued
for his comming, of the generall amazement
of the countrey of Luxembourg,
and of other Prouinces of the Low countries,
which made this Prince inuincible,
and which at the very first, would cause

weapons to fall out of the hands, and confidence
from the hearts of the most resolute.
                  The desire to behold it, was redoubled
in his soule, when as hee considered how
his desseignes, did as it were out-goe his
desires; that all things were conformable
to his will, and that Fortune did seeme to
present him with Townes and Prouinces,
taken in nets: Hee was so opportunely
and faithfully serued, as he caused places
of great importance to be discouered, before
they who commanded them had any
inckling thereof, and he was more confident
to take them, then resolute to assaile
them.
                  All the officers of the Crowne, all the
chiefe Lords of the kingdom, all the gallantry
of the Prouinces were neere about
him, & albeit they did not certainly know
whether the winde would carry them,
they were content to bee imbarked in a
shipp, whose Pilot was not onely skilfull

in guiding the Helme, but had beene alwaies
beloued and fauored of Neptune.
                  
                  
                     He said, that he would haue foure thousand
Gentlemen; that out of the same number, hee
would choose two thousand, and would cause
them to serue with pikes, with a thousand musketeiers,
chosen out of all the infantery, and
that vnder the conduct of a good Captaine,
hee would present them at the head of the enemies
army, and would cause them to skirmish.
                  Then hee added in fauor of the French
Nobility, of whose force, courrage, and
sufficiency hee had made good proofe.
What is their in the whole world that is able
to resist it? what can not two thousand
French Gentlemen doe in their Kings presence?
They will ouer-turne Mountaines.
Hee shewed. twelue petronels for twelue
foote-man, saying, that it was to salute
fiue hundred paces off, those galants who should
come to play the Carabines at any time when he
went to make discouery.
                  
                  Hee made account in his absence to

commit al royal authority to the Queene,
leauing the Constable and the Chancellor
with her, hee determined to take the
President Ianin along with him, in praise
of whose wisdome and integrity he said, I
haue euer giuen him good wordes, but no deeds.
Hee is old and hath still done me good seruice.
                  
                  He was highly pleased with the aduertisement
which the Marshall Bouillon had
sent him, concerning the state of the frontiers,
and for that the Marquis Spinola
made shew to meete him halfe-way, and
to hinder his passage into the county of
Liege, but that all the people cryed out
Viue la France.
                  
                  
                     At his dinner hee called Nerastang, and
told him what delight he tooke, in that his regiment
was one of the brauest and best armed,
and for that hee had so speedily caused it to
march to the Rendezvous, that the number
did exceed their entertainment, assuring him
that hee would remember his Captaines. Nerestang
replied, that the honour to be first employed

in the execution of his commandements
did oblige them to thinke more how to seeke occasions
to serue him well, then on the meanes of
recompence: being assured that they would neuer
bee poore vnder so great and fortunat a
Prince. Thus ought you to speak & in this manner
wil I be serued quoth the king. It is for subiects
to forget their seruices, & for Princes to
remember them. My seruants shold trust to me,
and to the care I haue of them. Those vnto
whome I haue done more good then to your
selfe doe not acknowledge it so much as you
doe, and of great benifits are made the greatest
ingratitudes.
                  Herevpon he perceiued the Princesse
and the Lady Christina his daughters comming
towards him, hee kissed them, and
asked if they had dyned. The Lady of Monglas,
their gouernesse, said that they had
dined at Saint Denis before they came forth,
and that they had there seene the relikes and
the treasor. The Lady of Vendosme added
that the Duke of Aniou looking stedfastly

on a too mbe, one had told him that it was
the Papa, and how that at that speech hee did
nothing but weepe and cry. That is because
he loues mee, (said the King) for yesterday
while the ceremony lasted he neuer gaue-ouer
crying Papa. He saw a master of requests
of his house-hold standing by, and from
a martiall discourse which he had ended,
he fell into an other of religion, witnessing
the desire which hee had at his returne
to labour in the reunion of his subiects,
by such certaine and iust remedies
as they should not bee reiected but by
those, who loued the disease better then
the cure. They are the most ardent vowes
and purest sighes of good mindes, whose
daies in this schisme are but careers of
troubles and discontent.
                  Hee amply enlarged his discourse
thereon, and of the meanes to worke the
couersion of a Gouernor of a Prouince
and one of his most confident and faithfull
seruants. This man wondering at

such thoughts in those great deseignes
of armes and affaires, did twise protest,
and that very zealously that his minde
was euer ready and disposed therevnto.
He gratiously receiued the booke of the
Auant-Victor which hee presented to him:
who-so-euer is desirous to know the Author
therof, to admire his wit, let him read
the French Soldier.
                  
                  After dinner hee talked long with the
president Ianin, and with Arnauld, the
superintendent of his treasures, telling
them that hee was resolued to labour in
the reformation of his state in euery
part thereof, to releeue the miseries
and oppressions of his people, and no
more to endure here-after, that gold
should bee of more power in his Kingdome
then vertue or desert, nor that
the sale of offices should prophane sacred
things, coniuring all his good seruants
to second his good intents, with
resolution and courage.
                  
                     
Hee came into the Queenes chamber
attended onely by the Marquis of la Force,
and albeit they said that hee was in
a pleasant humour, I found his countenance
other-wise disposed, neither did
his minde agree with his words. Hee
passed on to the Queenes Cabinet, who
was busie in giuing order for all things
necessary for the pompe and magnificence
of her entry, hauing commanded
the Bishoppe of Bezeirs, her cheefe Almner,
to goe to the Conciergery of the
Pallace, together with two or three maisters
of requests, to consult about the
enlargment of the prisoners. Hee perceiued
the Dutchesse of Guyse to bee
desirous to goe into the Citty, and said
vnto hir, Cosin, tarry here still wee
will laugh and bee merry, shee excused
her selfe by reason of an assembly made
by certaine Aduocates of the court of
Parlament, at which she must needs be.
He said, he would go visit the Princesse of

                     Conty who kept her chamber, being wearied
with the former daies toyle: Hee could not
tarry in one place & much lesse conceale
his irresolutions, in the sundry agitations
whereof, hee told the Queene that he
knew not what to doe; that hee was desirous to
goe to the Arcenall; and because hee grew
some-what cholericke, the Queene therevpon
said to him, Sir doe not goe your selfe,
send some one thither, you are now in a good
humor, and you will goe and disquiet your
selfe.
                  
                  At his comming foorth of the Queenes
Cabinet hee shut him-selfe into his owne
for to write, and at the fifth line, as his
spirits where neuer so attentiue to any
one businesse, but that hee had still force
and vigor to thinke of many more, hee
called in Clauary, whome hee had sent
to the Venetian Ambassador, to know
in what humor hee found him vpon the
composing of his quarrell.
                  After he had written, & giuen the letter to

one that waited for it, he came to the window,
and laying his hand vpon his forehead,
he spake these words. O God! there is
something lying heere that doth much trouble
mee. They were noted by Castelnaud, with
whom he confidently talked a long time,
hauing told him three dayes before, that
three kind of greefes did perplex him.
                  Cares are inseparable accidents to royalty.
These high regions are neuer without
stormes; great states, like vnto great
ships, are euer laden with troubles and
cares. This Princes minde was tossed too
and fro with sundry thoughts; and besides
all that, a prisoner hauing told him of
great matters contrary to his seruice,
hee was sorry that hee was enforced to
dissemble them till his returne. His iudgement,
which knew vnto what point of
greatnesse he ought to raise mens mindes
and courages, would not dispose of the
office of Marshall generall of the army, at
their pleasures who desired it.
                  
                     
Hee was discontented for that his army
was not employed, and for that they of
Coloigne, like to those of Liege, had not
beene dealt with concerning victuals. His
fore-sight, going before all necessities,
made him resolue not to march but in
safety, with considerations worthy his experiences
and reputation. In regard wherof
he determined to make three lodgings
for his army, the first at the passage of the
riuer of Semy: the other two farther on
in a neutrall countrey, and not to stir from
thence till hee had fortified them, with
cauallery and foote-forces, and with all
sorts of defences; and therefore aboue all
things he would be assured of that, whose
want breaketh greatest desseignes, and
weakneth the mightiest armies.
                  Comming forth of his Cabinet, he entred
into the Queenes chamber, where he
talked with the Chancellor about graue,
serious and important businesse, which
touched the future, more then the present

time: as though God would not haue him
to leaue the world, before he had opened
his last intents to the first and chiefe officer
of his iustice, and the last with whom
he conferred about businesse. This discourse
being ended, the Chancellor obseruing
that he made no hast to goe into the
city, said vnto him; Sir, I must go and assemble
your Councell. The King embracing him
replied; Go your way, I will go and bid my wife
farewell, Hee spake to the Lords there present,
and said; Yee know very wel how Queene
Marguerite said, that my wife hath done wonders
at her Coronation. This had respect to
some Ladies, who because they would bee
present at that solemnity had forced their
yeares and infirmities, and as they were
telling of certaine fooleries committed at
S. Denis, wherat they al did laugh, he said;
Let vs not laugh so much on Friday, least wee
weepe on Sonday. Hee did mock at that superstitious
opinion, beleeuing that on that
day all hearts would wholy giue themselues
ouer to mirth.
                  
                     
Hee came into the Queenes Cabinet:
And heerein I did obserue what power the
presence of this Princesse had, to sweeten
the discontents, and to scatter the cloudes
of this Prince his minde: for as though he
had no more felt the sorrow, whereof hee
euen now complained, he did fashion his
countenance, speech and gesture, to whatsoeuer
might make shew of a supreame
content of minde. Hee plaid the part of a
father with his children, the Dukes of Orleance
and Anjou. But in the middest of
all this it was discerned, that his desire
was to go abroad and yet could not. Hee
said to the Queene: I know not what I
ayle, I am not able to go from hence: shee
coniur'd him to stay still. He commanded
Frontenac to go to the Pallace to giue order
for the royall feast, and told him that
hee himselfe would be there by sixe of the
clock the next morning, to see how all
things were prepared.
                  
                     Within a while after hee sent de Vitry

                     likewise, willing him to haue a speciall
care that hee might there receiue as great
content, as hee had done at S. Denis, and
that he should finde Frontenac and Forcy
there. Vitry replied, Sir, you shall see other
matters there, but seeing your Maiesty doth
command mee to goe thither, it may please you
to remember, that I cannot bee in two places at
once: For when I see you hunting, or walking
smally accompanied, my minde is then at quiet,
and I am not afraid of your person, as I now
am in this great Citty, which is full of incredible
numbers of vnknowne strangers. Get you
hence, quoth the King, you are a Prater, and
would faine tarry heere to chat with these women.
Do that I bid you; fifty and odde yeares
are past, since I haue kept my selfe without a
Captaine of my Garde, I can yet well enough
keepe my selfe alone. To this Vitry replyed,
You need not Sir to be alone: for all your garde
stand ready, expecting when your Maiesty will
come abroad.
                  All the grace, excellencie, and charmes

of eloquency could not perswade him in
peace to care for that which he had neglected
in warre. His courage hauing so often
engaged him in danger among his enemies,
would not suffer him to distrust
among his subiects. That braue Alexander
thought it dishonor not to hazard himself
at the passage of the riuer Granick, hauing
crossed the arme of the sea of Helespont.
This generous Palme hath brought
forth fruite at all seasons of his life, and
his History doth furnish so many examples
thereof, as wonder stealeth away beleefe.
As the starres do goe contrary to the
course of the world, euen so doe his actions
against base and vulgar opinions, and
doe throwe dust in their eyes, which
thinke to follow the high pitch of his
valour.
                  From the first day that hee went to the
war, he forgat the greatnesse of his birth,
the necessity of his affaires, the fruite of
his hopes, to sacrifice his owne particular

safety to that of the generall. Neuer did
Captaine of a troope of Carabines beare
himselfe more brauely, freely, and with
more courage in dangers. Dangers in citties,
dangers in the field, dangers at the
passage of riuers, dangers at incounters,
skirmishes, battailes, and retreate.
                  Death was euery where presented before
his eyes, euery where did hee braue and
contemne it. Of a thousand examples
which may be found in his history, I will
mention two or three to cleere this truth,
and to make it apparent that neuer
Prince hath incurd more danger to deserue
the name of valiant, nor neuer
vsed greater discretion to purchase that
of Fortunate.
                  
                  He attempts to take Eaux with seauen
or eight men: a seditious fellow, sets his
harquebuze at his brest, saying, That hee
could hitte the white; because this Prince
aboue all those of his troope did weare
a white doublet.
                  
                     
The Citty beeing assured; his seruants in
the heate, caused him to bee hanged forth
at a window, the rope brake, hee vnderstood
that one of his followers had giuen
him a stab with a Poinard in the brest, hee
turned him away, and would no more see
him, saying, That hee who had escaped the
Rope, ought to incurre no farther danger.
                  
                  At the taking of Cahors, as hee passed
ouer the bridge, the shot of an harquebuze
from the citty, slue him that was next him.
The fight lasted more then thirty houres,
and without his example, in contempt of
dangers, the most resolued courages
would haue growne cold. His presence
did heate them, as they say liquid Bitumen
doth enflame the ayre which is round
about it.
                  He commeth forth of Nerac with nine
or ten horsse, to view the army of the
Marshall Matignon, who in a brauery was
comming thither. Hee was discouered by
those, whom he went to discouer, and on a

sodaine was saluted with a furious charge.
He retires without disorder, and without
enforcing his horse more then his ordinary
pace. They reckoned fiue hundred
poles or stakes which supporred the Vines
to be broken & crackt a sunder with shot,
by whose couert he returned to the citty.
                  If any man say that at the same time hee
was but King of a part of Nauarre, and
chiefe of a party, for whose fortune hee
was enforced to hazard his owne, his hurt
at Aumale doth testifie, that being King of
France he did not spare his flesh. The last
of his military actions is sufficient to iudge
of all the former.
                  
                     His army being in the Tarentaise made
shew to assaile a bridge, to discouer the
enemies order, and to engage them in the
fight. He commanded the Count of Soyssons
to goe thither, and perceiuing the
souldiers to grow warme, that the heate of
the fight did draw them farther on then
hee would haue had them, that they were

angry because they might not be suffered
to end the matter, he him selfe would goe
thither, contrary to the aduice of his
cheefe seruants, who said, that by thrusting
him-selfe so freely into danger, he was not only
carelesse of his owne life, but of al those likewise
whose safety depended vpon him; that
the cheefe duty of a Generall of an army was
to preserue him who was to preserue all the
rest. The Prince trespaseth against the publike
safety, which contemneth his owne particular.
The noblest and valiantest Grecians
were those who were best armed, supposing that
they who came to the warres badly armed,
had no desire to fight. Their lawes punished
him who did forsake his target, and not
his sword. The reason was that a man ought
cheefely to prouide for his owne defence before
hee attempt to offend his enemy, especially
those who haue the gouernment and command,
of a state or army.
                  But he would shew, that age doth not weaken
courage, that the dignity of a Crowne

doth not dispence a Prince from dangers,
that the Laurel doth not defend him from
the lightnings of warre, and that he desired
to haue no part in the glory of incounters,
vnlesse he had a share in the danger.
He mounted a horse which the Marshall
Desdiguieres gaue him, hee went bee-yond
the formost to hold them backe and to
bring them off from the danger whither
the excesse of valour did carry them,
                  When the enemies saw him with his
truncheon in his hand, a white beard on
a face fired by the heate of his courage, &
the contempt of dangers, they protested
that nothing could bee done with more
glory, grauity, iudgement, nor boldnesse.
In this action hee performed three charges;
that of a King, shewing the authority
and fortunatenesse of his presence:
that of a Captaine, ordring all matters
speedily, iudiciously, without disorder
and without daunger: and that of a
soldiour by being in those places where

the shotte of muskets and hargubuzes,
were liberally bestowed.
                  Let them that please, terme these exploits
by the name of happy rashnesse;
blame hee that list that generall who being
aduertized of the threatnings of his
death, answered, that Sparta did not depend
vpon one man alone: let who will magnifie
the opinion of those which say, that a
good and discreet Captaine ought to die
of olde-age, or at least wise old: Praise life
they that please, as the most pretious guift
of Heauen, which all the gold that the
Sunne hath made, and shall make, can neuer
bee able to buy: this Prince thought
that there was nothing so great nor so
generous, as the contempt of life, and that
the Caesars and Alexanders would haue neuer
bin crowned with so many Lawrells
if they had basely retired from dangers.
                  As hee did not respect present perills,
so he did mocke those which were far of,
Elizabeth Queene of England aduertized

him that a strange Gentleman who was
one of his followers had no good meaning
towards his person, reason would
that hee should haue beene apprehended,
or at least dismissed. He neuer shewed him
bad countenance for it, hee continued for
a time wel entertained in his court, mounted
out of his owne stable, honored with
his commandements, til his owne conscience
enforced him to get him thence, and
no longer to abuse that royall bounty.
                  This noble disposition could not beleeue
that to bee in an other man, which
was not in it selfe, and he did neuer disquiet
his owne rest with suspitions and
distrusts. Some foure yeares since, slaunder
did inuent against a worthy Gentleman
of Brettaigne, an odious and cruell
accusation of treason and disloyalty,
and did colour it with such strong circumstances,
as were sufficient to alter the pulse
and complexion of innocency it selfe. He
was aduertised thereof, and for to shew

that he could not distrust those whose seruices
had deserued his trust, hee called for
the Gentleman, he discouered this accusation
vnto him, and hauing assured him
that no impression thereof remayned in
him, he willed him to confere therof with
one of his principall ministers, who being
amazed at this freenesse and bounty in affaires
of so great importance, wherein a
man could not erre twise, where rigor was
commendable, distrust reasonable, secrecy
necessary, and simple suspitions taken for
accusations; after hee had told him that
which was past, with all circumstances
and presumptions, hee confessed that the
kings generous disposition had no Paralell
but that of great Alexander, who did receiue
with one hand the drinke which his
Phisitian Philip brought him, & with the
other shewed him the letter by which hee
was aduertised that Darius had promised
him great rewards to poison him. He was
aduertised at the same time that ther were

deseignes against his person, and hee supposed
that in such assemblies the execution
therof might be more boldly done: but
if during the fury of the wars hee had dispised
such admonishments, how could he
apprehend them in time of peace? It was
told him in the month of Octob. that one
was come forth of a certaine country with
such a curssed and damnable intent, but
when hee was informed of the fashion of
the man, and how that he had a marke on
the face, a beard of such a collour, and his
clothing after the Walloone cut, he said,
that the aduertisment was not good, and that
such a man was very easie to be known.
                  
                  His trusty seruants neuerthelesse did
not giue ouer their discouery of him:
he was aduertised besides of another who
came conducted by the same spirit, but by
another way, and was to come to Paris in
in Nouember, but he was not discouered.
                  Hee did wholy resigne himselfe to the
will of God, beleeuing that what-so-uer
hee had appoynted was in euitable

that a man ought cheerefully to follow
his destiny without fearing. He said vnto
those who did beseech him to haue more
care of his owne preseruation. He that shall
feare death shall enterprize nothing against
me. He that shall dispise his own life shall make
attempts on mine, and I shall not be able to hinder
them: It is your parts to looke to it. A life
that is continually in this feare is worse then
death. When I go to bed I recommend my selfe
to GOD, and when I rise I beseech him to preserue
me: the rest is in his power. He wil defend
me from fooles, and as for wise-men I feare
them not. Besides I liue in such fashion as I may
not enter into these distrusts; It is for Tyrants
to be euer in feare & dread; valiant shepheards
sleepe in safety; cowards are euer feareful. That
religious Numa would not distrust those who
trusted to him. Magnanimous as Cesar, greater
in Clemency then Caesar, is destroyed
like to Caesar, for that he did more regard
his greate and innocent bounty then an
other mans extreame fury & wickednes.
                  
                     
The manner of his life, the condition of
the times, the state of his affaires, the religious
obseruation of treaties of Peace,
and Edicts, would not suffer him to torment
his minde with the apprehension of
these attempts. The vlcers of the minde
were healed, the wildest hearts were tamed,
pretences amazed, discontents repaired,
and enemies so changed, as they detested
such conspiracies against a Prince,
whose life was so fruitfull and necessary
for all Christendom.
                  A desperate fellow borne at Negre-pelisse
went into Spaine to prostitute him
selfe to this damnable desseigne, he discouered
himselfe to one of the King of
Spaines Esquires, named by the place of
his birth Valdemoro. De Barraut, Ambassador
there for the King, had some inckling
thereof, and complained to the Popes
Nuncio, to the end hee should consider the
impiety of those who giue eare to such
monsters: The Duke of Lerma assured

him that diuerse of that humor had offered
themselues, and were still repulsed,
protesting that those impious and execrable
thoughts, vnworthy of the minde of a
King, were not in that of his maister, and
that he was amazed to see a nation, which
was so much praised for their fidelity and
affection to their Kings, so much to degenerate,
and to produce such vnnaturall
monsters. He commanded Valdemoro to
relate the whole course of that bargaine to
the Ambassador. Valdemoro came to him
and told him; how that this wretch came
vnto him, boasting that hee knew the
meanes how to kill the King. It is not
needfull to lay open that meanes, vnlesse
we should doe like those, who reproouing
superstition and inchantments, doe learne
the rules and charmes thereof. Hee confest
that hee had listned to that proposition,
but his conscience representing vnto
him the heinousnesse of such an attempt,
hee had imparted the matter to a Iesuit,

who did very much diuert him from such
a cursed practise, and had exhorted him to
aduertise the Ambassador thereof, to the
end they might haue a care of the safety
of the Kings person.
                  
                     De Barraut aduertised his Maiesty hereof.
Hee often spake of it, hee praised the
wisedom of his Ambassador, the integrity
of the Duke of Lerma, and the duty
which the Iesuit had done to truth and to
his owne conscience. The praise had been
more perfect, and the merit more plaine
and euident for the Spaniards, if they had
punished this traytor. Hee ought not to
haue come forth of Spaine vnchastised.
All Kings are brothers, and all kingdoms
interessed in these attempts. This act of
Iustice was reserued for De Verdun first
President of Languedoc, to annex it to
the other great examples which he hath
shewed in that Prouince.
                  This wretch comming to Tholouse,
was vpon the Ambassadors aduertisment

apprehended. From prison he was sent to
execution, and his fellow to the gallies.
                  Now to continue the discourse of this
generous contempt of death, it is certaine,
that this great confidence which this
Prince chiefly had in the protection of
God, then in his owne conscience, which
did not enforce him to feare his enemies,
nor to distrust his owne subiects, did much
hasten the storme which will now presently
fall vpon him. If he had erected in
France as many Trophies and Monuments
of the seuerity of his iustice, as
wonders of his clemency, attempts would
not haue beene so freely framed in weake
spirits. The Lybian Lions do not come
neere those citties on whose walles their
spoiles are hung, Woolues flie from the
sound of those drummes that are made of
their skinnes.
                  It is not long since, that it pleased him to
make a large discourse vnto mee of the
dangers, which by the singuler prouidence

of God hee had escaped, saying, That his
pleasure was to haue them remembred in his
History, euen as his heart did retaine the acknowledgment
of them, and vpon his relation
of his discontent, for that his Court of
Parliament at Tours had condemned a
man to dye, who for to escape from his
enemies had promised to kill him, his
heart neuer consenting to his mouth; I
told him, that those who were to administer
Iustice, could not vse too much seuerity for the
preseruation of his person, that so many heads
depended on his head, so many liues on his life,
that not onely consents, but thoughts, not onely
thoughts, but dreames to attempt against a
Princes life, were punishable, and had euer
beene punished.
                  
                  Hee continued his discourse, how that
if he had sent that mad fellow to his court
of Parliament, who incountred him on
the new bridge, and who saying, That hee
was descended from the first King of France,
demanded to haue the Crowne restored vnto

him, he did not doubt but that they would
haue put him to death for which hee
should haue been very sorry, because they
should haue punished a poore Ideot, who
to the first questiō that the President Ianin
asked him concerning his birth and quallities,
replied, that he could extract himselfe
from Pharamond. He was knowne (quoth
the King) to be so farre beside himselfe, and
so troubled with melancholy, as I being one day
at the Bastill, and he espying me a farre off, cried
out aloud, deliuer me my kingdome. I told
him madnesse did not excuse attempts of
that nature, how Caboche, for drawing
his sword vpon King Henry the second
like a mad man without effect and violence
was condemned to dye. That another
mad-man had vndergon the like punishment
who assayled Ferdinand King
of Arragon the yeare. 1492. and gaue
him a wound with a sword from the eare
downe to the neck, who beeing imprisoned
and tormented with all kind of tortures,

confessed nothing but that the diuell
had willed him so to doe, promising
to giue him Ferdinands Crowne. This
folly did not excuse him. They did cut
off his feete and his hands, they pluckt
out his eyes foorth of his head, hee was
torne in peeces with burning tongues,
his body was consumed with a lingring
fire, and hee gaue vp the ghost droppe by
drop. And albeit the saying is that mad
men are sufficiently tormented by their
owne madnesse, and that it is not lawfull
to augment the affliction of the afflicted,
yet neuer-the-lesse, there is nothing which
doth sooner make those who are out of
their wits to become temperate then the
punishment which is inflicted vppon
them.
                  The King did interrupt my speech with
this word, truely royall, and truely his
owne, Mercy pardoneth those who haue not
deserued it, and the iuster that wrath is,
the more commendable is mercy.
                  
                  
                     
This good Prince did still endeuour to
sweeten the sharpnesse and rigour of the
commandements of his lawes: and as Numa
would haue sooner appeased Iupiter
with heads of Garlick then of men, so hee
had rather like Alexander, execute the rigor
of his vow on the Asse, then on his
keeper.
                  This free and generous minde disdayning
all these feares and cautions, and
contemning all coniurements to haue respect
to his owne safety, would not for
feare of the future, abate any thing of the
time present, and beeing satisfied with the
mishap which euery day produceth without
adding by preuention that of to morrow,
said to the Queene, That hee was resolued
to goe into the Citty, and going forward
to the staires before the Queenes chamber,
hee asked, if his Caroche were beneath.
The villaine which had vndertaken this
execrable deed heard these words, and
grumbled betwixt his teeth, Thou art

mine, thou art vndone.
                  
                  Before he departed, he bad the Queene
farewell three seuerall times and kissed
her, as if his heart had testified his greefe
to bee separated and diuided from hers,
the Marshal of la Chastres wife perceiuing
these imbracements told him, that hee beganne
euery day to loue the Queene better and
better, that his good seruants did receiue great
content thereby, and did dayly hope for more,
but shee hoped hee did not flatter her. At his
going forth he met with the Dutch esse of
Mercure who was the last Princesse that euer
he spake to.
                  In comming down the lesser stayres he
commanded the Marshal Bois Dauphin to
make him-selfe readie to goe along and
beeing come downe into the Court hee
spake to the Duke of Anjou and shewed
him Bassompier, asking him, if hee knew
him. Hee tooke his Caroch about three
quarters of an houre past three, hee satte
in the cheefe place thereof, and hauing

asked the Duke Espernon if he had any businesse
in the towne, he placed him on his
right hand. In the boote of the same side,
was the Marshall Lauardin, and de Roquelaure.
The Duke of Mombason and the
Marquis de la Force sate in the fore-part
of the Caroche with Liancour his chiefe
Quiery, and the Marquis of Mirebeau.
                  The Coach-man intreated the Quirie
whose turne was then to waite, to aske
the King whether hee went, and hee answered,
Carry mee from this house. Beeing
vnder the Arche of the first gate, hee caused
his Caroche to bee opened on euery
side; when hee came as farre as the Hostell
of Longueuill, hee sent backe all those
which followed. They asked him once
againe whether the Caroche should goe,
hee said, to the Tirouer Crosse and when he
was there hee said. Let vs goe to S. Innocents
Church-yard. Hee went to the Arcenall
to acquaint the Duke of Suylli
with the great content hee receaued by

                     D'Escures iourney, and how that those
doubts which hee had made to him were
cleered.
                  And now doth mine ignorance and
humility cause mee to shutte mine eyes
against those radiant beames of that soueraigne
power which disposeth of second
causes as he pleaseth. My thoughts doe
loose themselues in the gulphes of this ineuitable
power called Destiny, which this
Prince accounted for an ordinance of
God, drawne to a necessity, and whereof
he made admirable obseruations. About
three yeares since, a gentleman, one of his
hunts-men, hauing waited out his quarter,
craued leaue of him to go home, intē
                     ding
to depart the same day. His Maiesty
hauing giuen him leaue, hee vnderstanding
that the King would hunt, staied his
iourney, and said, that he had a great desire
to see the Stag. He came, and saw it sonie,
as being strickē into the belly with on
of the braūcklers, he fell down dead in the

place. You may see (quoth the King, returning
from hunting) what destinies is, hee
craued leaue of mee to depart, and I granted
it, and hauing no businesse to stay him he would
needes seeke his owne death by hunting. His
houre was come, hee was not able to bold it
backe a minute, there-vpon he made a large
discourse of such like obseruations.
                  But when I consider how he did labour
to haue all things meete together with
this accursed moment, how that he goeth
abroade with some vn-willingnesse of
minde, which is euer the secret Oracle of
good or euill aduentures; how that the
Queene, to diuert him from going into
the Citty, did the same as Calphurnia
did to keepe Caesar from going to the Senate
house; how that hee made hast to
gette him forth of the Lovuere; how that
he would not suffer his Garde to follow
him; how hee sent away the Captaine
thereof to the Pallace; how the
Lieutenant is very sicke, the Enseigne

gone to visit the first President de Harlay;
how that hee causeth his Caroche to bee
opened on euery side, putteth of his cloke
the better to lay open his side, how the
footmen take an other way and leaue the
Caroch; how the street is stopped vp with
a Cart, I am enforced to say, that destiny
coupleth together all things, to the same
end, to make them fall out euen as it pleaseth,
that all things seeme to fauour this
damnable enterprize, that misfortune
blindeth those whom she will ouer-throw,
and vseth Pittacus his stratagem, who
fighting a combate with Phrinon, did so
cunningly intangle him in the snares
which he had hidden in his buckler, as being
fast he easily slew him.
                  The force of man was weake and fearfull
to attempt on the person of this
Prince: Hell spewed foorth the author
from hir bottomlesse pitte. This wretch
had lead a bad life, and among those who
knew him, was accounted a cast-away,

and a desperate fellow. He had a long
time followed a sute in law about a succession,
and hauing lost it, misery enforced
his father and mother to begge, necessary
pouerty made his resolution voluntary:
He threw himselfe into the monastery of
the Fueillants, and was throwne out again
by reason of the weaknesse of his braine.
Those who lodged him told me since
that he was wholy subuerted, and that the
word Huguenot would turne his folly into
madnesse. His mind was still amazed,
wauering and superstitious, susceptible of
all impressions, and euer resenting the
deprauation of his humors. He that walketh
madde a mile neuer cometh home
wise. The more his folly was aparent the
more he thought it was hidden, and the
duller he was the more he presumed of
wisdome, and not accounting himselfe
to be sick, he did not care for health, Afterwards
he returned home into his owne
contry where he continued a whole yeare

in prisō for a murther. He became a knaue
in the Pallace, a foole in the cloyster, and
desperate in prison, in which place he had
vizions and fancies, whereon, and vpon
the false reports which he went vp and
downe gathering against the Kings iustest
and sincerest actions, or vpon those false
impressions which were giuen him, and
which he greedily receiued, he framed
this execrable and damnable resolution
to kill him. His courage would not
suffer him to execute it so sodainly as
he had resolued it: he did three whole
yeares nourish the vipers of his thoughts
in his bosome; he was affraid of it, & confessed,
that at the very first motion his hair
stood vpright, that sweat dropped downe
from his fore-head, and a shaking ouer all
his members. In this fury he made some
iourneies from Angoulesme to Paris, the
last was in the Easter-hollidayes, intending
to execute his purpose, but he would
first haue the Qu. to be crowned, because

(as he said) hee would not haue her to bee
depriued of so iust and well-deserued an
honor. If hee had stayed but one day longer,
want would haue enforced him to
haue gone home againe; for hee had but
three quartescus left of all his money.
                  Resoluing then not to let this cursed
day slip without executing his cruell designe;
he did drinke more freely then hee
was wont, and continued a long time at
the Louure, sitting on the stones at the
gate, where the Laqueis attend for their
Maisters. Hee thought to haue giuen the
blowe betwixt the two gates: the place
where hee stood gaue him some aduantage,
but hee found the Duke Espernon to
sitte in that place where hee thought the
King would haue beene, and cutting a
shorter way, hee tarried for him at one of
the little shops which are towards the Innocents
Church-yard, in the street called
La Ferronnerie. In that street are many
small houses and shopps which ioyne to

the wall of the Innocents Church-yarde.
King Henry the second beeing at Compeigne
the yeare 1554. the 14. of May, a
fatall marke of the first yeare, and last day
of this great Princes life, considering that
this street was a crosse way in the City of
Paris, and the Kings ordinary passage
from the castle of Louuer to their house of
Tournelles, and that the shoppes made it
more narrow and vneasie, hee commanded
that they should bee taken downe.
The Edict was allowed in Parliament,
and the execution neglected to our woe.
This wretch sweating and in a heat, glides
along by these shoppes.
                  At the entry into the street, the King
saw Montigni in his Caroche, and according
to his vsuall affability, culled vnto
him, Seruant Montigni, Seruant Montigni.
The Caroche entring into this street met
with two carts on the right hand, the one
loaden with wine, the other with hay: and
that was the cause, that it tooke towards

the left hand, staying still and stopping
euery moment. The foot-men were gone
ouer Saint Innocents Church-yard; the
Gentlemen could not come neere the Caroche,
diuers men passed along betwixt
the Caroche and the shoppes; this Tiger
came the same way, his cloke hanging on
the left shoulder, the knife in his hand, and
his hat vppon it to hide it. The Kings sitting
embouldened him. If his face had
not beene from him, I thinke that the reuerence
and maiesty which Gods finger
hath imprinted on the face of Kinges
would haue kept him back. His right
arme was about Duke Espernons necke,
vnto whom he had giuen a paper to read,
his left arme leaned on the Duke Mombasons
shoulder, who turned away his
head because hee would not seeme too curiously
to hearken to that which the King
spake softly: For hee gaue himselfe forward
to speake to the Duke of Espernon,
and the Marshall Lauardin these words.

                     At my returne from the Arcenall, I will shew
you D'Escures his deseigne for the passage of
mine Armie, you will be pleased therewith, and
it hath much contented me.
                  
                  At these words, this fury perceiuing that
the King lay open with all his side, and
that one of the foote-men, who alone
might haue hindred him, tarried behind
to tie his garter, gaue him two stabs with a
knife ouer the wheele, & thought to haue
giuen him more, but the Duke of Mombason
receiued the third on his doublet
sleeue. The first stabbe was betwixt the
second and third ribbe, a fingers bredth
gliding vnder the muskle pectorall, not
hurting the Thorax. The second a little
lower in the middest of the side betwixt
the fifth and sixth ribbe the bredth of two
fingers and past beyond one of the lippets
of the lunges, euen to the very arterie, the
which hee did cut a sunder beneath the
left auricle of the hart. The King feeling
the first hurt, did lift vp his arme,

and gaue more ouerture to the second.
It was perceiued afterwards that the outward
part of his doublet sleeue toward the
hand, was stricken through in two places,
and his shirt in three by reason it was foulded
and this confirmeth the murtherers
speech, who said to diuers, that hee had giuen
three stabbes, but one alone did the deed.
                  
                  At rhe first the King said, I am hurt, but
the second followed so sodainely as hee
could hardly make an end of this word,
It is nothing. For the blood ranne forth of
his mouth like streames. Duke Espernon
presently ariseth to lift him vppe, and besought
him to thinke vppon God. Hee
clasped his hands together and lifted vp
his eyes towards Heauen. His soule bathed
in the blood of the innocent lambe
who was slaine from the beginning of the
world doth gently leaue this body, reeking
with bloud of wounds innocently
receiued.
                  The Caroche stood still: the way was

stopt, the street full of people, all things in
amazement, and the Coach-man so affrighted,
as hee could neither go forward
nor backward. Saint Michell, one of his
ordinary Gentlemen, drew his sword vpon
this wretch, to haue slaine him, the
Duke Espernon cried out, that hee should not
touch him, that it was as much as his life was
worth, and that the King had no harme. Hee
drew the knife forth of his hand. The
Count of Curson strake him on the throat
with the pommell of his sword. La Pierre,
one of the exempt Captains of the guards,
seazed on him, and deliuered him into the
hands of the footmen, who committed
him to Montigni. De Liancour came forthwith
out of the Caroche, and went to the
towne-house to take order for that which
belonged to his charge. Others went to
looke to the safety of my Lord the Dauphin.
The Baron of Courtomer by a letter
written by his owne hand, hath assured
mee, that at the same instant, and in the

same streete, the Marquis of la Force requested
him to goe to the Arcenall to aduertize
the Duke of Suilly of that accident,
that going thitherwards he met with
eight or ten men on foote, and two on
horse-back, who saying to them-selues
with blasphemies; Hee must dye, went forward
toward this Tyger to assaile him:
that he went before them with his drawne
sword, and crossing their weapons, told
them that the King was well, and had
commanded that no man should hurt
him. The first President beeing aduertised
hereof, sent his sonne the Count of Beaumont
vnto him, to demand whether hee
could tell what maner of men they were,
hee answered that they were lost in the
throng, and that in such a matter hee
ought not to propound any incertainty.
                  This lamentable and perfidious stab was
giuen so sodainly as no man perceiued it,
the confusion was so great, that if this
monster had thrown away his knife from

him, he would not haue beene knowne in
that amazement, for it was common: nor
by the palenesse of his countenance, for
he confessed, that he entred the Kings body
as easily as into a bottle of hay. At that
instant the diuell tooke from him all sorts
of apprehensions, of respect, and iudgement.
                  After that the Caroche was turned
back, the King was carried to the Louure.
At the entring into the Court, they called
for wine and Chyrurgians, but there was
no need either of the one or other. The
report of the hurt was already brought
thither, but his death was not knowne till
the comming of the Caroch, out of which
they drew the dead King. He was carried
and layd vppon the bed of the little Cabinet
by the Duke of Mombason, de
Vitry, the Marquis of Nermonstier, Sully
one of the Squires, and certaine others
whose names I could not learne.
                  
                     Petit his chiefe Phisition told me, that he

gaue not vp the ghost till he was laid vpon
the bed, and that hee hauing said vnto
him, Sir, remember God, say in your heart, Iesus
thou sonne of Dauid haue pitty vpon mee,
he opened his eyes thrice: Another Gentleman
told me the same thing. But it is to
be doubted whether the nature of the hurt
did affoord him so much life, without being
strangled with the bloud. De Vic,
Councellor of State, going vp with the
Chancellor and the other Lords of the
councell, was there present, and tarried
there all the night, shewing by that last
duty, with what affection hee had carried
all the former. The Archbishop of Ambrun
came thither, said the prayers and
suffrages of the Church for his soules
health.
                  It is reported that a Duke of Bourgondy
had like to haue died for feare at the sight
of the nine Worthies which a Magician
shewed him. Greefe had like to haue choked
in the place, those who in the turning

of an hand did see this King of worthies
lye dead.
                  Albeit that I saw his shirt bloudy, his
stomach swelled with the aboundance of
bloud, his fore-head beginning to waxe
yellow, his eyes shut, his mouth open, the
crosse of his order lying vpon it, it seemed
vnto me that it was an illusion, mine imagination
contradicting mine eyes, beeing
not able to figure vnto me that I saw him
dead, who an houre before spake of nothing
but to fight, vanquish, and triumph.
                  I said as other men did, is this that victorious
Prince vnto whom the whole world
hath giuen the title of Great and Inuincible:
who by remoouing himselfe gaue motion
to the whole world, whose deseignes eleuated
& discontents abated mēs courages,
whose menaces affrighted his enemies, &
lawes assured his subiects? This Prince
who susteined Christendom in hir weaknesses,
did comfort it in her afflictions, assured
it in her feares, who by the force of

his wit, by the light of his iudgement, by
the happines of his memory, by the proof
of his experience, and by these three eyes
of prudence, knowledge, foresight, & remembrance,
knew how to doe, and did so well
performe the hardest profession of all others,
which is that of commanding men.
                  This Prince, so constant in affaires, so
watchfull for occasions, so foreseeing in
doubtfull matters, so moderate in prosperous,
so discreet in difficult, who was neuer
daunted in fight, was not troubled in
dangers, & did not giue place to fortune,
who knew what ought to bee feared and
contemned, what was to bee desired and
sought after. This Prince who did reason
to al mē, who would know it in all things,
so ready to diuert euill and aduance good,
enuironed with al kinds of contentments,
with glory and felicity aspiring to great
maters, for the increase of Gods glory, the
reputation of France, determining to reforme
that which was yet in disorder, to

mend those great peeces of workes which
are equal to the proudest buildings, which
haue carried the name of wonders, and
euident workes; and resoluing to cause
learning and knowledge to reflorish in
the vniuersity of Paris, and Piety euery
where, the Great Henry vnto whome the
destinies, merits, and vertues, did promise
the Monarchy of the whole world, dieth
vpon the point of executing his promises.
All the Princes, the Cardinalls, the Prelats
and the Lords of the Court came to see
him vpon the bed of his Cabinet; one kissed
his fore-head, another his hand, diuers
fell downe at his feete, all melted into
teares. The Constable came thither likewise,
and did much augment the sorrow of
that spectacle, for complaining vnto God
that hee had suffered him to liue so long
and had taken away a Prince so necessary
for Christendom, his speech & legs failed
him. Their harts were cleft a sunder with
complaints, their eies melted into teares,

perceiuing those eyes to bee for euer extinct,
which were the delights of all the
Court, whose beames were so ardently
and carefully desired and pursued as diuerse
thought they had lost that day
wherein they had not deserued some
glance thereof.
                  Portrature in times past could not represent
the sorrow of a father for the
sacrifize of his daughter, eloquence
could not expresse the Queenes greefe
for the death of the King her Houseband.
If that bee not the subiect of most
iust teares nature hath none, sorrow findeth
none, reason ordayneth none.
                  But after that eyes had paid such iust
tribute to greefe, and that this Princesse
had spent nine nights without sleeping,
to giue satisfaction to her teares, and to
keepe this mischiefe from spreding forth
any further, shee shewed that God had
reserued her to clame the violence of our
miseries.
                  
                     
By this will wee beginne the History
of hir Regency, and of the King her
Sonnes raigne, where wee shall see how
their Maiesties entertaind these disastrous
newes, and with what greatnesse of courage,
affection and fidelity, they were serued
by the Princes and officers of the
Crowne, Lords of the Councell, Gouernors
of Prouinces, and by the Citty of
Paris, and by all the rest, where matters
haue passed on in such sort, as France
hath had matter to bee amazed in her amazement.
                  These discourses are like peeces forth
of frame, if they bee represented out of
time. All this merits a new volume: The
History of Henry the fourth passeth no
farther then his last gaspe, and where that
endeth, there beginneth that of Lewis the
thirteenth, the most happy sonne of a father,
who was the ornament of ages past,
and the admiration of succeeding times.
                  But it is against reason to put off till

an other time the duties which were rendred
to the greatnesse of his memory, to
the honour of his buriall, to the reuenge of
his death.
                  His History began at his Cradle,
it must end at his hearse. Vpon Friday at
midnight the Kings body being disrobed
of a blacke sattin sute raced, without lace,
was reuested with a white sattin doublet,
and laid vpon the bed of his chamber,
where he was seene, considered, wept for,
and lamented by all the Citty of Paris.
The heate of the season, and the bloud
which was gathered together in his belly
would not permit any longer to defer his
opening. It was done on Satterday about
foure of clocke, in the presence of foureteene
of the kings Phisitians, of whom the
cheefe were, Petit, Milon, de Dorme, Herouan,
foure Phisitians of Paris, eleuen of the
Kings Chirurgians Martel, Pigray, Guillemeau,
Regnaude, &c. They found, him so
healthfull, and all his partes so sound, as

had not this stab beene hee might haue
atayned to a long and happy old age.
They were likewise of opinion, that if he
had beene trrasparent to the view of this
parricide, he could not haue hurt him in a
more deadly place. His bowells were sent
to Saint Denis, by one of the gard, with
sixe soldiers, and buried without any ceremony.
                  The Kings hart was shut vp in an
hart of siluer. La Varenne, gouernor of
Angiers, and Post-master of France, came
to the Queene to put her in minde, that
the Kings intention was, to haue it lye at
la Flesche, where it was first formed; and to
commit the keeping thereof to the Colledge
of Iesuists. At this word, of the kings
hart, the Queene receiued a new wound
in her own, it being impossible that a wife
should without greefe endure to haue her
husbands hart demanded of her: She answered
that seeing God had done his will,
her desire was to haue the Kings performed,
                     
shee commanded that the same hart
should bee consigned into the hands of
the father Iesuits, to carry it to la Flesche,
and gaue charge of the conduct thereof
to the Duke of Mombason. The Prince
of Conty deliuered it Father Iaquinot,
Rector of the professed house of Saint
Lewis: Father Cotton gaue thankes in
the name of the whole company. De
Vitry caused foure and twenty Archers to
march neere to the Caroche, and twelue
torches, euen to their Church wherein
this precious pawne remained certaine
dayes. From thence it was carried well accompanied,
and receiued with great
pompe and magnificence into the towne
of la Flesche, by La Varenne, his sonne the
Baron of Saint Susanne, all the orders of
the Citty, and after sundry honours, discourses
and funerall Poems, it was set
down in the church of the Iesuits colledge
                  The Kings body being enbalmed
was laid in a coffin of lead, couered

with a biere of wood, vpon which was
spred a great cloath of golde, and the
Herse ouer that; two Altars vpon each
side, where eighteene daies together masses
were said in the morning, and the suffrages
at all houres, day and night, without
intermission.
                  Prayers were made for him in all the
Churches of France. Those whose doctrine
suppose it to be vnprofitable for the
dead, were not insensible of the publicke
griefe of this accident, for, iudging it to be
an effect of Gods anger vpon France, did
ordaine thorow all the Prouinces where
they haue Churches, a Generall fast,
whose lawes dispense with no man, and it
is performed with such discipline, as the
bodies endure hunger all the day, and the
soules are fed, either in speaking to God,
or hearing his word.
                  From the Chamber it was carried to the
Presence, where was yeelded to his effigie,
at dinner and supper times, the seruices

due to the originall when it was liuing.
Herevpon the Queene was councelled
to enterre King Henry the third, King of
France and Poland, and to yeeld vnto
him those duties which the liuing owe to
the dead, and which for sundry great respects
had not beene performed in their
due time. The Duke of Espernon, Bellegard
maister of the horse, were commanded
to go to Compeigne, to cause the coffin
to bee brought to S. Denis. The discourse
of his funerall shall be seene in the
end of his history. Wee must not make a
story heere, but onely to consider, how
that France in eight dayes space, hath
seene two Kings interred, vniustly and
perfidiously slaine by two stabbes of a
knife.
                  Eight dayes after, the funerall pompe
was solemnized. The enterments of the
French Kings, since Charles the eight, haue
euer held one selfe same order, hee that
seeth the picture of the one, beholdeth

that of all the rest, there is nothing to bee
added therevnto, but the noting of times
and places, and mens names. If in it there
hath beene any alteration at all, it is onely
in more or lesse sumptuousnesse. But as
this great Prince did in so many sorts surpasse
his predecessors, the Queene likewise
would haue his obsequies in expence
and magnificence, to out-goe all that had
beene before.
                  The effigie hauing remained tenne or
twelue dayes in the presence, for the maner
is not to let it stay there any longer,
was taken thence, the body laide vppon
Tressels, and the Chamber hung with
black. The King clothed with a royall
mantle of purple, came thither with my
Lords his bretheren, the Princes of his
bloud, and the Lords of the Court, and besprinckled
it with holy-water. The Soueraigne
companies performed the same ceremony
on other dayes.
                  The Chancelor with the aduice of the

Councell decreed that in the proclamation
he should be surnamed, Henry the great,
Incomparable in Magnanimity and Clemency.
Titles which he had deserued, as well for
the quallity of his person, as for the fauours
of his fortunes, and the merits of
his vertues.
                  That great extent of persons and honors,
which reached from the gate of Paris
to that of Saint Denis, may as well be
comprehended by imagination as discourse,
if we will figure to our selues great
numbers of burning torches, fiue hundred
poore persons, diuers lame soldiers
clad in black, and if we adde thervnto all
the Clergie of Paris, for all Congregations
regular and secular went along the Chartreux
& the Celestins exepted. The Iesuits
presented themselues to go with it. All the
Soueraigne companies, the ordinary Iustice
of Paris, all the faculties of the vniuersity.
The houshould, the Milicia, and
the Kings Stable. All this was the conuoy.
                  
                     
That which followeth, was ordained
for the pompe. The Chariot of armes
drawne with sixe horse, wherein lay the
Kings body. His effigie enuironed with
the Court of Parliament in scarlet gowns,
the Canopy carried ouer it by the Prouost
of Marchants and Sheriffes of the citty
of Paris. The hand of Iustice, the Scepter,
and Crowne. The Kings Armor was carried,
the Sword sheathed, the Helme crested
with the Mantelet, the coate Armor,
Shield, Gantlet, Spurres, the Pennons,
Banners and Ensignes of all the companies
cresped with black. The horse of honor,
twelue horses mounted by twelue
Pages. The Bishops, Archbishops, Ambassadors
and Cardinalls.
                  After followed the mourning, wherein
were my Lord the Prince of Conty, my
Lord the Count of Soyssons, the Lords of
Guise, Ioinuille, Elbaeuf, the Dukes of Espernon,
and Mombason, the Knights of
the order, and diuerse Lords. At other

times the Kings Children did mourne.
The body of Clotaire was conducted by
his foure Children from Compeigne to
Soisons, Lewis the grosse, yeelded that duty
to Phillip the first, his brother. Lewis the 8.
to Phillip Augustus, Phillip the 3. to Lewis
9. Charles the 5. to Iohn. Charles Duke of
Orleance, and Henry Duke of Aniou,
mourned at the obsequies of Henry the second
their father.
                  The Ceremonies which vpon such occasions
ought to be certaine, are altred according
to the times. That which seemeth
to be fit in one season, is not so at another.
Because saith Du Tillet, that they haue not
any certainty. At other times the effigie
was laid vpon the coffin, to mooue the
people to honour the body which was
within it, and for to shew that the King
dyeth not; and that the administration of
Iustice, the first and principall office of
a King ceaseth not, the court of Parliament
hath euer enuironed it. At the Funerall

of King Francis the first it was diuided
from the coffin, and from that seperation
proceedeth the disputation concerning
the place which the Bishop of Paris is to
hold in that Ceremony,
                  On Tuesday the 29. of Iune, the Coffin
was conducted to our Ladies Church, and
placed vnder the burning Chappell. The
Princes of the bloud, and the Lords that
mourned sate downe on the right side of
the Quier, the court of Parlament placed
it selfe on the left. On wednesday after the
seruice, the funerall oration being pronounced
by the Bishop of Ayre, and dinner
ended, it was conducted in the same
order to Saint Denis. Beyond the suburbe
the rankes were broken, those that were
on foot mounted their horses and Caroches,
this graue and goodly order vanished.
Montespan, Vitry, and Pralin, Captains
of the Guards, did not leaue the chariot of
armes, hauing declared that their charge
obliged them to serue the body and not
the effigie.
                  
                     
The Monks of Saint Denis came to receiue
it at the hanging crosse, they made
some doubt that the King was buried, and
that the body was not in the coffin, the
great and excessiue heat not permitting to
keepe him any longer in his Chamber,
where it was soone knowne that he had
not beene well enbalmed. Vitry assured
them that it was the kings very body, that
there was no deceit, and that the greatest
Kings are made of none other mettall
then the meanest men on earth.
                  The Ceremony needed no borrowed
weepers, nor hired teares. Euery one did
affoord them with aboundance, those
which had not their eyes ful of teares, had
their hearts voyd of pitty and commiseration.
Sorrowes were strangely redoubled
and brake forth into great cryes, as
he was layd into the graue with the honours
that were done vnto it. When the
Count Saint Paul, executing in that action
the office of great maister, told them

that the King was dead, and when after
him the Heralds thrice proclaimed ouer
the graue The King is dead, al harts followed
him in thought and many in desire.
Teares, which constancy and grauity
held in, that they might not appeare, were
no lesse bitter then those which common
greife did cast forth to be seene. If any one
had strength to resist teares, it was wanting
to fight with sorrow.
                  To tell now what the lamentation of
Paris was, is to goe about to perswade a
matter incredible to him that hath not
seene it; in all places fountaines of teares
were discerned to flow forth; in all places
cries & gronings of the people wer heard▪
they seemed to be knockt downe, so greatly
had the violence of sorrow danted and
amazed them. If it be demanded from
whence this extreame greefe came, the
answere is ready From loue, From whence
this loue? from the Kings goodnesse. Paris
beareth the immortall proofs of his great

and immense goodnesse. Who did more
offend him then Paris? vnto whom hath
hee shewed more loue then to Paris? Forgetting
all his riots and debauches, hee
taketh Paris, sets it at liberty, dealeth by
those like a Father, who before his entrance
called him Tyrant. Since then hee
hath still laboured to restore her ruines,
and to cause it to forget both the remembrance
and feeling thereof, to the end it
might say, that it had beene plunged in a
gulphe of miseries, onely to come forth thereof
more happy and more mighty.
                  
                  Paris did neuer more flourish then
vnder his reigne, hauing in that Cittie
builded other Citties to embellish and inritch
it. If I were assured (said hee) of as
much time as would suffice mee for two
great peeces of worke, I would build the
Louvre, and enclose the Suburbes of Paris
with walles, and then I would vaunt to
haue built the goodliest House, and the greatest
Citty in the world.
                  
                  
                     
All other Citties, in comparison of Paris,
seemed vnto him but Pyes-nests, and
held for a fable whatsoeuer was spoken
of Quinzey, grand Cairo, Cambalu, and
Cassagale.
                  Hee tooke a pride in shewing to strangers
the wealth, and the publick and particuler
commodities of this abridgement
of the world, and tooke no delight in
new inuentions to charge it. Goodly and
Royally ingenious was the answer which
hee made to the Prouost of Marchants
and Sheriffes of Parts, who besought him
to allow of some small taxe vppon the
conduit-pipes of the Citty, to help them
to beare the charge of feasts and presents
which they were to make to the fortie
deputies of the Suisses and their traine.
Hee heard them concerning this new
inuention, and then answered. Finde
out some other matter, it belongeth onely to
IESVS CHRIST to turne water into
wine.
                  
                  
                     
When men spake of the insolencies and
ryots of that Citty during the troubles,
he had rather to lay the fault on those that
ledde them, then to brand his fore-head
with the shame of her sedition and disobedience.
The people of Paris (said hee) is
good, it goeth as it is ledde. Mischiefe commeth
from those that goe before, and not from
their simplicity which follow after, and grow
bad by infection.
                  
                  These torrents of teares did ouer-flow
the whole countrey, It was pitty to behold
thorow all the Prouinces of France the
poore countrey-people to be gathered together
in troopes on the high wayes all
amazed, their armes folded, to learne of
those that passed by this disastrous newes,
and when that they were assured thereof,
a man might see them to scatter themselues
like sheepe without a shepheard,
not simply weeping, but crying out and
roaring as mad-men about the fields.
This sorrow sprang from this Princes

care to haue them liue in peace.
                  He was extreamely displeased with the
exactions which the poore people endured
by vsury and petti-fogging by law;
Hee was not insensible of their miseries:
Hee did not beare them as the high Preist
did the names of the twelue Tribes without,
hee had them imprinted in the bottom
of his heart, with a wonderfull discontent
for that the necessity of his affaires
would not permit to ease them; and
considering on a time that the taxes were
excessiue in sondry places of the kingdome
hee said, my people are made to pay a
double taxe, one to Mee and another to my
Officers. The second makes the first insupportable,
for the expences of the officers amount
to more then the taxe; It is a hard matter
to keepe my selfe vnrobd, and almost impossible
but that my people should be so: When
hee rode about the country, hee would
stay to speake to the people, to question
with those that passed by, whence they

came, whether they went, what commodities
they carried, what the price of euery
thing was, with other particularities;
and obseruing that it seemed vnto
diuers, that this popular facility did
offend his Kingly grauity, he said, The
Kings my predecessors held it dishonor to know
the worth of a Teston, but as for me, I would
I knew the value of a farthing, and with how
much labour these poore people vse to get it; to
the end they might not be charged aboue their
ability.
                  
                  The great numbers of Orations and
Funerall Poems which were made in
sundry places vpon his death, are so many
proofes how deare this Princes life was,
and his losse lamentable to the whole
world.
                  The Vniuersity of Paris hath shewed
it selfe to be the Nurse of gallant
wits, the Queene of Europes Athens. The
Schooles and Academies of those of the
Religion haue produced diuers goodly

and excellent writings in sundry Languages
vppon the same subiect: learned
men of forraine Countries haue
not beene silent in this generall afliction.
                  As this great Kings actions haue euer
beene more admired then followed,
more followed then equalled: euen so
haue we seene discourses therevppon,
which can neither be surmounted nor
imitated.
                  If passion did not carry away matters
with the selfe same hatred that it beareth
to the places and persons from whence
they come, it would allow of that which
is publikely rehearsed in a cōmon wealth
which hath not breathed but vnder this
Princes protection, deserueth to be reckoned
among the rarest and excellentest
peeces. But his triumph needeth not
our lawrels, his memory contemneth
our marbles, his merits surpasse our
discourses, his happinesse derideth
our Complaints, and his thoughtes

are not ours. The report of this death
was forth-with spred ouer all the world,
and did out-goe the accident in sundry
places.
                  This is not the first time that these
terrible blowes haue beene sooner published
then felt. Diuerse Kings of Christendome
entertained these newes with
sorrow, all with amazement, hauing but
too much subiect to deplore their misery,
whom they accounted so happy. It hath
beene a stratagem of nature, to bring
forth men incapable of reason, for if they
had any they would neuer accept the entrance
into this world. If the soules of
great Princes knew their fortunes and
dangers, and lastly the violent deaths
wherevnto their bodies are subiect, they
would neuer animate them. If they had
any choyce, they would sooner enter
into those of shepheards; to bee if not
more happy, at least more contented.
                  
                     
The King of England had the first newes
thereof beeing on hunting. His feeling
was such, as hee presently dispatcht messengers
to his Councell at London, and
maintained that words were not capaple
to expresse his griefe, adding this verse in
Latin, which saith, That light griefes speake,
and great ones are dumbe. Hee renued the
Edicts against the Catholicks, and fearing
least the ceremony of the declaration of
the Prince of Wales might bee disturbed
by some sinister accident, he commanded
them not to come within ten miles of the
assembly, and Priests to depart forth of
the Realme.
                  Before then, hee had sent the King
word by De Vitry, that hee desired to
oblige himselfe to him by a reciprocall
and solemne oath, that the children of
him that should first dye, should remaine
in the suruiuers protection, who should
take vpon him the defence of them and
their states towards all men, and against

all men, hee remembred it, did make a
new oath to keepe his word, and to employ
all his meanes to reuenge the death
of so good a brother, and so great a
King.
                  All the feelings of Princes were but
shadowes compared to the sorrow and
complaints of the Duke of Sauoy: Hee
lost both his rest and dyet, and held that
for a piercing and sensible offence which
the Spanish Ambassador said vnto him:
That of a certaine, God did loue the house of
Sauoy; for without this death, the Duke had
beene ruined.
                  
                  The Pope could not sleepe all that
night; hee prayed for the soule of this
great Prince; said that this losse was
common to the Church, and to all Christendome;
hee caused certaine yong men
to bee condemned to the Galleys, who
thinking that this death would free
their Prince and Countrey of a redoubted
enemy, had termed that Parricide

their Restorer, and had drunke to his
health.
                  Hee felt to the quick the Queenes sorrow,
and the wrong which was done to
the King, hee did forth-with dispatch
letters to the principall officers of the
kingdome, to coniure them to continue
towards the sonne those proofes of
loue and fidelity which they had rendred
to the father. And though Popes
are sildome present at Funeralls, hee
would needes bee there, and heard the
Funerall Oration pronounced by Iaques
Seguier, who gaue vnto this great
Prince the true titles of his vertues and
merits, stiling him, Protector of the publick
tranquility; The ornament of the Catholick
Church, the Vmpier of Christian Princes,
the Delight of the world. An Elogie
which not satisfying the Popes loue, hee
sent him word, that hee had not sayd
enough.
                  The King of Spaine was sodainly

awaked when this newes was brought
him, & not knowing what it was, demanded,
if the king had denounced warre against
him: he will neuer do it, for he is
slaine, answered the marquis of Velada.
At that word he said, being pressed with
truth and sorrow, That the greatest Captaine
of the world was dead, he remained for a
time speechlesse, and the Queene wept
with warme teares. When he vnderstood
that he which had done the deed was in
prison and aliue, he praised God for it, to
the end that they might be knowne who
had set him a worke, and that slander
might not preuaile ouer the innocent,
                  The Archduke resoluing to giue him
all kind of content, being assured that the
storme should not fal vpon his Countries,
vnlesse he did prouoke him, did not in his
priuat sorrow disemble the publique losse.
That generous Princesse borne of a flower
de luce of France, did more cleerely euaporate
the fier of her thoughtes, and

said, That Christendome had lost the glory
and ornament of Kings.
                  
                  The Kings of Poland, Sueuia and Denmarke,
bewailed his death, cherishing his
Pictures with an eternall loue, and recommending
to their children the admiration
and imitation of the heroick actions of
his life.
                  The Emperors domestick discontents
did not keepe back this sorrow from entring
into his solitude, nor himselfe from
considering where-vnto worldly greatnesses
doe tend. The going vp to them
is sharpe and slippery, the top trembling,
the downe-fall fearefull, wee ascend to
them with great difficulty, they cannot be
kept but with feare, and the descent from
them is a Precipice. The Princes of
Germanie sayd, That the burning torche of
Kings was extinct: Hee was lamented
and bewailed by the Suisses, and by the
States of the Netherlands, as a Father by
his Orphane children. The Lords of

Venice, said with teares in their eyes, Our
King is dead.
                  
                  Wee cannot expresse the griefe of other
Countries, which sweetly liued at quiet
vnder the shadow of the victories and
prosperities of this great Prince, and
which were couered vnder his protection,
as the Chicken pursued by the Kite
couereth it selfe vnder the wing of the
damme. The great Turkes account all
Christian Princes but dung, they thinke
nothing to bee worthy to bee equalled
with them. It was wondered that Mahomet
endured the comparison betwixt
himselfe and Mathias Coruin, but as Amurath
and Mahomet haue admired the great
and warlick actions of this Prince, euen
so Acmet their successor hauing notice of
this death, thought that the Columne
which vpheld the Christian Empire was
dead.
                  We haue already heretofore obserued,
how that the report of his death, did in

diuerse places fore-runne the certainty
thereof. D' Arsens Ambassador to the
States told me, that he could produce before
the Queene, hundreds of persons, who affirmed
this report to hee published in Flanders before
the arriuall of the Posts. I haue heard the
Queene say, That her Ieweller had receiued
letters from thence, written at the same time,
whereby hee was entreated to write back whether
it were true that the King was slaine.
The report often-times of these great accidents
are spred abroad among the people
without any certaine Author, and
when wee go about to seeke out the cause,
they are lost among the throng like waues
in a vast sea.
                  Demons and Sorcerers do vndertake to
bring speedy newes from farre. The late
King hath often told the tale of a spirit
belonging to a foot-man of an Earle of
Foix, who perceiuing that his Maister
could not sleepe, beeing troubled with
the incertainty of the successe of a matter

either of some siege or battaile, did on a
sodaine bring him all the particularities
thereof, so as this Prince, without stirring
from his house at Coraze, (where this spirit
is yet to be heard), knew whatsoeuer
was done ouer all Europe. In this manner
did Apollonius Thyaneus, see at Ephesus
how Domitian was slaine at Rome, and
Cajus Cornelius tarrying in Padua was at
the battaile of Pharsalia.
                  This doth not exclude the beleeefe of
the truth of Visions and Reuelations
which God giueth to his seruants, nor of
the care which the Angells haue that are
appointed guardians and defenders of
states, to cause people to know these great
and important motions. The Christians
in Palestine, had notice of the resolution
of releefe which the Christian princes had
promised them vpon the very same day
that the decree was concluded in the coū
                     cell
of Clermont.
                  This is memorable. A secular priest of

Doway, who, for his religious and holy
life, hath merrited the common report to
haue dyed happily, had before his death
three extacies: after the two first he spake
of things, which, because they were not
vnderstood, were not considered; beeing
come againe to himselfe from the third as
from a profound rapture, he cried out,
that they were killing the greatest Monarch of
the Earth. It is obserued that this word
was spoken at the very same time that the
stabbe with the knife was giuen,
                  We must goe on no farther without
astonishment, because that on the very
same fourteenth day of May, which shal
euer be marked with blacke in the Kalenders
of France, a Nunne of the Abbey of
Saint Paul in Picardy, sister to Villers-hodan
Gouernour of Diepe, being not very
wel, was visited in her chamber by hir abbesse,
sister to the Cardinall Sourdy, and
after that they had entertained one an other
with discourses fit for their condition

she cried out without any trouble, or
such agitations and feare proper to Enthousiasts,
Madam, pray vnto God for the
King, for they are killing him, and within
a while after, Alas, he is dead! By conferring
the wordes with the deed, it was
found that all this was done in one hower,
The piety and simplicity of this
Nunne, doth not permit this to be referred
to any other power then that
of God, who causeth his seruants to
see thinges a farre off, as though they
were present.
                  This manner of death, so sodaine, so
smally preuented did amaze the whole
world, euery man thought vpon his conscience,
and diuers Lords of the Court
by putting on mourning habit for this
death, did likewise take vppon them
the resolutions of the contempt of this
life, and said for a while, that which
a great Trompet of the Church said euer,
O life, which hast deceiued so many, Seduced

so many, blinded so many, thou art nothing at
thy beginning, thy light is but a shaddow, thou
art but smoke at thy height, thou art sweet
to fooles, thou art bitter to wise men, who loueth
thee knowes thee not, who knoweth thee
contemnes thee.
                  
                  The great ones who all their life long
runne after the dreames and vapors of
the world, whose thoughtes are wholly
anchored vpon the earth, and their hopes
haue no farther extent then the earth, did
in the picture of this death behold that of
the vanity of their greatnes and ambition,
things so vaine and fraile, as when
they seeme to glister and twinkle like Diamonds,
they vanish from our sight,
and breake them-selues in peeces like
glasse.
                  Their spirits beeing touched with
this death as with an Adamant, should
without ceassing turne towards the
firme and fixed Pole of that trueth,
                  
                     That what-so-euer is vnder Heauen

is nothing but vanity, and that the world passeth
away with his couetousnesse. The report
of this accident was a mighty voyce,
which awaked them, to make them consider,
that the earth is not their dwelling-place,
but the passage to an happier aboad:
that the pleasures, delights, and contentations
of the Pallaces wherein they
dwell in this world, doe oblige them to
take care to bee well lodged in an other,
because it is yrkesome to depart forth of
a faire and goodly house, and to enter for
euer into a foule and lothsome cottage.
                  It resteth now to see how publick Iustice,
being transgressed by this enormous
crime, hath beene satisfied by the vile and
wretched sacrifice of this Parricide. By
and by after this mischiefe, the Queene
sent the President Ianin, Lomenie, Secretary
of State, & de Bullion, Councellor of State,
to the House of Raiz, to examine him,
and to know what would follow this detestable
blow. What hee then told them

was the selfe-same that hee afterwards
spake, and their censure was the same of
all other wise-men, who haue held this
wretch for a melancholick fellow; They
made a shew that the King was not dead,
nor his hurt mortal, supposing with more
ease to draw from him the truth of this
instigation, and that the lesser the mischiefe
was, the easier would bee the confession:
but hee told them, That hee knew
well enough that hee was dead. A while before,
hee had said, That the knife entred so
farre into him, as his fist touched the Kings
doublet.
                  
                  They found certaine Papers about
him, and among others, verses for one
that is to be carried to execution: hee said
that an Apothicary of Angoulesme made
them, who had shewed it him to haue his
opinion thereof, because that hee had
vsed to make verses. I noted that hee had
written it with passion and attention, as
if hee did meane to make vse of it him-selfe,

for the words which he did set down
for the last violent leaps of a soule in that
taking, were written more curiously,
and in different letters from the other, and
because he said that he had euer bin desirous
to tell the King that hee ought to make warre
vpon those of the Religion, they askt him,
who had giuen him that counsell; he answered,
that they were not to know it, and that hee
would tel it to his Confessor. This I haue seen
in the originall. I saw him within a while
after in the Hostell of Raiz, where telling
mee that hee had beene a Fueillan, and that
hee was expulsed from that company for
composing writings concerning certaine
visions and meditations vppon Gods iudgments.
                  
                  I then perceiued that melancholy had
troubled his spirits with her fumes, had
made him capable of diabolicall suggestions
and impressions, that torture
would sooner make trial of his obstinacie,
then enforce his conscience.
                  
                     
Hee had imprinted in his imagination
a beleefe cleane contrary to the Kings piety
and Iustice. He had in times before
beene called in question for a murther,
and Sanguin, Councellor in the court of
Parliament, had drawne his processe.
Thervpon, an other councellor told him,
that it had bin good for him & all France that
he had beene punished for it, for then he should
not haue slaine the Lords anointed and the
most Christian King. He answered. It is a
Question to know whether he were the most
Christian king. From the time that this
cursed resolution was framed in his mind
he did (like the viper) conuert into poison
what-soeuer he heard to be well spoken
of this Prince.
                  Many, hauing iudiciously considered
his manners and motions, haue thought
that those visions which had so much trobled
him in his sleepe and waking, the interior
voyces which affrighted him day
and night, and a number of other violent

impulsions were manifest tokens of the
obsession of the Diuell. A fellow that often
lay with him said, That a spirit did awake
and torment him in the night, and when
he was askt who it was, he answered, It
is mine Vncle which craueth some ease of his
paines.
                  
                  He had besides his disposition to such
fooleries, a proud and furious conceit of
witt aboue all other men, an arrogant presumption
to haue a share in Gods Councells,
to be able to decipher his wills, and
to be chosen to execute them. Therevpon
he did brutishly declaime against higher
powers, and said, that it was necessary they
should be chastised. From this damnable
Thesis, That it was lawfull to kill a Tyrant,
he went on to this false hypothesis, that the
King was worse, and his chiefe tyrany was,
for that he would not make war vpon the
Huguenots, which is as much to say, as,
because he did not kill them, to make
them to beleeue, and did not set his kingdome

on fier, to clense it. It is certaine
that in this deluge of wordes, and among
so many slanderous speeches, which he
vttered, Truth, nor his owne Conscience
would not permit him to call the King a
Tyrant. Whatsoeuer he spake against the
life of this Prince was inspired into his
soule, by the same councell that had
practised his death, He that did the first
murther told the first lye.
                  But it was impossible to perswade the
people but that this blow had some other
setter on then the Diuill, and to be certaine
thereof they impatiently desired that this
Schelme (France hath no word horrible enough
to expresse so many abhominations)
might be deliuered ouer to the Parliament,
that in so extraordinary a matter
there was no need to stand scrupulously
vpon all the ordinary formes, that all his
kindred were to be seazed vpon, with all
those whom he had conferred with, and
that forth-with the truth would bee
knowne.
                  
                     
But those high spheres doe not gouerne
their motions by that of the inferior.
                  On Saterday, the xv. of May at night
hee was brought to the Conciergery of
the pallace. The first President du Harley,
the President de Blasmenil, the councellors
Boin and Courtin, did dilligently and exactly
labour to frame his Processe. The
Queene did often-times send the Marquis
of Ancre to acquaint them more confidently
with her intentions, and how desirous
shee was to haue the truth knowne.
Shee sent them word, how that a Butcher
had offered to flea that wretch aliue,
promising, to cause him to hold
out a long time, and to reserue strength
enough in him to endure the execution
after that his skinne should bee flead
off.
                  The Court imputed this proposition
to the zeale of a great Princesse, who
would haue the whole world to know,
that Iustice had omitted nothing for the

reparation of that publike offence, nor
for the discouery of the branches and
springs thereof. It did commend the
affection of a widdow, pierced thorow
with griefe, who pursued the iust reuenge
of her husbands death, and the care of
a charitable mother that feared for the
King her sonne, not thinking, but that
if this blow was deuised for the father,
the like was meant towards the Princes
his children.
                  Hir Maiesty supposing that if this
wretch could bee brought to repent him
of his crime, hee would more freely declare
who had set him on to do it: thought
it fit that hee should be visited by Doctors
and religious persons, who should so dispose
his soule, as it might apprehend eternall
torments rather then temporall.
                  Diuerse particular persons spake to him
in the Conciergery and vnto all of them
he told one tale, how that no man liuing had
concelled or vrged him there vnto.
                  
                  
                     
Hee that should take vpon him to set
downe all his speeches vpon this subiect,
with all the escapes of his fury and madnesse,
might augment this volume with
superfluities: wee must keepe our selues
to his answers before his Iudges, who
haue obserued that (his brutish speeches
against higher powers excepted) in all
other matters hee was ignorant and
blockish.
                  The question was not of knowing who
had committed the mischiefe, but who
had councelled and willed it to bee done,
Seruin, Le Bret, the Kings Aduocates, Duret
the first substitute to the Atturney Generall,
did therein vse whatsoeuer wisedome,
iudgment and sharpnesse of witte
might conceiue. They called before them
all those with whom the offender had
conferred, they examined two Iacobins,
and finding great sincerity and simplicity
in them, sent them away. They vsed a
young Friar with the same gentlenesse, of

whom the offender had askt this question.
Whether a Penetenciary ought to reueale
the confession of one, who should tell him that
hee had beene tempted to kill a King: This
yong Frier, either thorough insufficiency
or amazment, made him no answer. They
deliuered him ouer to his superiors, wishing
them to vse meanes, if, by the forme
of Regular discipline, they could draw
any farther light from him; and because
the Iacobins said, that vppon the same
question they had sent him to father Aubigni
the Iesuist, who was a man much vsed
in the resolutions of cases of conscience,
they sent for him likewise, and examined
him exactly therevpon. Hee told
Seruin in particular that since by the disposing
of his superiours hee had giuen
ouer preaching, to apply him-selfe altogether
to Confessions, God had giuen him
that singular grace, presently to forget
whatsouer had beene told him vnder the
seale of Confession.
                  
                     
The offender answering before the Commissioners,
nothing would euer be drawn
from him, which might giue any knowledge
of those who had councelled or
hartned him to this deed; he would neuer
reueale the setter on, protesting that hee
had not bin induced nor councelled thervnto
by any man, and that in confession
hee had neuer bewrayed his designe, fearing
least it should bee reuealed, and him-selfe
put to death, as well for the will as for
the deed. Hee said that the resolution of
his attempt, which hee termed a temptation,
proceeded from certaine visions
and meditations which hee had had
watching, and because that he had beene
made to beleeue that the Kings Armie
was appointed to march against the
Pope.
                  That a certaine man of Angoulesme
had told him how that the King had said,
That his predecessors had raised vp Popes, &
that it was in his power to hurle them downe:
                     
That a Soldier, speaking of the Kings designes,
said, that hee would serue him, though
against the Pope, beeing not bound to enquire
of the causes or motions of the warre. That
these reports had made him to resolue vpon the
deed, beleeuing; that to make warre vpon the
Pope, was to doe it against God: That the Huguenots
hauing attempted in the Christmas
holy-dayes to kill the Catholicks, the King
had not punished them. That in this opinion he
had beene desirous to speake to the King,
making meanes for that purpose to diuerse
persons, who iudging of his witte by his discourse
had still councelled him to returne home
to his house. That at the beginning of the
yeare hee came to the Louure, offered him-selfe
to speake to the King, and was kept
back by the guardes:
                  
                  
                     That hee had onely once spoken to Father
Aubigni the Iesuit, concerning his Visions
and Meditations, and had shewed him
a broken Knife, where-vpon was engrauen
a Hart and a Crosse, telling him, that hee

thought that the King ought to conuert those
of the Religion to the Catholick Church: That
Aubigni had exhorted him to haue recourse
vnto God, and to make meanes to some great
man to come to speake with the King, and to
vse broths to settle his braine. Aubigni being
heard, and confronted by the offender,
said, that it was all false and counterfeit.
                  
                  All men laboured to know the Author,
and desired to bee inuentors of new torments
to pluck it forth of the vilans bosome,
euery man thought that if they vsed
him gently, they should vse all other men
cruelly. Balbany Inuentor of the new Cesternes,
made offer, and did make an engin
in manner of a butter-churne, or Obeliske
turned vpside down, which he shewed
to Seruin. The body beeing put into it,
slided downe with its owne weight, was
thrust hard together, as the churne shrunk
in, and did sinke downe, in such sort as the
shoulders were fastned to the heeles with
torments slowly cruell, the body notwithstanding

loosing none of it strength, for
in foure houres after it might bee made to
endure the same torment againe.
                  The violentest tortures are not the cruellest,
those who suffer them can not long
endure them, and the extremity of paine
dulleth the sences Those that are most
long and languishing, are most bitter and
sharpe. The court of Parliament thought
it not fit to apply any other torments
then vsuall.
                  But it was a question whether the offender
should be tortured before his condemnation.
The antient manner would
not permit it, for tortures are appli'd but
in two cases, the one before iudgement to
draw forth proofe of the fact, the other
after to know the complices and authors.
It was not needfull to know the truth of
the matter, for the offender confessed it,
and was taken with the manner. They
found a decree, wherby one who had attempted
to poison King Lewis the eleuenth,

was tortured sondry times and
on sondry dayes before his condemnation.
                  Heerevpon the Parlament decreed that
he should be tortured three sondry times
and on three sondry dayes, but because he
endured the first with so great certainty
and continuance of his answers, without
varying or change, and fearing least his
strength being weakned hee would not
haue force enough to endure the execution,
they did not continew the tortures;
they did likewise perceiue, that all the torments
which he had endured, with those
which he was to suffer, were not of force
to alter his speech.
                  
                     La Guesle the Kings Atturney generall,
striuing with his sicknesse, caused
him-selfe to bee carried to the Court of
Parlament to take his conclusions with
the Kings Aduocates, and considering
that so great and horrible a mischeefe,

whose like was not to be found in ages
past, and which brought feare and
scandall to posterity, ought to be punished
with torments extreamely seuere,
he craued, with their consents,
besides the tearing with pincers and
the dismembring of that wretched body,
a new kind of torture by adding to
the burning pincers, molten lead, skalding
oyle, burning pitch, wax, and
brimstone incorporated together. Man
could not inuent a payne more sensible
and pearcing.
                  The Parlaments of France haue neuer
vsed the like, in antient time they
haue beene vsed apart in great executions,
and in most seuere reuenges, but
this Parricide was the first who felt the
mixture of all those ingredients.
                  It was great reason by vnknowne
meanes to seek satisfaction for so vnrecouerable
a losse.
                  The conclusions being taken the people

of Paris did greatly desire to see the execution
of that man, borne for the ruine
and desolation of men, who had slaine
the noblest man liuing, and because they
feared that if his health did impaire, as it
was likely it would, he should endure lesse
then hee ought, the first President besought
the Queene that it might please hir
to make an end of him. Hir Maiesty who
had desired this delay, in hope that time
would giue light to this darknes, referred
the matter to the discretion of the court.
                  The great Chamber, the Tournelle,
& that of the edict, being assembled, they
proceeded to the iudgment of the Indictment:
whatsoeuer had beene done before
the Commissioners being read and noted
the offender was heard. He reserued one
trick of his folly to tell being vpon his
stoole. Being in the Church of viuona beyond
Poitiers, he saw in a vision a Moore
in a triangle. He entreated a painter (who
lay with him) to lend him his pen and Ink

to set it downe in writing. The Painter
gaue him one made in forme of a triangle
and shewed him the picture of a Moore.
His imagination beeing wakened, and
heated with these obiects, obserued them
and tooke them for interpreters of what
he vnder-stood not. His minde, euer
prompt and ready to his hate against the
King, made him thinke that this Moore
was like him, that all the water in the sea
would not wash him cleane, and therevpon
he framed strange Chimeraes. This
was the reuelation which he kept so secret
and misterious as he neuer reuealed it till
at last.
                  His furious speeches against the King
made men beleeue that his mind had
beene pre-occupied with bad impressions
and his wicked and scelerous resolution
strenghened and maintained by the doctrine
to kill Kings. Therefore the Court
in iudging his processe decreed, that the
Colledge of Sorbone should be assembled

to renew their antient decree of the yeare
1413. confirmed in the councell of Constance
the yeare 1415. declaring this opinion
to murther Princes vnder collour of
Tyranny to bee hereticall and impious,
opening a dore to all sorts of disloyaltyes
and rebellions, the foundation of that furious
Anarchy, published in times past in
Bohemia, Germany, Scotland and France
in the times of trouble and confusion,
and reuiued in Spaine in time of peace, after
the death of Phillip the second. This
craueth a large discourse, which belongeth
to the History of the new raigne, wherein
shall be seene how this cursed doctrine,
the cut-throate of Kings hath been detested
and thundred against.
                  The fact being apparent, the offender
conuicted, they had no more to doe but
to ordaine a punishment as great as the
deed was heinous. They consulted whether
they ought to inuent a new. But the
court hauing euer detested punishments

of extreame rigor, they thought that those
who were already inuented were sufficient
to punish the fact; that they ought to borrow
none of strangers, nor leaue their vsuall
custome, considering that it did punish
men of flesh, not of brasse, Christians and
not Turks: and because those who had attempted
against the life of Kings without
effect had beene drawne with foure horse
and torne with pincers, and that heere the
attempt was followed by the execution,
they thought it reason to adde thereunto
(following the conclusions of the Kings
learned councell) lead, wax, oyle and pitch
melted together. Heerevpon there were
some who said that in the ptunishment
of offences men ought not so much to
respect the time past as that to come; that
offenders were not only punished because
they should perish but to keepe others
from perrishing, that punishments were
not so much ordained to put the guilty to
death, as to leaue behind an example and
detestation of the fact: that there were

penalties in the lawes of the Romans
which had neuer beene executed, as that
which permitted creditors to cut in peeces
the bodies of their debtors, that pouring
hot lead into the wounds, made with the
pinsors, it was to be feared that the prisoner
would presently faint and dye, and
that the residue of the punishment would
be ended on a dead body. That therefore
they were of opinion to referre it to the
sight and discretion of the executioner,
whether the ofender had strength enough
to endure the molten lead; if not, to pour
some other liquor which should not haue
the same sense and feeling on the members
of the offender, and yet neuerthelesse
for example should worke the same effect
in the peoples sight.
                  All matters being well considered by
the courts-decree he was declared to be
worthely attainted and conuicted of diuine
and humane treason in the highest
degree, for the most mischeeuous, most

abhominable & most detestable murther,
committed on the person of the King of
most happy and famous memory.
                  And for satisfaction thereof, it condemned
him to make an honorable amends
before the great gate of the Cathedrall
Church of Paris, naked in his shirt, holding
a burning torche in his hand of two
pound weight, and to declare, that wickedly
and treacherously he did kil the King
with two stabs of a knife in the body: from
thence beeing brought to the Greue, vppon
a Scaffold, his pappes, brawnes of
his armes, and calues of his legges, to
bee torne with burning Pincers, his
right-hand holding in it the knife wherewith
hee committed the murther to bee
burnt off with fire of Brimstone, and on
the places where hee shall bee torne with
Pincers, molten lead to bee cast, scalding
oyle, burning pitch and rosin, wax and
brimstone melted together. That done,
his body to bee drawne and dismembred

with foure horse, his members and body
consumed with fire, and scattered in
the wind, his goods confiscate, the
house where hee was borne to bee raced
downe to the ground, his father and mother
to be banished forth of the realme of
France, and his other kinsfolkes enforced
to change their names.
                  The Decree followed word for word the
conclusions of the kings Atturney. All the
differences was in three things which hee
requested, but were not decreed. The first,
that after the tearing with Pincers and the
molten lead, the parracide should be let alone
one houre before he were dismēbred
with horses. The second, that after the razing
of the house where he was borne, salt
should be sowne in that place, in signe of a
perpetuall cursse. The third, that for to abolish
the name of so execrable a murtherer,
and to purge France from such an abhominable
race, his father, mother, bretheren,
sisters, & other kinsfolke bearing

that cursed surname, should for euer be banished
out of the realme of France, and
haue but fifteen dayes allotted them without
further delay, to dispose of their goods
                  The Court considering how that all
offences, of what nature soeuer, did not
extend farther then the persons who committed
them, held back the punishment of
his father and mothers banishment, and
altered it by causing his other kinsfolkes
to change their names.
                  Murther in time past hath bin so odious
& detestable, as the punishment extended
to the ninth generation. I did demand one
day of an Atturney of Suizerland, why treson
was so sildome seene among them? Because
(quoth he) that we vse to punish traitors rigorously,
& we do wholy root out their generation.
It is better that a few houses bee desolate
thē a whole country. They would haue innocent
children to bear their fathers fault,
because that fatherly affectiō was of more
force to hold back an attempt, & to breake
the execution thereof, then the feare

of punishment. Guntran includeth in the
punishment of murtherers, all his kinsfolkes
that were conuicted of the crime.
Seruin on a time told this to the late King,
who accounted this extreame iustice, extreame
wrong. His mercy which did euer
striue with his iustice, saw no proportion
of reason, why the innocent should suffer
for the guilty, and said, That the soule of such
a King went a boot-haling in an other world.
                  
                  The abolishment of this accursed name
was most iustly decreed. It hath not appeared
in all this discourse to haue had the
honor to enter into the History; the murtherer
ought to bee satisfied with that
which his cruell and barbarous ambition
made him hope for, thinking by setting
fire, not to one Temple, but to the foure
corners, and in the middest of the kingdome,
to consecrate it to eternity.
                  The name of Manlius was famous in
Rome, one sleight suspition of state, against
the State did wholy deface it. The

names of these detestable wretches neuer
ought to dishonor an Historie; they must
bee smothered in obliuion, and if at any
time we chance to name them, it must be
with curses and execrations. The name of
this parricide must be giuen to the diuell,
wee must giue to this parricide the name
of Diuell.
                  The sentence was executed the same
day it was pronounced, and for to see the
execution, all the Princes, Lords, officers
of the Crowne, and Councellors of state,
came to the Towne-house, and the whole
citty of Paris almost, to the Greue. The
Execution was not thought fit to be done
all in one place, for if his hand had beene
cut off there where hee slew the King, the
place was so narrow as the punishment
would haue beene seene but of a few, and
paine would haue diminished his strength
which was necessary to endure other punishments.
                  Before the prisoner was brought to the

Greue, they gaue him the buskins, which
drew from his mouth the former words,
but farre greater cryes then the first torture.
It appeared by him, that although he
had the charme of silence, so much boasted
of by sorcerers, yet hee had none against
paine. At the first wedging he cried
out, O my God take pitty on my soule, and forgiue
mee this offence, but not if I haue concealed
ought. The second wedging ended the
torment, for a sownding seased on his hart
and within a while after the hang-man on
his body,
                  Diuers saw him in the Chappell, where
hee was assisted by two Doctors of Sorbonne,
Filsac and Gamache, to settle his
conscience and to make it fit and capable
of Gods mercy, and perceiuing certaine
Princesses and other Ladies to come in, he
said that he would speake with the Regester.
It was an excuse to rid them thence
that were there, and to be freed from their
sight, because they should adde no more
shame to his sorrow, for hee told him no

more then hee had done at former times.
                  The Doctors could get no more of him:
but I wonder how hee had the discretion
to tell them that his desire was to haue his
confession reuealed and published, to the
end the whole world might know that hee
had not done that deed by the instigation
of any man. The Doctors made this relation,
and the Regester caused it to bee enroled.
He thought that the people would
haue thanked him for the deed: and when
the Archers that guarded him to executiō
were cōmanded to take heed that no hurt
were done him in the streets, this proud
slaue answered, no body meanes to hurt mee,
but he was amazed when at the gate of the
Concergery, in the Court of the Pallace,
and in all streets, hee heard horrible cries
made against him. He perceiued the people
not onely desirous of the punishment
of his body, but of the destruction of his
soule, all men wishing him in hell, curssing
his birth and life. The Antients in
times past vsed wordes of straunge force

against those who were exposed, and as it
were vowed to execution, and to the publick
hate, Goe wretched soule, goe damned
soule, soule the most desperate vpon earth, let
the earth denie thee succour, refuse thee her
nourishment, and Heauen her light.
                  
                  He made an honorable amends before
our Ladies Church, falling prostrate on
the earth, he kissed the end of the Torch,
and seemed to haue his heart broken in
peeces with repentance. In prison he had
vttered diuerse blasphemous speeches, against
the piety, iustice, mercy, and other
good intents of the King. The Queene
commanded Testu, Knight of the watch,
to looke to him that hee did not so in the
streets; but already, before he came forth
of the Concergery, he had testified an extreame
greefe, for hauing held so bad and
impious opinions of this great King.
                  Being pressed with remorse of his owne
conscience, hee did detest his crime, for
when doctor Filsac would haue giuen him

absolution, & willed him to lift vp his eyes
to heauen, he answered, I will not do so, for
I am vnworthy to looke thereon, and he was
contented that this absolution should be
conuerted to his eternall damnation, if
he had concealed ought of the truth.
                  The people would not giue him the
comfort which they neuer denied to any
in that case. None but the Doctor sung
the suffrages vsuall at the execution of
offenders. All pitty lay in the Hangman
who promised diuers times quickly to
dispatch him, so as he would reueale the
truth. The most tender and compassionate
hearts, had none for him, and diuers
were sorry that he was absolued.
                  I obserued how those that were most
gentle and pittifull, tooke no pitty on this
man, and were so lost in their sorrow, as
notwithstanding they knew that Iesus
Christ dyed for him, yet they thought
they should not transgresse against charity,
to bid the diuell take him. Heerepvon

I cal to mind how the fathers of the councell
of Toledo making a decree to bind
Christians to desire the safety of King Cinthillus
the Goth; and to attempt nothing
against him, added there-vnto these
words. Anathematized and cursed be he who
shall despise our decree, or enterprize to offend
the King, in any sort, or vpon any occasion
what-soeuer: In all Christian congregations
let him be abhorred and condemned by a soueraigne
iudgement, execrable to all Catholikes,
abhominable to the holy angels, and to all those
whom God hath ordained for his ministers,
let him be destroyed in this world and damned
in the next, & without remedy let him be held
for dāned, at the day of euerlasting damnation.
                  
                  Perseuering in this confession he receaued
absolution, on condition to bee
damned if he had not told the truth.
                  He was laid along on the scaffold, horses
are tyed to his hands and feet, his right
hand being striken through with a knife,
was burned in a fier of brimstone. I noted

that it was not the same knife, wherewith
he slew the king, for after the hangman
had shewed it to the people, who by a generall
crie did testifie how they abhorred
that infernall instrument, he threw it to
one of his men, who put it into a bagge.
                  This wretch to behold how his cursed
hand did broile, had the courage to lift vp
his head, and to shake off a sparke of fier
which was in his beard. This vnproffitable
care to saue it being noted, afforded
matter to diuers to praise the custome obserued
in Germany, Suisserland, & diuers
other places, to shaue off and then to burn
all the haire from all parts of the bodies
of those who are conuicted for any notorious
crimes, but the court of Parliament
holds this for superstitious.
                  When they had pinched him with the
pincers he cast forth greeuous cryes:
Then they poured molten lead, scalding
oyle, burning pitch, wax, and brimstone
on those places burnt by the pincers

This paine was the most sensible and percing
of all his punishment, and he shewed
it by the lifting vp of his whole body, the
beating with his leggs, the panting of his
flesh. All this was not sufficient to mooue
the people to pitty; when all was done,
they wished it might beginne againe.
                  I saw a young man in the Hall of the
Towne-house in danger to haue beene
badly dealt with, for a word, which by indiscretion
and not of malice, escaped from
him, when he saw them poure the oyle on
the places burnt with the pincers, he was
amazed and in steed of saying what torment,
he said what cruelty is this, this word
was forthwith taken, and if the fellow had
not slipt a-way in the throng, hearing
them beginne to murmure and threaten
him, hee had beene taught how to call
that cruelty which was pure and perfect
Iustice.
                  If in this torment they vsed any pause,
it was to giue the hangman time to breath

and to the prisoner to feele himself to die,
to the diuines to exhort him to tell the
truth. He said that he knew none other then
what hee had so often before vttered, and
that he should be very foolish, perceauing his
body in that lamentable case to abandon his
soule to a worsse.
                  
                  The horses begunne to draw, but not
fast enough to the people minds, wherevpon
diuers to helpe them beganne to
pluck the ropes. No man thought it
shame to execute the hangmans office on
him who had slaine their father. A horse-courser
perceiuing one of the horses out
of breath alighted from his owne, tooke
off the bridle and saddle, and did put it in
the place of the tired one. This horse held
out better then any of the other, and gaue
such strong pulls to his right thigh as it
forthwith losed all the ioynts.
                  If the people might haue beene let alone
the Hangman should not haue medled
with him, diuers offered themselues, to

make his punishment last longer, and
himselfe to liue many dayes dying, An
Hart pierced through with greefe for
wrong offred to one it loueth, cannot
be satisfied, but by some great testimony
of sorrow and reuenge. A Iew dwelling
in the Citty of Aix in Prouence, was condemned
to be flead aliue before his owne
house for vttering blasphemous speeches
against the Virgin Mary: Certaine gentlemen
would needs bee executioners of so
iust a punishmēt, & with vizards on their
faces, they came vpon the scaffold, made
the hangman to come downe; and flead
the Iew, to saue whom the Sinagog ofred
to Renatus King of Sicille 11000. Florins.
                  The ropes, whereto the body was tyed
betwixt two posts set vp in the midest of
the scaffold, being loosed, it was a long
time haled and pulled foreward and on
euery side: His sides being dasht against
those posts, some ribb was still crackt in
pieces, so as it was thought that without
this and the greeuous infusion of lead,

life, which was strong and vigorous in
him, (and so strong as plucking back at
one time one of his leggs he stayed the
horse which drew it) would haue lasted
and continnued longer,
                  The Executioner peceiuing that all his
members were broken & crushed in peices,
that the horses were tyred, & that he
was in the agony of death, would haue
cut him in foure quarters, but at the first
stroke, the impatient people snatched
him forth of his handes, the lackeis gaue
him a hundred blowes with swords, euery
one gat a peece, and dragd it through the
Citty. A woman was seene with strange
reuenge to set hir nailes and teeth in that
murtherers flesh. The hangman was amazed
when hee saw nothing of him
left but the shirt to finnish the execution,
meaning to haue burnt the body to
ashes. The people drag'd these wretched
relicks vp and down the citty, in the same
manner as the Menades did teare the body
of Orpheus.
                  
                  
                     
At the last, it beeing deuided almost in as
many peeces as there bee streets in Paris,
diuers fiers were made in sundry places,
and chiefly there where the King was
slaine: The Suisses burnt one peece of it
before the Lovure. Little children were
seene in the streets to carry straw & wood
to the fire. There were some who hauing
drawne certaine peeces of that body vp
and downe the citty, gathered them together
on the Greue, and by burning them,
made an end of the execution.
                  It seemed that this so iust and exemplary
punishment would in some sort haue
comforted the publicke griefe; but the satisfaction
was not equall to the offence,
nor the comfort to the sorrow. The
wounds of hearts were opened againe
when men remembred that the causes of
this death were wrapped vp in impenetrable
darknesse, and when many cryed out,
That this murtherer at his death had retained
some after-thought.
                  
                  
                     
The opinion neuerthelesse of those who
thought that this detestable deed had
none other motion, but from his owne
mad and phrantick spirit, is maintained
by great likelyhoods. No stirres haue bin
within or without the realme. Nothing
ensued this mishap. All Princes are greeued
for it, and haue made offer of their
forces to reuenge it. Wee must not thinke
but that the prosperity of this Crowne
hath had great enemies, and that disloyall
minds haue offered themselues to disturbe
the quiet thereof. But if the law of God
did not tye Princes to detest such conspiracies,
that of honor would suffer them to
thinke thereon. The History of Lewis
the eleuenth declareth, what praise all
Europe gaue him for aduertizing his enemy
the Duke of Burgondy of an attempt
against his person.
                  A Prince who seekes to make away his
enemy, otherwise then by iustice, and by
the euent of warre, shewes a minde full of

feare, voyde of courage, and seemes to
feare that which it should contemne. It
was a generous deed of Fabricius, who
deliuered into Pyrrhus hands the fellow
who offered to poyson him: so noble a
deed as Tiberius perceiuing a certaine
Prince of the Celtes to make offer to kill
Ariminius by poison, answered: that Rome
did not vse to be reuenged of hir enemies
secretly and by deceit, but openly and by
Armes.
                  
                  By how much this act did adde glory
and honor to the reputation of the Romans,
by so much more was that of Titus
Flaminius odious, who put Haniball to
death, who was retired to the Court of
Prusias King of Bithinia. When Titus
Liuius notes that, hee considereth the
great alteration of the mindes and courages
of the Romans. The fathers of these
men aduertised Pyrrhus, who entred Italy
in armes, to looke to himselfe, that some
would poyson him, These men (saith he)

                     send an Ambassador to Prusias, to perswade
him to violate the lawes of Hospitallity with
Haniball. Plutarche to take away this
blemish of the Romans reputation, layeth
the blame on Flaminius, and saith,
that the Senate did repute that fact ouer
cruell, and proceeding from couetousnesse
of glory, to the end that in Histories
hee might bee named the cause and
Author of Hannibals death, whome
Rome left aliue, like a Birde whose
plumes and feathers were all falne off
with age.
                  How often hath offer beene made
to our King of certaine and infallible
meanes to dispatch his enemies? How
often hath hee reiected them, as vnworthy
the Religion and magnanimity of
a Christian Prince? abhorring to employ
against them any other thing then
the right of Armes. His valour carryed
him into dangers without feare,

gaue him victories without cruelty, Triumphes
without insolency, and changed
his lance into Lawrel, like that of Amphiaraus.
This braue Alexander did neuer
know how to steale victories, nor to vanquish
by trechery. He would like Marcellus
haue the Sunne alwaies to be witnesse
without reproch of all his triumphes.
                  It is some comfort to vs that this prince
was so well beloued, so much feared of all
Christian princes, as none had a hand in
this damnable deed. But that doth not asswage
our greefe, for the more we consider
how farre the greatnesse and felicity
of this Prince extended, the more is the
remembrance thereof sorrowfull, the
more sensible the losse. But if our soules,
in admiring the immortall reputation
which he hath left behind him, are not
comforted, the light thereof is but smoak,
the glory an illusion, and vertue but a
Chimera.
                  
                  Neuer Prince died more sodainly.

                     Heere is greefe. neuer did any Prince liue
in greater glory, Heere is comfort. He entertains
death in the great designes of his
courage, in the amazement and admiration
of the world; who euer made a more
glorious end? Of what death could he
haue dyed, to haue beene more bewailed,
or to haue lesse sence of death?
                  This sunne of Christendome setting in
the west, doth augment the force of his
beames. He dyeth like a torch, which giueth
greatest light when it is almost extinct,
redoubling his flame and darting
forth his last sparks in the body of his
light. The same wherein he procureth
sighs is so high, so full, and perfect, as if
his death were not so well knowne and
bewailed as it is, Posterity being amazed
at the heroicall actions of his life, should
haue more reason to thinke him immorrall,
then the Oracle had to doubt whether
Lycurgus were a man.
                  Greece being so much obliged to the

labours of Hercules, thought it folly not to
praise him: whosoeuer shall know what
this prince hath done to establish peace in
Europe, will thinke it want of discretion
not to admire the strokes of his sword,
and the excellency of his iudgment. The
Greekes neuer made Triumph wherein
the statue of Hercules was not carried about.
Neuer shall any great enterprise be
attempted but by the example of his great
actions; posterity wil hardly beleeue that
our age hath brought forth a Prince who
before him had none that could be equalled
with him in the greatnesse of his courage,
and will leaue none after him but
will hardly imitate that which he hath
fortunately executed both in warre and
peace.
                  For so much glory purchased with so
much toyle, for so many Trophees erected
with so much glory, for so many
prosperities which did crowne all his deseignes,
his mind was no higher eleuated,

nor his presence more estranged from
his subiects.
                  He did not thinke that his body yeelded
a greater shaddow after, then before his
victories, and he did not cause the heads
of the Collosses of the Gods to be taken
off, to sett on his owne. His maiesty was
kind and gentle to all men, and was terrible
only to proud and rash persons,
speaking often a latin verse, That he knew
how to pardon the humble and to tame the
proud. He had ioyned two things together
which commonly are seperable, Greatnes
and Moderation, and like Theopompus, King
of Sparta, giuing way to whatsoeuer was
to stiffe and boisterous in power absolute,
he made his commandements easie,
and the obedience to them without labour
and murmuring.
                  In a word, we cannot speake ill of a
Prince who hath euer done so well, Truth
shall for euer be victorious, it is immooueable,
and as gold and glasse cannot

bee turned into any other substance, because
the one is the sunnes last workmanship,
and the other that of the fire: Truth
which is as faire as gold, and as cleere as
glasse, may well bee molten in the fire of
slander, may well be broken in peeces by
lyes, but the essence thereof can neuer be
changed. In despight of Hel, the forge of
slander, and of all those hell-hounds who
some and fret against the memory of this
great King, hee shall haue the glory of a
Prince, religious, merciful, valorous, magnanimous,
gentle and wise. What his enemies
shall speake of him in secret, will not
much differ from that which his faithfull
seruants say of him publickly.
                  But if he vnderstand what wee speake
of him, and if hee doe yet entertaine that
curiosity which in times past hee had of
the truth of his History, I am certaine,
that he will not take it well, if we disroabe
him of humaine weaknesses: hee did not
loue flattery, which taketh away moates,

and leaueth spots on the garment, delighting
to be praised of those, who beleeued
those praises which they gaue him, but if
hee obserued any clawing, hee would no
more taste it. Princes pay flattery with
her owne money, Flatterers dissemble the
vices of Princes, and Princes dissemble
the lyes of flatterers.
                  True it is, that two scarres remaine on
the face of his reputation. Hee brought
the one into the world with him, the other
came with him to the Crowne. For the
first. This violent fault of his eyes did manifest,
that his heart was not invulnerable
against the shafts of loue, as it was inuincible
against those of Fortune. Hee would
not abstaine from louing that which was
faire, & of the most imperious passions of
his soule, this did vsurpe the soueraignty;
but, it did neuer make him to neglect the
offices & duties of a great King. Pleasure,
which in many subiects ouerthroweth
wisedom, debaucheth reason, smothercth

valour, did no wrong to his affaires, to his
wisedome, nor to his courage.
                  For the second. Hee was not displeased
to be thought hard to grant excessiue gifts,
neere and very considerate in recompenses,
neuer desirous to preuent demands,
nor to surprise hopes, albeit that hee had a
desire to giue, that he well knew that there
was no money better deserued, then in the
following of his Court and Armies, that
to giue speedily is to giue twice, that long
hopes consume patience, and that it is a
kinde of contentment for a man to come
to his iourneys end before he be weary.
                  Recompences were demanded by so
many men, as not beeing able to giue to
all those who thought they deserued
them, those who still remained discontented,
and gaue him the name of couetous,
were very many: albeit, neuer King of
France, did scatter his bounty into more
hands.
                  To conclude, his vertues were generall,

and his defects perticular, which were not
discerned, but as inuisible and needlesse
Attomes in the large extent of his fame.
Europe neuer bred a greater Prince, and
the Idaeaes of a better King remaine in
heauen, the originall and eternall aboade
of that royall soule, where it enioyeth
most perfect happinesse, and knows what
the vantage is of neuer ceasing to
liue, though it heere ceased
to Reigne.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  
                  A Panegyre:
Containing the Life and
Heroyck deeds of the most
Christian King Henry
the fourth.
                  
                     ALthough the world holds an opinion,
that there is nothing so
excellent and rare, but the like
may be seene againe; that nature is neuer
weary, and that the Phoenix riseth againe
out of hir owne ashes; yet will it be hard
to make vs hope, that Europe can produce
another Henry, whose actions are
admired by all the Kings of the earth, and
being compared to those of fore-passed ages
are like vnto those high mountaines
which disdaine the proudest rocks that
are vnder them.
                  In whom could there concurre so many

merits? for whom will vertue be so happy,
and fortune so constant? for whom
will heauen doe so great wonders? who
will vndertake to exceed him? who dares
equall him? who can follow him? of
whom may we say that which is said of
him. A wiser Prince there is not any found,
a more Couragious the world beares not, and
a better there cannot be.
                  
                  His life is so full a Table, as there is not
any thing but stayes the eye, stirres vp the
Iudgment, and drawes it to Admiration.
They shall not speake in any part of the
world of this Prince, but the fame of his
great and incomparable actions, will
make a great Impression in the brauest
courages.
                  
                     Theseus could not but talke of Hercules
labours: Themistocles could not
sleepe when he thought of the combats
of Miltiades: great Princes will
feele their heartes inflamed with glory
and honour, when they shall represent

vnto themselues the victories and
Trophees of great Henry.
                  
                  The very day that heauen made him be
born at Pau, it gaue him the crown of Nauarre,
it promised him that of France;
and did assure him that the glory of his
life and of his raigne should not be limited
with other bounds then the continuance
of the world. His breeding was as much
inferior in delights and dainties, as it
should be superior in force of mind and
greatnes of courage to other Princes of
his time.
                  His court was in the village, his nurce a
contry-woman, his Courtiers peasants,
his language Bearnois, his excercises in
the field, his walkes among the rocks, his
delights in Innocent things, his appetites
for necessary things, his distast in superfluous;
taking part with the children of
the village, of the iniuries of the ayre, and
the indisposition of the seasons, whilst the

equality of the age, and the liberty of that
life held the difference of qualities and
conditions suspended.
                  His inclination to Armes had not diminished
the pleasure he had taken in
learning, if they had not beene forced to
gird him with a sword as well for defence
as ornament. The Ignorance of that
which he should haue learned, and the
forgetting of that which he had learned,
did frame in his mind a continuall griefe;
complayning of the little care they had
had of his Institution: for hee desired in
greatest occasions to marry his penne vnto
his sword as Caesar had done.
                  As his breeding had inured his body to
trauell, and had presented paine vnto him
with pleasure, and pleasure with paine,
fortune had made his mind inuincible to
Accidents, and gaue him so great in quantity,
and so diuers in quallity, as in the end
she was forced to confesse that his courage
did surpasse the violence of her attempts

and his wisdome the stratagems
of hir deseignes.
                  Diuersity of Religion troubling the
most happy and profound Peace that euer
France inioyed, he was brought to
Bois de Veisane, or Vincennes, there to be
bred vp with the Infants of France, or rather
to be a precious gage of The ancient
fidelitie of the house of Bourbon. The Queen
his mother drew him from the court, to
instruct him in the religion whereof she
would haue him Protector, as they which
made profession therof did acknowledge
him for their Generall after the death of
the Prince of Conde, and the losse of the
Battell of Iarnack. His presence did reuiue
their danted spirits, and stayed the strangers
who would no more serue a cause
miserably deiected, condemned by the
Kings Edicts, and pursued with publike
hatred. Relligion found at Rochabeille
that she might hope for more by the presence
of this Prince then by the force of

her Armes. The Armie depended vpon
his authoritie, and hee depended of his
Mothers, who beeing courteously seuere,
did not allow his youth any thing, but
what shee might not well refuse.
                  After the Battell of Mont-conter, hee
went aboue three hundred leagues in a
short time, and hauing recouered new
forces, hee let them see at Rene-le-duk,
that hee would neuer lay downe Armes,
vntill hee had purchased for his party, eyther
an assured Peace, or an absolute victorie.
Hee first obtained a truce for two
moneths, and then a peace, more beneficiall
then the precedent, which should
haue been the end, but it was but a change
of the miseries of France.
                  Vnder his Influences appeared that fatall
and furious Canicular,The Massacre on saint Bartholmews day. which made a
burning sword runne through the streets
of Paris, and throughout all the good
Townes of France. His liberty was restrained,
his conscience forced, his seruants

banished. Some were ouer-whelmed
with the blowe, and others were
amazed at the clap, and all apprehended
the danger.
                  The Castle of Bois de Veisaine which
had beene his first Academie, became
his prison, and the Court the exercise
of his patience: King Henry the third
gaue him his liberty, but thinking alwayes
that his aboad in Court was an
honorable Captiuitie, he freed him-selfe,
vnder a coullor of going a hunting, and
was presently followed by them, who
did expect on earth none other succours
from heauen, then by the care which
this Prince seemed to haue of their conduct
and protection.
                  Hee did with griefe re-enter into the
seruitude which they doe feele which
command in Ciuill warres, detesting
in his soule all reuolts against the Prince,
and lamenting the condition of such as in
these diuisions were some-times forced to

see, doe and endure things contrary to the
euidence of reason, and the iust feeling of
their consciences. This warre taught him
great lessons of patience, constancie, frugalitie
and moderation. His vertue did
not exempt him from the out-rages of necessitie.
He wanted money, his munitions
failed him, his forces disbanded, his
friends grew wearie, his owne hope was
tired, and that which will hardly bee credited
in an other age, hee had some difficulty
(hauing foure score thousand pounds
starling of yearely reuenewes) to repell
hunger, which doth neuer force Kings.
Among the discourses which hee hath
made to yong men, to teach them how to
suffer, hee hath beene heard to say, That
hauing on a time made a great marche, hee was
forced to eate a peece of a Goose halfe broyled
vpon the coales without any bread, the which
was so old and tough, as it seemed to bee of that
race which had watcht to saue the Capitoll. He
felt a great delight to haue reduced delight

to that point, as no crosse of fortune
might alter her.
                  But amiddest all these wants, hee neuer
wanted courage, with the which hee promised
himselfe to haue whatsoeuer hee
wanted. A man may wish all things to his
enemy but courage, for there-with hee
shall depriue him-selfe of the fruits of his
wishes, and force (which is incountred by
valour) is alwayes in danger. The necessitie
of his owne defence did iustifie his
Armes, the which hee laide aside as soone
as the fift Edict of peace had setled concord
and obedience in the hearts and wils
of the French.
                  Hee did nourish this new plant carefully,
and, by the conferences of Flaix,
and Nerac, did pacifie the windes which
did blow against her first buddes. They
sought to ingage him in new confusions,
but as Vlisses, who for that hee would not
bee inchanted by the Syrens songs, caused
himselfe to bee tyed to the Mast of his

ship, he kept himselfe close to the body of
Saint Lewis tree, against forraine Inchantments,
which did sollicite him to stirre vp
new troubles. He discouered a farre off the
practises that were made to renew the miseries,
& resolued with greater constancie
to serue France, holding as a maxime, that
there was no health in the Estate, but with the
Estate, & in the sincerity of such thoughts,
the death of the Duke of Alençon, the
Kings onely brother, set him in the neerest
degree vnto the Crowne.
                  France was then diuided into three factions,
the two agreed easily against his;
yet did hee offer vnto the King the seruice
of his person and Armes, to make him recouer
that which a carelesse bountie in the
beginning of these disorders (when as he
preferred milde and fearefull remedies to
them that were hardy and seuere) had
wrested from him. When as this storme
fell vpon him, hee had no other thoughts
but to maintain France in Peace, to restore

authoritie to the King, and liberty to him
and his.
                  The realme was plunged into present
miseries, vnder the vaine feare of that
which was to come and vncertaine, the
King suffering that during his life they
should dispute of the succession of his
Crowne. They did no more looke of
him, but as the Sunne-set of his realme,
all mens eyes were turned vppon two
Princes, both great in courage and reputation.
The one had a Crowne already,
and the law of the Kingdome called him
to the second: the other had great parties
to get it, and to keepe it being gotten.
                  The heart of the one was inclined to
loue the other, they were seene in one
Chamber in the Lovure, they went a hunting,
made matches at tennis, played at
dice, visited the Ladyes together. The
King of Nauarre carryed the Duke
of Guise behinde him on horse-backe
through the streetes of Paris: Hee loued

him as his kinsman, hauing not any one
neerer next to them of his name. These
great shewes of friendship did not please
the King, but as great hatred proceeds
from great loue, and good Vineger is
made of the best wine, this loue degenerating
into hatred, was the cause of great
ruines, as we shall presently see.
                  If that age had carried desseignes worthy
of the swords of these two, who were
the greatest personages that France euer
bare, and two of the greatest Captaines in
the world, she might haue recouered those
goodly and rich peeces of her Crowne,
whereof she had beene dispossest. If their
controuersie had beene but for Achilles
armes, and that they had beene cast in the
middest of Palestina, to be his that should
win them by the point of his sword, Aiax
did neuer contend for them so resolutely
against Vlisses, as they would haue done
together, but their thoughts reacht not so
far, the one contented himselfe with that

which was iustly due vnto his birth, and
the other to purchase that which hee
thought should belong vnto his valour.
                  The King fearing the hope of the one
the deseignes of the other, and the courage
of them both, suffered the one to
force him to make war against the other.
So as in a moment we saw the Edicts reuoked,
and the cheefe forces of the realme
imploied against the King of Nauarre.
He was assayled, during the space of foure
yeares, by two royall Armies, one sent to
refresh an other, and led by great Captaines.
The God of armies gaue him the
victory at the Battell of Coutras, to make
it knowne that he would end in him the
wonders of his workes, and lead him by
the hand to the place whether his enemies
thought he should neuer come, especially
after that he had beene beaten with
the fulminations of the Vatican, and in a
manner out of hope to passe the riuer of
Loire after the rout of that great Army

which Germany had sent to his succour.
                  It seemed that the warre was dead: but
it did but sleepe, we saw that furious tumult
of the Barricados burst forth, the
which chased the King out of Paris; and
did wound his heart with an incurable
vlcer. He dissembled this iniury, he pacefied
those that had put him in choller, he
vsed all pollicie and arts to couer the fier
of his reuenge vnder the ashes of forgetfulnes;
he called an Assembly at Rouan,
whereas the Cardinall of Bourbon was
held for the first Prince of the bloud, and
the lawfull heire of the Crowne declared
vnworthy to succeed.
                  The more they labour to quench this
royal plant, the more it sprouts, the Councells
for his ruine prooue his aduancement.
The conspiracy of Iosephs bretheren
was the bridge wherby he past to the
chiefe honours of Egipt. Heauen which
neuer spares his prodigies with and

against great men, tooke away at that
time with a flash of lightening the barre
in the Armes of the house of Bourbon, in
the Chappel of Archambaud of Bourbon,
brake it in peices, and did not hurt the
flowers de Luce, nor the rest of the
scutchin.
                  The two Pillars which supported the
building were beaten downe, and their
fall did shake all France. The King, who
thought that he had quencht the fire of
warre in the bloud of these two Princes,
saw it kindled more violently in euery
corner of the realme, many came running
to haue some peices of this generall
combustion. Henry of Bourbon presented
himselfe to quench it, he past the riuer of
Loire; And when his seruants at this passage
aduised him to thinke of his owne
safety, and to consider with whom he had
to doe. He sayd, The chance is cast, the succor
of France, and the seruice of my King are
deerer vnto me, then mine owne life.
                  
                  
                     
He deliuered the King from the danger
wherein he was at Tours, and desiring
no other quallity then the first of his seruants,
he brought vnto his obedience
Gargeau, Gien, la Charite, Pluuiers, Estampes,
Dourdan, and fortefied his camp
in such sort before Paris, as he left it to his
choyse to enter by a Port or a breach, by
loue or by force, within three dayes he
had beene seene in his Louure and in his
seat of Iustice, without that fearfull blow,
the which wounding him in the belly,
did strike France to the heart, and reduced
it to that estate, as if it had not beene
speedily supported by that great Prince,
it had fallen in peeces. He receiued her
and cherished her, as if he had beene born
for France, and not France for him.
                  He might haue come to the Crowne by
succession, which was the easiest way,
but God, to try his courage and to excercise
the force of his mind, presented the
most painfull and difficult vnto him, that

of Conquest, through such continuall
toyles, such apparent dangers, and such
extreame afflictions, as a soule of another
birth then his would not haue vndertaken
so painfull a taske for a Diadem. I should
make a Historie insteed of a Panegyre, if
I would represent them all, they require a
more free and large discourse.
                  Great actions may bee represented in a
small table, we may see a Caesar at the passage
of Rubicon, and how hee defeated
Petreius, Afranius and Varro in Spaine;
Pompey at Pharsalia, Ptolomie in Egipt, and
Pharnax in Asia, but so many words, so
many discourses, euery action merits a
volume. Euen so wee may speake of the
actions of this King after the maner of the
Geographers, who note great riuers with
small lines, and strong and mighty citties,
with points.
                  Hee begins the first actions of his raigne
by the last duties of Pietie, which hee causeth
to bee done vnto the Kings body, the

which was laid in Saint Corneils Church at
Compeigne, a place of safety and famous
by the Interment of two Emperors Kings
of France. There was a horrible and
monstrous confusion seene, which sought
to disorder and ouerwhelme all things.
To a true and lawfull Royalty, they did
oppose one faigned and Immaginary, vnder
the name of a Prince that was prisoner,
who neither had the age, nor was of
a profession necessary to vndertake the reuenge
of the Kings death, and the preseruation
of the Realme.
                  Although the seruants of the true King
be diuided in religion, yet are they not in
the fidelity which they owe him, nor in
the affection of his seruice, neither yet in
desire to reuenge the execrable Parricide,
of their King. Their honour and that
of France is the only Trophee which
they promise vnto themselues of this
warre.
                  Other nations do it not but for spoile

and booty, but the French propound not
any thing vnto themselues but the honor
of the Kings seruice. Xerxes with his
Army of a hundred thousand fighting
men would be loth to charge them, as he
repented to haue taken armes against the
Grecians, when as he vnderstood that all
their ambition was to deserue, not crowns
of gold but garlands of Oliue, and Persly
at the Olympike games.
                  The Pope, who vntill this time had not
seene cleerly into these confusions, repented
that hee had taken the shewes and pretexts
for the causes and reasons of these
confusions, he pierceth into the desseigns,
and doth openly discountenance them,
whom in the beginning he had fauoured,
and that which before hee would haue
done as a Partesan, hee now begins to doe
as a Father.
                  The beginning of this raigne had
great difficulties, amazement beeing
more powerfull in the mindes of many,

then affection was zealous in their
hearts.
                  Hee saw him-selfe constrained to endure
of them, who could not endure of themselues,
to shut his eyes at that which hee
saw, and to turne away his eares from that
which hee vnderstood, practising that
Gratious manner cf pardoning, seeming to bee
ignorant of the offences, & suffering wickednesse
to drinke the poison which shee her
selfe had compounded. What other spirit
then his would haue been capable to temper
the passions of mens mindes? What
Vlisses could haue contained so many contrary
wines in one bottell? And yet in the
middest of all this, his heart is firme, and
his soule quiet, the more rebellion ouerflowes,
the more doth the sea of his clemencie
swell.
                  Neuer Prince imbarked in a better vessell,
but neuer did the sea rage more furiously
to swallow him vp. Hee had need
of as many eyes as Argus to watch,

as many heads at Typheus to dispose, and
as many Armes as Briareus to labour. Attending
some good occasion to imploy
his whole Army, he disperst it into three
Prouinces, Normandy, Champaigne,
and Picardy. He assures himselfe of Pont
de Larche, to cut of the Comerce by water
betwixt Paris and Rouen, he makes his
entry into Diepe, commends the fidelity
of Caen, forceth his enemies to retier
from Paris, and to come and be beaten
at Arques. Paris who thought to see him
a prisoner, sees him triumphing in her
suburbes, and knowes that this torrent
had beene stayed in one corner of the
realme, to ouerflow more violently.
                  He chaseth rebellion out of the Prouinces
of Dunois, Vendosme, Maine, Perche,
and the better part of Normandy; he
comes to Tours to refresh himselfe, and
to see his councell, the soueraigne companies
of his Iustice, and of his Finances.
From thence he forceth Mans and Alençon,

and it seemed that his Canons and
Regiments had wings, hauing marcht
aboue a hundred and fifty leagues in lesse
then two moneths. His councels passe the
wisedom of those that councell him; his
desseignes preuent the fore-sight of his enemies,
his courage giues assurance to his
seruants, and his happinesse in all his enterprises
makes them say, that if hee should
bee on the maine Sea vpon a hurdle, hee should
not perish. None but Iupiter can cast forth
lightning, none but Hercules can handle
his club, & it fits best with Henry to weare
a Crowne of Palme and Bayes. He besiegeth
Dreux, and seeing that his enemy did
aduance to succour it, hee makes shew to
retire, giues him time to passe the riuer to
follow him, and seeing him past, and ingaged
in the plaine of Yury, he offers him
battell, and wins it.
                  The battel of Marathon, where as 10000.
Grecians defeated 100000. Persians on
foote, & 10000. horse is not so renowned
to the Athenians, as this victory of reason

and right against numbers and force, is
vnto the French. All his griefe was to see
the fields dyed with the bloud of his subiects,
for hee could haue wisht that the
stranger alone had payed the expences of
his triumph. The fruits of this victory put
into his hands, in lesse then two moneths,
fifteene or sixteene good townes: onely
Meulan presuming rashly to resist his forces,
suffred the pains of her rashnesse. Sens
was the onely thorne which stayed the
course of his victory, but desiring to strike
rebellion at the heart, and to bury it in the
same place where it was first bred, he turned
head towards Paris, cutting the veines
which did nourish this huge body; he seazed
vpō the passages for victuals aboue &
beneath, of the riuers of Seine, Maine,
Yonne and of Oyse, by the taking of Mante,
Poissy, Melun and Montreau, and hee
takes from them also the commodities of
the plaine by the taking of Saint Denis.
                  He reduced Paris to extreame misery, but
desiring rather to faile in the seueritie of

warre, then in the mildnes of his clemency,
he intreats that Citty like a father
which called him Tyrant, daily, and vnderstanding
the fearfull effects which necessity
wrought, that they did eat raw
doggs publikely, and that the mothers
found their children missing, he desired
to releeue the despaire of this people, succoring
the Princes and Princesses with
victuals, suffering virgins, children, schollers
and Church-men to come forth, and
by this pitty augmented the obstinacy of
the rest of the besieged. Shee is freed from
famine to bee aflicted with new Calamities
and desolations; she hath eaten so many
doggs, as she retaines the rage and fury,
with the which shee fals vppon the
chiefe Officers of Iustice.
                  The King inuites the armie of strangers to
the hazard of a Battell, & presents himself
aboue the village of Chelles, but they will
not hazard any thing, and bound their
Conquests with the ruine of Lagny: and

the taking of Corbeil. It came into France
like a Torrent, but hee forced it to returne
being prest and scanted for victuals, and
did let them see at Longeual, that courage
prescribes a law to numbers, being content
to let the vanquished know, how far
the honor of a victory doth extend. In
this Incounter there was a troupe did obstinately
make head against him, ingaged
him in the thickest of the danger, and slew
fiue or sixe if his company neere vnto
him. In the end it was in his will to haue
cut them all in peeces, but as soone as hee
saw them humbled, he left his Pistoll, and
retained the iust aduantage which he had,
saying, That hee would not see them suffer
harme, which were not in case to do any.
                  
                  Soone after he had other meanes offred
him to enter into Paris, but hee would not
hearken to it, for that the execution could
not be without great disorder. One of his
good seruants, who hath disdained life after
the death of so good a maister, had

an infallible enterprise, hauing meanes to
let in by Port Bucy, (whereof they had
promised him the Keyes) as many men as
hee would, to fortifie the courages and resolutions
of them that were within the
Citty, and who desired rather to be taken
by their King with the hazard of their
goods, then to be garded by the Spaniards
with the losse of their liberties. This great
Prince considering that it was impossible
to preuent it, but in this surprise the Citty
would feele the fury of the war, & that the
good must suffer for the bad, hee said, that
he had rather not take Paris, then to ruine it.
                  
                  Chartres is besieged, and hauing endured
the siege two months, they were more
desirous to trust vnto the mercy of the
assailant, then to any hope of succors. The
enemy seeing that this Hercules could not
bee vanquished with any earthly forces,
they desire to draw lightning from heauē
to consume and ruine him. Gregory the 13.
the oracle of Philip, of a common father,

becomes the head of a party, casting forth
his fulminations against this Prince, the
Buls were burnt at Tours & at Chalons.
                  The Parlaments with the like courage
(as they had in former times, resisted the
insolencies of Bonifaces, Pius and Iulius)
make it knowne, that the remedies of fire
and bloud are not fit the languishings
of France: that this generous minde will
not be forced, & that they must hope, that
he wil one day bind the Church to cal him
some-times her father, and some-times her
sonne. Feare to displease the Pope, had not
so much power ouer them, as the care of
the Estate, & the preseruation of the liberties
of the Frēch church. The army which
came to demand the execution of the Buls
was as soone disperst as imployed. At the
sight of a hūdred horse of the Kings white
Cornet, a 1000. Cassaks of watchet veluet,
all imbrodred with gold & ciphers of keies
ioyned vnto swords, dare not abandon the
shadow of the walls of Verdun, and make
it known that their troop consists of many

men and good horses, but of few soldiers,
& that they had to deale with men whose
Armes feared not the lead of Rome.
                  The prosperity of his affaires did nothing
alter his minde from the desire hee
had in the beginning of his raigne, for the
good of a Peace; The ouertures and propositions
whereof were secretly handled,
for that they would not offend the Strangers,
who were better pleased to see France
languish then cured, and who laboured to
make the subiect irreconciliable to their
Prince. The time was so close as it would
not suffer the hearts of good men to bee
open; it was Impiety to propound a peace,
and treason to seeke it.
                  Hee looseth no time in the meane time,
he passeth into Normandy, to fortifie his
seruants and subiects by his presence: In
the sight of the sunne, & in lesse then two
houres hee executes a memorable enterprise
vpon Lovuiers; he causeth his councell
to come from Tours to Mante,

to resolue there vpon his cheife and most
important affaires, he enters into Picardy,
beseegeth Noyon, which at the third volley
of the Canon yeelded in view of the
Army, which durst not attempt to succor
it, nor to hazard a Battell against a lesser
number.
                  Hauing receiued some forces from the
Queen of England he presented himselfe
before Rouen, sommons it, & doth presse
it to yeeld him the duty which it owes.
The hope of succors makes the Inhabitants
obstinate in their resolutions. The
King turned head towards this new Army,
and resolued to fight with it, contrary
to the aduice of his cheefe seruants,
who seeing the disproportion of these forces,
aduised him to passe Pont de l'Arche.
His courage bound him rather to follow
the path of danger with honour, then
that of safety with shame, and made him
say, with Pompey, but with more truth and
better successe, That in striking his foote

against the earth he would raise vp Legions.
All his seruants which were farre of returned
to the armie, the Duke of Parma
who thought to haue an easie victory,
saw his enemies in front of him.
                  The two armies were in sight at Aumale,
where as the King was hurt with a
shot, which did not hinder him from pronouncing
that royall and generous word
Charge Charge, and to doe that which himselfe
had commanded, charging valiantly
with his hurt into the thickest of the
enemies fury, and then he made a glorious
retreat: diuers dayes after he was in
all the occasions, where as glory was neuer
seene but in a world of dangers.
                  Hee beats his enemies at Bellencombe,
he stripes them at Bure, and makes them
to quit Yuetot with dishonour and great
losse.
                  In the view of two Squadrons of the
enemies horse, he himselfe tooke a
Centinell perdu at Henry-quart-ville.

This great Armie was as much prest with
necessity, as the chiefe commanders were
with sicknesse, the soundest of them both
being carryed in a litter. The King ouertakes
them at Caudebeck vpon the riuer
of Seine, and forceth them to seperate
themselues, the one gets to Rouen, the
other by the sauour of two bridges, the
one at Caudebeck, and the other at Charanton,
recouers Chasteau Thierry, and
seazeth vpon Espernay.
                  This voiage did confirme him in the
opinion which he had at the first, as a
Soueraigne Prince interessed in the Kings
defence, and as a Prince of Italy enemie
to the pride of Spaine, that the Kings
quarrell being Iust and maintained by a
good sword, he would preuaile, and that
if the warre continued longer Spaine
should haue more wood to heate her
ouen, then corne to send to the mill. He
sayd moreouer That this Prince was an Eagle
in warre which soared into the cloudes

when they thought to take him, and fell sodenly
vpon them which held him to be farther off.
                  
                  Quilbeuf ruined that which remained, it
defended a seege three weekes, and forced
the assaylant to dislodge without drumme
or Trompet. Espernay was recouered;
eight horses put 300. to rout. Nothing
stayes the force of the Kings armes but
humility and piety: The vanquished
haue no hope but in the conquerors mercy.
He dismist the Prince of Anhalt with
the Reisters which he brought him.
                  He had promised at his comming to the
crowne, that he would not shew himselfe
difficult to be instructed in the Religion of
his predecessors. He had vanquished his
enemies, it was necessary he should vanquish
himselfe. That rich diamond of religion,
whose fire is so pure and water so
cleere, did not shine with that luster vpon
his Crowne, as his Predecessors had carryed
it, for that he did not serue God after
their manner. It was desired that Piety,

which hath giuen vnto the Kings the glorious
title of most Christian, should giue
vnto him that of the eldest sonne of the
Church. Hee therefore suffers himselfe to
be Instructed, and beeing instructed doth
acknowledge the truth, the Church doth
triumph thereat, and heauen doth furnish
bayes. His valour hath triumphed ouer
his enemies, and his Piety did triumph
ouer his conscience. Many haue had their
shares in his victory against his enemies,
but in that of himselfe the conquest is his
owne. This miraculous worke of heauen
ouer-threw new desseignes.
                  Hee makes profession of his religion at
the entry of the Church of the first Apostle
of France, the sacred monuments of
his Predecessors are the witnesses of the
sincerity of his heart. Hee caused himselfe
to be anoynted and crowned in the first &
most ancient Temple of Christendom,
which they say was dedicated by the Druydes,
To the Virgin that should bring forth.
                     
His heart like a Lampe prepared to burne;
was no sooner kindled by this diuine fire,
whereof Constancie and Truth are the
Vestalls, but darknesse vanished, and the
pretexts fell like walls vndermined. The
League, the Typhon of sedition, from
whence sprong so many Serpents and Vipers
of disloyalty was smoothered vnder
the Etna of her owne presumption and
pride. Those great Colosses of forraigne
desseignes were beaten downe, the foundation
of the pretext of Religion supporting
them no more. The warre can no
more carry the title of a warre for religion.
Paris at the first speech of this Masse,
or to speake more-properly, at the very
ringing of the Bell, receiues him for Catholike,
they runne to Saint Denis to adde
the teares of their miseries to those of ioy,
for a Grace which was more desired then
hoped for.
                  Hell storming at the sauing of a soule
so necessary for the glory of Heauen,

stirres vp a wretch who vndertakes to kill
him. The Tyger stayed at the shining of
a glasse: This Monster seeing the zeale of
Piety to shine in the eyes of this Prince,
confest that hee had horror to offend the
Soueraigne dignitie ordayned of GOD,
among Angels and men. Rome which
had cast forth her fulminations against
him from the toppe of Vatican, makes
bonefiers for ioy of his returne vnto the
Church, and erects a Triumph to his
Pietie.
                  The Iland of Zeilan holds not any
lawfull King, but hee that the day of his
Coronation carries the hereditarie ornament
of the Crowne, a Rubie as big as a
hand, and three fingers thick, for the
which the great Cham of Cathay, would
haue giuen a great and mighty Citty. In
like manner Rome could not hold him
for most Christian King, which did not
carry this precious Ring of the Religion
of Saint Lewis.
                  
                  
                     
Pagan Rome hath deserued great Elogies
of all the nations of the earth, they
called her the Citty of the world, a heape of
triumphes and trophees, and the mother of all
Citties. The Marbles and Medailes haue
named her, the eternall Citty. They of
Smyrna in the time of Cato: they of Pergamo
vnder Augustus: and they of Athens
vnder Adrian, haue giuen her the
name of Diuine, Holy, August and Sacred.
Christian Rome is called by those great
lights of the East and West, the Chaire of
the Apostles; the inexpugnable fort of truth:
the Metropolitaine of all the world; the Archetype
of Religion; the miracle of Piety, the
Sanctuary of Innocency; the rule of Consciences,
and the Mountaine of Syon. All tytles
equally famous, but the glory could not
bee greater then by that of a godly Mother
to a great Prince, who acknowledging
her, was receiued by her as the eldest
sonne of the Church. Shee sets these
trophees on the toppe of his conquests,

thinking that of a soule so pretious to
Christendome, very profitable to the
Church, and that her ground-worke
could not bee beautified with a goodlyer
plant.
                  France, which during her sleepy and
insensible stupidity, had suffered her,
members to be cut off by peeces, began to
open her eyes which she had kept shut,
for that she would not know her owne
miseries, nor feele her Infirmities, she neglected
all remedies, and now that she
feeles her owne wounds, she desires to be
cured: This feeling was the infalible Crisis
of her health: hope reuiued good men,
and confusion amazed the wicked. The
Crow which could not say from the top
of the Capitoll It goes well; may now say
All will goe well. This body had yet some
sound, vigorous and perfect partes, and
it had good blood to restore it. Gold set
in worke being cast into the fier, looseth
his fashion, but not his waight. The

ancient loyalty of the French, lost her
forme in this fire of rebellion, but the substance
remained perfect and without blemish,
to bee repaired and beautified by the
industry of this Prince.
                  The King promiseth to make her happy,
if she desires to be so; he makes her to
taste the sweetnesse of a truce, to make her
couet the felicity of Peace. The Parlament
of Paris hauing cast vppe the phleme of
temporising, kindles his courage, and by a
decree disperceth the Chymera's of Spain,
which thought to reduce France vnto a
Prouince. The most obstinate are forced
to confesse, that the earth striues in vaine
against the decrees of heauen; that whatsoeuer
had been done to keepe vnder and
ruine this Prince had raised, preserued
and aduanced him: that in declaring him
vnworthy of the crowne, they had drawn
him from the farthest bounds of France,
and thinking to hold him in the waues of
diuision, they had brought him to the Port

of greatnesse. Behold in the end hee is the
Hercules of Gaule, the tamer of Monsters,
which France had not brought forth, but
did nourish and entertaine.
                  Paris which had resisted his mildnesse, is
surprised by force: he takes it with 4000.
men. She sees her selfe taken & feels it not,
neither is there any alteration but that of
ioy dispersed through all the streets for so
sweet a change. He enters like a King and intreats
like a father. He changeth the sword
of iust reuenge, into a scepter of mild command:
he pardoneth euen theA seditious number of leaguers within Paris. sixteene,
the people adore him & kisse his feet. The
Lovure receiues his Maiesty, the Palace his
iustice, the temple his piety, and all orders
his clemency. Hee visits the Cathedrall
church of this citty to giue God thanks,
who was the Author of this conquest, the
founder of this authority, & the fountaine
of this felicity.
                  Laon was a refuge for the forrain troops
whom hee suffred to depart out of Paris.
they tried the effects of his clemēcy, & felt

of his valor: for hauing sustained three
asaults in one day, and seeing the defeat
of two mighty conuoyes, they yeelded.
This prise was followed by the reduction
of all Picardy. Hee beseegeth and taketh
Noion, and forceth the towne and castell
of Dreux. He casts the firebrand of warre
vpon those who had set France on fire,
and causeth Artois, the county of Bourgondy,
Piedmont and Sauoy, to feele the
iust fury of his armes. He strikes euery
where as soone as he threatens, He seems
to be mounted vpon Pegasus, to be in all
places where his presence is necessary. Behold
he enters triumphing into Lions,
and in an instant is vpon the frontier of
Picardy, from thence his authority like a
spirit of life disperseth it selfe throughout
all the members of the body.
                  But it is not sufficient for him to haue
made warre, if it doth not produce peace.
The most royall vertue of a great Prince
which entereth into a troubled estate is

Iustice, the most mighty is valour, the
greatest effects come from Armes, and
the most glorious fruits of Armes from
peace. Hee shewes that hee hath not made
warre, but for peace, that his club, (like
vnto that of Hercules) is made of an Oliue
tree, and his sword dipt in Oyle. He addes
vnto his Bayes a crowne of Olyue branches,
he giues peace to them that demand
it, and doth not refuse it, but vnto those
who beeing ostinate in their owne ruine
contemne it. Fiue Dukes sacrifice to this
royall clemencie.
                  The first obtaines peace for his estate,Duke of Lorraine.
beeing councelled and gouerned
in this resolution by Ferdinand great
Duke of Tuscany, a most wise and happy
Prince.
                  The second for his party,Duke of Maienne. whereof hee
is the head, and which giue him the glory
of great continencie in so great libertie,
and of wise command in a furious confusion,
for that hee would neuer yeeld

that religion should bee wronged, nor the
estate ruined.
                  The third,Duke of Guise. who seemed to bee most interessed,
for that in this ciuill tempest hee
had lost his Father and his Vncle, giues
his wrongs vnto France, and hath the
honour to receiue the Kings first embrasings,
hee is content to command in that
Prouince, whereas his grand-fathers, by
the mothers side, had sometimes reigned,
and that France should see foure yong
plants spring out of that tree, which the
Kings fury had ouer-throwne.
                  The fourth is content to leaue the troubles
of the world,Duke of Ioyeuze. to prepare himselfe to a
solitary life, where he had begun to liue.
                  The fift did beautifie the trophees of the
Kings glory,Duke of Mercure. by the whole reduction of
the goodliest Prouince in France, and sees
the Hermines to reuiue at the smell of the
Flower de Luce.
                  This great King had by his clemencie
wonne these great men, whose hearts had

neuer yeelded to weaknesse. Hee did so
gouerne their humors and affections, as
hee made them profitable for his seruice.
M. Sceuola had wonderfully wronged
Porsenna, but the constancie of him that
did the offence, changed the reuenge of
the offended into admiration. Hee restored
him his sword, and Sceuola taking it
with the left hand (for the other was
burnt) sayd vnto him; Porsenna, Thou
couldest not haue vanquished mee by feare,
and now thou hast ouer-come mee by courtesie.
Where-vpon hee discouered vnto him a
conspiracie of three hundred Romaines,
and protested that hee was not sorry that
hee had not slaine so good a man. Generous
mindes will not bee forced nor baffeled.
Lawrell is bitter to them that bite it.
There are herbes very sweete when they
are gently handled, but they lose their sauour
when they are roughly rub'd.
                  This Prince did neuer desire to be reuenged
but by the iustnesse of his armes, but

when he saw that other meanes would
not preuayle. In the greatest declining of
his affaires, and when as necessity did suffer
him to seeke reuenge, either by pollicy
or by force, he let them see that the generosity
of his courage could not yeeld vnto
the profit which may grow by a base and
wicked action. After the defeats of his
Reisters, a gentleman came vnto him at
Chastel Ialeux and told him that he had
meanes to ruine the Duke of Guise and
his chiefe enemies, setting fire vnto a sausedge
being planted in a certaine place of
the Palace of Guise, in Paris. To whom
he answered, be gone, speake no more of it, euen
as you measure to others so shall it be measured
to you againe.
                  
                  The temple of clemency being open
vnto great men, was not shut to the meanest.
He doth imbrace them and doth not
refuse to capitulate with simple captains,
suspending for a time the greatnes of his
maiesty to accomodate him-selfe to the

vnconstancy of the world, and to shew
that his hands no lesse accustomed to
beare the palmes of valour then the crownes
of clemency knowes how to raise vp them
that humble themselues, and reforme
such as goe astray. He is content to hinder
the fall of such as did shake and wauer
at the first wind of sedition; experience
hauing taught him that the people suffer
themselues to be abused with bruits, and
opinions, he doth therefore carefully obserue
the practises and pollicies of these
deceiuers.
                  The pleasure of liberty being recouered,
defaceth the sorrow of forepassed seruitude.
All the reuolted Townes seeke the
shortest way to retire themselues out of
this misery, and confesse that the shortest
follyes are the best. They returne to their
duties, not by order of their quallities, nor
the reason of example, but as they are
toucht with repentance of rebellion, the
which doth now seeme a dying lampe,

that hauing nothing to feed it leaues him
in suspence whether it be dead or aliue. Al
his thoughts tended to the happy end of
all his victories, and to encrease the prosperity
of France, when as his enemies surprised
Amiens with Apples and nutts, and
trobled him to recouer it with Canon shot
making it known that there was nothing
impossible nor impregnable for his courage.
                  
                  Then did Europe call him the Inuincible:
a title which he did not purchase with
his armes a crosse, nor by his Lieftenants,
but with the price of his blood and the perill
of his life in the view of his enemies,
and with the consent of all the world. To
say that he hath conquered France, and
subdued in France the most warlike Nations
in Europe, is to say al that can be said,
to iudge whether that he had deserued
that glorious title of alwaies victorious, alwaies
Augustus. This great King alone was
worthy of the conquest of France, and
France was alone worthy of the valour of

so great a King. France is no estate of Pigmes
which may be conquered by armies of
Cranes. It is neither America nor Canada,
contryes in a manner not habitable by
reason of the ordinary inundations, wheras
the Inhabitants are forced a part of the
yeare to leaue the land and to liue in Barks
and Canoes vpon the water, wheras the
people are so dull and brutish as they dare
not thinke themselues to be men.
                  It is not that miserable region of the Icthiophages,
whose townes and houses are
made of fishbones, nor that part of Numidia
wheras they liue of herbes and water,
it is the Queen of Realmes, it is the realme
of Kings, the beauty of delightes, the felicity
and the force of the world, so rich, aboundant
and fruitfull as in cutting of superfluous
things she hath no need of the
world for that which is necessary. It is
she that hath made head against the Romans,
then against the Gothes, Hunns,
Vandales, & Sarazens; which hath ioynd

vnto her crowne, Germany, Hungarie,
Saxonie, a part of Spaine, Palestina, and
the Empire of Greece; shee hath giuen
lawes and Kings to other Crownes, and
brought the French name in such reputation,
as the Christians of the East vsed not
any other. Yet shee hath not the wonders
which maketh other nations of the world
more admired then frequented, and from
whence no man comes but hee hath the
priuiledge to purchase credit, as they were
wont to say of those that went for Iseland;
If I say shee did not nourish cruell and sauage
beasts like vnto Affrick; If she doth
not carry trees fifteene faddom about the
body, as at Peru, nor doth produce cloues
like the Moluques, nor cinomon as at
Bantan, nutmegs as at Iauan, nor ginger
and pepper as at Calecut, muske as at
Sertuge, perfumes as in Arabia, nor Cassia
and balme as in Egipt: If it be not as rich
in Diamonds, as the Island at Zeilan, nor
in pearles like to Var, nor in Emerauds

like to China, nor in rubies like to Perne
nor in Opalls like to India, she is mighty
in men, capeable to conquer al this, If they
knew the meanes as well to keepe it as to
get it. Fruitfull and flourishing in men
which vnderstand the true point of honour,
the true honour of valour, which
cannot yeeld to dangers and which teacheth
them to goe on and how to dye better
then to kill. It is she that carries the crown
of glory and of piety, by the continuance
of her monarchy, the constancy of her
piety, the power of her empire, the reputation
of her princes, she carrieth the title
of the Queene of people and nations.
Great was the glory of this Prince to haue
reduced France vnder his obedience,
great indeed to haue vanquished so many
great courages that were armed against
him. Posterity, which shal iudge of all this
iustly will ascribe no lesse glory vnto him
to haue forced the King of Spaine to reason
then in former ages was giuen to

                     Alexander to haue subdued the persians,
Caesar the Gaulls, and Pompey the Parthians.
If this trueth doth not passe without
amazement, It will enter without contradiction
into the mindes of those which
know that they had to doe with men who
were Lyons in garrisons and Hares in
combats, and this Prince had in front & of
euery side men who were sooner surprised
with death then with feare.
                  The inequality of armes, and of forts
prooues the difference. Caesar found so
small resistance in one of his greatest designes,
as it is no wonder if he did not
write so boldly, I came, I saw, & I ouer came,
for in lesse then ten yeares he conquered
three hundreth nations to the Empire of
Roome. Pompey in pursuing Metridates
did nomber his victories by his iourneyes
and the seiges by his lodgings. When as
Alexander had defeated Darius in battell,
he found the whole contry open, ther was
not any resistance, but as nature giues at
the passage of Riuers.
                  
                     
If these 3. great Captains whom I hold
without comparison, but of themselues to
themselues, had been fronted by our caualary,
our regiments, our Canons, our muskets
and our petards, their glory had not
been so great and so disperst. Artilery is an
Inuention so new, so terrible, and so different
from al the antient engins, as we may
say that at these dayes we make warre not
with Iron, as in former time, but with fire,
not with violent force, but with the moderation
of wisdom & temporising: they do
not cōmit any thing to the hazard of fortune,
but that she carieth away by surprise.
                  The greatest armies of Europe haue
marched against him, and he hath defeated
the greatest Captaines. The death of
the Earle of Egmont and the ruine of his
troope did serue as a triumph of that memorable
day, whereas the God of armies
gaue sentence for iustice against force,
for a royalty against tyranny. Farneze
a Romaine by birth, Alexander by name,

                     Achilles by valour, and Vlisses in pollicie,
did by two goodly retreates couer the
weaknesse of his forces, and the refusall of
a battell. The Earle of Montmarchiano,
generall of the Popes army, who had tied
the Sword vnto Saint Peters Keyes, repasseth
the mountaines, without any fruites
of his voyage but repentance; Charles
Earle of Mansfield knowes, that to come
to fight, to vanquish, and to triumph, are all
one in this Prince. His forehead glistering
like a Comet at the encounter of Fountaine
Francoise, forced the Constable of
Castile to flie.
                  
                     Albert Archduke of Austria, hauing succeeded
Ernest his brother in the generall
command of the Low-countries, seeing
by the glorious recouery of Amiens, that
the King could not admire any thing (aboue
the Lawrell branches which did
crowne his head) but the Heauens and the
Sunne, that it was a folly to bee his neighbour
and not his friend, sought his friendship

with great earnestnesse. Phillip the second
King of Spaine, and the first moouer
of all these great engines, giuing motion
to all the lesser wheeles, considering that
fortune had not yet raisd any one to bee
victor ouer France, and that Charles the
fift his Father had alwayes exhorted him
to liue in peace with her, protesting that
there was nothing so gallant or couragious
as the Nobility of France, and holding
it a great honor to haue had two Princesses
of the bloud of the Kings of France,
for his grand-mother and great grandmother;
that warre against a Prince, who
was giuen and cherished by God, was his
ruine, and that an accord was the last anchor
of his affaires, desired to end his life
and his raigne, by the assurance of a peace
for his sonne, and the husbands of his two
Daughters.
                  They that had seene the King bred vp in
armes, and to command armies at foureteen
yeares of age, his first exercise in dangers

and perils, that he had purchased the
glory to know how to vanquish, to vse the
victory, to subdue his enemies, and to pardon
them being subdued, could not thinke
that a Prince of that courage, of that humor,
and of that fortune, would thinke of
peace, and quench the thirst of glory,
wherewith the greatest courages are wonderfully
altered; and yet he smothered the
seeds of ciuill warre, and ended all forraine
warre with much glory, profit, and
reputation, so as all men thought it
should continue long, giuing vnto his
people a happy peace, rich in all kinds of
prosperities, the which restored rest vnto
the people, liberty to the nobility, dignity
to the Church, and to all hope, suffering
France to take breath, being no more impossible
for a mans body to breath without
lights, then for an estate to liue without
peace.
                  Pope Clement the eight was the Angell
and the minister of this peace, desiring

that the concord of Christian Princes
might be applied to the aduantages which
this common enemy drew from their diuisions.
Hee had no greater desire in his
soule then to see the iniuries of Gods holy
name reuenged in the whole land, and the
triumph of our redemption raised, wheras
infidelity & ingratitude had cast it downe.
The world cannot furnish a warre more
iust, a Croisado more holy, nor a victory
more heroyck. The fruits of the Palmtree
of Europe are bitter, they of Affrick haue
no tast, they are only faire & good in Asia.
All the vertues of this Prince haue assisted
in the building of this publick peace, but
piety hath the cheifest honor. When as
the people saw that hee serued God in the
religion of his father, they beleeued that
the warre was not for religion, but against
the state, they held them all for enemies
that would not acknowledge a Prince
whom the heauens by so many miracles
had acknowledged. After the

bond which is giuen to piety, we know
not to whether of these three vertues,
Iustice, valour, or clemency France is
more beholding for her rest. They be all
three great, all three royall, neither had
they euer any worthier throne then in the
heart of this Prince. All haue a share in
the restauration of this estate: the one had
beene the sword, the other the buckler,
and the third the crowne, the one the
sterne, the other the ship, and the third the
port. Valour chalengeth the honour of
two famous Battels which did saue the
Crowne, and deliuered France from fiue
forraine armies; to haue caused courage
to triumph ouer nombers and right ouer
force, in a hundreth combats and as many
encounters, to haue clipt victories wings
to the end she should not flye out of
France.
                  Iustice hath retained many townes,
many people within the bounds of their
duty, whom the respect of wisdome, the

condition of affaires the indiscretion of
zeale might haue corrupted. She hath distinguished
the causes from the pretexts,
she hath carried a light before truth in the
darkenesse of these confusions, she hath
fortefied mens minds and produced examples
both of doing well and suffering
much,
                  Clemency hath vanquished towns that
were inuincible to the force of armes and
Iustice of the Kings cause, she is neuer weary
of pardoning, the more you draw of
this fountaine, the fuller it is, and the sweeter
her water. She hath wisely mingled the
victors with the vanquished, She hath giuen
life to the guilty, to augment the nomber
which doe not liue but by the glory of
his bounty. It is the Altar of Delos, which
Greece called holy, for that it neuer had
been gored with any sacrifise. That Prince
which is desirous to saue much, must pardon
much. His birth made him great, his fortune
greater and his clemency greatest of all. If

he had not pardoned so many rebels, hee
had not commanded ouer so many subiects:
when his Iustice did represent vnto
him, that examples of punishments were
necessary, his clemencie answered, that the
forrests of France would not furnish gibets, if
Hee should beleeue her. Some one besought
him to giue him leaue to carry the cannon
against some that held his house, hee demanded
of him, What hee would do when he
had forced them▪
                      his choller made him
answer, that hee would hang them all.
Wherevppon the King sent him away
with this milde reply, I haue no Canon to
that vse.
                  
                  You powerfull and warlike nations of
the world draw your Princes from their
graues, make them to liue againe with
their trophees and triumphes, you shall
not see any which shall march equall in
clemencie to ours. Where shall you finde
examples of this greatnesse of courage?
Paris is the perpetuall theater of this

clemencie. Hee might haue taken Paris,
and the feare to loose it, makes him to
neglect the taking.
                  Hee besiegeth Paris, and supplies the
besieged with victualls. Hee giues liberty
to those that desire to flye from
the miseries of the siege. Hee takes
Paris, and makes the victors condition
in shew no better then the vanquished,
his enemies goe forth with their
armes, beeing greeued to bee bound to
him for their liues, whose death they had
so often desired. They see him in Paris
like a priuate Gentleman which visits his
friends.
                  Spaine and Italy could not beleeue that
hee could trust him-selfe in a Towne
which had so much offended him,
and hold it for a miracle, that hee had no
feeling of these offences. There is
nothing so corrosiue that can alter
the golde of his bountie. Whereof

we shall see so many proofes in his Historie,
as they that haue not seene them will
hardly beleeue them.
                  All haue had need of the force of his
clemencie, many haue serued as a Trophee
to the power of his Armes, few haue
felt the seuerity of his Iustice, and many
haue found more profit to haue been vanquished
by his Armes, then to haue resisted.
This truth hath no need to bee set
forth with other coulours then her owne.
It is an oftentation of ignorance, rather
then of iudgment, to seeke reasons to
prooue a thing that is knowne to all the
world. A lawfull power hath no need of
the coulours of falsehood, to get beliefe
that shee is alwayes moderate in her prosperities,
and that her victories are neither
cruell nor bloudy. Tyranie, the most cruell
of sauage beasts, delights in flatterie,
which is the worst of domestick and tame
creatures.
                  Hee was both valiant and happy. Hee

neuer lead men to danger, but he brought
them back to glory. Occasions haue often
forced him to doe the duties of a resolute
souldier, hauing performed that of a
great Captaine. Hee hath alwayes loued
Achilles lawnce better then Paris harpe.
Neuer Prince hath runne into greater
dangers, encountered more glory, nor better
vsed his victories. His valour was not
without iudgment, nor his designes without
conduct. Minerua hath alwayes caried a
Torch before this Vlisses. As hee hath had
iustice in his armes, wisdome in his councels,
vigillance, deligence, and fidelity in
executions, sufferance in paine, and patience
in occasions, so his victories haue alwaies
beene without cruelty or insolency.
These three vertues haue restored France
vnto her King, and the French vnto
them-selues, the children are content
with the follyes of their fathers, and desire
not to succeed them. From the effects
of rebellion, they draw the fruites

of obedience, they suck hony out of the
stone and oyle out of the flint. They that
were hottest in sedition are become most
zealous in duty, and it seemes that famous
sorceresse hath made them more beautifull
and more cleere then before. If the seuerity
of his Iustice would haue vsed his
rigor, it had pulld vp many goodly plants
the which being manured with clemency
haue produced many excellent and necessary
fruits of obedience, seruice and
merit.
                  Al the iniuries of France were repaired,
only one remained, the iust fealing wherof
binds these three powerfull vertues to
seeke reueuge, Iustice declares warre, Valour
makes it, and Clemency ends it.
The lightening which should bee feared
of those which are not tucht with it, is ready
to fall. Iustice shewes the lightenings
a farre off, Valour causeth the thunder
to be felt, and Clemency repayres the
ruines, in a manner, as soone as they

are made. The King nombers his iourneys
as he passeth by so many townes
which he takes. His Canons ecchoing in
the Alpes amazeth all Italy. The Embassadors
of those Princes and commonwealths
finding it lodged in places, wheras
the Snow takes from their eyes the formes
of houses, and the compasse of the horizon,
were so amazed as they thought that
inchantment, taking from them the true
substance of that which they sought, had
substituted a fancy.
                  That proud Rock of Montmelian,
which some held to be an Acro-corinth,
humbles it selfe: and Charles Emanuel duke
of Sauoy, who sought by his assurance to
amaze or diuert the mischeefe which did
threaten him, submits himselfe wisely vnto
reason. Peace is confirmed on all sides,
valour giues vnto France the glorious title
of mighty Empire, Iustice makes it the
Empire of felicities, and Clemencie augments
the felicities of this Empire.
                  
                     
After so many actions, more to be admired
then imitated, and so many glorious
labours comparable to those of Hercules, if
fables may march hand in hand with
truth, France doth acknowledge him for
her Sauiour, her Esculapius, her Restorer.
But shee cannot belieue that her felicities
are perfect, nor her safety assured, if her
Prince do not iustly carry the name of father
of a Daulphin, as she doth acknowledge
him father of the people. It is a great
contentment for a King when as his subiects
account his sterillity among the
publike miseries, and that his infirmities
ingender not hopes but feares.
                  The seale which the eternall prouidence
adds to her felicity was the marriage of
this great Prince, with her who may bee
sayd to bee the only flower of Queenes,
as Florence which hath brought her forth
is the flower of all the Citties of Italy. If
the law of religion were as powerfull as
that of duty, they should appoynt sacrifices

vnto her, as Rome did to the nursse of
her two founders, for shee is mother to
three Princes, the liuely and firme pillers
of this estate, for whose liues France is
more bound to heauen, then it should bee
for the death of all her enemies.
                  Thus the great God who is the author
of vnion and concord, did shew that this
peace was pleasing vnto him, and added
to this blessing two graces, which could
not be expected but from his hands, both
which make estates absolutely happy, for
as children are the hopes of kingdomes,
so are Queenes the comforts of Kings.
Hee who preferred wisdome before all
other things that were offered vnto him
from aboue, saith, that such an incounter is
the gift of God, and iust recompence of merits,
and hee compares it to the Sunne rising,
to a Lampe before the Altar, to a
peece of gold, to a foundation vppon a
Rock.
                  As he had purchased the name of most

victorious in actions of warre, so hee got
that of most great in affaires of peace. He
had caused himselfe to bee feared and admired
in one season, hee maketh himselfe
to bee redoubted and beloued in another.
                  Vpon the height of this great tranquilitie,
hee considers the winds and clowds that
may trouble it. And as they that are neere
to mount Athos see the Sunne sooner
then others, hee discouers with the first
how designes rise, and how the affaires of
the world are managed. His eyes are the
stars which watch while the people rest.
He hath no need to haue a Page say vnto
him, like vnto the King of Persia, Rise Sir,
and take order for your affaires.
                  
                  Hee watcheth not simply as a King,
but like a Pastor, Who hath more care of his
flock then of himselfe. A royalty hath so
long and troublesome watchings as Dauid
in his distempers desired not the wings
of an Eagle to flye high, but of Doues to

rest him-selfe, for that they flie lowe neere
vnto the bankes, not of seas, whereas
the spirit is alwayes in paine, hauing to
deale in two such inconstant things, water
and winde; but of those riuers whereas
they neither lose bottom nor banck,
where-as the strange sauour of the water
doth not offend their stomackes, nor
the feare of danger, nor distrust least
the calme should bee turned vnto a
storme.
                  His watches makes vs to sleepe in
safety, breathing the sweete ayre of concord
and felicity, so as France were
no more bound to those which were the
founders of theyr greatnesse, then to
this Prince which was the setler of their
rest.
                  They should seeme very ignorant,
or malicious, that should not acknowledge
the great vigilancie in the concord
which was sometime vnknowne vnto the
French, by that furious diuision of minds,

which made France like vnto that Image
of that vnfortunate Laococon, the which
is seene in one of his royall houses, and
doth represent the extreame agonies of his
fathers death whom the serpents had slain,
of the childs paines whom he had stung,
and of his feare of another whom he had
foulded in his tayle. He knew well what it
was to feare, to suffer, and to dye at one instant
by the violent cruelties and cruell
violence of diuision, which in the end
makes those places where she inhabits,
like vnto those wheras poyson growes, so
naked and bare of all fruit, as euen the barren
dust cannot remayne there.
                  The Gods of the antients are represented
with a harpe in their hands. It is a pleasant
thing to see Apollo of Megara to hold a
lance in one hand and a harp in the other,
not that Musicke was their profession, but
the accord and harmoniacal proportion
of estates and of people is their chiefest
duty that command and raigne, and that

Prince may be compared vnto the Gods
who hold mens minds in concord.
                  Hee can order and dispose of things according
to seasons, his remedies are not
contrary to time. A good temper makes
all difficulties easie, and wee may say that
he hath in his disposition those two fabulous
tunnes, out of one of the which goeth
out the clowds which melt into waters,
and from the other the windes which
makes the raine to cease. The Panther after
a continued raine doth not cast
forth so sweete a perfume, as this peace
doth seeme sweet after a great inundation
of bloud and teares; And to the end this
first bud, which did but shew it selfe should
not be withered with the winds of discontent,
which were not yet pacified, and that
priuate murmurings should not end with
generall complaints, hee gaue order to repaire
all things that were needfull, and to
cut vp the rootes that might breed troble,
and aboue all to make him serue in peace
                  
                     
The praise, which is giuen a Prince for
his Religion and piety seems superfluous,
for there is not any one but should haue it
in perfection. To seperate religion from a
princes hart were to draw a flower from
the stock, the branch from the body:
one cannot liue without the other. Hee
cannot haue so little Irrelligion but he
hath enough to doe much mischeefe, and
the least errors that he commits are neuer
small. The zeale of Religion, which
serues for a pretext in the deseignes of
great men, is the chiefe instrument which
doth mooue the wills of the meaner sort,
who cannot endure to be forced in their
conscience.
                  It is a folly in princes to thinke to raigne
ouer men and will not suffer God to
raigne ouer them. Besides the common
obligation with all creatures, they are
bound, for that their power depends of
that of god, and their lands are of his land.
They must like Ezechias raigne vnder

the commandements of God, and the law
of God must raign ouer the people. While
their King had care of the seruice of God,
they were alwaies well serued. Whiles
the Ark appeared in the head of the army,
and the Army honoured the Arke, the
people of God passed no day without
triumph. The harmony is admirable
betwxit the Church and the State, Moises
prayes for Iosua, Iosua fights for Moises.
                  
                  Without the zeale of Gods seruice Constantine
had not merited that glorious surname
which the Calender of the Church
of Constantinople giues him, of Apostle among
Kings, of equall to Apostle, and other
which the marble monuments haue preserued
for him, of founder of the publique
peace and defender of Religion, and of the
faith. Without this zeale the two
Theodoses should not be held the two
firme pillars of Christendome, our
Kings should not be called most Christian.
Rauenna had not preserued in one of her

towers this goodly inscription: Pipin the
godly, was the first which opened the Paxe to
this great Church.
                  
                  This Diamond of Pietie is so goodly in
the heart of this Prince, as it hath no need
of any foile to set it forth. Dotage and superstition
are displeasing, and some-times
he laments the simplicity of those which
are abused, and the couetousnesse of such
as doe suffer it, and for all this he doth not
offer to lay his hand to the censor, or to
shake the Arke, contenting himself (without
wronging the piety of his fathers) to
keepe a iust measure in the harmonie of
conscience; The greatest and most continued
toyle of all others, for he can neuer
be so iust, nor so equall, but some mallcontent
will murmure. Hee must set diuers
instruments of prouidence to worke,
to distinguish the zealous, he must know
the interest of those which make vse of
the Kings authoritie to offend piety, and
of those which make a shew of piety to

offend the Kings authority, But he neuer
giues eare to counsells nor to remedies
which he knowes to be more dangerous
then the mischeife, and hauing learned
that faith must be manured by doctrine
and not by armes, by the fire of Charitie
and not by the steele of might He
leaues all the glory of the triumph of
armes to heauen, and is content to see the
combats for religion changed into disputations,
the battells into conferences, the
Canons into tongues, and the swords into
pennes. Mens minds grow more tame and
giue eare one to another: they which had
gone astray for company are reclaimed
by example. Euery one thinks of his own
pack. And parradise is open for all men,
get it who can.
                  The ministers of Religion, beeing alowed
by the Kings Edict, labour to gett
ground: The Prelats of the Catholicke
Church hauing long relied vppon the
continuance of their possession seeke out

their titles which they had neglected, and
produce them against those that troubled
them, but the contentions of doctrine
doth not touch the words of obedience,
they yield vnto Caesar that which is Caesars,
and vnto God that which is Gods, euery
man renders an accompt of his conscience
vnto GOD, and his duty vnto his
King.
                  Duties are performed without confusion,
and there is not any one but knowes,
that whatsoeuer binds them to the seruice
of God, exceedeth all other bonds both
naturall and ciuill. God before all, and all after
the King, where there is question of
Gods honor, you must tread all humane
respects vnder foot; Therein the children
are strangers, and the fathers vnknowne.
The fathers nourish their children, not
with their bread, but that of God, and God
hath redeemed them, not with his bloud,
but that of his sonne. Where there is question
of the Princes health, the life of those

from whom we hold ours, or which holdeth
from vs, should not be more deere vnto
vs.
                  An estate or common-wealth may fitly
be compared to a great family, the Prince
is the Father ordeined by God, but with
more authority ouer his subiects then the
father hath ouer his children, and duty is
not more strictly commanded and recommended
to children and seruants towards
the father of a family, then to subiects
towards their King. This benefit of
concord in matters so difficult to reconcile,
bound the King to praise God, and
the realme to thanke the King, and to
giue him the glorious name of Chasemischiefe,
which Greece hath giuen to
Hercules, as to the author of their publicke
safeties. Princes cannot doe more
for their people, there is no benefit that
doth equall this, and nothing doth so
much augment their affection towards
their Princes, as the remembrance

of their benefits. God is worshipped and
serued by men, for the great good and benefit
they receiue daily, and the thankes
that they yeeld vnto him, are new demands.
                  That great and necessary temper which
the King brings to the preseruation of the
publick concord, is not generally receiued
for a certaine proofe of his piety, they
will haue it more manifest. Slander, who
hath much toung, and little fore-head,
who is not pleased but in licking vlcers,
hath beene so impudent as to referre the
most cleare and sincere proofes of his pietie
to hypocrisie, and to say that his
mouth like vnto Annius Satire, did blow
both cold and whote. His enemies not able
to beleeue, but that this vessell did still retaine
the sauour with which it had beene
seasoned, said, that if his conuersion had
beene true, it had produced the same effects
which they had seene in those great
Princes, who had declared themselues irreconciliable

enemies to those whom
they held to bee forsaken of the true religion,
not allowing temples nor altars to
the subiects, beeing impossible that truth
should agree with lyes, that Iosua could
haue intelligence with Achan, Sampson
with the Philistines, Dauid with Goliah, Asa
with the Idolaters, Constantine with Arrius,
Theodosius with Nestorius, Martian with
Apolinaris, and Eutiches; Saint Lewis with
the Albigeois, and where the Arke is, Dagon
must needs giue place.
                  Happy for thee, poore France, that
these reasons which are not good at all
seasons, nor in all countries, are no more
whispered in thine eares; that these inhumaine
councels which haue made
thee loose so much sence, and so much
bloud, are now banished from the
thoughts of thy Princes. Councels of
Empiricks and Montebancks, no Christian
councels, and much contrary to the
eternall wisdome which seperateth the

good grane from the bad vntill the haruest.
                  If thou diddest beleeue them, thou
must open the wound which the soueraigne
balme of this concord had cured,
and shouldest execute vpon thine owne
children, who had so well serued in thy
restauration and liberty, the threate of Cresus
against the Lamsachnes, to roote them
out like vnto pine-trees, which being once
cut doe neuer put forth againe. As the Piety
of this Prince is slandered by strangers
euen so many of the religion, from whom
he had seperated himself, did beleeue that
the necessity of his affaires, hauing forced
him to this change, his heart had not consented
vnto it but only in shew. A great
spirit among them seeing where Chastell
had hurt him, spake thus boldly vnto
him, Sir, for that you haue left vs with the
mouth only, God hath hurt you but on the
lippe.
                  
                  But both friends and enemies were forced

to change this discourse, when as hee
would haue the honor of Fountainbleau
remaine to the Catholicke Church,
when as they saw him presse with such
earnestnesse the Duchesse of Barre his sister
to bee instructed; when as hee had
restored the masse in three hundred places
from whence it had beene banished;
when as so often, in so many discourses
hee blamed the Intention of the first
authors of these nouelties: saying they had
done like vnto him that to clense his fathers
house setts fire of it to haue it done the more
speedily.
                  
                  Euery man knowes how he did comfort
those, wcich had any thought to
reduce themselues. When he saw them
wauer in the contrary opinions and that
it seemed they would be instructed in that
which they would not willingly beleeue,
he added these reasons which were alwaies
most powerfull. Hee told them
that it is great presumption in children

to know more then their mother, obstinacie
not to bee mooued at the secret motions
of the spirit, which breaketh and
consumes presumption, reduceth vanity
into powder, and mocks at the wisdome
of the wise. Hee hath beene often heard
say, that hee would haue lost an arme, that
they which were in error, had acknowledged
the truth; but that faith was a gift of GOD,
where vnto hee called all, but did not enforce
any.
                  
                  Great is the bounty of God, who vouchsafeth
to seeke man, great is the rashnesse
of man, who causeth God to seeke him,
and great is his felicity if he will be found.
Hee therefore exhorteth the Bishops and
Doctors, to intreate these sick men with
gentle and easie remedies, and that the
heate of passion should yeeld to wisdome
and mildenesse. That royall speech came
out of his mouth, they must bee tamed, as
they say Hercules did a certaine Gyant,
which is (as they of the religion reproch it

vnto me) embracing them he should smother
them. This piety had extended her
branches beyond the seas. The Christians
which are in the East confesse that his
respect had preserued many Churches,
and that the markes of our redemption
remaine still in despight of the rage and
enuy of the Iewes, who vanted that they
had obtained the destruction therof from
the Emperour of the Turkes. So many
new houses of religion, of doctrine, and
of piety, shew with what zeale the heart of
this Prince was enflamed, and that they
may say of him as of Theodosius, that he had
no lesse care of the affaires of the church then
of his owne. But this is not enough, Pope
Clement the 8. doth not thinke that the
church doth enioy the full fruits of the
peace which he had procured, vnlesse the
Iesuits might returne to their houses. The
King restores them, nay rather he settled
them in France; for they were not before
as they had found by proof. His clemency

defended them against the reasons of the
first seate of his iustice, against the teares
of his eldest daughter the Vniuersity
of Paris. And although the fruits of
the Olyue-tree come late, yet their
liquor is good and holsome. Euen so as
this grace had beene long attended and
pursued, nine yeares, it was no lesse sweet
vnto them that receiued it. It was published
throughout all the world, thanks came
from all parts, They of Peru, and Chochin,
Iapan, Goa and China, added
presents of some singularities of the Contry.
It was followed with the ruine of the
Pyramide, with greatest effects of loue and
magnificence. He gaue them his house of
La Fleshe with the garden. I haue obserued
the pleasure which he tooke in speaking
of that action and what content he
receiued when as a great Cardinall tould
him that by this restoring his maiesty had
gotten two thousand learned pennes
for his seruice and perpetuall fame:

When as they represented vnto him the
Catalogue of Colledges, & the thanks of
three prouinces of France, Hee vsed these
words vnto them, which should serue as
an Epigraphè vpon all their houses, assurance
followes confidence, I trust in you, assure
your selues of Me, with these papers
I receiue the hearts of all your company,
and with the effects I will witnesse mine
vnto you. I haue alwaies sayd that they
which feare and loue God well, cannot
but doe well, and are alwaies most faithfull
to their Prince. We are now better informed,
I did hold you to be otherwise
then you are, and you haue found me other
then you held me, I would it had
beene sooner, but there is means to recompence
that is past: loue Me, and I will
loue you, But the Iesuits do not alone
enioy this sweet light of this fauour;
merit calleth other companies whereas
they finde great and worthy obiects
of this Princes grace who applieth not

there spirits but to the glory of God, and
the publick good, worthy to enioy dignities,
for that they had no desire to obteine
them, capable to execute their charges,
for that they feare not to lose them, and
are content rather to deserue them then to
pursue them. Among them he hath found
great seruants for God and his Church,
and the choyce which hee hath made of
their merit, hath giuen glory to his iudgment.
The Bishops and Pastors which he
had chosen are Timothes in their houses,
Chrysostomes in their pulpits, and Augustines
in disputation. Three Cardinals, made by
his hand, haue beene found so accomplisht
in all vertues, as the conclaue had
not sought any other to fill the first chaire
of the Church, if the scruple of the beginning
had not staid it.
                  The estate of piety and religion beeing
setled in his estate, nothing wauers in the
policie but hee doth assure it, nothing
stumbles but hee raiseth it vp againe, and

although hee liues in the very center, yet
if there bee any motion vppon the extremities,
his hand is there as soone as his
thoughts. The sweetnesse of rest, the pleasures
of peace, are not let to great voyages
in the most difficult seasons of the yeare.
Sedition begins to breake out in Poytou,
he disperceth it; the affaires of Normandy
haue need of his presence, he goes thether
and giues order for the gouernment
of Cane; there is a diuision betwixt the
towne and citizens of Metz, but it vanisht
at the first beames of his eyes. His seruice
is disturbd in some places of Gyenne, but
at the first newes of his comming, euery
one doth sacrifice to his obedience. Sedan
hath the honor to make him arme powerfully,
& they content receiue him victoriously,
and yet the victory brought them
no other discommodity, but a forced
obedience.
                  In this great prosperity of his affaires,
hee yeelds the like to those which haue

releiued and assisted him in aduersity, and
which haue serued and followed him in
his greatest crosses. All Europe doth honor
him, as the first ornament of all that
which hee hath at any time produc'd of
great and famous in soueraigne houses.
His word, fortified with this great credit
and authority, hath such power in the
hearts of earthly powers, as they hold it
as the Oracle of that which they should
do or auoide, and salute him with this glorious
title, of Arbitrator of Christendom, and
protector of their quiet.
                  
                  If the general good had not touch'd him
neerer then his owne perticuler, and if he
had not had a liuely feeling in his soule of
the ruines which Christendome suffered
by the diuisiō of hir Princes, he had made
his profit of the miseries of his neighbors.
Hee had entertained the hatred betwixt
Spaine and England, whereof the rootes
were to deep. He had not refused the command
of the Low-countries vnder the

name of Protector. He had done his businesse
beyond the Alpes during the war of
Ferrara, hee had past after the taking of
Montmelian, and had disputed the rights
of the houses of Orleance and Anjou.
                  Pope Clement the eight considering all
this, said, that the holy Sea was no lesse
bound vnto this Prince, for that hee had
retired his army from the frontires of Italy,
then it had bin of former times to Charlemaine,
in freeing them from the oppression
of the Lombards. The 2. pillers which
supported her quiet, were shaken in the
beginning of the Popedome of Paul the 5.
Discord laboured to ouer-throw, and their
ruine was at hand. Sicile by an earthquake
was sometime seperated from Apulia, and
Spaine from Affrick, it was to bee feared
that Italy by this ciuill diuision would bee
pulled from the vnion of the Church. It
seemed that the Pope was come to Ferrara
to giue the first blow, and that the Venetians
stood ready with their Pikes charged.
                  
                     
That great GOD which descending to
the earth brought peace with him, and returning
to heauen recommended it to his
Apostles, would not that the Pope should
remaine long in the thoughts of warre,
nor that hauing drawn one sword against
the Venetians he should strike them with
another, punishing one offence with a
double punishment. He would not suffer
the Venetians to ingage themselues in
doubtfull resolutions fit for such as are in
some hard and desperate condition,
which suffer themselues to fall into the
fire after that they haue of long auoyded
the smoke. He would that the King
should be the author of this peace, and
the Arbitrator of the controuersy, he
made it knowne that he dealt not in any
thing but the euent was happy, representing
to the one & the other that the course
they tooke to repayre their interest by
armes, was full of danger and scandall.
The dispute was betweene the father and

the children, and there could be noe such
bitternesse betwixt persons so neere allied
but it might be mollified.
                  Loue ingaged their hearts one to another.
the father liues more in his children then
in himselfe. As the thing known is in him
that knoweth it, so contrariwise he that
loues is wholly in it that it loues. As soone
as he had made these spirits apprehend
the ruines and desolations which this discord
should bring to christendome, they
disrobd themselues freely of their interest,
and gaue them to the wise counsell of this
Prince.
                  If the Netherlands, after they had endured
the fury and violence of warre fiftie
yeares, doe now tast of the sweetnes of
peace, they are bound to him. No man
but he could gouerne those vlcerd spirits
hauing so wisely foreseene and attended
the times that the sore should be ripe and
ready to open and to cure.
                  The powerfull and warlike Nation

of the Suisses, which hath preserued the
antient discipline of armes, who purchased
their liberty by nine battels, and maintained
is at the charges of the Princes of
Christendome who giue them siluer to
haue their friendship, haue alwaies beleeued
that the aliance of this Prince made
a part of their felicity. His name was so
venerable, his authority so sacred in their
assemblies as in pronouncing it many
seeds of discord and diuision which beganne
to grow haue beene supprest, and
fence the renuing of ancient treaties those
people haue thought that they lost all
their thoughts, wordes and deseignes
if they did not employ them to praise
the vertue and fortune of this great
Prince.
                  Hee maintayned his estate in peace,
he did not suffer the flower to wither
before it brought forth the expected
fruites.
                  He had a care to keepe that Oliue-branch,

purchased with the price of his
bloud, hazard of his life, aud the losse of
the goodliest and most flourishing yeares
of his age, alwaies greene, He yeelds liberty,
concord, abundance and felicity
to the French whereof ciuill diuision had
depriued them, and representing vnto
himselfe the stormes and tempest which
did aflict Moscouy, Swedland, Poland &
Persia, and the clouds which he did foresee
would fall vpon other prouinces, he
had beene seene to lift vp his eyes to heauen,
whether he sent his best thoughts to
acknowledge the prosperities which he
had receiued, and turning towards his
good seruants, he spake these words, God
be thanked we haue beene as they are, vpon the
stage, but now we are spectators and courteous
hearers. An inseperable acknowledgement
in his soule, and an ordinary prayse
in his mouth.
                  He referrs all the conquest and restauration
of France to the glory & vertue of
God. He must haue a soule wel setled, in al

her functions, and well composd, that
doth not flatter himselfe in these encounters.
All great Captaines, speaking of their
exployts, grace them either with their valour
or with their wisdome, it is a wonder
to see them giue a greater share to fortune
then to their owne iudgments, or confesse
that they are more bound to the fauors of
heauen, then to earthly powers. Onely
Moyses was so temperate and modest as he
neuer vaunted of that which he did. The
greatest armies of the world compared
vnto his, are but troopes of Carbines, for
he commanded ouer a million and eight
hundreth thousand soules, whereof there
were two and twenty thousand Leuits,
and sixe hundreth, three thousand, fiue
hundreth and fifty fighting men. It is a
goodly sight in the historie of the Iewes,
to behold these twelue Tribes put into
foure battallions towards the foure corners
of the world, vnder foure Colonells,
and foure Standards, whereof the first

being greene, had for a deuice a Lyon; the
second redde, with a mans head; the third
yealow with a Bull, and the fourth white
and redde with an Eagle. Hee makes no
accompt of all this, but referres his victories
to the inuincible arme of the God of
battels.
                  The remembrance of the graces which
this Prince hath receiued from heauen, is
like vnto a pure Christall glasse, which
sends back the portraite vnto his beginning,
but hee hath often beene heard to
speake these Royall words; When I was
borne, there were a thousand other soules more
borne, what haue I done vnto God to be more
then they? It is his meere grace and mercy,
which doth often binde mee more vnto his iustice,
for the faults of great men are neuer
small. By the singular prouidence of the
great God hee hath brought France to a
more happy estate then shee her selfe
durst hope for, whereas hauing scarce
either pulse or spirit, after the death of the

last King, shee cast her selfe into his
armes. Hee had beene an Alexander in
warre for her, dangers haue beene his exercises,
toyles his delights, afflictions his
pleasures. He hath maintained his affaires
by courage and resolution, hee hath vnfolded
the gordian knot of ciuill confusion:
hee hath forced all his enemies to
turne their backs, and their faces to flight.
His valour hath appeared in most desperate
occasions, which could neuer
amaze his iudgement, nor shake his courage.
Hee ledde his seruants so safely and
happily in dangers, as he might say vnto
them as Pericles said vnto the Athenians,
If no man but I lead you to death, you shall
bee immortall.
                  
                  Hee hath performed an infinite number
of great and heroyck exploits with
such diligence, as they that consider the
combate and encounter of his Army,
holds that it neuer stood still, and they
that numbred the sieges it made, beleeued

that it did alwayes Campe. In the end
hee bound all his subiects to praise God,
to see him seated in the royall throne of
his fathers: Hee had made it stately in
peace. In the beginning he found it all of
brick, but hee built it all of Marble. Hee
adorned it with goodly workes, whose
beautie is not yet vnprofitable, like to the
Pyramides of Egipt, for besides the glory
which did redound to the magnificence
of this estate, it brings great commodities
to Artes, manufactures, comerce and
voyages, they ease the needy, employ
idlenesse, and make her no lesse bound
vnto him, hauing restored their good
orders, then Thebes to Pelopidas, and
Athens to Thrasibulus, who had giuen
them libertie.
                  Pollicie which was vnknowne whilst
that right was not seene but through the
smoake of Harquebuses, and that
France had as many Kings as Gouernors,
now she discouers the iniuries which are

done vnro the Law with the oppression of
the poore people, she will not suffer the
feeble to bee ouer laden with the burdens
which the stronger haue cast vpon them;
that inequality shall not produce confusion,
nor confusion mutenie, and that
what hath escaped by the fury of armes
shal not remain abandoned to the violēce
of Iniustice, So as order hauing restored
good bloud into the veines, and giuen spirit
to the heart of France, she doth enioy
happily the euerlasting mines of corne,
wine, salt, cloth and wooll, for the which
Peru payes for a tribute the halfe of that
which is sent into Spaine; for of eight millions
foure come into France, whervpon
some one praising Spayne for that there
was only Pistols and Ryalls to bee seene,
and no other coyne beeing currant; The
King answered in these termes, Those coines
in those Countries are markes of aboundance,
out of their country they are markes of necessirie.
They come to vs, and we goe not to them,

they doe not giue them to vs they owe them as
to their creditors. To make the felicity of
France absolute, aud to make it so strong,
and powerfull as after it shall seeme an
oke, which to braue the winds hath as
many branches without as rootes within,
there is no frontier but sees her places in
safety, no Arcenal but is full of armes and
Canons, and no garrison but is content
with his entertainment. He makes a temple
of Saturne of the Bastile to preserue his
treasure and to defend him from the violence
of necessity, the which hath often
represented vnto him how pittifull that
Princes estate is which is surprised and
hath no meanes to resist, He acquitts his
debts, payes his pensions, furnisheth his
charges, and disingageth the demeanes of
his crowne▪ His liberality dispenseth so
iustly the graces, which to haue them continue
long he poureth forth sparingly.
He gaue by reason, not by ostentation, &
neuer did vertue loose her time in her pursute,

if first shee lost not patience.
                  All things are restrained within the
bounds of duty, the magistrates haue their
eyes open, so as nothing can passe vnpunished,
and the mischiefe perisheth with
the author. The first examples proffit, the
publike impunity draweth on offences
wheras punishment smothers them. The
blowes that fall vpon the authors amaze
others. Phallaris did one act of Iustice
shutting him into the Bull of brasse that
had inuented it.
                  Their are seditions whose beginning
cannot be discouered, and those are most
dangerous, resembling bushes which
grow without sowing or planting; one
branch ioynes to another, a thorne fastens
to a bramble by such a thick coniunction
as no man can put to his hand without
harme, and if he set fier to it, it is able to
burne a whole forrest, and yet no man
knowes whence the fier comes. That eye
which watcheth ouer Scepters sees and
foresees it. He suffers not bad wordes to

haue any aliance with murmerings, nor
false bruits with rash iudgements of publicke
actions and enterprises, and that the
subiects shall not seeke to hold any other
in the estate then that of obedience.
                  The liberall sciences and professions
durst not in the beginning promise vnto
themselues any great reliefe from a Prince
who in his youth had no other accademie
then ciuil warre, which opening the temple
of Ianus doth alwaies shut that of the
muses▪ learned men spake plainly that
they should not attend of him neither
the honors nor the prayses which Plato
receiued of Dennis, Possidonius of Pompey,
Frontonius of Marke Anthony, Arsenius of
Theodosius, nor Ausonius of Gracian, and
they thought that the work-men could
not be esteemed or cherrished but of such
that loued the workes. But as the fier and
lightening comes out of the clouds
that are moist and soft; the most ardent
fauors somtimes comes from wills

that seeme cold, for this Prince whom
they held a Marius, shewed himselfe a Caesar
to all that professed learning. The exercises
that flourished in the chiefe Citties
of this Realme, the new buildings, and
the new chaires adorned the Vniuersities
of France; the honors, dignities, pensions,
and preferments which hee had giuen in
fauor of learning, are certaine proofes of
his affections. And if our age doth produce
Virgils, hee will be their Augustus, if
Aristotles their Alexander; if Polibius their
Scipio; if Alcuinus their Charlemaine; for he
drawes from among the common sort,
those which haue more excellent qualities
aboue the rest. Hee holds that it concernes
a Prince in honour and dutie to
yeeld vnto peace all the liberties and
commendable exercises which war hath
taken from her.
                  The Romans did sometime place the
Image of Hercules neere vnto the Muses,
and the Greekes gaue him the name of

                     Musagete, to shew that the sciences haue
need of the force of Princes for their quiet,
and Princes the fauour of the Sciences
for their reputation. All that haue knowledge
enter not into the Temple of his
bounty, if they doe not produce singular
proofes of their knowledge; Hee will
know them, trye them, and prooue them,
whether their heads bee as well made as
well fild. Good God! what a cleernesse of
iudgment is this knowledge? Mettall is
not better knowne by the sound, then hee
doth iudge of mens spirits by their words.
Nothing can bee held so couert & so close
but he perceth into it. He maketh no great
accompt of those which haue but a superficiall
shew of sufficiencie, & are like vnto
small wines which will not keepe. From
these iudgments I haue learned this goodly
doctine. For as small springs are emptied
if they be often drawne, euen so spirits
which haue shallow foundations; Silence
is good in them to make them seeme wise,

distrust to appeare aduised, and reprehension
to seeme iudicious. Hee doth not regard
the vaine and fruitlesse curiosities
which extract the braine, and learne that
which they must forget when they haue
learned it, The study of vaine things is a
toilesome idlenesse, and a painfull folly.
The spirits beeing once stroken with this
disease, are cured very late, they spend
whole nights to finde how many knots
were in Hercules club, and of what coulor
Achilles beard was, and the end of their curiosity
is alwayes ignorance. Hee doth
much commend those men which can
speake of all things, and are like vnto liuing
libraries, whereas they finde whatsoeuer
they desire. Hee holds that doctrine
perfect and solide, which doth not
passe ouer difficulties slightly, but pierceth
into them, and resolues them, and
especially that which honoreth the publick
and profiteth the priuate.
                  A maker of Anagrames presenting some
thing vnto him vpon his name, & telling

him that he was very poore; I beleeue it, answered
the King, for they that vse this trade
cannot grow very rich. Hee was attentiue to
the discourses that were made in his presence,
but hee could not indure ignorant
men to speake, when as learned men were
silent, nor that they should hold their places.
Athens could not endure Pothinus to
play his comedies vpon the theater wheras
Euripides had repeated his tragedies.
                  It seemeth that many good and profitable
inuentions haue bin vnknowne in former
ages, to appeare vnder his raigne, and to
make nature iealous of art. And although
that imposture & falshood disguise themselues
often with the habit of sufficiencie,
hee doth not contemne the Inuentors, hee
heares them willingly, remembring Alexanders
repentāce, who would not heare an
vnknown person, which promised to giue
him news within six daies from places frō
the which hee did not receiue any in sixe
weeks, & foūd him not when he had most
need.
                  
                     
But can we cast our eyes vpon al his great
and royall actions, and not admire that
great modesty and temper which doth
beautifie them, which are not easily seene
in great powers and authorities, which
breeds a maiesty confirmed by time, prosperity
and reputation? Princes which
haue made their fortune, who haue raigned
long and haue all according to their
harts desire, do commonly grow insupportable,
and thinke to offend their maiesty
if they do not retire themselues from
the sight of men. Alexander after the defeat
of Darius did not vse any salutation
in his letters but vnto Phocian and Antipater,
A long raigne makes a Princes power
so absolute and so fearfull as he can hardly
containe himselfe in that first moderation.
Wherfore Tiberius and Nero were as
much hated in the end of their empires
as they had beene honored in the beginning.
                  Their is no change in the good nature

of this great Prince, he doth not abuse his
good fortunes, he doth not thinke that
his body yeelds a greater shaddow after,
then before his victories. They haue often
admired his great familiarity with his
subiects and oft he hath beene heard say
to free them from this wonder, Pompe and
shewes are for those which haue no other means
to make themselues to be esteemed, but God by
his grace hath put enough into mee to make
knowne what I am, and at all euents I had rather
be beloued then feared. A royall speech.
Loue growes not from rigor, nor pride.
The philosophers hold that bitternesse
brings forth nothing. Too great seuerity
ruines in steed of edifying. A prince may
be hated, although they which hate him
are not hatefull vnto him; but he cannot
be beloued vnlesse he loue. He which will
be beloued and not loue, is like vnto him
that seeketh to light a lampe at a torch
that is quite out.
                  Posterity will receiue with more admiration

then beliefe the tables of this incredible
mildnesse and facillity. I haue seene
Embassadors so rauisht and amazed, as
going from their audience they haue said
that they wondred that the stones and rockes
haue not mooued out of their places to serue so
good a Prince. His moderation, which
makes him so wise in affaires and so tractable
vnto reason, doth not suffer his spirrits
to wander in the deseignes of Cyrus,
who did not limit his rest vntill he was tired
with the vanities of his ambition, for
he thinkes in time what he shall doe for
himselfe when he hath no more to do for
his estate, that my Lord the Daulphin
shall be capable to raigne and he in that
part of his life which counsell Princes
that haue liued in torment to seeke for a
safe port.
                  Hee giues the great toyles of his youth
to all France, and reserues the last season
to his house at Fountainebleau.
                  King Francis the first, her first restorer,

had foretold that they should one day see
her one of the goodliest ruines in Europe,
The last troubles, verifying this prediction,
had made it a retreat of wilde
beastes which durst not goe to the
Forrests.
                  He hath raised her ruines and hath beautified
her with such perfections as she
merrits to be nombred amongst the wonbers
of the world. The Duke of Sauoy,
The Duke of Mantoua, the Duke of Virtemberg
haue admired it as the goodliest
abode in Europe. There he resolued to attend
some glorious occasion for the crouning
of his life and toyles to the good of
Christendome. In this sweet solitarinesse,
which is alwaies enuironed with actions,
exercises and affayres, he is pleased to
quite the victorious Bayes which shaddowe
his forehead, to refresh him-selfe
in the shaddowes of those vallies which
he hath planted; and to passe the time
without any losse of time.
                  
                     
When hee is in his house, idlenesse doth
not steale from him any moment of his
houres, he is alwayes in vigor and force,
alwaies fresh and in humor, alwayes carefull
of his reputation. The older it growes
the more carefull it should bee manured.
His exercises in peace are no lesse laborious
then his millitary actions, hee enters
into affaires before day, and with the
break of day he goeth a hunting & followeth
the Stags thirty leagues, at his returne
he giues himselfe to some other exercises,
he ends the iourney in his alleys, goes about
his channel, & maks his whole train
to sweat. Hee neuer steps foote, speakes a
word, nor giues a looke but with some designe.
There is no discourse so familiar,
nor priuate fauour which hindreth, but
within an houre after hee lets them know
whom hee hath fauoured that hee is the
maister.
                  In this goodly and royall house he hath
treated of the goodliest affaires in Christendome,

and hath receiued great blessings
from heauen. There he hath ioyed
at the birth of my Lord the Dolphin, of
the Duke of Orleance, the Duke of Anjou,
and of the Lady Elizabeth his eldest
Daughter.
                  This place hath produced that iust and
necessary Edict against the liberty and fury
of combates, the happy fruits of peace,
to spare and stanch the best and whotest
bloud of France, which was shed by this
wound of the point of honor. The losse
of bloud is alwayes suspect, if nature doth
not consent vnto it, not the Physitions ordaine
it. It is so necessary for the preseruation
of mans body, as from what part soeuer
it goes, wee must seeke to stay it. The
King was not content, with Numa to haue
the law which staies this bloud within the
body published, but hee would like vnto
Lycurgus haue it obserued. In former ages
they feared men more then lawes, in his
reigne they fear the laws more then men.
                  
                     
This exact and perfect obseruation,
showes, that ordinances which were impossible
to his predecessors, passe without
contempt vnder the absolute and redoubted
respect of his cōmandement. Hee was
much grieued that he had no sooner vsed
this remedy, and said, that hee had not attempted
it but when as he thought he might doe
it effectually and profitably. A noble man of
Flanders came to demand leaue of him to
fight in France against another stranger.
Hee answered him with this Dilemma,
Combats are eyther permitted by God, or forbidden;
if it bee allowed why doe you refuse it
in Flanders? if it bee forbidden; why doe you
seeke it in France? there may bee many and diuerse
Kings, but there can bee but one God, one
faith, and one law; and if there were no reason
to the contrary, should I allow that to strangers,
which I grieue that I cannot preuent in
mine owne subiects?
                  
                  A midst these publick thoughts he doth
not forget the priuate care of the breeding

and institution of the Princes his childrē,
the three mighty pillers of this estate. Hee
hath a wonderfull desire to see that royall
plant which should succeed him, to grow
and flourish, and said often to the Queen,
that she could not haue any meditation in her
soule, nor prayer in her mouth of greater feruency
and deuotion, then to obtaine the fauour
of God, to see her sonne well bred vp, adding,
that there was nothing so dangerous, as
to be an ignorant King, sometimes calling
those Princes that were ill brought vp,
golden Calues. When as he gaue him those,
who do at this day so carefully second his
intentions, he spake these words vnto him
worthy of so good a father, and so wise a
King, My sonne, trouble not your selfe for riches
or treasure, I will leaue you sufficient, but
you must make your selfe capable to get knowledge
and vertue, which I cannot giue you:
If you your selfe doe not endeuour to attaine
vnto it by those meanes which those will
shew you whom I haue appointed to bee about
you. Princes may bee borne good,

generous and capable of vertue, but institution
only makes them wise: wisdome
cannot be gotten without payne, she cannot
be sould, and it may be she should find
few Chapmen, for folly is bought daily.
                  Realmes haue an interest in the breeding
of their Kings children, and the care
that comes from them should be sacred
vnto them. Romulus to make triall of his
force cast a Iauelin from mount Auentin
to Palatine, the which entred so farre into
a far soyle, as it could not be puld out, the
end of the dart which was of a Ceruicetree
was couered with earth, tooke roote,
cast forth branches and became a great
tree, the which was walled about and preserued
with so great care, as if any one
saw the leanes but wither, or that it had
neede of watering to keeep it greene, he
gaue an alarum to the whole Citty and
cried for water, as if all had beene on fier.
                  In like manner subiects haue cause to
greiue and complaine when as these

plants from whence they hope for fruits
of Iustice, and the shaddow of their rest,
do wither, being negligently clensed, watered,
and manured.
                  Amidst all this he is wonderfully carefull
of his maiesty, and to maintaine this
great reputation which makes his life admirable
to the whole world. They haue
no other discourse in the Cabinets of
Princes nor in the Senates of commonweales,
but of his heroicall actions and of
his iust and perfect felicities. They are
wonderfully amazed to see a Prince in
former-times so hated, to be so beloued, a
Prince so persecuted to be so happy, a
Prince so valiant to be so milde, a Prince
so good to bee so feared. His name is
knowne to Nations which doe not know
him, he is of such authority as he prescribes
a law euen to those which will not
receiue it but by force. They of Holland
and Zeland haue carried it vnto the 70.
degree, and those countries deserue not

to bee knowne, which doe not know his
reputation. Reputation the Manna and
Nepenthe of generous spirits, the goddesse
of great courages is so delicate, as the least
excesse doth blemish it, an vniust enterprise
dishonoreth it, an act of indiscretion,
negligence, or idlenesse doth deface it, and
a sinister successe ruines it. It is a spirit that
goes and returnes no more. They report
that water, fire, and reputation, vndertooke
to goe throughout the world, and
fearing they should goe astray, they gaue
signes one vnto another: Water said that
they should finde her where as they sawe
reeds, and fire whereas the smoke appeared,
loose mee not said reputation, for if I
get from you, you will neuer finde mee againe.
There is no such misery as to suruiue
ones reputation, nor so great a folly
as to put it in hazard. They commend
that braue archer, who refused to shew his
skill vnto Alexander; fearing to loose that
honor in an houre, which hee had gotten

all his life. In the course of the Olympike
games, hee that failes in the ambitious
hopes of the first crowne, may pretend
the second, or the third, but in this course
of Royall vertues, who so cannot obtaine
that of reputation, shall reape small fruits
of the rest, he is presently contemned, and
to vse the termes of this great Prince, hee
may well say, that the chaine is broken, for
after that he is once grown into contempt
he alwaies declines. They say a Prince
should neuer see the portrait of feare but
on his enemies backe, but there are two
kindes of feare excusable, the one within
against conspiracies, and the other without
against the power and designes of
strangers. He shall preuent the first in doing
nothing that may make him contemtible
and odious to his subiects, and force
& armes shall defend him from the other.
                  A great King that will not haue his maiesty
strike against this dangerous rock of
contempt, must alwaies bend his thoughts
to great actions, for great Princes

are not knowne but by their great enterprises,
God showes that he is God by the
greatnesse of his workes. If he builds it is
a world, if he be angry against the world
he sends a deluge, if he will show his loue
that he beares to the world, he suffers his
sonne to dye vpon the crosse to saue the
world, if hee will recompence the world
it is with his paradice; If hee armes, the
Angels march in the head of his armie,
the Elements are the Marshals of his
Campe, the Rocks remooue from their
center, and follow it to giue it water, the
clowds guide it by day, and pillars of fire
by night, the Sea opens in twelue parts
for her passage, and the sunne stayes to
giue it time to end her victories. If there
were any proportion between that which
was finite and infinite, we may say, that in
like manner a King, which will bee alwayes
held a King, should not doe any
thing but should tend to greatnesse.
                  Wherfore considering that many great

Princes had lost, in the pleasures of peace,
the glory which they had purchased in
the danger of warre, he labours incessantly
to preserue this great authority, credit
and generall reputation. His spirit, which
is quick and actiue, like vnto the highest
element, hath no rest but in trauell, nor
content but in paine. The issue of one
designe, is the entry into another. But as
all things are maintained by order, that
the temples of the Gods are not made of
base stuffe, the reputation of this great
Prince proceeding from great and incomparable
actions, must bee preserued
and increased by great and admirable effects.
Princes which goe not out of their
Cabinets, whose liues are like vnto Oysters,
alwayes shut vp in their shels, who
cause themselues to bee kept like vnto the
fire of the vestall virgins, and are like vnto
those Idols that haue hands and vse
them not, feete and goe not, doe alwayes
suruiue their reputation.
                  
                     
Behold in an Instant a great and mighty
Army which drawes vpon it the eyes and
thoughts of al Europe. If we shall iudge of
the deseigne of this Prince by his courage
and good fortune, what triumph shall he
not hope for? We see the bow bent, but no
man but the Archer knoweth whether
the arrow shall flie. He hath no cause of
feare neither within nor without the
realme. All Princes speake according to
his hearts desire, and yeeld to what he demands.
He knows their forces and sercheth
into their deseignes. The desire to
be vnderstood without sending either letter
or post, hath inuented the Cipher of
the Adamant, by the which they imagine,
that when as the caracter is toucht it
mooues in the counter-cipher a hundreth
leagues from thence. The harts of al princes
are like letters of Adamant, the King
carries the Alphabet, they do not mooue
neere, nor farre of, but he vnderstands it.
                  Charge great King, Charge, where and

when you please. If the God of Armes be
for you, who can be against you? the lightning
makes way through the darkest
clouds, and your deseignes shall shine amidst
the greatest difficulties. They shall
succeed otherwise then men thinke and
in places not foreseene, like vnto diuedoppers,
who casting themselues into the water
rise againe where they are not looked
for. And admitt you had no deseigne, neither
on this side the riuer of Rine, nor behold
the Alpes, it is sufficient to shew what
you can doe when you please to execute
that which is difficult. They iudge of the
monstrous greatnesse of Polyphemus by the
measure of his finger: we must consider
of this Armie what the power of your
Maiesty is.
                  When we behold you in this height of
glory our discourse is changed into admiration,
we do like vnto those people who,
adoring and admiring the sunne, can do
no other thing but lift vp their handes

and set them to their mouthes. Admiration
beginnes and silence ends their homage.
Your felicity is so absolute as you
haue no need of felicity, your subiects are
so happy vnder your Empire, as they can
desire nothing more then that it may be
perpetuall.
               
               
                  Stay Reader.
                  
                     BEhold a strange passage,
frō a Triumph to a Tombe.
I had prepared this discourse
as a Table of the Kings most
memorable actions,, and did
desire to end it by the great effects which were
expected of that mighty Army, which was vppon
the frontier; but in a moment all my
thoughtes were ouerthrowne, and this remainder,
which should haue beene beautified with
the trophees of his armes is filled with the
mournefull spoiles of his life. As sometime the

Citty of Athens was at one instant transported
with great ioy for the happy returne of Theseus
from his voyage of Candy, and afflicted
with exceeding griefe for the death of King
Aegeus his father, witnessing both the one
and the other passion by that cry, which since
hath beene solemnly obserued by the Oschophories

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      whereof the first is a sound of
triumph and courage, and the other a voyce of
amazement and affliction; euen so France full
of contents, and apt to receiue greater, sawe it
selfe it an instant plung'd in a gulfe of sorrowes
and afflictions for the execrable paricide committed
on the sacred person of her King.
                  This misery, the bottomlesse spring of sorrowes
and complaints, hath made this Panegyre
imperfect, for whereas it should haue
ended by the glory of things done, I cut it off
with the hope of that which was to doe. It
shall haue perfection enough if it may appeare
among so many goodly and rich peeces, which
the mournefull Muses haue erected about the
tombe of this great Achilles. They haue not

ceased these ten moneths, to honour him with
crownes of all prices, of all fashions, and of all
sorts of flowers. What may bee done more? behold
some leaues which they haue left all bathd
with teares, the which as much obliged as many,
but lesse diligent then any, I adde vnto this
publick sorrow.
                  If any one say that I performe this duty too
late, this griefe is alwayes in season. It is so extreame
and violent, as it growes more bitter by
consolation, it resists reason, it is renued with
time, it is comprehended more by feeling then
discourse, constancie cannot vanquish it, nor
wisdome dissemble it. I wept when as all
the world spake, and now when as the time
of mourning wipes away teares, I continue
and renew my complaints. My afflictions encrease
when as I heare of consolations. Sorrowes
growne to a custome, are pleasing to miserable
men, the obiects reuiue them, and the
Historie of this great King, which is the
Rocke I rowle dayly, furnishing mee at euery
moment where-with to make his life to bee

admired, giues mee but too much subiect to
lament his death. Farewell Reader, and
passe on.
               
               
                  A Funerall Discourse of the sodaine
death of the most Christian
King Henry the
fourth.
                  
                     YEsterday Saint Denis was
all in triumph, Paris should
haue beene after to morrow,
& this day all France
mournes, all Frenchmen
are full of affliction. Thus the clearest
dayes haue their stormes, the euening is
not answerable to the calmnesse of the
morning, nor to the cleernesse. of the
noone day. Cloudy rocks deceiue Marriners,
and shippes are lost where they
thinke them-selues safest. Pleasures

smother them that imbrace them; sorrow
and delight hold so fast together, as they
are as inseperable as a conuex superficies
from a concaue.
                  Let vs speake more plainly, betwixt the
high and flourishing glory of the greatest
King of the world and his fall, there was
but the twinkling of an eye, the turning of
a hand, and the stay of a Caroche. There
was a night betwixt being and not being
of a mighty Citty of the Guales, but here
there is but a moment. A moment so full
of wonders and misteries, as it is able to
entertaine the minde of man day & night
in deepe meditations. A moment which
may better bee considered by silence then
by discourse. A moment which giueth
feare vnto the faithfull, amazment to the
prophane, and sorrow to all men.
                  An arrow shot from towards Egipt, slue
Iosias in his Chariot. Henry the fourth,
the first King of Christendome, the greatest
Captaine of Europe, & the best of the

French kings, who neuer was in any place
but a victor, and who neuer desired victories
but for the good of the vanquished;
who was chosen of God to march first
with his thundering sword to reuenge the
iniuries and raise the ruines of Christendome;
who was a Dauid in courage, a Sa.
lomon in wisdom, and an Ezechias in zeale;
who in the felicity of his dayes, may iustly
be termed the Christian Augustus, for
that there neuer had beene a general peace
but vnder his raigne; who made it known
what a great iudgment could do in a great
fortune, a great modesty in a great power;
victorious ouer so many armies, and triumphing
at so many seiges, combats, enterprises
and encounters; Henry vpon
whom all eies were turned, his Heroicall
vertues commended, his will respected,
and all his actions admired; Henry redoubted
of all Soueraigne powers, aduanced
to the height of worldly greatnesse
and full of all sortes of contents,

happy in warre, happy in peace, happy
in wife, happy in children, and happy in
euery thing, is miserably and trecherously
slaine in his Caroch, and passeth from one
life to another in a moment.
                  This fatall and desastrous moment, ingaging
vs for so many years in mourning
and sorrow, is the day of the death of our
prosperities, and the birth of this Princes
life. The first day of the fift moneth of the
fiftie seuenth yeare of his age must be called
his day, for how long soeuer mans
life be he hath properly but one day that
may be termed his. The hower which
thrusts forth his last gaspe is his hower,
all the rest is no more his. Whatsoeuer he
hath done in his life is considered by this
day, the iudge of all his other dayes, the
most difficult Catastrophe of the tragedy
of mans life. He that is the author of the
first and disposeth of the last doth only
know it, foresees and mocks at man who
thinkes he is farre from it. Before the

last sand of this last day be runne, he cannot
crowne his felicity: we must prayse
safety after dangers, nauigation in the
port, and victory in the triumph. Who
can commend his life and hold himselfe
so happy whiles that the time past ministers
vnto him matter to lament, and that
which is to come to feare? This day was
feared of all men, yet not expected of any:
Euery man did apprehend it as the period
of some great reuolution, but for that
they held it to be a farre of the opinion of
the length of time did moderate the
apprehension, and the lesse it was
foreseene the more fearefull it hath
prooued.
                  And who could imagine so great a
mischeefe in the midst of so many prosperities,
or foresee this storme in so great a
calme? If any one amidst this generall ioy
and content should but haue thought of
these accidents, they would haue held
his braine to haue beene troubled

with the fumes of melancholy, they would
haue laught at him as they did at Anaxagoras,
who came to the Olimpick games
in a great gowne, for that the day was so
fayre and the ayre so cleeere, as there was
no shew of raigne, and yet presently after
it poured downe in great aboundance.
                  We saw this Prince in the Solstice of
felicities and contents, it seemed that the
world, hope, nor fortune could produce
any thing more perfect, that the starres
were of his intelligence, that the Intelligences
guided his deseignes, and misfortune
which may fal vpon any man could
not fall vpon him, that the lightening of
heauen which had often fallen neere vnto
him and not hurt him, would respect
his tables as it had don those of Hercules.
I am forced to confesse that the bright shining
beames of this great felicity, and of
this powerfull reputation dazeled mine
eyes, I could not behold it firmely, my
sight could not find any obiect that might

equall it, I saw nothing beyond this King
greater then God, neither did I see any
thing on this side God more mighty then
this King.
                  I had knowne the world sufficiently neuer
to doubt of her vanity and inconstancie,
and although this knowledge be long,
yet the life of man is not too short to learn
it, but the proofes are dangerous. Since the
time I had the honor to see and examine
strictly the actions of this great King, I
felt this knowledge to alter in my soule,
and doubting of that which was not questionable,
I began to beleeue that which
was altogether vncertaine. I did consider
what he had done, and what he would
do, I saw him redoubted of his neighbors,
well serued at home, his power much respected
and admired abroad, his affaires
assured, his counsels sound, his Arcenall
full of armes, his Bastile full of gold,
his house of blessings, his realme of prosperities,
and his spirit of great designes;

the Princes kept short, the greatest made
humble, the parlaments ready at his commands,
the subiects to praise that whereof
in former times they had complained,
and Orpheus statue to sweat at the bruite
of his deseignes, and the admirable preparation
of his armes. So great and mighty
a preparation as if he would haue limited
his deseignes by the riuer of Rine they
would haue intreated him to rest satisfied
with all that is on this side.
                  In the admiration of all this I said vnto
my selfe. Behold an age of wonders, the order
of the world is changed, this Prince vnderstands
it, he seekes an vnknowne way, he will
settle a new beleife of the stability of worldly
things, he will fixe a naile to stay fortunes
wheele, he will let vs see that which we durst
not hope for.
                  
                  They say that Iupiter during the combat
betweene the Grecians and the Troians,
when as the Gods were deuided among
themselues for the one and the other,
cast forth a great thunderbolt which

amazed both parties. As France is ready
to passe the frontier to incounter some obiect
worthy of her power, behold the terrible
and fearfull blow which striks amazement
into all the world, behold that tragick
moment which mockes at my discourse,
and makes me see that these great
shadowes did betoken the sunnes setting.
                  In the Image of this fatall day, I represent
vnto my selfe that of Phillip, father
vnto Alexander, who in the 46. yeare of his
life, and the 24. of his raigne, resolued to
passe into Asia, and to prescribe a law to
the persians, he consulted with the Oracle
to know the Issue of his deseigne, and it
was told him that the oxe should be crowned
to be led vnto the sacrifise, he thought
that the King of Persia should haue been
the oblation: and to begin to giue thankes
to the Gods of victories, which he held
but in hope, he ordained sacrifices, playes
and publick feasts, and prises for learning
armes, and musicke; he inuited all the
Citties of Greece to this publick ioy, & to

make it the more stately, he added the solemnity
of the marriage of Cleopatra his
daughter with Alexander King of Epirus,
this great content did so blind his eyes
from seeing the mischeefe which should
depriue him of life, as Neoptolemus singing
an hymne during the feast, which at
euery change spake of the vanity of great
Kings and how that death crossed their
deseignes, all which he tooke for his aduantage,
as a prediction of the ruine of
the King of Persia.
                  The next day he went vnto the theater
to see the playes, and sheweth himselfe
with a maiesty contrary to the ordinary
of Kings. His Image followed twelue statues
of the Gods, after which he marched,
and to shew that he had no distrust of the
Gretians he would not haue any guards about
him. In a moment fortune, which
neuer giues great contents for nothing,
changeth this pompe into mourning.
                  
                     Pausanias who did smother in his soule

the reuenge of an iniury, seeing him in
this estate, aduanceth, and drawing a
sword from vnder his robe thrust him in
to the flanke and slew him.
                  But who so knoweth that this murtherer
being greiuously wronged by Attalus
could obtaine no iustice from Phillip, will
abate much of the amazement, the which
cannot be diminished in this other accident,
for the King is miserably murthered
by a man who neuer had any cause to
complaine of him. I do not hold it strange
that the Emperour Maximin was murdered
in his tent with his wife and children.
nor that the souldiers cried out that not
any one of a wicked race should be left aliue.
For besides that these violencies
were ordinary in the Roman Empire, he
tooke away the goods, honor, and liues
of Cittizens without forme of Iustice: I
am no more amazed that Antiochus did
breed wormes in his flesh, he had left liuely
markes of his impiety in the Temple.
                  
                     
I am silent when I see Attalus King of
Pergamo, reduced to extreame misery,
and Pyrrhus pursued by Fortune both by
sea and land, and Cambises fall vpon the
point of his sword, and Aristobulus vomiting
forth his soule with his bloud.
The first had slaine his mother and his
wife, the second had spoiled Proserpinas
Temple; the third had murthered his
brother and his sister beeing with child,
and the fourth had put his mother and
his brother to death.
                  But I am amazed to see a Prince who
deserueth to bee called the delights of
man-kinde, encounter with a death so
vnworthy of this great and incomparable
bounty. A Prince so great, so
good, so mercifull, so wise, so happy,
so redoubted, so valiant, was worthy of
another age and of another end.
                  But when as I present him to my selfe
like a Lyon, who beeing as often victorious
as assayled, is in such reputation of

his owne force, as it doth amaze with the
terror of his eyes those that meane to assaile
it, and that I see him slaine by a flye,
for there is no greater disproportion betwixt
these two creatures then betwixt
him and the Parricide, all my thoughts
are confounded, I know not where I
am.
                  The most humble and staide spirits
seeke to examine that which the Philosophers
call destinie, a certaine necessitie,
imposed vnto things, and cause her to
come from aboue, or from supposed
principles, as from the concurrens of the
Atomes of Democritus, or the imaginations
of the soule of the vniuerse, or from
the order or course of causes, or from the
influence of the starres.
                  The pure Doctrine termes it A disposition
of the diuine prouidence of that
which regardes the aduentures and
euents of the beeing, and of the inferiour
life. A disposition which beeing

eternal & immutable, as being in the spirit
of God, doth not impose any necessity,
and in that shee carrieth her effects into
things that are humane and created, she is
temporall, mutable and contingent. So as
man being considered as temporall, he is
vnder destinie, but in his principall part,
which is immortall, hee is not subiect vnlesse
hee list. The starres haue no power
ouer his will. The action of destiny, vpon
the matter is necessary, the effect is not. It
may be preuented by vigillancy, care, wisdome
and other helpes from heauen, and
yet in doing nothing but what wee will
there happens nothing but what God
knowes shall succeed.
                  All that is in God, is God himselfe, the
knowledge of God is his essence, his essence
is immutable, and so consequently
his knowledge is inuariable, all that hee
knowes is infallible, and yet this knowledge
doth not impose any necessity vpon
the actions and wills of men, for this

knowledge compared vnto things created,
is like vnto the knowledge of the
workman vpon his worke, the which is
not the cause; it is the will of the workman,
without the which the worke should
alwaies remaine conceiued and framed in
his minde and be neuer seene. The Idaeas
which are in the vnderstanding of God,
are the formes and beginnings of all
things, wherefore the knowledge of God
is not the cause, for the actions doe not
proceed from the knowledge, but by the
meanes of the will which commands,
and of the power which executes; and
therefore the knowledge of God is not the
cause of things which are bad, and whervnto
his will cannot incline, for good
cannot be the cause of bad, and from the
necessity of knowledge, we may not conclude
the necessity of actions.
                  That eternall wisdom whose secrets are
vnknowne to men, and shall neuer bee
deciphered but at that day, when we shall

see his maiesty drawn in a chariot through
the clouds, hath suffered this mischeefe to
fall either to free and deliuer this Prince
from some greater, or to aflict this realme
or to make it an example to all the Princes
of the earth, or to shew that the world
and al her greatnesse are but a shadow,
dust and wind.
                  The great God who is the iudge of life
and death, hath disposed of the life of
this Prince by so fatall and mournfull an
accident, to the end France should know
that they be the effects of his great iustice,
who being offended at the excesse of this
people, with the daughters of Moab, commanded
Moises to cause al the Princes and
heads to be hanged in the sight of the sun,
to the end his fury might be diuerted from
Israell.
                  He giues wayward and difficult Kings to
the people, and takes away good, when as
he seeth they are vnworthy of the one
and haue need of the other.
                  
                     
He will of that these execrable blowes,
as of so many vipers, Princes should
compound a treakle against the pride,
ingratitude and blindnesse of their liues,
vnto the end they may truely apprehend
whence they are come and whether they
should goe.
                  What shall those proud spirits thinke
who can neuer humble themselues,
when with the eyes of their thought
they shall enter into this Caroch and
view this great King slaine in the middest
of seuen great noble-men of his court,
by the poorest wretch of his Kingdome?
Can they haue a better lesson
to teach them the misery of their condition?
Let them aduance their deseignes,
and grow neuer so proude they
shall be like vnto those misticall trees,
which decayed, when as from the topps
of them they might discouer the sadde
ruines of ancient Troy.
                  
                     
when in this folstice of greatnesse and
worldly felicity, they shall behold the
tombe of this great King, their pride must
needs fall and their ambitions grow
humble.
                  Swell all thou canst humane arrogancy,
thou art but a shadow and no more. Take
the wall of the Gods if thou wilt, all thy
glory is but winde. let Belus vsurpe the
name of God if he list: let Ninus or daine
altars for his father: let Nabucadonosor
cause himselfe to be adored, let Clearchus
the tirant of Heraclea carry the lightening
for his deuice, and call one of his
Sonnes thunder: let Alexander terme him
selfe the son of Iupiter Ammon: Cesar go equal
with the gods, Augustus hold himselfe
the Sonne of Apollo, Nero take the crowns
from the Altar of the Gods, to adorne his
bed, Domitian disdaine his mother to call
himselfe the sonne of Pallas, Caligula take
of the heads of the Images of the Gods to
set on his owne, Commodus hold Mercuries

Caduce in his hand, let Marcellus being in
Spaine suffer Crownes to descend vppon
his head with artificall thunder and lightning.
Let the King of the Molossiens play
Pluto in his Court, and call his wife Proserpina
his daughter Ceres and his dogge
Cerberus, yet they are men, and in this
word are comprehended all the vanities
and miseries of this world. They are but
weaknesse in their birth, inconstancy in
their life, and stinking putrifaction in
their death, compassed in with a thousand
miseries as soone as they come out of their
mothers womb. Their pride is but smoak
which vanisheth as it riseth, and in the
end drawes teares from their eies. The
greatest Princes of the world haue humbled
themselues as often as they haue considered
that they were but men, and that
it might happen in an instant they should
be no more what they were, or should be
somwher els, or not at al. earth earth earth
saies the voice of the Prophet. heare the

word of the Lord. We must haue eares to
heare them of men, but our eyes onely wil
heare that of God. Wee vnderstand him
in seeing these great & terrible accidents.
Earth which commest from earth: earth
which art fed with earth: earth which remainest
on earth: earth which goes to
earth, earth in thy birth, in thy life and in
thy end, behold the greatest of the earth
returnes to earth.
                  Emperors, Kings and Princes, you are
but dust, know it; your crownes depend of
God, acknowledge it: your daies rowle
and slide away like a waue: your life is
more fraile then the winde; an earthen
vessell handled gently and preserued carefully
may bee long kept; But howsoeuer
you care for your liues, they must needs
breake and dissolue. Your greatnesses are
but heapes of snow, which we see melt into
water from whence it comes: your life
is like a lampe exposed to the winde, the
which is put out with euery puffe
                  The mornful sight of this Carosse binds

you to consider of the great & wonderfull
distance which is betwixt God and you.
The names shew the difference. EL signifies
force, support & the foundation of all;
Adam Imbecility, infirmity, and so feeble
a thing, as it cannot stand of it selfe. Your
dayes are compared to the shadow of a
Torch, the which vanisheth, it beeing put
out: the weakest differs not so much from
the most valiant, & the meanest from the
most excellent: as a mortall thing from
that which is diuine: Mortall and diuine
are opposite and contraries. Accursed flattery
doth blush for shame when shee sees
the Heathen deale otherwise with great
men. The towne of Athens receiued Pompey
with these words. For asmuch as thou
holdest thy selfe to bee a man, we esteeme thee a
God. Those great Cedars of Libanus are
ouer-throwne at the least puffe of death,
which make shepherds equal vnto kings.
& who hauing come to the old age of som,
hath laide ambushes for the youth of others.
That this great Prince is dead, it

is the course of nature, and the law of the
vniuerse. Hee hath runne the same course
which 63. Kings of France haue done,
and which all his successors shall doe. It is
a folly to complaine of life, and to bee
troubled at ones end. He that is grieued at
death, is grieued that he is mortall, and his
griefe comes too late, for he should grieue
at his birth, which makes him mortall,
and not at his death which makes him
immortall.
                  That it was violent, great Princes are
subiect to these misfortunes. The Romaine
Empire had more Emperors slaine
by their gards, then by their enemies. As
the birth and funerals of Princes haue
more pompe then others, so hath their
death more amazement. That hee is dead
sodenly, it is the sweetest death, for it takes
feare & apprehension from death, which
is most troublesome. But that hee is dead
with the reputation of one of the greatest
Princes of the world: it must needs be the

effects of a wonderfull glorious life. To
dye in the brightnesse of great deseignes,
is to braue death it selfe, and to reuiue
and liue againe. The last gaspe of such
a death, hath no paine, and there is comfort
in the shortnes. It is nothing, said,
that Prince in dying. Death which seemed
to be the west and sunne-set of his life, was
the Meridian of his glory. Neuer Prince
carried his life farther into death: for it
seemes he past without any midest from
one extreame vnto the other death.
                  The Colosse of Rhodes, one of the
wonders of the world, was no lesse admired
beeing beaten downe then when
it stood, when as they saw that with
one of the fingers they might make many
great statues. In like manner as long as
they saw great Henry like a Colosse of the
wonders of Heauen, a maister-peice of
the almighty power, the world admired
him; but when as they saw that from his
incomparable actions, and the least

effects of his reputation, they might draw
perfect Images, and assured examples of
vertues necessary for Kings, this admiration
was changed into rauishment.
                  A theater of vertues▪ He that wil frame
his heart to pure and simple piety, let him
consider his zeale to the seruice of God,
his bounty to Churches, and his care for
the concord of Consciences. He that will
see Iustice, let him behold it in his lawes
and in his armes: who so desires truth, let
him examine his words and his promises.
He that knowes not wherein magnanimity
doth consist, let him represent vnto
himselfelfe the crosses which he hath incountred,
and the dangers which he hath
surmounted, Hee that labours to know
constancy, let him admire his fortune. He
that will learne the true vse of liberality,
let him obserue what he giues and what he
refuseth, how he giues in refusing, & how
he demands in giuing. He that seeks infallible
proofes of wisdome valor and moderation,

let him thinke of his deseignes,
note his combates, and consider his
victories.
                  He that hath desire to erect trophees vnto
clemency, let him nomber the enemies
which he hath vanquished, saued and recompenced,
left them their liues and restored
their honors. Of wrongs receiued
he hath giuen some vnto time, many to repentance,
and al to his bounty. This death
was violent by the stroke of that paricide
arme, but it was not by the wil of him that
receiued it; as he desired not death so he
feared not his hower. He had beene so often
and in so many dangers confronted by
her, as he attended her euerywhere resolutly
and with an assured constancy. He
hath been often heard say, that he would
neuer refuse to drink of that cup.
                  
                  He did not care whether it were by a feauer
or by the sword, whether the gate were
open or broken. Hee was not of the
humor of Aristides of Locris who dying of

the biting of a Wesell, was grieued that he
had not beene bitten by a Lyon. Hee
thought that this present, whether it were
brought by a Rauen or by a Doue, came
from heauen, and by his appointment
who onely knowes the number of our
dayes.
                  Being at Fontainbleau in Nouember
last, and discoursing which was the best
kinde of death: Hee concluded with Caesar
for that which was sodaine, adding,
that hee would willingly bee shot in the
head with a Cannon, that day that hee
should win a battle for France. Epaminondas
commanded that they should drawe
out the darte wherewith hee was wounded,
and did willingly embrace death
which came to salute him in the middest
of the acclamations for a victory which
he had gotten for his country. All Greece
did coniure and inuire Diagoras the Rhodian
to runne vnto death, after hee had
seene his three sonnes Crownd at the

Olympick games. As hee did not seperate
action from life, so would hee not
haue glory seperated from death, nor that
the length of aboad should preiudice the
sodainesse of the issue. Hee held them
miserable, who had nothing but yeares
to prooue that they had liued, and them
more miserable, who had suruiued their
reputation. Alexander in his opinion was
happy, for that hee dyed yong, in the progresse
of his reputation, and Cyrus wretched
for that the length of his life had exposed
him to the change of his fortune.
                  Hee that thinkes of the life of the soule,
may desire a goodly death for the body,
and all her beauty doth consist but in the
honor. The ambition to yeeld vp the
last gaspe gloriously, is alwayes commendable
in a Prince, who cannot too much
desire honor, nor too much contemne all
the rest. It is the continuall obiect of his
eyes and heart. Golde which is but earth,
more purified then the rest, and riches

which are lost on the earth are for men,
whose spirites are full of earthly vapours,
honour is for the Gods, and for
those that are esteemed neere vnto the
Gods.
                  A generous life runnes vnto a death
different from ordinary men, such a
death as many Princes of that venerable
and couragious house of Bourbon,
haue desired and incountred; Iames of
Bourbon Constable of France, and
Peter of Burbon his sonne, dyed at the
battle of Brignay, neere vnto Lyon;
Lewis of Bourbon at that of Azincourt,
Iohn Duke of Burbon, the first
of that name, was taken prisoner there.
Francis of Burbon Duke of Chasteleraut,
was slaine at the battle of Saint Bridget;
Charles Duke of Burbon at the taking
of Rome; Iohn of Burbō duke of Anguien
died at the battle of Saint Lawrence; Anthony
of Bourbon Duke of Vendosme and

King of Nauarre, was slain with a harquebush
shot at the siege of Roan, Lewis of
Burbon Prince of Condy, dyed at the
battaile of Iarnae.
                  This great Prince would not end his
life otherwise, thinking it vnworthy of
a great courage to languish betwixt a
desire of life, and the feare of death,
and to quite for the interest of his abode,
some-times the vse of a member, halfe
Eis sight, and all his hearing, and to submit
himselfe to the discretion of paine and
old age.
                  His desire was not like vnto ours,
wee would haue wisht to haue seene
him send vppe his soule quietly to the
place of his beginning after a long continuance
of yeares, and the glorious
ending of his designes, that the Queene
had closed vppe his eyes, that the
Princes his Children had receyued his
blessing, the which is of such efficacie,

comming from the mouth of a father, as
many haue thought that Oracles and prophesies
were not more certaine: we would
haue desired that he had had time to teach
his sonne, as he said, the knowledge of
good and euill, that his death had beene
like vnto theirs, who sung dying, and who
dyed singing the graces which they had
receiued from the handes of the Almighty.
                  But as death is certaine, so the forme is
vncertain, we see round figures fall otherwise
then Cylinders or Triangles, life ends
not all after one manner, the fruits of one
tree fall not all at one instant, some are gathered
before they be ripe, others fall of
themselues; some are snacht away, some
pulled gently, and the violence of the
wind and haile beateth them downe indifferently.
                  As he liued and is dead after an other
manner then other men, so the sorrow for
his death, was different from that of other

Kings. He had liued triumphing, he dyed
in the assurance of a great triumph, his body
being carried to his graue did go vnder
triumphant arches, he hath past triumphantly
beyond the firmament, where
he sees God, liues with God, is in God, and
knowes the truth of the glorious relations
which had beene made vnto him of the
Citty of God.
                  In a moment, by the losse of some years
which seemed to remaine of a painefull
and laborious life, he purchased eternity.
For soddenly vppon the feeling of this
mortall wound, he turned his eies towards
heauen, and carried his thoughtes whether
his extreame aflictions did conduct
him. we must not demand whose they are
which are aflicted, nor wheron they
thinke. Afliction makes men forget the
world, when they must thinke of heauen.
Afliction is the liuery of the seruants of
God. Heauen speakes vpon Iordan and
vpon mount Thabor to advow the sonne

of God, but at his death it is silent, for that
the crosse is sufficient to declare what he is.
                  He who is in all places where hee is called
on, God in the crib, God on the crosse,
God in the graue, and God euery where,
who heares Ieremy in the mire, Daniell in
the den, who makes a pallace of a stable▪
of a Thabor a Mountaine, of a Caluary
a Paradice, maks of this Caroch an Arke
of propitiation, and sends his Angels
thether to assist this soule, all gor'd with
bloud, going forth of an innocent
wound, nay rather all bathd and couered
with he bloud of the Lambe which
was slaine from the beginning of the
world. Hee receiues this generous, courteous
and meeke soule, which neuer refused
his grace to any one that sought it.
                  That great and vnspeakable mercy fortifie
vs in this beliefe, and the same truth
which recommends mercy vnto men;
for that God is all mercy, and will rather
cease to bee God, then to bee mercifull,

who promiseth mercy to those which
shall be mercifull. This great King who
in the whole course of his life hath done
nothing but remit offences, who hath
not onely pardoned but forgotten them,
not onely forgotten but recompenced
them, hath found in heauen the fruits of
mercy which hee had sowne vpon earth.
His offences are remitted that doth remit;
hee that demands grace and shewes it not,
is like vnto him that ruines a bridge ouer
which he is to passe. Hee which sheweth
grace to his inferiour, is assured that his
superiour will not refuse it him. It were
blasphemy to thinke that God will bee
vanquished by his creature. Hee is pleased
to shew his great succour in great accidents,
Man falles, and hee comes from
heauen to giue him his hand. Hee had
many other meanes to haue raised him
vppe, but his loue found none more
fitte. Hee might haue suffered this
Prince to haue dyed otherwise, but his

mercy had not beene so apparant in any
other kind of death. He calls these terrible
and soddaine incounters to the absolute
power of his bounty, where as man hath
scarce the time to contribute a thought or
a sigh. Moreouer the Church hauing in
her institution bound all Christians to
pray for the health of all Kings and Princes,
there is no doubt but at the very houre
of their death all these continued prayers
made incessantly, and sent vp to heauen
by so many millions of hearts, are of very
great efficacie, by his merit whom Israell
crowned as a King, and crucified as an
offender.
                  A soddaine death is terrible and fearefull,
but it is not to those which attend it
alwayes constantly, and haue beene often
in those places where she doth neuer terrifie
any but cowards. This sodainesse doth
shake and amaze those soules, which doe
neuer thinke of God but at need. A Prince
who did watch, sleepe, walke, & eate often

with these cogitations, made Christian-like
discourses, and said so often, that it
was not sufficient to know the graces of
God, but they must acknowledge them,
might well be taken, but he could not bee
surprised by death. The treacherous knife
opens his side to make a passage for that
royall soule, but it could not wound his
heart, to the which at his morning rising
he had giuen the name of God in gard.
                  Wherefore let vs rather lament for our
selues then for him, and let vs say of him
as Rome did of Tytus, Hee is gone for his
owne good, and for our afflictions; death
which hath raised him to immortall felicities,
doth plunge vs into a gulfe of miseries.
Wee lament iustly for our selues, who
see our hopes dead and our miseries liuing,
death hath stroke but one, and hath
slain many. The felicity which he enioies
doth not ease the affliction which doth
torment vs, the contents which hee finds
in heauen, takes not from vs the feeling of

those griefes which his absence hath left
vs vpon the earth. If death after this blow
should haue broken his bow, dispairing
euer to make the like shot, that would not
cure the wound which his arrow hath
made.
                  It auailes not to tell vs that we lament
him not as dead but as absent, to represent
vnto vs that we haue not lost him, but
that we expect him, wee find occasions
daily which make vs remember our losse,
and the assurance of his returne cannot
moderate the greefe of his departure. If
there be any thing in this world able to
mollifie our greefe, it is, that all nations
and al people haue sorrowed for that
which we lament. The aflicted receiue
som ease when as euery man bears a share
of their afliction. Christendome hath sorrowed
for this Prince like vnto a mother
who being a widdow and ould hath lost
her owne sonne: Her publicke teares doe
witnesse what she hath lost and what shee

doth seeke. This generall mourning in
all realmes shews the reason of her greefe
and the greatnes of her losse.
                  This common sorrow comprehends all
Epitaphes that can be erected to his memory.
Teares are better vnderstood then
words, it is more easy to weepe for this
Prince, then to speake of his Royall
vertues.
                  If they will haue discourses to praise
the wonders of his life, the whole world
is the Theater, fame the Trumpet, and
Immortality the triumph. If to animate
mens courages to immitate them, they
are in inimitable, no man but Hercules
could measure that Olympian course,
none but hee could bend that bowe,
none but hee could weare the spoyles of
Lynx, no man but Theseus could carrie
that Clubbe.
                  Discourses are to no end, neither to
augment the griefe of the losse, nor to

aduance the greatnes of the glory of this
Prince, for the one is infinite and the other
is seene in his Apogea. But teares
shew that he which was lamented of euery
man was necessary for all. Glory hath
presents and crownes of all sorts, vpon al
occasions, and to honour all persons, she
giueth in like manner to shipps which returne
happily from long voiages, shee
hath for the liuing, for the dead and for
their tombes. Athens ordained leaues,
Roome gaue them gold, and by the law
of the twelue tables she did religiously recommend
their remembrance. Haniball
gaue a Crowne to the body of Marsellus,
Cleomenes to Lidias, Pericles to Paralas, Augustus
crowned Alexanders monuments,
the vrne of Dometrius ashes was crowned,
& when as the Emperor Adrian demanded
the reason from the Philosopher Epictetus
he vnderstood that those crownes did belong
to the dead as victors ouer life, which
is but a perpetuall warfare.
                  
                     
Neuer Tombe deserued better to bee
crowned then that of this great Prince,
who hath crowned all the actiōs of his life
with immortal crowns of glory & reputation.
But if they should giue him as many
as they did nomber in Ptolomes pompe &
at Syllas funerall, or as many as Nero dedicated
to Iupiter Capitolinus, and that they
were fiue or sixe cubits high, like vnto
those which Greece presented vnto Berenice
vpon golden Chariots, they should
neuer equall the esteeme of so many tears
which haue beene poured foorth vppon
his death.
                  To the glorious Titles of most great,
most happy, most victorious, the sword and
buckler of Christendome, the lightning of battailes,
the Eagle of armes, the Phoenix of
Captaines, the Loadstarre of Kings, Trueth
addes for the most glorious that of, Lamented
of all men, for he must haue great
and eminent quallities whom all men shal
lament, a generall admiration doth pre-suppose

more then common vertues;
and common teares argue a generall
losse
                  The world shall end before they will
leaue to lament a prince which hath been
the ornament therof. Time which cureth
the deepest wound will make ours incurable.
Let mens harts sacrifise to constancy
in another season and let them obtaine of
reason that which they cannot hope for
of time, in this the glory of teares is in continuance
to satisfie such as did thinke that
there was nothing whereof the mind of
man was sooner tired then with heauines,
nor springes sooner drawne drye then
that of teares.
                  There will alwaies be in the reuolution of
ages, some Alexander to honor Achilles
tombe, alwaies some Cesar to renew the
mourning for Hector, wee shall not bee
able to staye his teares in considering
his owne disabilitye to doe that which
this Alexander hath done.
                  
                     
These teares which flow in so great abundance,
haue no other spring then the incredible
bounty of this Prince; neuer people
sorrowed for them that were haultie
and difficult, who haue alwaies pride in
their forhead and collor in their eyes, seruitude
is not more intollerable vnto them
then pride.
                  Roome being bound to the birth of Romulus,
to the piety of Numa, and to the valor
of Tullus, had the roialty of it selfe and
the names of Kings in contempt, when as
she saw her selfe imperiously commanded
by Tarquin, in whose excesse she did only
consider his pride, and comprehended
all vnder the name of proud which shee
gaue him.
                  People flye from those Princes which
neuer leaue to bee solitary, but to make
all solitary, which goe not forth of
their Palaces, but like Lyons out of
their cages, to feare some and to hurt
others.
                  
                     
We should neuer grieue for a seuere, cruell
and inhumaine Prince, our teares should
be fained and forced; but for so good and
milde a Prince, so louing to his people, so
much beloued of all, and so respected of
strangers, the sorrow can neither bee exprest
nor limited.
                  Prodigy of our dayes! this great bountie
which did merit to see the sun of three
ages, which had beene respected among
the Scythians, and had forced them to
loue it, is lost among the French. Shall it
bee said, that France, alwayes barren in
monsters, shall be come both the Mother
and Nursse? shall she be defamed amongst
all the nations of the world, to haue slaine
two Kings one after another? The Angels
reioyce infinitely, when as they vnderstand
that men haue done any thing
that is good, but how much are they greeued
which haue a perticular care of this
Crowne, which haue fought by our
Kings to saue it; who desire to haue their

ruines repayred, and who knowes that
the walls of the heauenly Ierusalem must
not bee built but with this sand and lime,
when as they see that it serues for the Babilon
of hell, and that the first and goodliest
realme of religion doth produce
these monsters.
                  If this crowne were electiue, they should
not finde any one that would accept therof
to runne this fortune. After the death
of Cleolulphus, the realme of Northumberland
was deuided into many factions,
seauen Kings in a short time were slaine
or expeld by sedition.
                  They that would not indure Kings,
subiected themselues to the discretion of
tyrants: good Princes did abhorre to
command a nation which gloryed more
in killing then obeying, it remained thirtie
yeares as it were in prey to the first
Inuader, the Danes enterd it, and were expelled
by the Saxons, who in the end added
this Crowne vnto theirs.
                  
                     
Alas! France is well purg'd from this
reproach, and her teares haue washed away
this infamie. Shee hath powred out
a thousand execrations against this detestable
paricide, shee hath cursed the
day of his birth, and doth not suffer
any other remembrance to remaine,
but of the iust punishment which hee
hath suffered.
                  By the aboundance of the teares of
France, wee may iudge of the excesse
of her sorrow and losse, wee neuer grieue
for that which wee care not to loose, neither
doe wee hold that lost, which wee
hope to recouer, but shee hath lost so
good a Prince as wee must neuer thinke
so see any thing equall to his bounty,
and wee must say vnto nature vppon
her death, as was sayd vnto Nero vppon
the ruine of his Pauilion; that the
losse thereof would showe his disabylytie
and weakenesse, beeing vnable

in a long time to produce the
like. With the same passion that men
grieue for the priuation of things of
great price, they sorrow for those which
haue beene well beloued.
                  Hee that shall know that this Prince
liued in his Realme like the head of a
Family in his house, and that hee was
beloued of his Subiects, as a Father
of his Children, will not bee amazed
at the teares of the French, neuer
eyes powred forth iuster teares, neither
were hearts afflicted with iuster
sorrow.
                  If wee bee bereaued of the sweete
light of our eyes, why should wee not
complaine? If they haue clipt the
wings of our hopes and prosperities,
why should we not cry out? if they haue
drawne forth ourbowels why should we
not feele it?
                  Can wee dissemble such sencible

greefes? can any man touch such painfull
wounds and not be mooued? what
proportion of Equity and Iustice is there
in that law, which commands to loue and
forbids to lament the losse of that which
wee loue?
                  If the Egiptians wept threescore and
twelue dayes, for the death of their King;
if that of a good seruant was so greeuous
vnto Alexander as the whole army carried
the markes of his sorrow; if for the
death of Masistius the towers of the towne
were beaten downe, Carthage caused her
walles to bee hanged with black, if Babilon
ordained publicke cessations for the
death of her Kings, and if in these sorrows
the Pagans were ashamed to eat for that
they would not seeme to be touched with
affections and the care of life, what shall
France doe to witnesse that which she suffers
in the death of her King and Father?
                  If she did not weepe for this Prince, I
know not for whom she should not spare

her teares, if shee should forget him, I know not
of whom shee should haue any remembrance. As
among the Romains hee was held for prophane
which had not in his house the portrait of Anthonine;
so shall hee vnworthily carry the name of a
Frenchman, which shall not preserue in his heart
the Image of this great King, a true Anthonine in
clemencie, a Traian in bounty, an Augustus in wisdom,
and a Caesar in valour. Armies will alwaies lament
their generall, the Sciences their restorer,
France her King, Kings their Captain, people their
Father, the Church her eldest Sonne, Christendome
her protector, and Europ her ornament.
                  The conquest and restoring of France, & the setling
of peace and quietnesse in Christendom, haue
giuen him a greater reputation throughout the
world, thē 
                     Caesar euer purchased in 52. battels, Marcellus
in 40. and Scipio in the taking of 152. townes,
and therefore the more that wee consider what hee
hath bin, the more we grieue for that he is no more,
the more our eyes were pleased with this sweete
light, the more troublesome the Eclipse thereof is.
                  But this sun is not quite gone, it hath but past, we
see this Phoenix rise out of his ashes. In the Fathers

West, we adore the Sonnes East. It is the same Egle
which hath renued his plumes: we see the same maiesty
in his fore-head, the same mildnes in his eyes,
the same quicknes in his actions, the same designes
in his inclinations, the same hopes in his words,
and in a maner the same promptnesse in his replies.
                  That great and incomparable Princesse his Mother
reuiues in her regencie the raigne of this good
King, who hath left vnto her wisdom and felicity,
and the same instruments which he vsed in the gouernment
of this Monarchie; The affection which
he bare vnto his people remaines in the King his
sonne. As God could not more aduance the fortune
of this Princesse, then in making her wife to so
great a King, so could he not place her vertue vpon
a greater Theater then in committing to her trust
the instruction of the King and the gouernment of
the Realme. Let the Father liue in heauen, and the
Mother and Sonne long and happily on earth,
while that they shall continue happy,
France cannot be vnhappy.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  THE
TROPHEIS
of the Life
And
TRAGAEDIE
of the Death
of
That Vertuous and Victorious
Prince
HENRY the GREAT
Late
of France and Nauarre.
                  
                  TRANSLATED
and
Dedicated
To the L: Vis-Count Cranborn.
                  
                     By
Ios. Syl.
               
               
                  
                  To the Right Honourable
the Lord Viscount
Cranborn.
                  BEsides old Bonds which my best Vowes engage,
                  To your deere Parent; and besides the Due
                  Which to your Selfe might iustly thence accrew;
                  Th' apparant Vertues of Your April-age,
                  Challenge of right this Poëms Patronage:
                  The rather, sith we first receau'd from you,
                  The speedy Notice (no lesse quick then true)
                  Of HENRY'S Death, through Hells despightfull Rage.
                  You saw this Sunne, at his High-Noone-shine Set,
                  In sodaine Clowd of his owne Royall Bloud.
                  O Horrid Hap! Who euer can forget
                  Such Fate, such Hate, of one so Great, so Good:
                  O iust Reuenge, roote out th' Ignatian Pack,
                  The Moule that moou'd in Faux and Rauaillac.
                  
                  
                     Iosu. Syl.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE
TROPHIES OF THE
Vertues and Fortune of HENRY
the Great.
                  
                     SInce first Apollo lent the world his light,
                     And Earth empregned with his heatful might,
                     Europe hath seene no Potentate, no Prince,
                     To Paralel great HENRY'S excellence.
                     No Terme, no Time, his fresh renowne shal shed,
                     Neuer was King more deere, neuer more dread.
                  
                  
                     Phoenix of Kings, wonder of Christendome,
                     Passing all past, and without Peere to come;
                     His Courage only match His Clemency;
                     And should his Tombe to These Two equall be,
                     Both Spaine and France, could not contain the same,
                     Which haue so often seene his feates of Fame.
                  
                  
                     His Life's a lampe to Princes, and a line,
                     A Trophey rear'd by miracle diuine:
                     A Theater to all the Vertues built,
                     A goodly Garden with such plenty fild,
                     Of choisest fruits and flowers that chusing, there
                     Aboundance troubles more then Want else-where,
                  
                  
                     
                     The yeare that EDVVARD in Great Brittaine dy'd,
                     That France (beyond the mountaines) Spaine defi'd.
                     That Therwin walls were thundered to the ground,
                     That a faire flower our Royall Hymen Crownd;
                     I'th winter Solstice (when the yeare is worne)
                     Within Pau Castle This young MARS was borne.
                  
                  
                     Borne for the Worlds Good, as his Enterance
                     Presag'd him then the HERCVLES of France;
                     
                     To re-aduance her Lillies long decayd;
                     For as (by chance) bare-head, abroad he playd,
                     At fower years old, a Snake he finds and kills,
                     At forty, foiles the Hydra of our Ills.
                  
                  
                     Nor was He bred in soft delicious wise,
                     (Which formes young Spirits into the forme of Vice,)
                     His Grandsire vs'd him to all Weathers Ire,
                     His Saulce was Labour, Excercise his Fier,
                     His noble Heart did neuer ought inflame,
                     Saue Heauens desire, and th'Honour of the same,
                  
                  
                     Scarce fourteene times had he beheld the birth,
                     Of th'happy Planet (which praesag'd his Worth,)
                     Predominant in his Natitiall;
                     When he became an Armies Generall,
                     Whose hottest flame, without Him was but fume;
                     Nor, but by Him, durst any good presume.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hee purchast Peace, the which eft soones was stain'd
                     With His Frends blood, and his young soule constraind
                     To faine some Change of His Religion:
                     At Vinsein: Castle He was sea'zd vpon,
                     And to the Court confin'd; where, discontent,
                     His Spirit droopes, out of His Element.
                  
                  
                     Escaped thence: with restlesse toyle, He tends
                     To saue the Syde of his Aflicted Frends;
                     By peace againe he bringeth all in vre:
                     And Mcuusieures death doth well his Hopes assure
                     Of th'after Crowne, who but betweene him stood;
                     So, now was Hee the first Prince of the Blood.
                  
                  
                     Then from a farre he doth new Stormes descry,
                     To threat his fortune, and his force to try:
                     Hee meets the danger with vndaunted front,
                     And in fower yeares beares ten braue Armies brunt,
                     All with the might of a great Monarch grac'd,
                     Whereof, at Coutras hee defeats the last.
                  
                  
                     At last the King to extreame Streights reduc'd,
                     In doubt of all, and daring none to trust,
                     Implores This Prince, who rescues him from Tours,
                     
                     With iust Reuenge; and had yer many howers,
                     Re-humbled Paris to her Princes yoake,
                     But for Saint Clements Paricidiall stroake.
                  
                  
                     
                     After which stroake (which all true French-men hate)
                     France sadly falls in a most wretched state:
                     Who hath least Reason, hath most Insolence;
                     Who hath most Power, hath least Obedience:
                     Nor Awe, nor Law; disorder euery-where:
                     Good without hope, and wicked without feare.
                  
                  
                     Rebellion spaunes as fast as (in the Spring,)
                     Fruit-fretting virmine; it doth Discord bring
                     In families, dearth in Townes, death in field,
                     O! happy you who neuer daign'd to yeeld
                     Vnto that Hagge, but Loyall to the Crowne,
                     Haue left you Heires, Heires of a true renowne.
                  
                  
                     Who coumpts the cares that on a Crowne doo wayte,
                     As well may number Autumnes fruitfull fraight,
                     And Flora's too. Yet this great spirit of man,
                     Mid th'ebbs and floods of This vast Ocean,
                     Seemes a tall Ship, which maugre Winds and Waues,
                     In wished Hauen her and her Burthen saues.
                  
                  
                     Hee's neuer idle, nor his Excercise
                     Other then stands with princely offices:
                     MARS, and DIANA, and CVPID wayte on Him:
                     Maugre his Losse hee alwaies gaines by Time.
                     Vnto Affayres his eares are open aye,
                     Nor waytes hee lazying on his bed for day,
                  
                  
                     
                     Shafts, Tigers, Torrents; no, nor lightning flyes
                     More swift about then This bould Aegle plyes
                     (Amid all perrils) to preserue his State,
                     With Heed and Speed, from Rebells Pride and Hate.
                     In Battailes first, last in Retreats: in briefe,
                     In Action, Soldier, in Direction, Chiefe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Diepe saw his Fortunes on a desperate Dye:
                     The League presum'd hee needs must yeeld or flye:
                     But, as a Brooke the more wee stoppe his Course,
                     Breakes downe his Bay, and runnes with swifter Force,
                     He foiles his Foes at Arques, and shewes them plaine
                     That Heauens iust hand doth His deere Right sustain.
                  
                  
                     Tis buzz'd in Paris, and beleeu'd in part,
                     That hee is taken; or constraind to start
                     From Diepe to Douer, to seeke Englands Ayd;
                     And, while Him comming Prisoner-wise, they sayd,
                     To the Bastile; He came and ouercame
                     Their Suburbs soone, to their Suborners shame.
                  
                  
                     Conquest attends him, whether he encamps,
                     Or marches on: againe he takes Estampes:
                     
                     Lizieux, Eureux, Mans, Meulan, Vandosme, Perch,
                     And Honfleur, formost in His Trophie march;
                     As earnest-pence of His recouer'd State,
                     And Crowne of France, which well admits no Mate.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Tyber and Iber then together flow,
                     (Too strong in wrong) his Right to ouer-throw.
                     There prowdeth Power, Heer Prowesse brighter shines,
                     And dayly shewes vs by a thousand Signes,
                     How great Aduantage a true Birth-right brings
                     (Against Vsurpers) vnto lawfull Kings.
                  
                  
                     In IVRY Fields, hee seemes a Blazing Starre;
                     Seene in the Front of all his Hoast, a farre▪
                     
                     Maiestick Fury in his Martiall Face,
                     The brauest Troopes, doth in instant Chase:
                     And boldest Rebels, which the rest had lead;
                     Came charging one way, and by forty Fled.
                  
                  
                     
                        Melun surrenders, to his Warlike Lot,
                     
                        Chartres is chastizd with his thundering Shot,
                     
                        Louuiers lyes humbled at his Conquering Foot,
                     
                        Noyon lamenteth her Three Succors rout,
                     
                        Espernay yields her wholely to his hest,
                     
                        Dreux twise besieged, opens as the rest.
                  
                  
                     The League that late so violently burn'd,
                     To a Cold Feuer now her Frenzie turn'd;
                     And trusting still in Strange Physitians ayde,
                     Neglects her Care till all her strength decaid:
                     In dread of all, In doubt her owne will quaile:
                     As a weake Ship affraid of euery Saile.
                  
                  
                     
                     That (late) ACHILLES of the Spanish-Dutch,
                     
                     
                        Farnezean Parma that atchieu'd so much
                     In Anwerp's Siedge, by match-lesse Stratagem;
                     And weend the World had had no Peere to Him:
                     Had heere the heart, twise, to refuse to Fight;
                     And twise departed and bod none Good Night.
                     
                  
                  
                     Fortune, for Him, no longer vs'd her Wheele,
                     But, kinde and constant, followes at his heele:
                     Hee's happy euery where, and ouer all
                     Spring Palmes and Lawrels: onely neere Aumale
                     
                     A murderous Bullet put him to some paine,
                     Yet hindred not His Rescue of his Traine.
                  
                  
                     Who weens to vanquish Him, makes Him invict;
                     Milde to the Meeke, to Proudlings sterne and strict:
                     Hee loues the Lawrels without bloud be-sprent,
                     A Cruell Conquest Hee doth euer lament.
                     His Thunder batters but Rebellious Walls,
                     And who least fear him, on them first hee falls.
                  
                  
                     
                        France, Selfe to slay, and her owne Throat to Cut,
                     Armes her owne hands; and (in strange rage) doth put
                     The Knife to whet, in Spaines ambitious pawes;
                     
                        Spain that would Spoil her Crownes primordiall Lawes
                     And would a Scepter with a Distaffe blinn:
                     But all in vaine: The Lillies cannot Spinn.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Re-Romaniz'd, so (say They) Heauen coniures;
                     His Errors at Saint Denis hee abiures:
                     This Change, in Court Yet chang'd not one nor other;
                     For, though his Subiects haue not all one Mother,
                     Hee holds them all his Sonnes, They him their Sire;
                     And Christians all, all to one Heau'n aspire.
                  
                  
                     Within the Temple of The Mother-Mayd,
                     
                     That bore her Sonne, her Sire, her God, her Ayde,
                     With Heau'n-sent Oyle hee is annointed King,
                     Donns th'Order-Coller; and by euery thing,
                     To prooue in Him, Saint Lewis Faith and Zeale,
                     The Sick hee touches, and his Touch doth heale.
                  
                  
                     By law of Armes, A Citty tane by Force,
                     Should feele the Victors rage, with small remorce;
                     
                        Paris so taken, is not treated so:
                     Though well his Iustice might haue razed lowe
                     Those rebell Walls which bred & fed These Warres;
                     To saue the guilt-lesse, hee the guilty spares.
                  
                  
                     There, There's the Hope and Safety of His Side;
                     If There hee faile, then farewell all beside:
                     The Spaniard therefore Thither speedy sends,
                     A great strong Conuoy to confirme His Friends.
                     Which soone defeated: There began the End
                     Of Ciuill Warrs, and all to Vnion tend.
                  
                  
                     
                     Th'Honor of sauing and restoring France,
                     
                     Is not alone due to His Valiance;
                     
                     His Clemencie hath part; which lets him in
                     To stronger Holds, then all his Armes could win:
                     That, satisfied with Teares; makes from all parts,
                     Repentant Rebels yield him vp their Hearts.
                  
                  
                     
                        Lyons, the Porter of one Part of France,
                     
                     
                        Rouen that sees none like strong in ordinance,
                     
                        Orleans, which England did vndaunted prooue,
                     
                        Marseillis, iealous of old Neptunes loue,
                     Aix, Bourges, Sens, Meaux, Poictiers, Troy, Thoulouse,
                     And Reins; of These, each to his Bountie bowes.
                  
                  
                     This gratious Prince excus'd the simpler sort,
                     Whom (Malice-les,) blinde Passions did transport,
                     Against the Lawes, with fury of the Tyme,
                     Who selfe-affraid to faile in fowler Crime,
                     Seduc'd by others slye seditious Lore,
                     Followd (like Sheepe) their Fellowes straid before.
                  
                  
                     This heauenly-humane Clemencie of His,
                     Yet cannot shield Him from some Treacheries;
                     One wounds him in the Mouth and breakes withall
                     One of his Teeth, (ò Act vnnaturall!)
                     And had not God in part put-by the blowe,
                     Euen then in Paris had hee perisht so.
                  
                  
                     
                     But, hauing quencht the Ciuill Fiers in France,
                     
                     Gainst his ill Neighbors now his Armes aduance;
                     In Piedmont-Fields his Lillye-flowers he plants,
                     Pills Bourgognie, and all Artois He dants,
                     And makes the great Castilian M'ARS to flye,
                     With Feare within; without, with Infamye.
                  
                  
                     Then those great Warriors that had disobay'd
                     (Whom not their Courage but their Cause betrayd)
                     Which came with shame and sorrow (as was meet)
                     To cast their swords at his victorious Feet,
                     Fearing his Rigor: He receaues them (rather)
                     With King-like grace, and kindnesse like a Father.
                  
                  
                     Heauen dayly works, for him, some special Miracle,
                     His Faith's an Altar and his Word an Oracle:
                     His greatest foes haue neuer found him fayle,
                     And should Sincerity, in all men quaile,
                     Exiled from the World (as Moores from Spaine)
                     In This Kings soule she had been found againe.
                  
                  
                     
                        Spaine by a train of many Wyles wel layd,
                     Surpriseth Amiens, France is all affraid:
                     The Spaniard, hence prouder then euer, swells,
                     Vndaunted HENRY Thence him soone repells,
                     Re-gaines his Citty, and constraines His foes,
                     To begg their Peace, or to abide his blowes.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Stormes that long disturbd the state are val'd,
                     Th'ill Vapors now are from all hearts exhal'd,
                     And France is now all French euen all about:
                     Only the Breton stiffly yet stood out.
                     But those white Ermines at the last must need,
                     Of th'only Sent of the faire Lillies feed.
                  
                  
                     Old PHILLIP longs to see the Waters calme,
                     Finds all designes vaine to supplant This Palme;
                     Sith the more shaken, it more fast doth grow:
                     Hee seeketh Peace, the Pope solicits so,
                     
                        Veruins doth treat it, Bruxells sweares it donne,
                     And PHILLIP pleasd departs the World anon.
                  
                  
                     
                        France yet retaines one sensible Offence,
                     For which she vowes Reuenge or Recompence:
                     Among the Alps her thundering Canons roare,
                     Proud-browd Montmeilan flaunts and vaunts the more
                     To stop her furye, but in fine is faine,
                     To rue her rashnesse and repent in vaine.
                  
                  
                     God hastens his owne Work: This Monarch marries
                     In Lyons Church, the choice, the Chiefe of Maries;
                     
                     The Heauens delight, our Lillies ornament:
                     
                        Loue, in one hart two louely Soules hath blent,
                     Whence Peace is more confirm'd, and Discord, dasht
                     For; by This knot many great Plotts are quasht.
                  
                  
                     
                     At Fountainblean (a Paradise for scite)
                     She brought him forth his Dolphin, his delight,
                     Whose tender youth giues happy hopes of Worth;
                     One Daughter also did she there bring forth,
                     And two Sonnes more (Supporters of the crowne,)
                     Two daughters more, Paris for birth doth owne.
                  
                  
                     His Clemency hath conquered Rebells rage,
                     Made of dis-loyall loyall Vassalage;
                     Yea forced Wills by Pardons and by Grace,
                     The proof wherof is writt in every place:
                     Through al the Townes of France both great & smal
                     Where, for Reuenge, Reward was daign'd to all.
                  
                  
                     Once, only once, his Mercy admirable,
                     Was deafe to Biron and inexorable;
                     Sith when he might, his hault despight would none,
                     I wonder not to see that Myrmadon,
                     
                     In the Bastile, a shamefull death to beare:
                     But This I wonder, that he would come there.
                  
                  
                     Of factious spirits, of close deep hearts, and double,
                     (Whose Life is strife, whose Rest is best in trouble)
                     He knowes the driftes, and knowne disolues the same
                     As fast as fire melts Lead within the flame.
                     His voice alone, as Dust cast vp aloft,
                     Breakes Hornets buzzing and their swarming, oft.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Discord disturbing holy Churches rest,
                     Twixt Rome and Venice did debates suggest:
                     Ambition set in foote, free-swelld with hope,
                     To bridle both the Senate and the Pope;
                     
                     Both prest to fight: His Prudence reconcil'd,
                     Their Difference, and did their mindes remyl'd.
                  
                  
                     He relisht now the harmeles Sweets of Peace,
                     Willing his People should pertake no lesse;
                     But yet some-where he feeles a Thorne to prick:
                     To plucke it out he armes and marches quick
                     Euen to the Frontier: There attaines hi's will,
                     Wisdome (so) fitly takes her Season still.
                  
                  
                     You Nations, that for forty yeares haue seene,
                     BELLONA'S Tempests and fellt MARS his Teene;
                     That for your Liberties haue pawnd your liues:
                     If freely now you ioy your Wealth, your Wiues:
                     If now your Trades into the East you bring,
                     (Vnder Heauens Kingdome) onely thanke This King.
                  
                  
                     Thus heapt with Honors, This braue King is loath,
                     That his braue Knights, effeminizd by Sloath,
                     Mid Games and Dames, during so long a Peace,
                     Should stil lye still in Citties pomp and ease:
                     Therefore he rears an Army strongly dight,
                     In Gulich's Claim, his wronged friends to right.
                  
                  
                     
                     A noble Prince, whose Prowes and Prudence, late
                     
                        Buda admir'd, and Rome hath wondred-at
                     (The Honor of His Time) was Generall;
                     So stoard with Gould, with Gunns, with Armes, with al,
                     That neighbor Princes were all in alar'm.
                     Yet Them This Thunder brought more feare then Harm.
                  
                  
                     Feare-les it Marches, and respect-les threats,
                     What-euer Log that its free Passage lets;
                     Gesture and voice already skirmishing:
                     And vnder Conduct of so braue a King,
                     Great-Brittains, Germans, Switzers, Belgians,
                     Serue all the Greatnes of the Crowne of France.
                     
                  
                  
                     Els-where the while, The Duke that rules the Alpes,
                     
                     Seemd t'haue his heart no more beyond the Calpes,
                     
                     Braue noble heart, Saxonitally-Franch.
                     
                     
                        Fuentez, affraid, with shoulder-shrincking wrench,
                     Doubts least that Milan stoop to France again;
                     And CHARLES prouoked proue the Skourge of Spaine.
                     
                  
                  
                     Heauens now, to Crowne his Tropheis, had set downe,
                     That at Saint Denis he his Queene should Crowne
                     With royall Diadem; and in one Day
                     The State, the Maiesty of France display.
                     Nothing but Great, but great Magnificence;
                     But MARIUS Grace excell'd all Excellence.
                  
                  
                     
                     Hence, hence false Pleasures, Momentary Ioyes,
                     Mocke vs no more with your illuding Toyes:
                     A strange Misshap hatched in Hell below,
                     Hath plung'd vs all in deepest Gulfe of Woe,
                     Taught vs, that all Worlds-hopes as Dreams do fly,
                     And made vs all, Cry All is Vanity.
                     
                  
                  
                     At th' Euenings-fower, forth from the Louure road
                     This mighty Prince (without his Gard) abroad
                     To see his Arsenall: To his Caroche,
                     In a streight lane a Hell-hound durst approach,
                     And with a Knife, twise stabbing, killd him quight,
                     Turning that fairest Day to foulest Night.
                  
                  
                     Twice did the Monster stab, for els, the first,
                     Had not bin mortall; but the Knife accurst
                     Thrilling his Lungs, cut at the second stroake
                     Th'arterial vein, whose blood-flood soone did choake
                     The peer-les Prince; His dying Eyes and Heart
                     Imploring Heauen, soone did his Soule depart.
                  
                  
                     Fell Tigre, tell vs, tell vs Why, or Whence,
                     Thou durst (accurst) assalt so Great a Prince:
                     Wherein had He to Thee or Thine don wrong?
                     When once (yet This) Thou didst too-neer him throng,
                     His Gard rebukt thee; but He Them, for That:
                     Caus'd That Thy Malice, and His Murderous fate?
                  
                  
                     
                     Fates ruth-les Law alots his royall brest,
                     To dye the death that CAESAR thought the best;
                     Death without sense of death, a death so quicke
                     It seldome leaues Kings leasure to be sicke:
                     Nor giues Him leaue of his sixt Decads date
                     To fill the Roule; but seauen Six Months did bate.
                  
                  
                     He, He that was the Hope, the Prop of His,
                     He that restored France to what it is,
                     He that confin'd the Power of Princes still,
                     He that Commanded Victorie, at will,
                     That was the Worlds delight, Kings glory sheen,
                     He, He receaues Deaths treacherous stroak, vnseen.
                  
                  
                     Th'vnhappy street where This fell Hap fell-out,
                     Where wofull Paris saw her Light put out,
                     Where cursed Iron pierc'd her Princes heart,
                     It shall no more be clept The Iron-mart:
                     
                     It shall be calld The cursed Corner, still;
                     
                        The Hag-street, or The Hell-street: which you will.
                  
                  
                     Lord! where wert Thou! When That disloyall wretch,
                     With cruell hand did Thine Annointed reach;
                     Quenching the Raies of Royall Maiesty?
                     No heart is hid from thine All-piercing Eye,
                     It sees the Centre, knowes the Thoughts, Yet thought;
                     Could it see This, and suffer it be wrought?
                  
                  
                     
                     Hell oft before, out of his blacke Abisse,
                     
                     Had spew'd vp Monsters to haue acted This:
                     But still thy hand from former wounds did ward.
                     And had he not still trusted to Thy Gard,
                     His Owne had waited Round about his Coach,
                     And This fell Tyger neuer should approach.
                  
                  
                     These Words, this rasher Words escapt my tongue;
                     When I beheld That Monarch layd along
                     Dead on his bed, so dead, so butchered;
                     I blamed Heauens, and Whispering soft, I said,
                     Because They stopt not This strange Hap before,
                     Their slumbering eyes now watch the World no more.
                  
                  
                     But, are mine eyes mine owne? Is This That Prince,
                     Which might haue made all Europe His long-since?
                     Had he not thought th'Empire of France inough.
                     That Lyon-heart, that Courage Cannon-proofe,
                     Which did so oft Impossibles atchiue?
                     I see tis He: yet scarce my sight beleeue.
                  
                  
                     Is This That Mighty King, Gods liuely Image,
                     To whome the greatest in the World did Homage?
                     In Peace a Doue, in Warre an Aegle quicke,
                     NESTOR in Court, In Camp ACHILLES-like,
                     That with a hundred horse a thousand foil'd:
                     That from most Dangers neuer yet recoil'd.
                  
                  
                     
                     Geat Rome was strangely mazd and all a mort,
                     When She beheld her CEASARS bloody shert:
                     And say, Great Citty, how weart Thou dismaid,
                     When first thou sawst Thine HENRY sadly layd
                     Along his Coach, and Couered with a Cloak?
                     "I thought the Prop of all my Fortunes broak.
                  
                  
                     Those that haue seene in Townes surpris'd (while-yer,)
                     When to the Churches all haue fled for fear;
                     May well imagine Paris deepe Affright.
                     Nothing but shiuering: Nobles armed bright,
                     Clergy at Prayers, People weepe and houle:
                     And the Kings wound hath wounded euery Soule.
                  
                  
                     
                        Paris in Honor of her peer-les Queene,
                     Had plotted Showes, (more pompous neuer seene)
                     As, rich to th'outward, rare to th'inward sense;
                     But all those Archs (Marks of Magnificence.)
                     Those Tropheis, Terms, Statues, Colosses, All,
                     Make but more Mourners at the Funeral.
                  
                  
                     I yeeld My Pencill: helpe APELLES, here,
                     To Limme (to life) Her dying-liuing Cheere:
                     Beleefe is hardly in Mans heart impress't,
                     Her Griefe more hard to be by Art exprest,
                     Therfore ô Queene! Great Stay, Great Star of France,
                     
                     This Vaile I draw before Thy Countenance.
                  
                  
                     
                     Heauen steel'd Thy Heart with Fortitude That Day,
                     Thy Courage kept the Kingdome from Decay;
                     And to the Throne Thy Sonne our Soueraine heft:
                     Though angry Fates of Father him bereft,
                     Yet Mercifull, they left him such a Mother,
                     That France could hardly haue beene ruld by other.
                  
                  
                     The soudaine Clap of This drad Thunder sounds,
                     From Alexanders to Alcides Bounds:
                     The Kings and Princes stand amazed all,
                     With horror of an Act so Tragicall.
                     Some Rest for-sake, others Repast for-beare,
                     And Each like Fortune to him-selfe doth feare.
                  
                  
                     So soudainly to see Day turn'd to night,
                     
                        Tryumphant Palmes into Funerial Plight,
                     The Royall-Crowne to a deepe Mourning Vale,
                     A liuing King to a dead Corps and Pale,
                     Our Flowers to Thornes: seeme Tricks of Sorcery,
                     Wherein, Conceipt consents not with our Eye.
                  
                  
                     Yes, He is dead: and his eye-lids no more
                     To view this Light shall open (as before;)
                     Those louely Eyes the Load-stars of the Court,
                     Whose gracious glances on the Worthy sort,
                     Gaue Vertue vigor, and Whose awefull frowne,
                     Dis-dared Vice; are now Eclipst and downe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Where are those ready Battaill-ranging Hands?
                     Those lightning Eyes whose wrath no wall with-stands?
                     That Voice so dreadfull to the stoutest hearts?
                     That Hart which wrought so many wonderous parts?
                     That piercing Wit dispersing Clouds of Doubt?
                     Where is that mighty King, so Fam'd about?
                  
                  
                     Inexorable Death! inhumaine, cruell,
                     Thou shalt no more reaue vs so rare a Iewell;
                     
                        Nature hath broake the Mould she made Him in.
                     In all thy Triumph (trayling euery Kin)
                     Shall neuer march His Match, nor worthier Prince,
                     T'haue bin exempted from thine Insolence.
                  
                  
                     Ah! poore, weake Vertue, Zealous Loue of Thee,
                     Prolongs not Life, protracts not Death (I see)
                     This Prince that gaue Thee euen his Hart for Temple,
                     This Prince whose Raigne shal serue for rare Example
                     To future Kings, in future Things dismaid,
                     Should haue come sooner, or haue later stayd.
                  
                  
                     His Piety, was neither Fond, nor Faind;
                     His Prowesse, neither Feare, nor Rashnes staind;
                     His Prudence cleard his Councells, steerd his State;
                     His Temperance his Wrath did temperate;
                     His Iustice with his Clemency did Yoake:
                     Yet could not All free Him from Fatall stroake.
                  
                  
                     
                     Inuincible in all: onely, the Darts
                     Which haue not spar'd the Gods immortall harts,
                     Haue often batterd His: but, by your leaues,
                     O fairest Beauties! (Beauty it selfe deceaues)
                     
                     You neuer were the Souerains of his brest:
                     He You (perhaps) You neuer Him possest.
                  
                  
                     In Arms-Art, what Hee knew not, none can know't,
                     Neither attempt what Hee attempted not,
                     Reason was aye the Aime of His designes,
                     His braue Exploits (worthy immortall lines)
                     Shall furnish Theam to Thousand learned Clarks,
                     Whose Works shal Honor Him, He more their Warks.
                  
                  
                     His Royall Gests are euery-where extold,
                     Grauen, Carued, Cast, in Marble, Wood, and Gold;
                     His Life alone's an Historie admir'd,
                     Wherein all Penns, all Pencills shalbe tir'd,
                     In pourtraying all His valiant Feats to-forn,
                     Whose Tables euer shall all Courts adorne.
                  
                  
                     His Bounties Temple had a hard Accesse,
                     Not knowne to any but to Worthinesse:
                     
                     That Gate (indeed) did seldome open quick.
                     His Liberalitie, (coy Beautie like)
                     Lou'd to be woo'd, prest, and importun'd still,
                     Yea, forc'd to giue, what glad and fain shee will.
                  
                  
                     
                     Yet, by th'effects to waigh his Clemency,
                     Mee thinkes His Heart must more then humane bee,
                     Mee thinkes therein some higher Power did shine,
                     It surely seem'd celestiall and diuine,
                     And but I saw him dying, pale and wan,
                     I could haue scarce beleeu'd This Prince a Man.
                  
                  
                     Hee euer lou'd rather to saue then spill,
                     Not cimenting his Throne with Blood, with Ill,
                     Nor ween'd by Feare his Diadem assur'd
                     With Myldnesse rather grieued minds he cur'd
                     His Memorie did neuer wrongs retaine,
                     Beloued Kings (He thought) securest raigne.
                  
                  
                     Praise you This Bounty, you that past the Poles,
                     Bear Heauens Embassage to Belief-les Soules:
                     HENRY restor'd your Country and your credit,
                     Hee gaue you leaue ouer all France to spred it,
                     Restord you Bizance, and each pleasant part,
                     Left you his Court, bequeath'd to you his Hart.
                  
                  
                     If France now flourish, proyning round about,
                     Oliues within, and Lawrells all with-out,
                     If now, She giue the Law to other States,
                     If Peace and Plenty raigne within her Gates,
                     If now She feare no Ciuill Stormes againe,
                     These are the fruits of This Great HENRY'S Raigne;
                  
                  
                     
                     If now Her Schooles with learned men abound,
                     If Her rare witts be through the World renownd,
                     If doubts of Faith be cleared and explor'd,
                     If Learning be to her dew Place restord,
                     If now Desert the charge in Church attaine,
                     These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY'S Raigne.
                  
                  
                     If now her Buildings passe for bewty farre
                     The Worlds old Wonders (which so famous are)
                     If Paris Thou be peerles to behold,
                     For State, for Store, for People, Goods, and Gold,
                     If in Thy Citty Citties sprout againe,
                     These are the Fruits of This Great HENRY'S Raigne.
                  
                  
                     If the French Scepter be now Selfe-entire,
                     Fear-les of Forraine or Domestick fier:
                     If France haue fellowes of ACHILLES Fame,
                     If now in France be nothing out of frame,
                     If now the Indies her Bastile containe,
                     These are the fruits of This Great HENR'YS Raigne.
                  
                  
                     If now we ioye to see our Country free
                     From Theiues and Rebells (which exiled be)
                     If Iustice now do keepe the lewd in awe,
                     If Desperate Duells be now Curbd by Lawe,
                     If now the Weake waigh not the Strongs disdaine,
                     These are the Fruits of This Great HENRYS Raigne.
                  
                  
                     
                     If Merchants rich, If Magistrates be found,
                     If Officers like Emperors abound,
                     If pursie Lawyers liue Prince-like at home,
                     If now Inuentions to their height be come,
                     If now good witts finde where them to sustaine,
                     These are the fruits of This Great HENRY'S Raigne.
                  
                  
                     Who lou'd not Him, neuer beheld his browes,
                     Who knew his Fortunes, must admire his Prowes,
                     Who feard him not, His Greatnesse did offend,
                     Who weend Him to beguile, his Wisedome kend:
                     Who durst displease him knew his mercies store;
                     Who durst not speake his myldnesse did ignore.
                  
                  
                     Who waileth not his Death knew not his Life,
                     Glory of His and Others Enuie rife,
                     Incomparable, Admirable Prince
                     Excelling all th'old HEROES Excellence.
                     For His true Story shall their Fables shame:
                     Inimitable Life, Illimitable Fame.
                  
                  
                     O French-men, stop not yet your weeping flood:
                     This Prince for you hath lauisht oft his blood,
                     O! be not niggards of your Teares expence,
                     (Vaile heere, my Verse, doe ANNE a reuerence;
                     Rare ANNE that shames the rarest witts of Ours
                     Her diuine Stances furnish thee these Flowers)
                  
                  
                     
                     The Heauens may giue vs all Prosperities,
                     Sustaine our State, remooue our miseries;
                     But cannot drye vp our Teares bitter streame:
                     In extreame Euills remedies extreame.
                     Restore our King, quick shall our Ioyes recouer,
                     Els, neuer looke our Sorrowes should giue ouer.
                  
                  
                     Each-where our Greife finds matter to augment it,
                     His Names Remembrance doth each where present it,
                     His famous Gests doe busie euery Sort,
                     Some tell his Warres, others his Workes report.
                     Others his Fauors past, glad-sad deplore;
                     Then, not to mourn, is not to minde Him more.
                  
                  
                     Ah! must wee liue, and see so soudaine dead
                     The Life that late our Liues enspirited?
                     Strike saile my Soule, let's put-into the Port,
                     While HENRY liu'd 't was good to liue (in sort)
                     But let vs after; sith Hee's reft of breath,
                     Desire of Life is now farre worse then Death.
                  
                  
                     Sorrow, with vs doth both lye down and rise,
                     Wrinckles our Browes, withers our Cheekes and eyes;
                     Wee shunn what-euer might our Griefes allay,
                     We wish the Night, w'are weary of the day,
                     Night brings sad Silence with her horrid Shade,
                     And euen her Colour seemes for Mourning made.
                  
                  
                     
                     Extremest Woes yet are with Time ore-past,
                     Riuers of Teares are dryed-vp at last:
                     But neuer Ours: Ours, euer fresh shall flow,
                     Wee defie Comforts, wee'll admit no mo,
                     Nor seeke them, but as Alchimie profound
                     Seekes that which is not, or which is not found.
                  
                  
                     Who from the Ocean Motion can recall,
                     Heat from Fier, Void from Aier, Order from All,
                     From Lines their Points, from IRIS all her Dyes,
                     Perils from Seas, from Numbers Vnities,
                     Shadowes from Bodies, Angles from the Square,
                     May separate our Harts from Grief, our Mindes from Care.
                  
                  
                     He must be hart-lesse that is smart lesse found,
                     The Soule that is not wounded with This wound,
                     Most brutish, hath no humane Reason in't:
                     There is no brest of Steele, no hart of Flint,
                     But must be-mone so great a King, so slain,
                     Who would not waile a Gally slaue so tain.
                  
                  
                     Let vs no more name HENRY'S Kings of France,
                     
                     Death with two Kniues, and with one shiuer'd Launce,
                     Hath killd Three HENRY'S: one at Iousts (in iest)
                     Th'other in's Closet, in's Caroach the best:
                     So, Three King RICHARDS; and Fiue Other crye,
                     Some fatal Secret in some Names doth lye.
                  
                  
                     
                     What worse Disastre can you haue behinde
                     To threaten France, ó Destinies vnkind!
                     What greater Mischief can your Malice bring,
                     So good a Father rest, so great a King?
                     What will you more? Sith we no more can hope
                     For any Good that with This Ill may cope.
                  
                  
                     This noble Spirit doth to his Spring re-mount,
                     This Bounties Flood retireth to his Fount,
                     This Atomie to's Vnitie vnites,
                     This Starre returnes to the first Light of Lights,
                     This Ray reuerts where first it light did take,
                     And mortall wounds, This Prince immortall make.
                  
                  
                     Fare-well sole Honor of all earthly Kings,
                     Fare-well rare Prince for All kinde Managings,
                     Fare-well Great HENRY Heau'ns and Natures Gemm,
                     Fare-well bright Starre of Kings, Glories great Beame,
                     Fare-well sole Mortall that I keepe in minde,
                     Fare-well false Hope, Fortune, and Court vnkinde.
                  
                  
                     Heere, leasi Obliuion should vsurpe her roome,
                     FAME writes in Gold, These Lines vpon thy Toombe.
                  
                  
                     THIS PRINCE, VN-PEERD FOR CLEMENCY AND COVRAGE,
                     IVSTLY SVR-NAMD, THE GREAT, THE GOOD, THE WISE,
                     MIRROR OF FVTVRE, MIRACLE OF FORE-AGE;
                     ONE SHORT MIS-HAP FOR-EVER HAPPIFIES.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   