
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
                        blazon of Prince Frederick
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        blazon of Princess Elizabeth
                     
                  
                  portrait of Prince Frederick and Princess Elizabeth
                  
                     יהוה
                  
               
            
            An English-Royall Pedegree:
Common to the two moſt Noble Princes
Lately Maried.
            FRIDERICK,
firſt Prince of the Imperiall,
blood ſprung from glorious Charle-Magne,
Count Palatine of the Rhine,
Duke of Bauier, Elector and Arch-Sewer
of the holy Romaine Empire, & knight
of the renowned order of the
Garter.
            
               interlocking hearts
            
            and
            ELIZABETH,
Infanta of Albion, Princeſſe Palatine,
Dutcheſſe of Bauier,
the onely Daughter of our moſt
gracious King Iames and
Qu
                  •
               ene Anne.
            
            Being both of them in one, and the ſame degree of lineall deſcent from
Edward the Third, the victorious King of
England.
            
            
               EDward the Third of this name, King of England, France and Ireland, the Author and firſt
Knight of the renowned order of the Garter, and Vicar generall of the Empire.
            
            
               IOhn of Gant, Knight of the Garter Earle of Richmond, Darbie, Leiceſter and Lincolne, Palatine
of Cheſter, Duke of Lancaſter and Aquitaine, heigh Steward of England, great Conſtable of
France, and in the right of his ſecond Wife, King of Caſtille and Leon, the Fourth Sonne of King
Edward the Third.
            
               IOhn Beaufort Earle of Somerſet, Marquiſe 
Dorſet, Lord high Chamberlaine
of England, Knight of the Garter:
Sonne to Iohn of Gant, and brother to
Henry the Fourth King of England.
            I Ane Beaufort, Daughter to the Earle-Marquiſe 
               Iohn, maried to the moſt
vertuous, valorous, and learned Prince,
Iames the Firſt, King of Scotland.
            I Ames the Second, Sonne and heire of 
King Iames the Firſt, of Scotland, and
of Queene Iàne of England.
            I Ames the Third, Sonne and heire of 
the moſt couragious▪ curteous, and
affable Prince King Iames the Second.
            I Ames the Fourth, Soune and heire of 
King Iames the Third.
            I Ames the Fift, Knight of the renowned 
order of the Garter, and King of
Scotland, the moſt worthy and vertuous
Sonne of a moſt religious, vertuous, and
worthy Father Iames the Fourth.
            
               MArie ſurnamed Clarabella, for her 
incomparable beautie and bountie,
Queene heire of Scotland, Queene
Dowag
                     •
                  r of France, and Princeſſe apparant
of England, France, and Ireland, as
being the great grand childe of the moſt
prudent and puiſſant Prince Henry the
Seauenth King of England, and the onely
Daughter and heire of the moſt noble
Britaniſh Prince Iames the Fifth King of
Scotland.
            
               CHarles-Iames ſurnamed the Concorder
Britaines King of Concord, the 
onely Sonne and heire of Queene Mary
and of her ſecond husband, the moſt
comely and noble Prince Henry Lord
Darley, Earle of Roſſe, Duke of Albanie
Knight of the renowned order of Saint
Michaell, and King of Scotland; being
her Maieſties neareſt and deareſt coſin,
and the great grand childe of the foreſaid
King Henry the Seauenth.
            
               ELizabeth ſurnamed the Beloued, the
onely Daughter of our moſt gracious
King Iames and Queene Anne.
            
            
               PHilippa Daughter to Iohn of Gant, and 
                  •
               iſte
                  •
               
               Henry the Fourth King of England, and to Iohn
Earle of Sommerſ
                  •
               t Marquiſe Dorſet maried to
Iohn King of Portugall.
            
               EDward King of Portugall, Sonne to King Iohn,
by his wife Queene Phillippe of Lancaſter.
            
               LEonora Daughter to King Edward of Portugall
maried to the moſt noble and vertuous Prince
Friderick the Third, Arch-Duke of Auſtria and Emperour.
            
               CVnegund Daughter of Friderick the Emperour,
and Leonora, and Siſter of the glorious Emperour
Maximilian the Firſt, maried to A
                     •
                  bert the
Fourth, Duke of Bauier.
            
               SVſanne Daughter to the right noble, learned, &
prudent Prince Albert the Fourth, by his Wife
Cunegund of Auſtria, maried to the right generous
Prince Caſimire Marquiſe of Brandeburg & Duke
of Pomerane.
            
               MArie Dau
                  •
               hter to Caſimere Marquis of Brandeburg
by his Wife Suſanne of Bauier, maried
to Friderick the Third of this name Prince Palatine
Elector and Arch-Sewer of the holy Romaine
Empire, Duke of Bau
                  •
               ere, Earle of Obrink Simmer
and Spanheim, who was a Prince peaceable and
learned and a ſingular Patron to Schollers; he likewiſe
planted the reformed Religion in his Citie of
Heidelberg.
            
               LOdouick the Fift Elector of this Name, Prince
Palatine and Duke of Bauier, and Bipontz,
Earle of Simmer and Spanheim, Sonne to Fridericke
the Third, a Prince godly and vertuous, care
                  •
               ull to
eſtabliſh iuſtice Policie and peace in his Princedome
he enriched the famous Colledge of Heidelberg
with new reuenues.
            
               FRiderick the fourth of this Name, Prince Palatine,
Elector, and Arch-ſewer of the ſacred Romaine
Empire, Duke of Bauier Sonne to Lodouick the
Fift aforeſaid; he was a Prince endued with many
heroicall parts, a louer of learning, and of the
learned, the moſt magnificent houſe-keeper of all
the Germaine Princes▪ he was exceeding officious
to our gracious Soueraigne King Iames, and very
kinde and curteous, both to Engliſh and S
                  •
               ottiſh
Trauailers.
            
               FRiderick the Fift of this Name, the inheritor of
his noble fathers Princele dignitie, vertue and
worth, Sonne in law to our moſt gracious King
Iames and Queene Anne.
            
            Being both of them almoſt in one and the ſame degree of lineall deſcent (as I can ſhew) from
25. Emperours of Romaines Greeks and Germaines, and from 30 Kings of diuers
Kingdomes and Countries.
            This Royall an
                  •
                Princely Pedegree, is by the Author dedicated to the right noble Lady, Elizabeth
               Ʋicounteſſe Hadington, Wife to the moſt valorous reſcuer of our King, Iohn Lord Ramſey▪
                Vicount
Hadington.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for Henry Goſſon.
            
            
               Iames Maxwell.
            
         
      
   