
      
         
            
            
            THE HISTORY OF
THE CHVRCH OF
ENGLANDE.
            Compiled by Venerable Bede,
Englishman.
            Translated out of Latin in to English by Thomas
Stapleton Student in Diuinite.
            You being sometimes straungers and enemies in vnderstanding &c.Coloss. 1
                     •
                  
                He hath
now reconciled in the body of his fleshe through death &c. If yet ye continew
grounded and stedfast in the Faith, and be not moued away from the hope
of the ghospell, which ye haue heard, which hath ben preached amonge all creatures
vnder heauen.
            
               SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS
            
            Imprinted at Antwerp by Iohn Laet,
at the signe of the Rape: with
Priuilege. Anno. 1565.
            
               
               
                  E. R.
                  God saue the Quene.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND MOST GRATIOVSE PRINCESSE, ELIZABETH BY THE GRACE OF God Quene of England, Fraunce, and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith.
(
                  ••
               )
            IF THE mind of man (most gratiouse
Souuerain) in respect of vvhich vve
are made after the image of the highest,
excelled not in passing degrees,
the lumpe of mortall fleshe, by meanes
vvhereof it vttereth his naturall functions, iff
the qualitees of the one surmounted not infinitly
the conditions of the other, neither should it seme
vvorthe the vvhile to set penne to paper for defense
of true religion, in these perilous times of schisme
and heresy, neither vvould it be sitting for one
of my calling to commend such labours to the vevve
of your Maiesty. For, as in the vvriting I haue
good cause to remembre that Truthe purchaseth hatred,
so in the commending of the same I can not
forgett that a younge scholer, and base subiect attempteth
to talke vvith a right mighty Princesse
and his lerned Souuerain. Notvvithstanding, considering
the invvarde man and better portion off
my selfe, I haue to comforte me bothe in the one,

and in the other. In the one, respect of the profit
vvhich may arise hereby to the deceiued consciences
of my dere countremē, your highnes subiectes,
my regard to Gods honour and zeale to the truth
do make me lesse to feare the displeasure that may
ensue. In the other your highnes most gratiouse
Clemency, and knovven good affection to be enformed
of the truth, enboldeth me to present particularly
to your most Royall Maiesty, that vvhich
I publish to the vvhole Realmes commodite. For
as that vvhich the body receiueth, the Head first
vevveth and considereth, so thought I most conuenient,
that the generall history of the realme off
England shoulde first be commended to the princely
head and Souuerain gouuernour of the same.
Againe, the history in Latin being dedicated by
the Author to a kinge of this realme, one of your
most Noble progenitours, it semed no lesse then
duty, that the translatiō and nevv publishing of it
ought to come forth vnder your highnes protection
succeding in the Imperial Crovvne of the same.
            The matter of the History is such, that if it may
stande vvith your Maiesties pleasure to vevve
and consider the same in vvhole or in part, your
highnes shall clerely see as vvell the misse informations
of a fevve for displacing the auncient and
right Christen faith, as also the vvay and meane of
a spedy redresse that may be had for the same, to
the quietnesse of the greater part of your Maiesties

most loyal and lovvly subiectes cōsciences. In this
history it shall appeare in vvhat faith your noble
Realme vvas christened, and hath almost these
thousād yeres cōtinevved: to the glory of God, the
enriching of the crovvne, and great vvelth and quiet
of the realme. In this history your highnes shall
see in hovv many and vveighty pointes the pretē
               ded
refourmers of the church in your Graces dominiōs
haue departed frō the patern of that sounde
and catholike faith planted first among Englishemen
by holy S. Augustin our Apostle, and his
vertuous cōpany, described truly and sincerely by
Venerable Bede, so called in all Christendom for his
passing vertues and rare lerning, the Author of this
History. And to thentent your highnes intention
bent to vveightier considerations and affaires may
spende no longe time in espying oute the particulars,
I haue gathered out of the vvhole History a
number of diuersities betvvene the pretended religion
of Protestants, and the primitiue faith of the
english church, and haue annexed them streight
ioyning to this our simple preface. Maie it please
your most gracious highnes to take a short vevv of
it, and for more ample intelligence of euery particular
(if it shall so like your highnesse) to haue a recourse
to the booke and chapter quoted.
            Beside the vvhole history of holy and lerned S.
Bede, I haue published a short and necessary discourse
to mete vvith the only argument of such as

vvill pronoūce this vvhole booke to be but a fardle
of papistry, a vvitnesse of corrupted doctrine, a
testimony of that age and time vvhich they haue
already condēned for the time of no true Christianite
at all: of such I saie as haue altered the faith vve
vvere first Christened in, condemning our dere
forefathers of allmost these thousand yeares, the
Christen inhabitants of your graces dominions.
This I haue done principally in ij
                  •
                partes. In the firste
by expresse testimonies of holy Scripture, the
psalmes, the prophets, and the nevv Testamēt, by
remouing the obiections of the aduersaries taken
out of holy Scripture, by the glorious successe of
these later 900. yeares in multiplying the faithe of
Christ through the vvorlde, last of all by clere and
euident reasons I haue proued that the faith of vs
Englishmen all these ix c. hundred yeares, coulde
not possibly be a corrupted faith, traded vp in superstitions,
blindnesse, and idolatry, as it is falsely
and vvickedly surmised of many, but that it is the
true and right Christianite no lesse then the firste
vj. c. yeares, and immediat succession of the Apostles.
In the second part, vvhere vve gather a number
of differences in doctrine, in ecclesiasticall gouernement,
in the order and maner of proceding,
in the course and cōsequēces of both religiōs, that
first plāted among vs and so many hundred yeares
cōtinevved, and this presently preached and pretē
               ded,
I haue shevved by the testimonies of the moste

auncient and approued Fathers, of the Councels
and histories of that time, that in all such differences
our faith first planted and hitherto continevved
amonge vs, agreeth and concurreth vvith
the practise and b
                  •
               elefe of the first vj. c. yeres, the time
approued by al mens consent for the right and
pure Christianite. If it may stande vvith your Maiesties
pleasure to vveigh this double truthe so clerely
proued first out of Gods holy vvorde and euident
reason, then out of the assured practise of the
primitiue churche, your Grace shall quickely see a
ready redresse of present schismes, a compendious
quieting of troubled consciences, and an open pathe
to returne to the faith, vvithoute vvhiche is no
saluation. As vve knovve right vvell, the meaning
of your gracious highnes to be already seriously
bent to haue the truthe tried and to be sincerely
published throughe all your Graces dominions,
so to the ende that this godly zeale maie
in your Maiesties most Princely hart the more
be kindled and cōfirmed, most humbly and lovvly
I beseche the same, to beholde a fevve examples
of the most puissant Princes that haue ben in
Christendom, vvhich in that singular vertu haue
principally excelled.
            At vvhat time Princes and Emperours (hauing
certaine hundred yeares fought and striued all in
vaine against the light of the ghospel and publishing
of Christen religion) beganne at length them

selues to take the svvete yoke of Christe, to submit
their Sceptres to his holy Crosse, and ioyning
deuoute humilite vvith vvordly policie began to
procure their soule helth, and to prouide for the
vvorlde to come, then the prophecy of Esaie vvas
in them fullfilled saying to the churche of Christ.
Beholde I will stretche out mine hande to the gentils, and sett
vpp my token to the people.
               Esaiae. 49. 
               They shall bringe thee thy sonnes
in their lappes, and cary their daughters vnto thee vppon
their shoulders. For kinges shall be thy nursing Fathers,
and Quenes shall be thy nursing mothers. They shall fall
downe before thee: &c et. Then their chiefe endeuour
and principall care hath ben to maintaine the only
Catholike faith in their dominions, and to chase
eftesoones all schismes and heresies that from time
to time sprange vp amonge. Constantin the great
(vvorthely so called for sondry respects) the Arrian
heresy vnder him arising, laboured by all meanes
possible and semely to his princely vocation to
quēche the same. For this purpose, first he directed
that lerned and vertuous Father Osius bisshop of
Corduba in Spayne,Niceph. li. 
                     •
                  . cap. 12. to the churches of AEgypte
vvhere the terrible tragedy of that hainous heresie
beganne, vvith his letters of exhortation to reconcile
them againe vvhich vvere diuided in matters
of the faith.Cap. 13. He vvrote also to Arrius him selfe
and Alexander the bisshop of Alexandria, persuading
vvith them to come to agreement and accorde.
After (al this fuffising not) at the motion and

order of the vertuous bishops of that time and by
their ordinary meanes,In praefat. Nic. Con. he caused the truthe of the
controuersy to be enquired, examined, and discussed
in a full and generall Councell helde at Nice,
vvhere he presented him selfe bearing the charges
of the bishops that dvvelled farre of.Nicep. lib. 8. cap. 14. After this councell
according to the determination of those
holy Fathers, for quieting the church, he banished
Arrius, Theognis, Eu
                     •
                  ebius of Nicomedia, and other
masters of that secte. He talked also and commoned
vvith Acesius a bishopp of the Nouatians, labouring
to vvinne him to the Catholike church
againe. Being troubled also vvith Donatus and his
complices breding then a nevve secte in Christes
church, against Caecilianus their lavvfull bishop, he
vvrote vnto Miltiades then Pope of Rome to decide
the matter,Idem li. 7. cap. 42. and directed a commission out of his
ovvne Courte for the better expedition of the same.
Thus laboured that vertuous and Christen
Emperour Constantin the great to maintaine
the vnite of Christes church, and to abolish all heresies
in the prouinces of the vvhole vvorld then
subiect vnto him. This glasse he lefte to his posterite
other Christen Princes to looke on.
            Valentinian the first, the next catholike Emperour
of any continuaunce after Constantin,Hist. tripart. libr. 8. c. 13. so earnestly
t
                  •
               
               ̄dred the catholike religion, that vvhen Valēs
his brother the Arriā Emperour of the East, demaunded
aide of him against the Gotthes, then

breaking in to the Romain empire, he ansvvered
that being an heretike, it could not stande vvith
his conscience and religion to helpe him:2. par. 19
                     •
                   &. 25. fearing
vvorthely the checke that God by the mouth of
Iehu gaue to Iosaphat kinge of 
                  •
               uda, for aiding
the Apostata and Idolater Achab, kinge of Israell.
Theodosius successour of Valens in the East
called also the great for his vvorthy and princely
qualities, for the maintenaunce of the catholike
faith of Christes church, published an edict against
the Arrians and the Manichees, vvherby he
imbarred them all maner of assembles,L. Omnes Vet
                     ••
                  ae. cod. de he. et Manich. preaching
or teaching, banished thē out of cites and places of
resorte commaunding also no man should company
vvith them. Againe the same Emperour after
much disputations and conferences had vvith the
Arrians, perceauing at lenght by the aduise of Sis
                     •
                  nius,
that they agreed not amonge them selues,
nor approued the lerned vvriters in Christes churche
before their time (bothe vvhich great faultes
are euident in the principal promoters of this nevv
pretended religion) vtterly to extinguish all heresy,
and for a finall extirping of schisme,Socrates li. 5. c. 10. S
                     •
                  zomenus lib. 1. c. 17. he vvith
Gratian commaunded expressely, that such doctrine
and religion only shoulde take place, as Damasus,
then Pope off Rome, taughte and allovved.
            Honorius and Arcadius sonnes to Theodosius,
folovved the godly steppes of the vertuous Prince
their Father. Thereupon Arcadius by the stoute

aduise of Chrisostom vvould not graunt to Gainas
a famous Scythian Captain vnder him one poore
corner in all the East to practise his Arrian profession
in.Niceph. li. 13. c. 5. Honorius likevvise hauing information of
the horrible schismes of the Donatistes in Afrike,
directed in commission thither Marcellinus to be
present at a general assemble in Carthage of the caholike
bishops and the Donatistes,Tom. 7. as it appeareth
by the conferences of that assemble yet extant in
the vvorkes of S. Augustin.
            Hovv diligent Theodosius the second next successour
to the foresaied Emperours vvas in extirping
the heresy of Nestorius, and in setting forth
the right doctrine touching the godhed of the holy
Gost against Macedonius and his scholers, the
vvritings of Cyrillus ad Reginas, and to Theodosius
him selfe do euidently declare.
            After these Marcianus the Emperour vvith that
vertuous princesse Pulcheria laboured diligently
to extinguish the heresy of Eutyches, as it may appeare
by sundry epistles of lerned Leo then Pope
of Rome solliciting eftsoones the Emperour thereto,
and by the Actes of the fourth generall councell
of Chalcedon. VVhich not long after him Iustinus
the Emperour,Niceph. li. 17. c. 2
                     •
                  
                vvith s
                  •
               ch Christen zeale defended
that he caused Seuerus the schismaticall bishop of
Antioch to haue his toūg cut out for the daily blasphemies
he vttered against that councell.Cap. 9. Iustinian
also his successour caused al the hereticall bookes

and vvritinges of the saied Seuerus and other to be
burned and made it death to any that kept or vsed
any such books. The Christen zeale of this Emperour
tovvard the maintenaunce of Christen religiō
is declaredin the fift general coūcel kept at Cō
               stantinople
against sundry heresies.Cap. 27. Procopius cō
               mending
the earnest and vertuous zeale of this
Emperour,De 
                     •
                  ello vandalico. lib. 4. vvriteth that he vvould neuer admit
Gelimerius a valiaunt Captain and one that had
done him noble seruice ioyning vvith Belisarius
in the vvarres against the VVandalls, vnto the order
of his Nobilite, bicause he vvas infected vvith
the Arrian heresy.
            Such hath alvvaies bē (most gracious Souuerain)
the vertuous zeale of the vvisest and most politicke
Princes to extirpat heresies and false religiō out
of their dominiōs, knovving right vvel, that none
are better subiects to the Prince than such as most
deuoutly serue almighty God. And again that nothing
more highly pleaseth God thā that a prince
do farder and set forth the true seruice and vvorshipping
of him. Such a one vvas kinge Dauid, of
vvhō therfor God saied. I haue foūd Dauid a mā according
to my harts desire.
               Act. 13. And these Emperours here specified,
as they tēdred most the setting forth of true
religiō, and abolishment of the false, so prospered
they most of al other in vvorldly respectes. For as
vnder Constantin the great first by vs mencioned
the empire most florished, and vvas thē first placed

in the East, the cyte of Byzance being then magnificently
enlarged, and called Constantinople
of that most mighty Emperours name, as he had
diuers and most glorious conquestes against the
tyrans, Maxentius, Licinius, and other forrain barbarous
enemies,Pr
                     •
                  copius lib. 1. 2. 3. &. 4. so (to lett passe the other) Iustinian
the last of vs mentioned vvas he that most
gloriously restored vpp againe the Maiesty of the
Romain empire then allmost fallen flatt dovvne,
chasing the VVandals out of Afrike, cleering Italy
and the vvest empire of the Gotthes, extinguishing
vtterly the Hunnes in Graece, and hauing
most noble victories against the Persians.
            Longe it vvere particularly to discourse vpon
the Princes of euery singular prouince in Christendom,
and to notise vnto your hignes, the zeale,
diligence, and endeuour of eche one in extirping
haeresy and schismes. Yet to thentent it may appeare
that the one Imperiall Crovvne of Christendome
being parted in to seuerall realmes and dominions,
the zeale of eche one in the particular
prouinces vvas no lesse to maintaine the vnite off
Christes church, then vvhen the vvhole vvas vnder
the monarchie of one Empire, may it please
your most gracious highnes to call to remembraunce
that this Christen and godly zeale hath ben
in the Princes of seuerall countrees so glorious and
euident, that in respect of the same, most honourable
titles haue ben appropriated to the royall

Crovvnes of such personages.
            To the Imperiall Crovvne of your Maiesty, the
Noble and glorious title of Defender of the faith hath
ben of late yeares annexed and perpetually geuen
by the S
                  •
               e Apostolike, for the most godly and lerned
vvorke of your highnes moste noble Father,
our late dread Souerain, in defence of the seuen
holy Sacraments of Christes Church (off vvhich
the scholers of Geneua haue taken avvay fiue) and
against the vvicked heresies of that levvde Apostata
Martyn Luther. To the crovvne of Spayne
for the great zeale of kinge Alphonsus in extirping
the Arrian heresy,Michael Ritiu
                     •
                   N
                     •
                  a politanus. aboue 800. yeares past, the
title of Catholike vvas annexed, and continueth yet
hitherto vnblemished. To the crovvne of the frenche
kinge for the passing zeale of those princes (namely
of Clouis the first Chrsten kinge, of Charlemain,
of Philippe surnamed Auguste) in extirping
heresies from time to time out of their dominions,Les annal
                     •
                  s de Fiā 
                  
                     •
                  
               
the title of Most Christian, hath also ben appropriated
from the time of Pipin and Charlemaign
his Sonne hitherto.
            Though I abstaine (to auoide prolixite) the farder
recitall of particular Princes, yet may it please
your most excellent Maiesty fauorably to attend
to one or tvvo examples more for the extirping
of the heresies of Iohn vvicleff and the Bohems,
contayning in many pointes the doctrine novve
preached for the very true vvorde off God.
            
               In the history of Polidore vve read of that Noble
prince and of most vvorthy memory Henry the
fifte one of your highnes most noble lineall progenitours,Lib. 12.
that hauing called a Parlement, and decreed
therein a voyage in to Fraunce for recouery
of his right, the mony being gathered, souldiars
pressed, all thinges prepared for that enterprise, yet
the generall Co
                  •
               ncell of Constance then beinge
appointed, he staied his pri
                  •
               at quarell for Gods
cause, directed his lega
                  •
               s vnto the Councell, expected
the fine thereof, and in the meane vvhile appeased
the rebellion of Iohn Oldecastle labouring
by force and disobedience against his Souuerain
(as the nevv VVicleffs do presently in Fraunce and
Scotland) to maintaine the heresy of VVicleff, and
pronounced trait
                  •
               u
                  •
               s all the adherents of that
vvicked secte. By this speedy diligence of that gratious
Prince, bothe that heresy vvas then quailed
in your highnes dominions, and (as Polidore noteth)
the Noble victories of that valiaunt prince
ensued: God vndoubtedly prospering his affaires,
vvho had preferred the quarell of him, before his
ovvne prepared viage.
            It is novv a hundred yeares and more sence the
time that the kingdō of Bemeland being greuously
mangled and almost destroied vvith ciuill sedition
through the schismes and heresies plāted there
by the same VVicleff and Huss,Cromerus i
                     •
                   e
                     •
                  ist. ad Proceres Poloniae. vvas offred of the
people it selfe to the king of Poole Vladislaus to haue

and rule it as his ovvn, setting amonge them some
quiet order of gouernemēt. But bicause of the
heresies then praeuailing, it vvas of that vertuous
Prince vtterly refused. Yea vvarre also vvas threatened
them vnlesse they agreed and recōciled them
selues to the Catholike church.
            If it may like your most excellent highnes after
the patern and examples of these most puissāt and
vertuous Princes to procede in your most gratious
meaning to the publishing of the true christen faithe
(vvhich is but one, and not nevv) through your
graces dominions, as al Christendom hartely vvissheth,
the vevve and consideration of this present
history, a vvorthy and most authentike vvitnesse
of the first and true Christen faith planted in your
Graces dominions, vvith that vvhich is annexed to
proue it a right and vncorrupted faithe, shal not a
litle (I trust in God, in vvhose handes the hartes of
Princes are) moue and farder your highnes vertuous
intēt to the spedy atchieuing of that it desireth.
For faith being one (as the Apostle expressely
saieth) that one faithe being proued to be the same
vvhich vvas firstgraffed in the harts of englishmē,
and the many faithes of protestants being founde
different from the same in more then fourty clere
differēces gathered out of this presēt history (vvhiche
reporteth not al, but a fevv by occasion) it must
remaine vndoubted, the pretended faith of prote
               
                  •
               tants
to be but a bastard slippe proceding of an other

stocke (as partly of old renevved heresies, partly
of nevv forged interpretations vpon the vvritten
text of Gods vvorde) and therefore not to be rooted
in your graces dominions, lest in time, as heresies
haue done in Grece and Afrike, it ouergrovve
the true braunches of the naturall tree, cōsume the
springe of true Christianite, and sucke oute the
ioyse of al right religion: leauing to the realme the
barke and rine only, to be called christians. VVhich
lamentable case the more euery Christen hart abhorreth,
and your highnes most gracious meaning
especially detesteth, the more it is of vs your highnes
most lovvly and loyall subiectes to be vvished
and daily to be praied for at the dreadful throne of
Gods depe mercy, that it may please his goodnesse
so to direct the harte of your highnes, so to inspire
vvith his heauenly grace the most gracious meaning
of your Maiesty, that it may vvholy and perfectly
be bent to the restoring of the one catholike
and Apostolical faith of Christendom, to the extirping
of schisme and heresy, and to the publishing
of Gods true seruice. Al to the honour of almighty
God, to the contentatiō of your Maiesties pleasure,
and to the vvelth of your graces dominiōs. The
vvhich God of his tendre mercy, through the merites
of his dere Son, and intercession of all blessed
Saints in heauen, graunt. Amen.
            Your highnes most lovvly subiect, and bounden oratour, Thomas Stapleton.
            
         
         
            
            DIFFERENCES BETWENE THE PRIMITIVE FAITHE OF ENGLAND CONTINEVVED ALMOST THEse thousand y
                  •
               res, and the late pretensed faith of protestants: gathered out of the History of the churche of England compiled by Venerable Bede an English man, aboue DCCC.
yeares paste.
            BEcause if the saith first plāted amōg vs englishmen, was no
right Christen faith at all, then protestants (if their faithe
be right) are n
                  •
               w the Apostles of England, let vs cōsidre
what Apostolicall markes we finde in our first preachers, wan
                  •
               ing in
protestants.
            
                S. Augustin our Apostle, shewed Signum Apostolatus sui in
omni pa
                     •
                  ientia in signis & prodigijs:
               
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 12. the token of his Apostleship
in all patience, in signes and miracles, as S, Paule writeth of him selfe
to the Corinihians, whose Apostle also he was. And of such miracles
wrought by our Apostle S. Augustin, and howe Eth
                  •
               lbert the
first Christen king of englishm
                  •
               n, was thereby induced to the faith, the
first booke, the xxxvj. and the xxxi. chapters, Item the second booke,
the second chapter do evidenly testifie. Miracles in confirmation of
their doctrine protestants haue yet wrought none.
            
                In the primitiue church of the Apostles, we read, Creden in̄ erat
cor vnum & anima vna.
               Act. 4. The multitude of them that beleued, were
of one harte and of one minde. How much our Apostles tendred this
vnite, it may appeare in the second booke, the ii. Chapter, where they
labour to reduce the olde Brittons to the vnite of Christes church. Nothing
is more notorious in protestants, then their infamous dissension.
            
                Our Apostles and first preachers wer sent by an ordinary vocatiō
as Christ was sent of his Father,10. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 20. and of him the Apostles. The history
reporteth their vocation in the first book, the xxiij. Chap. Protestāts
haue first preched their doctrine without vocatiō or sending at al, such

as the church of Christ requireth, as it is other where at large proued.
            If this enterprise be of men saied Ga
                  •
               aliel of the Apostles preaching,
it shall perish. But if it be of God it shall not perish.Act. 5. Our faith of England
hath continued 900. yeres and vpward. The protestants faith is
already chaunged from Lutheran to sacramentary in the compass
                  •
               
of lesse then 20. yeres, and their primitiue faith is loste, Luther
being now accompted a very papist.
            S. Paule s
                  •
               ieth. Fides est sperandarum substantia rerum. Faith 
is the grounde or substaunce of thinges to be hoped for.Heb. 11. And againe,
that the Iust mā liueth by his faith.Rom. 1. Such faith putteth thinges by the
belefe and practise wher off we may be saued. Such a faith our Apostles
taught vs. Our Crede, our sacraments, our lawes and Canons ecclesiastical
receaued of them do witnesse. The faith off protestants is (as I
may so saie) ablatarum substantia rerum. A substaunce or masse off
things taken away and denied. It is a negatiue religion. It hath no affirmatiue
doctrine but that which catholikes had befor. Al that is their
own, is but the denial of oures. This other wher is proued, and may also
presently appere by the differences which folow in doctrin betwene them
and vs.
            
               Differences in doctrine.
               Our Apostles saied masse. In the first book, the xxv. Chap. it is mentioned.
Item of their successours in the fourth book the xiiij. and xxij.
chap. Nothing is more horrible in the sight of protestants then Masse.
               In the Masse is an externall sacrifice offred to God the Father the
blessed body and bloud off Christ him selfe. In the fi
                     •
                  fe booke the xxij.
chap. this doctrine is expressely reported. This semeth an extreme blasphemy
to protestants.
               This sacrifice is taught to 
                     •
                  e propitiatory in the iiii. booke, the xxii.
chap. Protestants abhorre vtterly such doctrine.
               Off confession off sinnes made to the priest the fourth booke doth 
witnesse in the xxv. chap. and xxvii. chap. This sacrament in the faith
off protestants off our countre is abolished.
               Satisfaction and penaunce for sinne enioyned, appereth in the fourth 
book the xxv. chap. also: which in like maner the court off protestants

admitteth not.
               
                   Merit off good works in the history is eftesoones iustified. In the. 4.
book the 14. and 15. chap. This doctrine semeth to protestants preiudic
                     •
                  all
they saie to Gods glory, but in dede to their licentious liberte.
               
                   Intercession off Saints protestants abhorre. The practise theroff appeareth
in this history in the first booke the xx. chapter before we had
the faith, and in the iiii. booke the xiiii. chap. after the faith receaued.
               
                   The clergy off our primitiue church after holy orders taken, do not
mary. In the first booke the xxvii. chap. Now after holy orders and
vowe both to the contrary, priestes do mary.
               
                   In our primitiue church the vow of chastite both off men and wemen
was thought godly and practised. See the history the 3. book the 8. and
27. chap. the 4. b. the 23. chap. and in many other places. Such vowes now
are broken, are estemed damnable, are not so much as allowed in suche
as woulde embrace that perfection commended in the ghospell and vniuersally
practised in the primitiue church off the first v. C. yeares.
               
                   Such monkes and virgins liued in cloister, in obediēce, in pouerty. It
appeareth through out all the three last bookes off the history. Namely
in the 3. booke the 8. chap. and the 4. booke the 6. chap. All such cloysters
and orders the religion off protestants hath ouer throwen as a state
damnable and wicked.
               
                   Praier for the dead, dirige ouer night and Requiē Masse on the
mornīg was an accustomed matter in our primitiue church. Witnesseth
this history the iij. booke and ij. chap. I tē the iiij. boo. the xxj. chap. This
deuotiō the sober faith of protestāts estemeth as abhominatiō before god.
               
                   Reseruation of the blessed Sacramēt thought no superstitiō in our
primitiue church, or prophanation of the sacrament. lib. 4. cap. 24.
               
               
                   Howseling before death vsed as necessary for al true christiās. As the
practise specified in this history witnesseth lib. 4. ca. 3. & 24. Protestāts
vnder pretence of a cōmuniō do wickedly bereue christē folcke thereof.
               
                   Consecrating of Mōkes and Nunnes by the hāds of bishops a practised
solēnite in our primitiue church. It appeareth in the 4. booke the
19. and 23. chap. Protestāts by the liberty of their gospel laugh and scorne
thereat.
               
                  Commemoration of Saintes at Masse time. In the fourth booke the 
14. and 18. chapters. In the communion of protestants such commemorations
are excluded as superstitious and vnlaufull.
               Pilgrimage to holy places especially to Rome a much wount matter 
of all estates of our countre in our primitiue church, the history witnesseth
in the iiij. booke the 3. a
                     •
                  d xxiij. chapter. Item in the v. booke,
the vii. chap. Nothing soundeth more prophane or barbarous in the
religious eares of protestants then such deu
                     •
                  tion.
               Of relikes of holy men, of the reuerence vsed tow
                     •
                  rdes them and off 
miracles wrought by them the history is full. Namely the first booke
the 29. chap. the 3. booke the 29. the iiij. booke, the 6. chap. Nothinge
is more vile in the sight of protestants, then suche reuerence of Christians.
               Blessing with the signe of the Crosse, accompted no superstition but 
practised for godly and good, in our primitiue church, witnesseth the
history in the iiij. booke the xxiiij. chapter: and in the v. booke the ij.
chapter. In the deuotion of protestants it is estemed for magicke.
               Solemnites of Christen buriall protestants despise and sett light by,
terming it a vaine of gentilite or heathen superstition. The deuotion of
our primitiue church was to be buried in monasteries, churches and
chappels, as it appeareth in the history, in the second booke the iij. chap.
the third booke the viii. chap. and otherwhere.
               Benediction of the bishop, whereby the superiorite of the spirituall 
pastour ouer the laie, according to the reasoning of S. Paule, euidently
appeareth, is to be read in this history of our primitiue Churche,Hebr. 7. in
the iiii. booke, the xi. chap. Protestants confounding all good order, do
scorne at this also.
               The seruice of the church was at the first planting of our faith in the 
latin and lerned tounge, as it may appeare in the first booke, the xxix.
chapter and the iiii. booke the xviii. chap. This protestants haue altered
bothe against due or
                     •
                  er, and condemning wickedly other partes of
Christendom for the contrary.
               Aultars protestants haue plucked downe contrary to the order of 
                  
our primitiue faith, as this history witnesseth in the first booke, the
xxix. chap. And in the second booke, the xiiij. chap.
               
                   Aultar clothes and holy vestements the prophane saith of protestāts
admitteth not. Our primitiue church vsed them, witnesseth the History,
in the first booke the xxix. chap.
               
                   Holy vessels in like maner for the due administration of Christes
holy Sacraments, protestans bothe diminishing the number of them
and prophaning the right vse of such as they kepe, knowe none. Our
first faith had and vsed thē. The history reporteth it in the first booke
the xxix. chap. and in the second booke the last chapter.
               
                   Holy water protestants abhorre. Our first faith vsed it. In the
history 
                     〈◊〉
                   appeareth. In the first booke the xxix. chap.
               
                   Nothinge is more reuiled of protestants, then the ecclesiasticall tonsure
of the clergy. How, after what maner, and wherefore the church
of Christ vseth it, the history disputeth and sheweth at large, in the fifte
booke the xxii. chapter, toward the ende.
               
                   Our primitiue church was gouuerned by Synods of the clergy only,
in determining controuersies ecclesiasticall. The History declareth this
practise in the first booke, the ii. chap. the fourth booke the v. chap. the
xvii. chap. and xxviii. chap. Protestants haue called the determination
of ecclesiasticall matters from thence to the laie Courte only.
               
                   The spirituall rulers of our primitiue church were bishops and pastours
duly consecrated. It appereth in the History, the first booke the
27. chap. and the second booke the 3. chap. Protestants haue no such due
consecration, no true bishops at all.
               
                   Protestants haue brought the supreme gouuernement of the church
to the laie authorite. In the primitiue faith of our countre the laie was
subiect to the bishop in spirituall causes, Peruse the xiii. and xxii. chapters
of the third booke.
               
                   Last of all, the finall determination of spirituall causes in our primitiue
Church rested in the See Apostolike of Rome. This practise appeareth
in the second booke the iiii. the xvii. and the xx. chapters. Item
in the fifte booke the xx. chap. How farre that See is nowe detested by

the sober religion of protestants, all men do see.
               To note how differently the Catholike faith of al Christendom was
first planted in our countre, and the parted faith of protestants hathe
corrupted the same, the first difference is clere herin that our first Catholik
faith we receaued of the See of Rome. This heresy hath begonne 
by first departing from that See. The Apostles of our faith came
from Rome, the messangers of these schismes beganne first by scattering
frō the See Apostolik of Rome. How we receiued our faith of Rome,
the later chapters of the first booke, and the first of the secōd do testifie.
               Againe our faith was first preached with Crosse and procession.
Lib. 1. cap. 25. These heresies first raged by throwing downe the Crosse,
and altering the procession therewith.
               Our first Apostles were monkes. See the first booke, the xxiii. chap.
and the third booke the iii. chap. The first preachers of protestants haue
ben Apostatas. Luther, Oecolampadius, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Barnes,
Barlow and other.
               The first impes off our faith, the first scholers off oure Apostles 
were holy and vertuous mē. Reade the xxvj. chap. of the third booke.In postilla magna in Dom. 
                        •
                     . Ad.
The broode of protestants in the very first issue hath ben so enormous,
that Luther the holy Father thereof confesseth his scholers to be vnder
him farre more wicked, then they were before vnder the Pope.
               The first preaechers of our faith liued Apostolically in voluntary 
pouerty, as the history reporteth in the first booke the xxvj. chap. This
Apostolicall perfection, protestāts bearing thē selues for the Apostles of
England, neither practise them selues, neither can abide it in other.
               As touching the effect and consequences of both religions, our faith 
builded vp monasteries and chirches as the history reporteth in the firste
booke the 32. chap. in the third booke, the iij. and xxxiij. chap. Itē in
the fourth booke the iij. chap. Protestants haue throwen down many, erected
none.
               By the first Christians off our faith, God was both serued day and 
night, as in the fourth booke the vij. chap. it is expressely mencioned.
Protestants haue abolished al seruice off God by night, and done to the

deuill a most acceptable sacrifice.
               
                   By the deuotion of the people first embracing our catholike faithe
much voluntary oblations were made to the church, as in the first booke
the xxvij. chap. it appeareth. By the rechelesse religion off protestants
due oblations are denied to the church.
               
                   Princes endued the church with possessions and reuenues, moued
with deuotion and feare of God.Li. 2. ca. 3. lib. 4. ca. 3. & 16. The loose lewdenes off protestants haue
stirred Princes to take from the church possessions so geuen.
               
                   Last of all our first faith reduced the Scottishmen liuing then in
schisme to the vnite of the Catholike church.Li. 2. ca. 4. li. 3. ca. 25. This late alteration hath
remoued them from vnite to schisme.
               All these differences touching doctrine and ecclesiasticall gouernement,
are proued to concurre with the belefe and practise of the first
vj. C. yeares, in the second part of the Fortresse of our first faith set forthe
presently with the History.
               ET Priuati & Brabātici Regiae Maiestatis Consilij diplomate
cautum est ne quis infra quadriennium proximum
Historiam ecclesiasticam gentis Anglorum, Authore
Venerabili Beda Presb. a Thoma Stapletono in Anglicum
sermonem versam, per omnes Burgundicae ditionis regiones
imprimat aut alibi impressam distrahat aliter quám eidem
Thomae videbitur, sub poena in Diplomate constituta.
               
                  Datum Bruxellae. 20. & 23. Iunij. 1565.
                  
                  Subsig. Bourgeois. Facuwez.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
            THe kingdom of heauen is compared in holy scripture
(christen Reader) to a marchant aduenturer, whiche
seking and trauailing to finde precious stones,Matt. 13. hauing
at length founde out one of singular and most excellēt
value, goeth and selleth al that he hath to bye that one. What
this singular and most excellent perle is, whereunto the kingdom
of heauen is compared, if we weigh and ponder diligently,
we shall finde it to be no other thing, then the Faith in Christe
Iesus, whereby the kingdom of heauen is vndoubtedly purchased.
This perle is of price so singular, and of value so excellent,
that to gett it we sell al that we haue, we renounce the
worlde, the fleshe and the diuell with all the pompe thereoff,
we cleaue onely to this, we professe to lyue and dye in it.
This precious pearle off Fayth, this singular iewell of true
belefe, this heauenly treasure off the right knoweleadge
off God and off his commaundements, as all nations att
one tyme receyued nott,Act. 14. God off hys secrett and right iustice
sufferring the Nations to walke on their waies, but in
seuerall ages, and by seuerall meanes, as and when it pleased
God was opened and made manifest, so haue al nations not only
for that, solde all which they had, yelding and submitting
them selues only and wholly thereto, but also haue stedfastly
and assuredly cleaued vnto it, haue by longe succession preserued
it, and enioyed it. If any haue in time vtterly lost this most
excellent and rare iewell (as we see, alas, all the Southe and all
most all the East part of the worlde hath) the cause thereof
hath ben the alteration, and new deuised furbishing of that perle
from the former and natural shape thereof, first and formest
receiued. Such nations and partes of the worlde as haue in many

ages and, do yet kepe and enioy this riche and princely
treasure, do therefore yet kepe it and enioye it bicause they
continew and remaine in it after such order and maner only,
as they receiued it: bicause they kepe it as they founde it, bicause
they continue it, as they begonne it. Of the first if we remembre
the breaking in of the Wandals in to Afrike about the
yeare of our Lorde 400. men soone after infected with the Arrian
haeresy, if we call to minde the great rage and tumult of
heresies, in the Greke Churche, Arrians, Macedonians, Eutychians,
Monothelites, and a numbre of such other, if we
will truste the reporte and course of Hystories thereof, we shall
euidently see, that this inestimable iewell off the Christen
faithe hath in Afrike and Grece vtterlye ben loste, bicause
they departed from the first paterne deliuered vnto them,
bicause they altered the faith first receiued amonge them,
brefely bicause they yelded to heresies. Of the later if we haue
an eye to the vniformite of the Christē faith first receiued in al
such countres as yet remaine Christians, with the faith first
planted and graffed amonge them, if we looke to Italy, to Fraunce,
to Spaine, to the catholike territories of Grece, of Germany,
of Suicerland, to the kingdomes of Poole, of Portugall, and
of other maine landes in other places off the worlde dispersed,
where the precious iewell of this faith is knowen and enioyed,
we shall finde that all those countres haue and do therefore yet
continew in the same, bicause they varie not from the first
faith receiued, bicause they mangle not the iewell geuen vnto
them, neither alter the naturall shape thereof, brefely bicause
they beleue al one thinge and after one sorte as their first teachers
and Apostles beleued and taught them. For why? They
haue well remēbred the admonitions of S. Paule to the Corinthians
conuerted by him to the faith of Christ, when he wrote
vnto them and saied, Vigilate & state in fide. Wathch and stande
in the faith
                  •
               
               1. Cor. 16. Also to Timothe by him in like maner christened,

writing vnto him and saying. O Timothee depositum custodi, deuitans
prophanas vocum nouitates.
               1. Tim. 6. O Timothe keape wel that is
committed to thy charge, auoiding prophane nouelties of wordes.
And again to the Colossians, praising them for the faith receiued,
if yet (saieth he) ye continew stedfast and grounded in the
faith, if we wauer not from the hope of the gospel, which ye haue heard,
which hath ben preached in all the worlde.
               Colos. 1. Al Christened Catholike
countrees haue wel remembred these lessons of the Apostle.
And as many as haue remembred and folowed them, haue
remained and do yet remaine in the faith of Christ, haue long
enioyned and do yet enioye this rare and inestimable iewell
compared to the kingdom of heauen. As al other countres haue
so done, so haue we englishmen also these many hundred yeres
kept and preserued sound and whole the precious perle of right
faith and belefe, as longe as we remained stedfast in the faith
first plāted and graffed amōg vs, as long as we kept that which
was committed vnto vs, as longe as we wauered not from the
gospell first receaued and vniuersally preached through all the
worlde, as S. Paule willeth vs. But after we beganne to alter and
poolish after our owne newe deuises this auncient perle so lōg
kept amonge vs, so vniuersally made of and estemed, after we
forsooke the first paterne off the Christen faith deliuered vnto
vs, we haue fallen in to plenty of heresies, from one heresy to
an other, from Lutherā to sacramentary, and so forth, we stande
also in daunger to fall (as other countres haue done before vs)
from a false faith to no faith, from heresy to paganisme.
            The which lamentable and dreadfull state to the entent we
may by the example of other countres, and by the aduertisement
of the Apostle beware and eschew
                  •
               , to the entent we lese
not vtterly in time this inestimable treasure off our Christen
faith, that we may remembre vnde exiderimus, from whence
we haue fallen, I haue thought good to put thee in mind, Christen
Reader) of this precious iewell of our faith in Christ, what

and of what maner it was, when wefirst receiued it, how and
when we came by it, what force and authorite it ought to
beare with vs, and last of all how farre and wide it varieth
frō the pretended false faith of these wicked daies. As touching
the former pointes, what the faith first planted among vs englisshmē
was, how and when we receiued it, bicause it is a matter
historicall, in an History'ye shall reade it. As concerning the later
pointes, of what authorite the faith then planted ought to
be, and how notoriously the false faith of this time pretended,
differeth from the same, bicause it is a matter of doctrine, a matter
to be tried by lerning, in a treatise by itselfe as farre as our
abilite serueth, it shall be proued and tried. The history which
must reporte the faith first planted amongevs, shal be no story
of our owne deuising, no late compiled matter, where bothe for
vncertainte of thinges so longe paste, we might be much to
seke, and for the case of controuersies now moued, partialite
might iustly be suspected, but it shal be an history writen in the
fresh remēbraunce of our first Apostles, writen aboue 800. yeres
past, writen of a right lerned and holy Father of Christes churche,
of a countreman of oures liuing and flourishing shortly after
the faith so planted amonge vs. Of the Author of this History
and of the matter thereof we shall presently speake, if we
first admonish thee, gentle Reader, that touching the treatise
to fortifie this faith, and therefore called, A Fortresse of the faith
first planted among vs englishmen &c, and cōcerning al that therin
shall be treated, you take the paines to readethe Introductiō or
first chapter therof. In it you shal see what the whole cōtaineth,
what is of you to be looked for and of me to be perfourmed.
            Touching the Author of this History, he was a countremā
of oures borne in the Northe countre, by Weimouth not farre
frō Dyrrhā.Of the Author of this History. He flourished in the yere 730. He was a mā of great
lerning and vertu, much reuerēced not only at home, but also
through out al Christendō euē in his life, time and much more

after his death. Of his rare lerning and knowleadg his writinges
yett extant,Of his lerning. are a clere and sufficient testimony. The protestants
of Basill haue of late yeares sett forthe his whole
workes now extant, in eight tomes contayning four great volumes.
In them it appeareth that S. Bede was a man vniuersally
sene in all good lerning, as well of humanite and philosophie
as of diuinite, expert off the tounges, ready in holy
scriptures, perfectly conuersant in the olde fathers. He was so
great a folower of S. Augustin, the worthyest piller of the churche
sence the Apostles time, that his commentaries vpon holy
Scriptures bothe of the olde and newe Testament, are allmost
worde for worde out of S. Augustin. He was so diligent a reader
of that lerned Father, that whereas in the wordes of S. Augustin
no perpetuall commentary vpon the epistles of S. Paule
being extant, and yet that worthy Fathers in diuers places of
his lerned workes hauing by occasion touched and expounded
euery text of those epistles, Venerable Bede for the great profit
of his posterite, as a man borne to edifie Christes Church,
hath so gathered those scattered places out of the mayne sea off
S. Augustins workes, that placing them in order and facion, he
made a iust and full commentary vpon all the epistles of S. Paul
with S. Augustins owne wordes, noting to the reader allwaies
the booke and chapter of S. Augustin, from whence he had taken
those places. This worke is intituled Collectanea Bedae. In
which worthy worke, we may doubte whom to maruaile more
at or commend. S. Augustin which had so ofte in his workes
treated of S. Paul, and omitted no one sentēce vnexpounded, or
S. Bede which so gathered into a iust commentary the sayinges
of S. Augustin, meaning no such thinge. As S. Bede was a great
writer, so he was a continuall preacher. His homelies yet extant
do testifie, made not only vpon the ghospells and epistles
of the Sondaies through out the yeare but also vpon the festiuall
daies of Saintes. They are to be read in the seuenth tome

of his workes. These homilies of his were so highly estemed
that (as Trithemius reporteth) they were openly read in churches,Lib. de scri. ecclesiasti.
while he yet lyued, through out our countre. Euen as we
reade of holy Ephrem that lerned deacon of Edessa, that his
writinges also were openly read in churches,Hieron. in Cata. vir. illust. next after holy
scripture. After his death they were receiued of other partes
of Christendom, Fraunce especially (as Platin noteth)
and are to this daye read in principall festes with no lesse authorite
and reuerence then the homilies of S. Ambrose,In Ioan. 6. S.
Augustin, S. Gregory, and other. Briefely the whole occupation
and businesse of this lerned man was, to lerne, to teache and to
write, as in his owne wordes placed after the ende of this history
he recordeth him selfe. Againe for the more commendation
of his lerning, it is to be remēbred what lerned scholers he had.
Amonge the rest the most famous were (as Polidore specifieth)
Rabanus,Lib. 5. Histor. Alcuinus, Claudius, and Ioannes Scotus, not the
scholeman but an other of S. Benets order. These were all famous
and lerned writers, as in Trithemius who hath writē their
liues the lerned may reade. Alcuinus S. Bedes scholer beinge
sent of Offa kinge of the middleenglishmen in embassage to
Charlemain the first and most glorious Emperour of the Germans,
was for his vertu and lerning retained with the Emperour,
and became his scholemaster and instructer in all kinde
of good lerning. He taught after at Paris, and persuaded the
Emperour Charlemain to erect there an vniuersite: which beginning
with that vertuous fountaine S. Bedes scholer and our
countre man, we see now to what a great riuer it hath multiplied,
and how many lerned men these vij. hundred yeares and
vpwarde haue from thence ben deriued. To returne to S. Bede,
he had two lerned brothers, Strabo, and Haymo bothe famous
writers and lightes of the church, as in Honorius, Trithemius,
Platin,In Ioan. 6. and other ecclesiasticall writers it may be sene. And thus
much of his lerning, which who list farder to trie, he may reade

his lerned workes, lately sett forth (as I saied) and much commended
by the protestants thē selues of Basill. For more satisfying
the english reader, I will after the preface place his whole
life shortly writen by Trithemius, with the enumeration of certain
of his workes in his time knowen.
            As touching the vertu of holy S. Bede,Of his vertu. which properly cō
               mendeth
an historiographer, and dischargeth him from all surmises
and suspicions of false reporting or poeticall fayning, yt
may be to any well meaning man a sufficient argument that euen
from the age of seuen yeares (as he writeth him selfe)
he liued in cloyster and serued allmighty God day and night in
religion to the last houre of his life, which was the continuaunce
of lxv. yeares. All which time he so attended to praier, to
daily and howrely seruing of God in the church, to priuat meditations, that (as one writeth) if ye consider his life, ye would
thinke he had studied nothing, and againe if ye beholde his study,
ye would suppose he had spent no time in praier. For his
great vertu and modesty he was in his life time called Venerable
Bede,
               In vitae Bedae. as Trithemius noteth, of whom also Platina in that sence
speaketh, saying.In Ioan. 6. 
               Beda praeter graecae atque latinae linguae doctrinam
quā non mediocriter tenuit, ob religionem e
                     •
                  iam atque modestiam Venerabilis
cognomentum adeptus est. Bede was surnamed the Venerable
for his religion and modesty: beside that he was lerned
in the Graeke and Latin tounge.Lib. 1. Polydore alleaging Bede in
the history of oure countre, citeth him with these titles. Beda
homo Anglus, quo nihil castius, nihil melius, nihil verius, & caet.
Bede an english man, then whom none more chaste, none off
more vertu, none of more truth, &c. With like commendation
and reuerence he is alleaged of his lerned posterite in al ages. In
his life time not only at home with his owne countremen for
his vertu and learning he was in high estimation, and in greate
credit with the Nobilite of our countre, but also he was abrode
with other Christen princes (being but a monke by profession)

in greate estimation and muche reuerenced. Therefore
lyke as we reade of S. Antony, S. Hierom, before his tyme,Tripart
                     •
                   hist. lib. 1. cap. 1. In Epist. off
S. Bernard and other after him, all monkes and religious men,
that in their priuat celles they had yet a care of publike quyet,
and lyke counsellers of the whole worlde they moued princes
to their duty, so of holy S. Bede we reade the same. For thus
Platin reporteth of him.In Ioanne vj. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
               Cum Africa & Hispania á Sarracenis
occuparetur, Beda, qui eisdem temporibus fuit, hanc calamitatem literis
ad Principes Christiani nominis scriptis, lamentatus est: quo
bellum in hostes Dei atque hominum susciperent. When Afrike and
Spayne was taken and helde of the Sarrazens, Bede which lyued
in that time, l
                  •
               mented this calamite in letters writen to
Christen Princes, to the entent that they should make warres
against the enemies of God and men. Wherein bothe the vertuous
zele and religions care of common quiet in holy S.
Bede appereth, and the authorite also whiche he hadd abrode
with other Christen princes is signified. Vnto whom also a litle
before his death in familiar letters he prophecied of the great
waste of Europe and the West church, whiche soone after his
death ensued by the Sarazens. For as Afrike by their meanes
lost the faith and lacketh it yet, so Spayne off late only recouered
the faith againe. Thus muche off his learning and vertu.
Other especialls of his life, as where he was borne, howe he lyued
and dyed, ye maye partly reade in his lyfe written by Thrithemius,
which we haue translated and placed a part after the
preface, partly in his own words folowing after thende of this
history.
            The Authour of this history being a man of suche lerning
and vertu, a countreman of oures, one that writeth the history
of thinges done at home, done in his lyfe time, or in few yeares
before, the memory of them being yet fresh and newe, it shall
not nede I trust to persuade the Reader in many words to geue
credit vnto him in such thinges as he reporteth. Neither may I

feare to prefer his authotite before the authorite or report of any
man that now liueth. For beside his lerning and vertu, it is
to be considered that he liued in a quiet time,VVhy the Author of this history
                     •
                  s to be credited. before these controuersies
which nowe so trouble Christendom, were moued.
He is an indifferent reporter. There is no suspicion of partes taking,
no preiudice of fauouring either side, no feare of affection
or misseiudgement to be gathered vpon him. We haue good
cause to suspect the reportes of Bale, of Fox, of Beacon and suche
other, whiche are knowen to maintaine a faction and singular
opinion lately spronge vp, who reporte thinges passed
many hundred yeares before their daies. No such suspicion can
be made of S. Bede, who lyued aboue eight hundred yeares paste,
and reporteth the planting of Christen religion among vs
englishmen, partly by that whiche he sawe him selfe, partly by
the reporte of such who either liued at the first coming in of
Christendom to our countre them selues, or were scholers to
such
                  •
                Who also was no maintainer of any secte or faction, but
liued and died in the knowen common faith of Christendom,
which then was, and is now but one.
            In this history therefore vewe and consider the coming in
of Christen faithe in to oure countre,Of the matter of the history. the heauenly tydinges
brought to our Lande, the course, encrease, and multiplying
thereof. The vertuous behauiour of oure forefathers the firste
Christen englishmen. Peruse and marke the faith which they
beleued, the hope wherein they continued, the charite wherby
they wrought. Their faith taught them to submit them selues
to one supreme head in Christes church the Apostolike Pope
of Rome, Peters successour, to whom holy Scripture telleth vs
the kayes of the kingdome of heauen were geuen.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   16. Their faith
taught them all such thinges as are now by protestants denied,
as for the more part we haue out of the history gathered by a
numbre of differēces, placed in the second part of the Fortresse.
Their hope and charite so wrought, that our dere countre of

England hath ben more enriched with places erected to Gods
honour, and to the fre maintenaunce of good lerning, then any
one countre in all Christendome beside. Gather honny lyke
bees oute of this comfortable history of oure countre, not venim
like spiders. Reade it with charitable simplicite, not with
suspicious curiosite, with vertuous charite, not with wicked
malice. As for example. The facte of Saint Gregory described
in the seconde booke the first chapter of this history reporting
how that holy man seing in Rome certain of our countremen
sette to be solde in the market, moued with their outwarde beauty,
beganne to pitie and lament their inward foule infidelite,
holy S. Bede writeth diligently as an argument of his greate
good zele and tendering of Christes religion, and construeth
it to the beste, as no honest Reader can other wyse do. But
baudy Bale according to the cleanes of his sprit and holy
ghospell, like a venimous spider being filthy and vncleane him
selfe sucketh out a poisonned sence and meaning, charging that
holy mā with a most outragious vice and not to be named.Sueton in Neron
                     •
                  . So
like an other Nero (who liuing in lewde lechery woulde not be
persuaded that any was honest,) this olde ribauld, as in other
stories he practised, maketh this history also, ministring no vnhonest
suspicion at al, nor geuing any colour of vncleane surmising,
to serue his filthy appetit and bestly humour. It will
better become the godly reader, and Christen hart to interpret
al to the best. For in dede, none can think euill of other, which
is not euill him selfe.
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 13. 
               Charite, saieth S. Paule, thinketh no euill, reoyseth
not of iniquite, but is delited in verite. Such charite if it had
ben in Bale and his felow protestants, we should not now haue
had so many lewde lies and malicious surmises vpon the liues
of holy men, as are to be sene in the workes of Bale, Fox, and
other.
            In this history it shal be no losse time to peruse the lerned,
vertuous, and zelous epistles of certain Popes of Rome after

               S. Gregory, as of Bonifacius, Honorius, Vitalianus, and other
to the kinges of our countre as wel for the encreasing of Christen
faith, as for the extirping of Pelagians heresy, for the due
obseruation of Easter, which al Christendom hetherto kepeth,
and other like matters. While ye peruse this, ye may remembre
the lewde lies and slaunderous reproches of protestants daily
preaching and writing that after S. Gregory al faith was lost,
Gods honour was trode vnder foote, all right religion was
ouerturned and that by the Popes them selues. Better to bestowe
idle houres in such vertuous lessons as this History geueth,
and more charitable to note the godly writinges of the
Popes here also comprised, then to prie out with baudy Bale
the euill liues of our superiours. Who were they as badde
as the Pharisees or worse, yett they are to be obeyed by the cō
               maundement
of our Sauiour in such thinges as they saie,
though not to be folowed in their doinges. Truly monasteries
beinge now throwen downe, no examples of vertu and
and perfection appering in such as now preache and teach, all
remembraunce of Christen deuotion would be forgotten, if
the helpe of stories were not.Of the miracles, reported in this History.
            
            As touching the manifold miracles mencioned in this history,
note the person that reporteth them, and the time they
were done in, to witt, in the primitiue church of the english nation.
At the planting of a faith miracles are wrought of God by
the handes of his faithful for more euidence thereof. Good life
in such as newly receiue the faith is more feruent. Visions and
and working of miracles accompanie those as liue in such feruent
goodnesse and perfection. We haue therfore rather more
cause to lament the corrupt state of our time, and the kaye colde
deuotion of this age, then to miscredit the perfect behauiour
of our primitiue church, and the miracles wrought therein.Tobi. 12.
               Opera dei reuelare & confiteri glorio sum
                     •
                  est. It is an honourable
thinge to reuele and confesse the workes of God, saieth the

Angel to Tobias in holy scripture. Such therefore as wil thinke
the miracles of this history here reported either vncredible,
either vnprofitable and such as might haue ben left out, truly
either they must denie the author, or enuie at Gods honour.
Such as denie the author we wil not force thē to beleue him. We
make it not a matter of such necessite or importauuce. Yet this
I thinke I may be bold to require them that they beleue as farre
S. Bede, as they do the Actes and monuments of Fox, the storie
of Bale, and such other. I thinke it no sinne to matche
Venerable Bede with any of them in any respect either off lerning,
honesty or truthe. It may rather sauour of sinne or at lest
off wronge iudgement, and great partialite to beleue Bale and
discredit Bede: the one being notoriously bent to one side, the
other without al suspiciō off fauouring any side: the one a late
knowen naughty man, the other a confessed holy man of al the
Latin church. Last of al the one thought lerned only off a few,
the other accompted for excellently lerned euen of the protestants
them selues, namely those of Basil, who haue most diligently
and with much commendation published his workes.
But I may seme to do iniury to that holy man, to cōpare him
with any of our da
                  •
               es, glory he neuer so much of the sprit or off
the ghospell. To returne therefore to the matter no indifferent
Reader hath any cause to discredit the miracles reported in this
History, if he will haue an eie to the person that writeth, and
to the time in which they were wrought. Nay rather it is
no small argument for the confirmation of our Catholike
faith, planted amonge vs englishmen, that at the planting therof
such miracles were wrought. Of this argument in the
second part of the Fortresse we haue treated more at large.Cap. 3. That the History ought not to se
                  
                     •
                  e 
                     〈…〉
                  . To
that place I referre the Reader.
            If otherwise the History for the often miracles here repeted,
seme to any man vaine, fabulous, or vncredible, him
earnestly I require diligently to pondre and beare away that

which foloweth: First generally in an ecclesiasticall history,
in a history writen off the Churche, in the Historicall narration
of matters pertaining to God, to faith, and to religion, it
hath euer so fallen out in all Christen writers, that of miracles
much and often mencion hath ben made. Who so peruseth the
ecclesiasticall histories of Eusebius Pamphilus and of Ruffinus,
the tripartit history of Socrates, Sozomenus and Theodoret,
the history of Euagrius and Nicephorus, he shall finde in them
straunge and miraculous matters in the liues of holy mē reported.
For example of such,Li. 6. c
                     •
                  . 9 Eusebius reporteth of Narcissus a holy
man that light lacking in the church all the oyle of the lampes
being spente, he made by praierwell water to serue in stede
of oyle, and the lampe light to burne by that. Also of the same
man he writeth that whereas three men had periured them
selues in an accusation against him, eche one wishing to him
selfe diuerse plages and vengeaunce from God if their accusation
was false, eche one had soone after the plage that he wished
falling vpon him euidently and miraculously.Li. 7. ca. 18 The same writer
reporteth of an herbe growing before an image of our Sauiour
in Caesarea of Phaenicia, where also an other image standeth of
the woman cured by Christ of the bluddy flixe, which herbe
after that by groweth it toucheth the brasen hemme of the
Images garment, it cureth deseases of all sorte. Ruffinus in like
maner in his ecclesiasticall history reporteth miraculous things
of Spiridion the holy bishop of Tremithunt in Cypres,Lib. 1. c. 5. as
that when certain theues would haue stolen of his shepe, and
came to the folde in the night time for that purpose, he found
them in the morning fast bounde without
                  •
                any man to binde
them. Who finding thē in such case in the morning, and vndertstanding
the cause
                  •
               therof, absoluit sermone, quos meritis vinxerat.
He loosed them by his worde, which before had bound them
by his merites, saith the History. Againe whereas a certaine
f
                  •
               ende of his had left with his daughter Irenee by name, a certain

pleadg, and the maide minding to kepe it sure hyding it vnder
the earth, and dying shortly after, without telling the Father
any thing thereof, the party came soone after to require the pleadg,
Spiridion the holy bishop not being able otherwise to finde
it about his house, and seing the poore man greuously lamē
               ting
the losse thereof, went hastely to the graue where the maide
lay, and called her by her name. Who straight answering
him: he asked her where she had laied the pleadg of such a man
which the maide forthwith told him, and he therupō founde it,
and restored it to the party. Thus much and more reporteth the
ecclesiastical history of Ruffinus writen about the yere of our
Lorde 400.Li
                     •
                  . c. 8. 10. Lib. 2. cap. 8. If I would stand vpon the recitall of other miracles
in that history reported done at the Crosse of Christ founde
out by Helena, done by a captiue Christian woman in Iberia,
done by the scholers of S. Antony the eremite,Hist. tripart. li. 1. c. 5. 10. & 11. lib. 7.
                     •
                   cap. 5. 
                     •
                  oz
                     •
                  m. lib. 6. ca. 29. Isidorus, Moyses,
and other: If I should likewise make a particular recitall
of the miracles mencioned in the tripartit History wrought by
the Crosse of Constantin, of the visions of Amos and Antony
the eremites, also of Piammon the monk, of the miraculous
cures and prophecies by Ioannes a monke also, of the visions
and miraculous cures wrought at Cōstatinople in the Catholike
oratory of Gregory Nazianzen,Lib. 7. c. 5. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 22. if I should againe touche
the miracles wrought by Symeones that famous Anchoret,
and of a number of other out of the History of Euagrius and
Theodoret,Li. 4. et in Philotheo. I should passe the bondes and measure of a preface.
It shall be sufficiēt generally (as I saied) to note that al ecclesiasticall
Histories (such as this History of Venerable Bede is) do
alwaies by occasion intermingle miracles in the liues of holy
men and lightes of Christes church.The most lerned 
                     •
                  athers of the first 
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . yeres ha
                     •
                  e w
                     ••
                  
                  ten Saints liues.
            
            Yea this kinde of write hath bē thought so profitable and
necessary for the church of Christ, for cōfirmation of the faith,
for exāple of good life, for the glory of God, that the best and
most lerned writers in Christes church haue occupied their studies

therein. Athanasius wrote the life of S. Antony the Abbat:
and so much commendeth the knowleadg thereof, that in the
preface he saieth: Perfectaest ad virtutem via Antonium scire quid
fuerit. It is a perfect waie to vertu, to know what a man Antony
was: Gregory bishop of Nissa, brother to S. Basill, wrote the liues
of holy Ephrem,Tom. 3. and Theodorus the Martyr. S. Hierom
wrote the liues of Paulus, Hilarion, and Antony monkes. S.
Ambrose wrote the liues of S. Agnes,Li. 1. & 3. de virg. Item inexhortat ad virgines. 
               S. Thecla, S. Soter, and
Pelagia, all Martyrs and virgins of Christes church. Eusebius
Emissenus wrote the liues of Genesius, Epiphodius, Alexander
Martyrs of Christes church also. Prudentius wrote in verse
the liues and miracles of many Saints.In hom. so. 126. Theodoret that lerned
bishop of Cyrrha wrote a great book of Saints liues, intituled
Philotheus, whereof he maketh oftē mention in his ecclesiastical
history.Li. 1. ca. 7. Li. 2. c. 30 Li. 4. c. 25 & 27. Li. 22. c. 8 Seuerus Sulpitius an eloquent writer of more then
twelue hundred yeares paste, wrote the miraculous life
off Saint Martine. Saint Augustine in his bookes De ciuiDei,
among other arguments and tokens of the Christen faith
reakoneth vp in a sette chapter sondry miracles wrought at the
toumbes and relikes of holy Martyrs, especially of S. Steuen.
Brefely, if we will haue an eye to holy scripture it selfe, we finde
in the foure euangelistes beside the heauenly doctrine, beside
the tydinges of our saluation, beside the mysteries of oure
redemption, the miracles also wrought by our Sauiour moste
diligently expressed, and of the three which first wrote particularly
repeted: we finde in in the Actes of the Apostles, many
miraculous cures, and expulsions of wicked spirits wrought by
the Apostles. In the bookes of the kinges likewise manifolde
miracles and thinges (otherwise vncredib
                  •
               e) are reported to be
done by Elias and Heliseus the prophets. To conclude therefore,
this present history of Venerable Bede, this history of the
church of England (our dere countre) containing in it beside
the historical narratiō of the coming in of vs englishmen into

this lande, and of attaining to the faith off Christ in the same
manifold miracles, and particular liues of holy men, as of saint
Augustin, Paulinus, Mellitus and other our first Apostles, off
lerned Theodoret and Wilfrid, of the holy bishops Aidan of
Scotland, S. Cutbert, S. Iohn of Beuerlake, S. Chadde, S. Erkenwald
of England, of S. Oswald, of S. Audery and diuers other
religious virgins, in the very springe and first frutes of our
Christen faith, ought not to any Christen man seme a vaine,
fabulous, or incredible narration, more then the histories of other
Saintes liues no lesse miraculous and different from the
common trade of men (especially in the lewde loose liberty of
this wicked time) than are the liues and doinges mentioned in
this history, ought to seme: being yet writen of the most lerned
fathers in Christes church aboue named, and in the purest
time of Christianite, by the aduersaries owne confession, to
witt: all within the compasse off the first V. C. yeares. And as
Theodoret in the preface of his Philotheus warneth the Christen
Readers not to discredit any thinge by him to be mentioned
in that history of saintes liues, so will I with his wordes,
warne the studious Reader hereof, such as esteme the iudgement
of the holy and lerned Fathers. Theodoret saieth, and
I in the name of Venerable Bede saie the same.In praefat. ad Philotheum. 
               Eos qui in huius
historiae lectionem inciderint, oro atque obsecro &c,
               An admonition out of Theodoret touching miracles. Those whiche
shall happen to reade this history (saieth Theodoret) I praye
and beseche that if they finde any thing writen, which passeth
their power, they do yet beleue it, not measuring the vertu and
power of holy men, with their owne vertu or power. For
God geueth giftes of the holy Ghoste to the godly, and more
excellent to such as excell in godlynes. And this I speake to
them which are not acquainted with the secret works of God.
For suche as haue wel serched and tried the secrets of the holy
Ghost, they knowe and feele his bountifulnes, and do wel vnderstand
what God among men worketh by mē, when by the

mighty power of miracles he draweth the vnbeleuers to the
knowleadg of him. Truly whosoeuer will sticke to credit such
thinges as we shal report, no doubt but he will also sticke and
stagger, to beleue the miraculous workes of Moyses, of Iosue,
of Elias and of Elizeus. Yea the miraculous workes of the Apostles,
he will accompt for very fables. Otherwise, if he wil
beleue those other thinges to be al true, why wil he mistrust
these for false? For the same grace of god which wrought in the
other, hath also wrought in these holy men all such thinges as
they did. For this grace being continual and euer running, tendring
alwaies such as make them selues worthy thereof, by suche
men, as by certain riuers, kepeth her mayne course, and floweth
most plentifully. Thus farre Theodoret.An other out of S. Augustin. For in dede, as
S. Augustin saieth serching out the reason how we that liue are
visited of holy men departed this worlde,Lib. d
                     •
                   cura pro mor tuis gerēda cap. 16. 
               A lij sunt huma
                     •
                  arum
limites rerum, alia diuinaerum signa virtutum, alia sunt quae naturaliter,
alia mirabiliter fiunt, quamuis & naturae Deus assit vt sit,
& miraculis natura non desit. The bondes of mans abilite, and
the signes off Gods power be diuerse. Some thinges are done
naturally, some miraculously: though yet bothe God helpeth
nature, and nature concurreth in miracles. And therefore S.
Augustin though (being yet so excellently lerned) he could by
no reason finde out how holy men departed this worlde miraculously
worke here on earth (as in the same place he expressely
confesseth) yet he reporting how that Iohn that holy Monke
appeared in a vision by night to a godly woman feruently
desiring to see and talke with him, and how he heard it by the
mouth of one which lerned it of the party her selfe, and of her
husband, he saieth,Cap. 17. 
               Qui hoc ab eis comperit, retulit mihi vir grauis,
& nohilis, & dignissimus, credidi. One which vnderstode this
of the parties them selues, reported it vnto me, a sober man
a worshipful, and worthy of credit, I beleued him. But (saieth
S. Augustin in the wordes immediatly folowing) if I had sene

that holy Monke my selfe, bicause, as they saie, he was both
very gentle to be asked, and very wise to make answer, I would
haue asked of him (touching this matter) whither he him selfe
came to that woman in his sleape, that is, his goste in the shape
of his body, as we also do dreame in our bodies, or whither he
him self being otherwise occupied, or if he sleapt, dreaming some
other thinge, such a vision yet of him appeared to the womā
in her dreame, either by an Angel, or by som other meanes,
and that by the spirit of prophecy he foreknew all this, and therefore
promised before to her husbande that he woulde see her.
For iff he hym selfe was present to the woman in her dreame,
truly that was done by miraculous grace not by nature,
by the ghifte off God, not by his owne power. But iff
he being otherwise occupied, or sleaping hym selfe, and occupied
with other phantasies, yet the woman sawe hym in her
sleape, truly then it semeth not much vnlike to that we
reade in the Actes of the Apostles, where our Sauiour speaketh
to Ananias of Saul,Act. 9. and telleth him, that Saule did see Ananias
coming toward him, Ananias him self not knowing any thing
thereof. Which so euer of all these that man of God should answer
vnto me, I would farder yet aske him touching the Martyrs,
whither they them selues be present in visions, or by some
other meanes do appeare to such as see thē in what forme they
list, and specially whē the deuils in mēs bodies cōfesse that they
are tormented of them, and desire them to spare them, or whither
all these thinges be done at the will of God by the Angelicall
powres for the honour and commendation of Saints, and
for the profitt of men, the martyrs them selues being in the meane,
in most perfect quiett, occupied with more excellent sightes
seuerally from vs and praying so for vs. For at Millain also
at the toumes of the holy Martyrs Protasius and Geruasius, the
deuills naming them, as also other departed men, confessed also
bishop A
                  •
               . brose then liuing, and cried vpon him to spare them,

the bishop then being otherwise occupied, and not knowing at
all thereof. Last of al whither these thinges be some times done
by the very presence of the Martyrs, sometime by the ministery
of Angels, and then whither it may be discerned of vs, and by
what tokens we may discerne it, or whither none els can discerne
it, but such as hath that gift by the Spirit of God diuiding
peculiarly to euery one as he willeth.1. Cor. 12. Al these thinges, I thinke,
this Iohn would discusse and declare vnto me: that either at his
teaching I might lerne and knowe such thinges to be true and
certain, or els I might beleue without knowleadge, he teaching
yet such thinges as he knew. But if perhaps he would answere
to all these my doubtes out of holy scripture, and saie vnto me.Eccles. 3.
Seke not such things as passe your capacite, nor serche not after
that which excelleth your abilite, but what our Lorde hath cō
               maunded
you, thinke vpō those thinges allwaies, I should gladly
take this answer also.Note. 
               Non enim paruus est fructus, si aliqua
obscura & incerta quae comprehendere non valemus, clarum certumque
sit nobis non esse quoerenda, & quod vnusquisque vult discere,
putans prodesse si sciat, discat non obesse si nesciat. For it is no small
profitt, if in such darke and doubtefull matters as by reason we
can not finde, yet we may clerely and euidently see that such
thinges are not by reason to be founde. And that euery one desirous
to knowe, thinking such knowleadge might profitt him,
may lerne it is nedelesse to knowe, which he can not possibly
knowe. Thus farre S. Augustin in that place, beleuing the
miraculous operations of holy Martyrs, and visions of holy
men, though he could not attaine to the reason of either other.
In like maner he beleueth that S. Felix the holy Confessour off
Nola,Lib. eodem Cap. 16. when that cyte was greuously assieged, non solis beneficiorum
effectibus, verum etiam ipsis hominum aspectibus apparuisse,
not only by miraculous workes and present succour, but by euident
vision and common sight appeared vnto men. Such visions
such miracles holy and lerned men sticke not to beleue,

though the reason therof they perce not vnto. And euen so such
holy and miraculous examples as abund in this History, though
they can not perhaps sinke in to the hartes of protestāts, whose
faith is limited by reason, and builded vpon wordly witt, yet
Catholikes which haue lerned of S. Paule to subdue their vnderstanding
to the obedience of faith,
               2. Cor. 10. and whose faith is guided by Charite
which beleueth all thinges, as the Apostle also teacheth,1. Cor. 13. can
easely beleue the report of so holy and lerned a man,Heretikes will not beleue miracles. as Venerable
Bede in all Christendom hath these many hundred yeares ben
accompted. Let protestants folowe the Arrians, which when a
blinde man was restored to sight at the toumes of S. Geruasius
and Protasius at Millain S. Ambrose then being bishop,Confes. lib. and S.
Augustin not yet christened being then present also, saied yet
(as S. Ambrose writeth of them) Non sunt isti martyres, nec torquere
diabolum possunt,
               Serm. 91. 
               nec aliquem liberare. These are no Martyrs,
they can not torment the deuill, they can not helpe men.
And againe. Ariani dicunt. Non sunt daemonum vera tormenta,
sed ficta & composita ludibria. The Arrians do saie. These are not
true torments of the deuills, but fayned and imagined illusions.
Let protestants folow their forefathers, olde cursed heretikes,
let them scoffe at the miracles done at the toume of S. Alban
that holy Martyr, and of S. Cutbert that holy Confessour. We
will with Theodoret, with S. Augustin and with S. Ambrose
beleue such vertu and miraculous power of holy Martyrs and
Confessours mentioned by Venerable Bede, as they beleued the
report of good men, before them.
            For the farder contentation of the Reader in this pointe,
beside all whiche hath ben saied, we shall in the history it selfe,
when straunge and vncredible miracles and visions shal occurre,
note in the margin other lyke examples auouched by
the most approued writers of the primitiue churche. To make
an ende, if all this suffiseth not to defende this history from the
cauilles of protestants, bicause of the miracles here reported

then let them shewe a reason why the Actes and Monuments
of M. Fox, deserue not the lyke.Protestāts pretende miracles. Are there not also in
that donghell heaped a number of miserable miracles to sette
forth the glory of their stinking Martyrs? I report me to the
leaues of that booke, pagi. 95. 183. 208. 251. 389. 416. 433. 442. 443.
444. 520. 645. 668. 8
                  •
               8. 881. 1040. 1355. 1670. 1677. In al which places
miracles such as they be, are to be foūd. And to speake somwhat
particularly, he that in this history will discredit such miracles
as S. Bede reporteth vpō report of one brother or sister, let him
geue a reason why he beleueth the tale of Elyzabeth Lawnson
and Symō Harlston.Pag. 1677. Who mistrusteth miracles reported vpon
coniecture, let him, considre the miracle tolde of Tindall.Pag. 520. If it
seme incredible that the bodyes of dead men may remaine vncorrupted
and sounde, why is it tolde for a miracle that the
hart off Zwinglius was found whole in the ashes,Pa. 444. all the rest of
the body being burned vp? If visions appearing to some, not to
al that are present seme fabulous,Pag. 355. let it be a fable (as in dede it is,
being thereof eye witnesse my selfe) that he telleth of Latimers
hart bloud, when he suffred in Oxford. Iff the Crosse of saint
Oswalde seme a superstitious tale, how much more fonde and
fabulous is the tale of one that suffred at Bramford,Pa, 1670. with a greate
white crosse, appearing in his brest? Thus if we may cōpare
truth with falshood, light with darknes, true miracles with
light tales, we see as much vncredibilite, if we looke to reason,
as great vanite in respect of the matter it self, in the one as in the
other. But how farre more credit this auncient history of Venerable
Bede deserueth then the liyng libels of vpstert sectaries,
it shal (as I haue already saied) easely appeare, if we consider
but the Authour of this history, and the time that he wrote in.
Whereof we haue spoken at large before. One thinge remaineth,
which being saied. I shall haue finished. Concerning the
proper names of places, as of cyties and monasteries mencion
                  •
               d
in the history, we haue many tymes kept the lat
                  •
               n or rather

Saxon names: where Polydore and other instructions coude
not helpe vs to call them by their present names they now beare.
Wherein we desire the gentle Reader the rather to beare
with vs, considering that this translation being penned on this
side of the seas, we coulde not being out of the countre, haue
such speciall intelligence of eche shere and Countie as to that
purpose was requisit, and as we might perhaps easely hadd, yff
we had ben at home, and trauailed the countre our selues. Notwithstanding
as touching the sheres, principall cytes, and diners
monasteries, by the helpe of Polidore we haue termed
them, as they are now called. Whereby the whole course of the
history shall be euery where perspicuous and euident, thoughe
some certaine small monasteries and villages remaine vnknowen.
How so euer it be, the principall intente bothe of Venerable
Bede and of vs being the honour of God, the publishing off
our first Christen faith, the course and proceding thereof, we
haue chosen rather to sett forth the history in some part barbarous
thē to c
                  •
               nceale frō our dere countre (in these necessary times
of instruction) the precious treasure of our Christē belefe,
wherein we were first baptised, and haue so many hundred yeares
in such quiet and felicite continued. Trusting verely in almighty
God that the perusing hereof, with the Fortresse and
defence of our faith, presently also set forth, may staie the conscience
of some from daungerous deceites of this later religion
so directly and in so many pointes repugning the other. Which
if it may please the goodnesse of God to worke in the hart of
any one of my dere countremen, I shall thinke all my labour
happely bestowed, and my simple paines abundantly rewarded.
In the meane we haue declared our good wil, and done in
part our duty. VVhiche with all that is amisse, if any thinge so
be, I beseche euery gentle Reader to accept in good part.
            Fare well.
At Louain. The 12. of Iune. 1565.
               
               Thomas Stapleton.
            
         
         
            
            THE LIFE OF S. BEDE: WRITEN BY TRITHEMIVS.
            BEde a monke and priest of the monastery of S. Peter
and Paul, of S. Benets order in England, a man in holy
scripture much conuersant and very well lerned.
In other good lerning of great knowleadg. As in philosophie,
Astronomie, Algorisme and Poetry. Skilful of the greke toung:
of an excellent witt. His tounge and stile not curious, but pleasaunt
and semely. He wrote many volumes in the which his
witt and lerning is tried. This man at the age of seuen yeares,
was by his frendes committed to Benedictus, and after to Ceolfridus
the Abbbat of the forsaied monastery, atAt VVei mouth at the riuer VVere whiche runneth by Dyrtham. Murmouth,
to be brought vp and instructed. From the which age continuing
all daies of his life in that monastery, he bestowed all diligence
in the study of holy scripture. And obseruing with all
the rule of his order, singing daily gods seruice in the church, in
the rest he delighted allwaies, to lerne, to teache, or to write. In
the nintenth yere of his age he was ordred deacon. In the xxx.
yere he was made priest. Bothe which orders he receiued at the
handes of the holy Bishop Iohn of Beuerlake, by the cōmaundment
of Ceolfrid his Abbat. Frō which time of his pristhood,
vntel the ende of his life he wrote the workes here folowing.
            
               In Genesim vsque ad I saac.
               lib. 4.
               In Exodum.
               lib. 1.
               De tabernaculo & vasiseius.
               lib. 3.
               In Numeros.
               lib. 1.
               In Leuiticum.
               lib. 1.
               In Regum. 30. quest.
               lib. 1.
               In Deuteronomium.
               lib. 1.
               In Iudicum.
               lib. 1.
               De aedificatione templi.
               lib. 2.
               In principium Regum.
               lib. 3.
               In I
                     •
                  suae.
               lib. 1.
               In Prouerbia Salomonis.
               lib. 3.
               In Paralipomenon.
               lib. 2.
               In Ecclesiastem.
               lib. 1.
               In Cantica Canticorum.
               lib. 6.
               In Esdram & Neemi
                     •
                  m.
               lib. 3.
               
                  In Tobiam.
               lib. 1.
               In Ezaiam prophetam.
               lib. 2.
               In Ezechielem.
               lib. 1.
               In Hieremiam.
               lib. 2.
               In Danielem.
               lib. 1.
               In xij. prophetas minores.
               lib. 12.
               In epistolas Pauli.
               lib. 14.
               In epistolas Canonicas.
               lib. 7.
               In Euangelium Marci.
               lib. 4.
               In Apocalypsim.
               lib. 3.
               In actus Apostolorum.
               lib. 2.
               In Euangelium Lucae.
               lib. 6.
               Gesta Anglorum.
               lib. 5.
               Flores B. Gregorij in Cātica.
               lib. 2.
               Homilias euangeliorum.
               lib. 2.
               Chronicam sui coenobij.
               lib. 2.
               G
                     •
                  sta diuersorum sanctorū.
               lib. 1.
               De tēporibus & natura rerū.
               lib. 1.
               Martyrologium.
               lib. 1.
               De passione Sancti Felicis.
               lib. 1.
               Aliud minus volumen.
               lib. 2.
               De Locis sanctis.
               lib. 1.
               Vitam S. Alberti episcopi.
               lib. 2.
               Scintillarū ex sentētijs patrū.
               lib. 1.
               Epigrammata hero.
               lib. 1.
               Himnorum diuerso carmine.
               lib. 1.
               Distinctiones in Hieremiam.
               lib. 1.
               Lectiones noui Testam.
               lib. 1.
               Lectiones in vetus Testam.
               lib. 1.
               De Christo & Ecclesia.
               lib. 2.
               Distinctiones in Iob.
               lib. 1.
               Epistolarum ad diuersos.
               lib. 1.
               De cantico Abacuc.
               lib. 1.
               De orthographia.
               lib. 1.
               De arte metrica.
               lib. 1.
               De schematibus.
               lib. 1.
            
            He wrote also many other thinges, which are not come
to my knowleadge. This mans workes were of such authorite,
euen while he yet liued, and wrote allwaies newe, that they
were openly read in Churches, by the appointment of the bysshops
of England. And bicause that, his homelies then read in
the church, bearing the name of the Author, as the maner is,
were intituled The homelies of the venerable priest Bede, not being
able to call him with a more honourable name while he yet lyued,
the same title hath remained euen to this daye. Whereby
he is rather called Venerable Bede then S. Bede. For it was not
lawfull to call any a Saint yet liuing. Some do faine other causes
why he should be surnamed Venerable. As that being blind,
he preached to stones, and of an epitaphe writen by an Angel.
But these men are deceiued. For neither Bede was blinde, neither

it is knowen that any such epitaphe was writen vpon his
sepulchre. And truly, were it not to auoide prolixite, I coulde
easely confute these folies. He departed this worlde vnder Leo
the Emperour. In the yere of our Lorde 732. In the yere of his
age 72. the last daie of Maie. Indictione. 15.
         
         
            BEDE TO THE READER.
            All vnto whom this storie of our nation shall come, either
hearing it or reading it, I humbly beseche, that for my infirmites
as well of body as of minde, they wil be intercessours before
the heauenly clemencie. And that euery one in his countre
will so awnswere my labour with mutuall charite, that whereas
I haue noted in euery prouince, shere, or countie, and in the
most notable places thereof, such thinges as I thought worth
the remembraunce, and pleasaunt to the inhabitants of eche
one, that I may for al reward haue the helpe of their godly praiers.
            FARE WELL.
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE KING CEOLVLPHE BEDA THE SERAVNT of Christe and Priest.
            THE History of thinges don in the church of
the Englishe nation which of late I had set
fourth, I did both first very gladly send your
grace desiring then to haue a sight and proufe
therof, and now againe do send it you, to the
entent you may both coppy it out, and more fully at your lesure
consider it. I can not but highly commend this yower zele
and good desyre you haue not only to geue good eare to the
holyscriptures, but also to know of things both don and spokē
by worthy men before your time, and specially of our owne
country. For whither an history containeth good thinges don
by good men, the wise hearer is therby prouoked to wel doing:
ether reporteth euill things don by euil men, the vertuous and
wel disposed reader neuerthelesse is moued therby both to flye
that is euill and noisom to his soule, and embrace the thinge
he knoweth to be good and acceptable vnto God. Which thing
you wisely pondering, desire to haue the sayd history published
both to the instruction of your selfe, and also to the edifieng of
such other whom God hath committed vnto your gouernance.
And to thentent I may put both your grace and all other
that shall heare or reade it, out of all doubt of the verite of the
sayd History, I will briefly shew you what authours I haue
chiefely folowed in the making therof. The chiefest authour
and aider I had in compiling this worke, was the right reuerent
abbat Albinus, a mā of great learning, which being brought vp
in the church of Canterbury vnder Theodorus Archebishop of
blessed memory, and Adrianus abbat, both mē of great worship

and learning, hath procured and sent vnto me al such thinges as
wer don by Saint Gregory the Popes disciples, ether in the prouince
of kēt, ether other places adioyning and bordering vpon
the same. Which thinges the said Abbate hath learned partly by
writinges partly also by tradition of elders, and such things as
he hath in such sorte learned, he hath sent vnto me by the handes
of Nothelmus priest of the church of Londō, to be receiued
ether in writting ether by mouth and relatiō of the said Nothelmus.
Which also going after vnto Rome was permitted by Gregorie
bishop, which is now head of that church, to search the
closettes of the saied holy church of Rome, where he founde
out certaine epistles of saint Gregorie and other bishops there,
and at his returne hath deliuered vnto vs the sayd epistles to be
put in to our history with the counsell and aduise of the reuerent
father Albine aboue mencioned. So that from the beginning
of this booke vnto the time that the countrye of England
receiued the faith of Christe, we learned such thinges as we
bring, gathered out of the workes of such as had wrote thereof
before our time. And from thence vnto this present such thinges
as hath ben don in the church and diocese of Canterbury
by the disciples of Saint Gregory or their successors, or vnder
what kinge they haue ben done, we haue knowen by the
industrie of the sayd Abbate Albine, at the reporte of Nothelmus,
who also hath brought me in sum parte of knowledge of
such things as wer don in the prouinces of theEssex. east andSalisbury. Exceter VVelles. west
saxons, and also of theSuffolck, Norfolck and Cambrigd shere. east english and of the Northūbers that
is to wit, by what bishops preaching, and vnder what king
ech of the said prouinces wer conuerted vnto the faith of Christ.
And to be shorte, by the exhortation of the sayd Albine, I was
chiefly prouoked and enboldened to set vpō this enterprise.Northumbers are called in this stistory al. that dwel beyōd the riuer Hū
                  bre North ward. Daniel
also the most reuerent bishop of the west saxons, which is
yet a liue, hath instructed me in certaine pointes of the ecclesiastical
history both of his prouince of theSussex and Hapshere. South Saxōs, and of

the Ile of Wite. Now in what sort the prouince ofMercia or Marshland containeth the dioceses of L
                     •
                  hfield and Couētry, Lincolne and VVorcet. 
               Mercia, recerued
the saith which they knew not before, and the prouince
of theEssex. easte Saxons recouered the faith which they had
lost before, both by the ministery of Ceddi and Ceadda priests
of great deuotion, and how the ij
                  •
                saied fathers both liued and
died, we haue diligently lerned of the brothers of the monastery
of Laestinge by them erected. Again of things don appertaining
to the church in the prouince of the easte english we
haue found out partly by monuments of writting and traditions
of the foreliuers, and partly, by the information of the
reuerend Abbot Esius. As for such things as wer don in the territory
of Lindissig (that is holy Ilond) touching the furderance
of the faith of Christ, and what priests there succeded from time
to time, we haue learned ether by the writinges of the reuerent
bishop Cynebertus, ether by the liuely voice of other men
of good creditt. The history of the prouince of the Northumbers
from the time they receiued the faith of Christ vnto
this present, we haue gotten not by any one author, but by
relation of many faithful witnesses which might know and remēber
the same beside such things as by my owne experience I
knew. Among which you shal note, that such thinges as I haue
wrote of the most holy father and bishop Cutbert ether in this
book ether in the treatice that I haue made of his life, I haue takē
partly out of those things which I found befor writē of him
by the brothers of the church ofThe countre of Northū
                  berland properly. 
               Lindisfarnū
                folowing simplely
the faith of the history which I read, and partely also haue
added thereunto such things as I could learne my selfe by
the faithful testimony of such as knew him. I humbly beseche
the Reader, that if he shal finde any thing otherwise then truth
in this treatise, he wil not impute it vnto me, as the which hath
endeuoured to put in writing to the instruction of our aftercommers
such thinges as we could gather by common report,
which is the true lawe of an history.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE church of Englande.
            
               
                  Of the situation of Britanny and Ireland, and of the people which inhabited there of owld time.
               
               The 1. Chapter.
               BRitāny an Iland of the Oceane, which of owld
time was called Albion, doth stande betwext
the north and the west, right ouer against Germany,
Fraunce, and Spayne, iij of the greatest
countries of Europe. Which being eight hundred
myles longe Northward, is but ij hundred
myles broade, excepte yow reckon the cabes or poyntes of the
mountaynes which runneth owt a long far into the sea, wherby
the Iland is in cumpasseThat is 1800. miles. 
                  forty and eight times lxxv myles. Of the
sowth side it hath Flaunders, the first hauen towne wherof to arriue
at for a man comyng owt of England is called Ruthubi, the
hauen whereof is now corruptely calledThis hauen is now loste by the irruption of the sea. 
                  Reptacester 50 myles of
from Calleis, or as some write 60. myles. On the back syde of it
where it lyeth open vnto the mayne Oceane, it hath the Iles called
Orcades. It is an Iland very batfull of corne, frute and pasture.
In sum places it beareth vines, it hath plentif of fowles of diuerse
sortes, both by sea and by land, of sprynges also and riuers full
of fysh but specially of lampriles and eles. Ther be many times
also takē porposes, Dolphyns and whales, beside many kynde
of shellfishes, among other of muskles, in whom be founde perles
of all coulours as red, purple, crymson, but specially white:
ther is also great store of cockles, whereof is made the dye of
crymson, whose rudd will be appalled nether with heate of sonne
nether with wette of wether, but the oulder it is, the more bright
and beutifull glasse it casteth. It hath also sprynges fitt to make

salt, and others of whott waters, where ar buylded seuerall places
meete for all ages as well for men as women to bathe them
selues. For the water (as saynt Basill writeth) runnyng thowrogh
certayne metalles, receiueth therof such vertue of heate, that it is
not only made warme therby but also skalding whot. This Iland
is stored wyth mynes of sundry metalles, as of brasse, lead, iron,
and syluer. It bringeth furth also great plētyf of the Geate stone,
and that of the best. This stone is blacke and burneth being put to
the fire, and then is of vertu good to chase away serpentes. If you
rub him till he be warme, he holdeth fast such thinges as ar layd
vnto him euen as Aumber doth. This Iland had in it sumtimes
xxviij fayre cities, beside an innumerable sort of castles whiche
also wer well and strongly fensyd wyth walles, turrettes, gates,
and bullwarkes. And for as much as it is placed right in manner
vnder the north pole, it hath light nightes in the sommer, so that
at mydnight many times men dowteth whether it be yet twylight
of the euening past, or breach of the day followyng. Wherby
the daies be of a great length there in sommer, as contrary the
nighte in wynter that is to wytt, xviij howers, by reason the sonne
there is so farre gō sowthward. And so in like maner the nightes
in the sommer ar there very shorte and the daies in the wynter
that is to wytt vj. equinoctiall howers, where as in Armenia,
Macedonia, Italia, and other countries subiect to the same line,
the longest day or night passeth not xv, the shortest ix howers.
This Iland at this present to the number of the v. bookes of Moses,
wyth v. sundry languages doth study and set furth the knowledge
of one perfecte truth, that is, wyth the language of the English,
the Britannes, the Scotts, theThe Redshankes. Pictes, and the latine, which
by study of the scriptures is made common to all the rest. At the
first this land was inhabited of none other nation but only of
the Britānes, of whom it receiueth his name: which Britānes comyng
out of Armorica (called now litle Britāny) as it is thought,
chose vnto them selues the sowth parte of this land. And after

when they from the sowth forward had in their possession a
great parte of the Ile, it chaūced that certaine people of the Pictes
coming owt of Scythia, as it is sayd, trauailing vppō the seas
with a few long shippes, the winde dryuing them in cumpasse
rownde about the coaste of Britannye, blewe them a land on
Irelands syde, on the north partes therof. Which they finding
inhabited of the Scottes, besought thē to allow them some part
of the land, where they might plante them selues. But they coulde
not obtayne their desire. This Ireland, next vnto Britanny is
the greatest lland of the Oceane sea, and standeth westward of
Britanny. But as Northward it is not so longe as it, so westward
it is much longer, and reacheth vnto the North partes of Spayne,
hauing the mayne sea runnyng betwext. The Pictes (as I
haue sayd) arriuing wyth their nauy in Ireland, required of the
inhabitants, that they might be suffered, there to rest and place
them selues. The Scottes aunsered that the Iland was not bigg
inowgh to hold them both. But we can geue you good counsel
(quoth they) what we thynke best for you to doe. We
know well there is an other Iland not farre from oures standing
easte ward from hence, which we may see owt of this land
in a fayer sonnye day. If you will goe thether, you may inhabit
ther at will. And if there be any resistance made against you, we
wil ayde you. Whervpon the Pictes arriuing in Britanny planted
them selues in the North partes therof. For as for the sowth
partes the Britānes had taken vpp before. And wheras the Pictes
hauing no wyues did require of the Scottes to marry their
dawghters, the Skottes agreed to graunt them their bone, vnder
condition, that as often as the matter was in dowt, they should
choose their kyng rather of the next of the howse of the woman
then of the man. Which order, it is well knowen the Pictes
kepeth euen to this day. In processe of yeres, after the Britās and
the Pictes, the Skottes also wer receiued in to Britanny amōg the
Pictes. Which coming owt of Ireland vnder Rewda their Capitaine,

either by force or frendship, entered and inhabited the
country in Scotland, which they possessed. Of which capitaine
euen vnto this day they ar callid dall reudini, for in their language
dall signifieth part.A description of Ireland. 
                  Irelande both in bredth, holsomnes and
fines of ayre, for passeth Britanny, so that there snow remayneth
skant iij. dayse to gether: and no man there for foddering of his
beastes, ether maketh hay in the sommer, or buyldeth stawles for
his cattaile. There is no noysom creping beast to be sene there,
no serpent that can liue there. For many times serpentes which
hath ben brought thether owt of Britanny, the ship drawing nere
vnto the land, as sone as they ar towched wyth the smell of
the ayer, they dieth owt of hand. Yea more then that, all thing in
maner that cometh from the sayd Iland, is of souerayne vertue
against poyson. And this we sawe with oure eyes, that whē certain
men, that wer stinged of venemous serpents, had taken the
scraping of certaine leaues of bookes which had bē of Irelād, and
had drōke it in water, forthwyth all the force of the venim was
staynched, and the swelling of the stinged bodies vtterly asswaged.
This Iland is rich in milk and hony, nor voyd of vines, fish
or foule, and full of stagges. This is properly the country of the
Skottes, owt of the which they isshuing hath inhabited Britāny
being before possessed of the Britons and the Pictes. Ther is a
great creke of the sea whiche seuered of ould time the Britons
from the Pictes, which from the west runneth far in to the lād.
Where vnto this day there is a citty of the Britons very stronge
and well fensed called Alcuith. At the north side of the which
creke, the Scottes hath come and made their dwelling country.
            
            
               
                  How that C. Iulius Cesar was the first of all the Romains that came in to Britanny.
               
               The. 2. Chap.
               THe Romains had neuer accesse vnto Britāny, nor knoledge
therof vntill Caius Iulius Cesars time. Who the
593. yere from the buylding of Rome and the 60.

before the incarnation of ower Sauiour Christ, being Consul
wyth L. Bibulus, at the time that he had battell with Germany
and Fraunce, which two countres the riuer Rhene doth seuer,
cam into Picardy, from whence is a very nigh and short passage
in to Britāny, and wyth 80. ships charged wyth men and warfare
prouision, passeth ouer in to Britanny: where he being receiued
wyth a very sharpe and hotte byckering, and after shaken
wyth a contrary tempest was fayne to returne in to Fraunce
wyth the losse of a great part of his nauy, and no small number
of his souldiars, and of the most part of all his men of armes.
And so for that wynter he was forced to dimisse his army: which
being ouer past, he sayleth againe in to Britanny, wyth a nauy of
600. sayle one and other. Where after he had arriued, and was
nowe marching toward his enemy wyth his mayne hoste, his
ships riding at the anker, were with a violēt storme rent and cast
either one vppon the other, either vppon the quick sandes, and
there broken in peces, in such sort, that xl. of them wer lost owt
of hand, and the rest wyth much a doe repaired. Cesars horsemen
at the first encounter wer ouerthrowen of the Britannes,
and Labienus one of his coronells slayne. At the second encounter,
wyth great losse and daunger of his army, he put the Britannes
to flight. From thence he went vnto the riuer of Tems,
which men say can be waded ouer but in one place: where
on the farder side a great number of the Britannes warded the
bankes, vnder Cassibellauno their capitayne, which had stycked
the bottom of the riuer and the bankes also thyck of great stakes,
wherof certayn remnantes vnto this day ar to be sene, of
piles of the bignes of a mans thyghe couered wyth lead styckyng
fast in the bottome of the riuer. Which when the Romans
had espyed and eskaped, the Britannes, not able to stāde the violence
of the Romane Legions, hidd them selues in the woddes,
owt of the which they ofte brekyng owt, greatly endomaged the
army of the Romaynes. In this meane timeColchester. 
                  Trinobantum, a very

stronge citty, wyth their Capitain Androgorius yelded vnto
Cesar, deliuering xl. hostages. Which example, other moe citties
followyng, fell in leage wyth the Romans: by whose aduer
                     •
                  ising
Cesar hauing intelligence of a stronge hold, that Cassibelianus
had buylded betwene two dykes or marishes well fensed wyth
woddes on ech side, farsed wyth plente of all thinges, assayling
wyth great force at lenght ouercomed. After that returning
in to Fraūce, hauing dimissed his army for the wynter season, he
was sodenly besett wyth great tumultes of warres reised against
him on euery side.
            
            
               
                  How Claudius the Emperour was the second that came in to Britanny, which did also subdue the Iles Orcades, And how Vespasian se
                        •
                     . by 
                        •
                     im tooke the Ile of wyte.
               
               The. 3. Chap.
               THe 797. yere from the buylding of Rome, Claudius the
third Emperour after August, being much desirours to
shew him selfe a prince profitable vnto the common
welth, sought by all meanes battaile and conquest. Whereuppon
he made a viage in to Britanny, which was all in a mute
ny, for that such as wer traytorously fled from them, wer not
restored. He passed ouer in to the Iland whether nor before Iulius
Cesar, nor after, any durst aduenture. And there with out
ether blud or battaile receiued by submission the greatest part
of the Iland voluntaryly yelding them selues vnto him. Also
he brought in subiection to the Romaine empire the Iles Orcades,
which lieth in the Oceane aboue Britanny: which don
he returned to Rome the vj. moneth after that he departed
thence:The yeare of our Lord 46. and caused his son to be surnamed 'Britānicus. This battel
was sought the foruth yere of his empire which was the yere
of thincarnatiō of our lord 46. In the which yere also there fel a
great famine,Actor. 11. thorough out al Syria, which in the Actes of the
Apostles is shewed to before spokē by Agabus the prophet. Vespasianus
which after Nero was emperour, being sent of the said
Claudie in to Britanny, subdued vnto the Seigneurie of the Romains

the ile of Wite, stādigng nigh Britāny westward. Which
is of length frō este to west about 30. miles: frō south to North
12. being in the east part by sea 6. miles, in the west 3. miles of
frō the west shore of Britāny. Nero succeding Claudius in the empire
neuer durst meddle with warfare matters. Wherby among
other many hindraunces which befel in his time vnto the empire,
one was that he had almost lost Britanny: For vnder him
two noble townes wer taken and ouerthrowen.
            
            
               
                  How that Lucius Kyng of Britanny sent to Eleutherius desiring to be Christened.
               
               The. 4. Chap.
               THe yere of the incarnatiō of our Lord 156.An. 156. 
                  Marcus Aurelius
Verus the 14. Emperour after August, gouerned
the empire with his Brother Aurelius Commodus. In
whose time Eleutherius a holy mā being Pope of the church of
Rome, Lucius Kyng of Britānes wrote vnto him, desiring that
by his commaundement he might be made christian: which his
request was graunted him. Wherby the Britannes receiuing
then the fayth, kept it sounde and vndefiled in rest and peace,
vntill Dioclesian the Emperours time.
            
            
               
                  How Seuerus the Emperoure by a trench drawen ouerthwart seuered one part of Britanny from the other.
               
               The. 5. Chap.
               THe yere of our Lord 189.An. 189. 
                  Seuerus borne in Afrike at Tripolis, the 17. emperour frō August, reigned 17. yeres. This
mā being rough of nature, entāgled with much warres,
gouerned the cōmon welth very valiaūtly, but yet with much
trauail. After he had vanquyshed his ciuill enemies, with which
he was very sore assayled, he is called in to Britanny, by the
meanes of the great defection of the most part of the country
from the Signorie of the Romans. Where after he had recouered
by great and greuous warres a great part of the land, he made
a partition betwext them and the other wild and sauage
people, not with buylding of a wa
                     ••
                   of stone as some suppose,
but with a trench and a rāpaire of tur
                     •
                  e and timber, thyck fensed

with bulwarkes and turrets. Which sayed trench he caused
to be drawen from one sea to the other. And there at yorke he
died, leauing behinde him 2. sonnes, Bassianus and Geta, which
Geta being condemned of treason, died. And Bassianus taking
vpon him the surname of Antonius gouerned the empire after
the deceasse of his father.
            
            
               
                  Of the Raygne of Dioclesian, and of the persecution which he raysed against the Christians.
               
               The. 6. Chap.
               THe yere of our Lorde 286,An. 286. 
                  Dioclesianus the
xxxiij. Emperour after August, being chosen
of the army raygned xx. yeres, and he created
Maximinianus surnamed Herculeus, his fellowe
in gouernement of the Empire. In whose
time one Carausius, of low degre in byrth, but valiaunt in
armes, and politicke in counsell, was appointed toward the
sea coaste against the French menne, and the Saxons, whiche
then with continuall robberies much wasted that countries.
But he so behaued him selfe, that he did more hurt there, then
the ennemies them selues: For such pillage as he had recouered
from them, he did not restore it to the right owners,
but reserued it to him selfe, whereby he was suspected, that he
wittingly suffered them to pill and spoyle at pleasure. Wher vppon
being commaunded to be put to death of Maximinianus,
he toke vppon him the princely authoritie, and vsurped the
gouernance of the Britannes, which after he kept vij. yeres. At
length by treason of his fellow Allectius he was slayne. Which
Allectius him selfe, (Carausius being killed) kept the possession
of the Iland iij. yeres, whom Asclepiodotus chiefe gouernour of
the army ouercam, and receiued the Iland in his possession the
tenth yere after it was inuaded. In the meane time, Dioclesian
in the easte, Maximinianus in the West raysing the tenth persecution
after Nero against the Christians, commaunded the

churches to be spoyled, the Christians to be tormented and
killed: which persecution was both longer and also crueller
then all the other: for hole x. yeres together it continued in
burning the churches, in bānishing the innocēts, in murdering
the Martyrs, and neuer ceased. Brefely among other places, it
made Britanny to be honored wyth the glory of many holy
Martyres which constantly stode and died in the confession
of their faith.
            
            
               
                  The passion of Saynt Albane and his fellowes, which did shead their bludd for Christes sake.
               
               The 7. Chap.
               AMong other suffered Saynt Albane: of whom
Fortunatus priest in the booke he wrote in the
prayse of virgines, speaking of the Martyres
which from all coastes of the world cam vnto
God, sayth, Albanum egregium foecunda Britā
                     nia
profert.
               
               The fertile lande of batfull Britanny
               Bringeth furth Albane a Martyr right worthy.
               This Albane being yet but a Pagane, when the cruell commaundements
of the wicked Princes were set forth against
the Christians, receiued in to his house one of the clergy whiche
had fled from the persecutours: whom he perceiuing bothe
night and day to continewe in praying and watching, beinge
sodaynly towched with the grace of God, began to follow the
example of his faith and vertu, and by litle and litle instructed
by his holesom exhortations, forsaking his blind idolatry became
Christiā with his hole hart. At length after the sayd person
of the clergy had certain daise taried with him, it came to the
eares of the Prince, that this holy confessor of Christ (whose time
was not yet come that god appointed for him to suffer martyrdome)
lay hid in Albanus house. Whereuppon he commaū
                  did
his souldiours to search his house with all diligence. Whether

when they were cum, saynt Albane apparelled in his gests
and masters garments offerid him selfe to the souldiours, and
so was brought bound vnto the iudge. It chaunced that the
iudge the same time, was doing sacrifice vnto the deuills before
the aultars. And when he had sene Albane, being all chaufed
with anger for that he feared not voluntarily to offer him selfe
vnto the souldiars and perell of death, for his geste, whom he
had harbored, he commaunded him to be brought before the
idoles of the diuells, before whom he there stode. And for so
much (quoth he) as thou haddest rather to conueye awaye the
rebell and traytour to our Gods, then deliuer him vp vnto the
souldiours that he might sustaine due punishement for his
blasphemous despising of the Gods, looke what paynes he
should haue suffered if he had ben taken, the same shalt thou
suffer, if thou refuse to practise the rites of ower religion. But
Saynt Albane which wilfully had before discouered him selfe
to be a Christian, litle heeded the menacies of the Prince. But
being thorouly fensed with spirituall armour of grace, told
him plainly to his face, that he would not obey his cōmaundemēt.
Then said the iudge, of what house or stock art thou? Albane
aunswered
                     •
                   what is that to the of what house I am? but
if thou be desirous to know of what religion I am, be it knowen
vnto the that I am a Christian, and that I employe my
selfe to Christian maners and excercises. Then the iudge demaunded
him his name. My parents (quoth he) nameth me
Albane: and I honor and worship the true and liuing god whiche
made al thing of naught. Thē the iudge being very wroth
sayde. If thou wilt enioy long life, cum of, and do sacrifice vnto
the great goddes.The Martyrdom of saint Albane the firste Martyr of Britanny. Albane aunswered, theis sacrifices whiche
yow offer vp vnto the diuells, neither helpe the offerers nor
obtaine them their desires, but rather purchase them for their
reward eternall paynes in hell fire. The iudge hearing this
being in a rage, commaunded the holy confessor of God to be

all beaten of the tormentours, thinking his constance would
relent at strypes, which refused to yeld to words: but he shewed
him self not only patient, but also ioyful in the middle of all his
torments. The iudge when he sawe he could be nether wonne
with wordes, nor tourned with torments from the religion
of Christes faith, commaunded that he should be behedded.
In the way as he was ledd to his death, he came to a floudde
which with a very swift course ranne betwixt him and the place
where he should suffer. Now he saw a great company of all
sexes, degrees, and ages going with him to the place of his execution,
in so much that it semed the iudge was left alone at
home without any to attend vppon him. This company was
so great, and the bridge they had to passe ouer so litle, that it
would be toward night, er they all could get ouer. Albane longing
much for his blessed death, and hasting to his Martyrdome,
cumming to the riuers side and making there his prayer
with lifting vp his eyes and harte to heauen, sawe furth wyth
the bottom to haue bin dried vp, and the water geue place for
him and the people to passe ouer dryshod as it were vpon euen
grownde. Which when among other the executioner which
should haue beheddid him did see, he made hast to mete him, at
the place appointed for his death, and there (not without the
holy inspiration of God) he fell downe flat before his feete, and
casting from him the sword which he held in his hande ready
drawen, desired rather that he might be executioned ether for
him or with him, rather then to do execution vpō him. Where
vpō this mā being now made a fellow of that faith wher of before
he was persecutor, and the swerd lying in the groūd before
thē, the other officers staggering and doubting all who might
take it vpp and doe the execution, the holy confessor of God
with the people there assembled went vnto a hill almost half a
mile of from that place beautifully garnished with diuers herbes
and flowers not rough or vneasy to climme, but smothe,

plaine and delectable, worthy and mete to be sanctified with
the blood of the blessed Martyr, vnto the the top where of
when he was ascended, he required of God to giue him water:
and strayt there arose a spryng of fayer water before his feete
whereby all might perceaue that the riuer before was by his
meanes dried. For he which left no water in the riuer, would
not haue required it in the topp of the mowntaine, but that it
was so expedient, for the glory of God in his holy martyr.
For beholde the riuer hauing obeyed the Martyr, and serued
his deuotion, leauing behinde a testimony of duty and obedience
(the Martyr hauing now suffered) returned to his nature
againe. Here therfore this most valiaunt martyr being behedded
receiued the crowne of life which God promiseth to them
that loue him. But he which there tooke vppon him to doe
that wicked execution, had short ioy of his naughty deede: for
his eyes fel vnto the ground with the head of the holy martyr.
There also was behedded the souldiour which being called of
God refused to stryke the holy confessor of God: of whom it
is open and playne, that though he was not Christened in the
fount, yet he was baptised iu the bath of his owne blud, and so
made worthy to enter in to the kingdome of heuen. Now the
iudge seing so many straunge and heuenly miracles wrought
by this holy martyr, gaue commaundement that the persecution
should cease, beginning to honour in the sayntes of
God the constant and pacient suffering of death, by the
which he thought at first to bring them from the deuotion
of their fayth. S. Albane suffered his martyrdome the xx.
day of Iune, nigh vnto the citte of,
                     
                        •
                      which we call now dorsuolde 
                        •
                     odde. 
                  Verolamium. Where
after the Christiane churche being quietly calmed and setteled
againe, there was a temple buylded of a meruailous rich
worke, and worthy for suche a martyrdome. In the which
place truly euen vnto this day ar syck persons cured, and
many miracles wrought. There suffered also about that

time Aarō and Iulius towne dwellers of the citty of Leicester
and many other both men and wemen in sundry places,
which after diuerse fell and cruell torments sustayned in al
partes of their bodies, by perfitt victory atcheued by pacience,
yelded their soules vnto the ioyse of heauen.
            
            
               
                  How that after this persecution ceased, the church of Britanny was sumwhat quiet vntill the time of the Arrians heresies.
               
               The. 8. Chap.
               AFter that the stormes of this persecution wer
ouerblowen,Temples of Martyres: holy daies. Cō
                     secration of the B. sacramēt. the faithfull christians which in
time of daunger lay hid in dennes and desertes
cometh furth and sheweth them selues abrode,
reneweth their churches, which before were
ouerthrowen flatt to the grownd, foundeth, buyldeth, and perfiteth
new temples in honor of the holy Martyrs, celebrateth
holy dayse, doth consecrate the holy mysteries, with pure mouth
                     •
                  
and harte, and euery where as it wer displayeth their ensignes
in signe of conqueste.Heresies in Britā
                     ny. And this peace continued in the
church of Christ in Britanny vntill the fury of the Arrians
heresies: which rūnyng thorough out the world corrupted also
with his venemous errors this Ilād, though situat out of the
cōpasse of the world. Now whē that once by this meanes heresy
had once found an open vent to passe ouer the Ocean sea
in to this Iland, shortly after all manner of heresies flowed in
to the sayd land, and was there receiued of the inhabitants as
being men deliting euer to heare newe things, and stedfastly
retaining nothing as certaine. About this time died Constantius
in Britanny which in Dioclesians life time gouerned Fraunce
and Spaine: a man very milde and of much courtesy. He
left Cōstantine his son by Helene his cōcubine created emperour
of Fraunce. Eutropius writeth that Cōstantine being created
emperour in Britanny succeded his father in the kyngdome.
In whose time the heresy of the Arrians springing and being

discouered and condemned in the councell of Nice, did neuerthelesse
infecte not only the other partes of the world,The Arrians heresie prospereth, not with standing th
                        •
                      generall councell of Nice. but also
the very churches of the Ilands with deathly doctrine and pestilent
infidelite.
            
            
               
                  How that in the time of Gracian the Emperour Maximus being created Emperour in Britāny returned in to France with a great army.
               
               The. 9. Chap.
               THe yere of the incarnation of our Lord 377.An. 377. 
                  Gratian
the 40. Emperour after August, raygned vj. yeres after
the death of Valens, though a litle while before he raigned
also with Valens his vncle and Valentinian his brother.
Which seing the state of the commen welth miserably plagued,
and nigh altogether decayed, was drouen of nece
                     •
                  site for
the better repairing of the sayd decaise, to choose vnto him
Theodosius a Spanyard borne to be his partener in gouernance
of the Empire, comitting, vnto him the regiment of the 
                     •
                  aste
and also of Thracia. In which time, one Maximus a vahaūt mā
and a good, and worthy of the Imperiall crowne (had it not
ben that contrary to his othe and allegeance he tooke vpon
him by tyranny to be Emperour in Britanny) half in maner against
his will being created Emperour of the army, passed ouer
in to Fraunce. Where he slewe Gratian the Emperour being
circumuented by subtile wiles, and sodenly stolen vppon ere
he were ware, as he was in minde to passe in to Italy. After that
also he chased Valentiniā
                   the other partener of the empire out
of Italy. Valentinian flieng for succour in to the easte, and there
with all fatherly piete being receiued of Theodosius, was by his
helpe strayt wayse restored vnto the empire, Maximus the tyran
being shutt vp by seige with in the walles of Aquilegia
and there shortly after taken and slayne.
            
            
               
                  How that Aradius being Emperour, Pelagius a Brittain made wicked battail against the grace of God.
               
               
               The. 10. Chap.
               THe yere of our Lord 394.An. 394. 
                  Arcadius son vnto Theodosius
with his brother Honorius, being the xliij. Emperour
after August, raigned xiij yeres. In whose time Pelagius
a Britan borne, disperkled the venim of his faithlesse doctrine
very far abroad, holding that a man might liue well without
the helpe of the grace of God, vsing herein the ayde of Iulianus
of Campania, who was intemperatly sturred with the losse
of his byshoprick.The propery of heret
                        •
                     kes. To whom S. Austen and other catholick
fathers also hath aunswered in most ample māner, but yet they
would not be amended therby. But being conuicted of their
falshed, they rather would encrease it by defending and mainteining
it, then amend it by retourning to the truth.
            
            
               
                  How that Honorius being Emperour, Gratian and Constantine vsurped tyranny in Britanny, where the first shortly after was slayne and the other in Fraunce.
               
               The. 11. Chap.
               THe yere of our Lord 407.An. 407. 
                  Honorius son of Theodosius
the younger being emperour in the 44. place after August
ij. yere before that Rome was iuuaded by Alaricus
Kyng of the Gothes, when the nations of the Alanes, the
Sue
                     •
                  es, and the Vandalls and many such other with them, the
frenchmen being beaten downe, passing the Rhene raiged
thorough out al Fraunce about that time Gratianus in Britāny
is created tyrā, and is slayne. In his, place Constantine being but a
cōmon souldiour was chosen: only for the names sake, with out
any desert of vertu: which so sone as he had taken vppon him
the empire, passed ouer in to Fraunce, where being ofte deluded
of the barbarous nations (as vnwisely and vncertainly making
his leage with them) greatly endomaged the common
welth. Wher vpō 
                  Honorius sending Constantius the Counte in
to Fraunce with an army, Constantine was beseiged at Arells,
and there taken and slayne, and Gerontius his partener slew his

son Cōstans at Vienna, whom of a mōke he had made emprour.
Rome was destroyd of the Gothes the 1164. yere after it was
buylded. After which time the Romans lefte to rule in Britāny
after almost 470. yeres that C. Iulius Caesar first entered the sayd
Ile.The first destruction of Rome. The Romanes dwelt with in the trench which as we haue
sayd, Seuerus drew ouerthwart the Ilād at the south part, which
thing may appeare by the citties, temples, bridges and paued
stretes to this day remayning. Not withstanding they had in
possession and vnder their dominion the farder partes of Britanny
and also the Ilandes which ar abo
                     •
                  e Britanny.
            
            
               
                  How the Britannes being spoyled of the Scottes and the Pictes, sought ayde of the Romans, which at the second time of their comming, buylded a wall betwene the ij. countries, but they shortly after were oppressed with greater miseres then euer they wer in before.
               
               The. 12. Chap.
               BY meanes the sayd tyrannes and capitaines of the
Romans did vse to transport with them ouer in to
Fraunce the flower of all the youthe of Britanny to
serue them in their forayne warres,The cause why the olde Brittons became weake and open to forain inuasiōs. their men of warre wer
consumed, and the country being all disarmed was not now able
to defend them selues against the inuasion of their
enemies. Where vppon many yeares together they liued vnder
the miserable seruage and oppression of ij. most cruell outlandish
nations, the Scottes and theRedshā
                     kes.
                  Pictes. I cal them outlandish,
not for that they wer out of the circuit of Britanne, but that
they wer diuided from the land of Britanny by ij. armes of the
sea running betwext them, of the which one frō the easte sea,
the other from the west rūneth in far and wyde in to the land
of Britanny though they may one reach to the other. In the
middle of the east creeke there is a citte buylded called Guidi.
Aboue the west creeke towarde the right hand standeth a citte
called Alcuith, which in their language is as much to say as the
Rock Cluith, for it standeth by a fludd of the same name. The
Britannes then being thus afflicted by the sayd nations, sent

their embassadours wyth letters vnto Rome, wyth lamentable
supplications requiring of them ayde and succour, promising
them their continuall fea
                     •
                  te, so that they would reskue them against
the oppression of their sayd enemies: where vppon there
was sent vnto them a legion of armed souldiours from Rome,
which commyng in to the iland and encountering wyth the enemies,
ouerthrew a great number of them, and draue the rest
owt of the fruntiers of the coūtry, and so setting them at liberte
and fre from the misery wyth which they wer before so greuously
ouercharged, coūseled them to make a wall betwene th
                     •
                  
ij. seas, which might be of force to kepe out their euill neyghboures:
and that don, they returned home with great triumph.
But the Britons buylding the wall which they wer bid to make,
not of stone as they wer willed, but of turue, as hauing none among
them that had skyll there in, made it so slender, that it serued
them to litle purpose. This walle they made betwen the ij.
sayd armes or creekes of the sea, many myles longe, that wher as
the fense of the water lacked, there by the helpe of the trēch they
might kepe their country from the breakyng in of their ennemies.
Of which pece of wurke, there remayneh euen vnto this
day most assured tokens yet to be seene. This trench begynneth
about two myles of from the monastery of AEbercuring,
Westward in a place which in the Pictes language is called Peanuakel
and in English is called Penwelt, and runnyng owt eastward is
ended by the citty of Al
                        •
                     luith. But the former enemies when
they had once perceiued that the Roman legion was returned
home againe, furth with being sett on land by boates, inuadeth
the borders, ouercometh the countrey, and as it wer corne reddy
to be cutt, they moweth, beateth, and beareth downe all before
them. Where vpon Ambasadours be sent agayne to Rome,
wyth lamentable voyce requiring their succour, beseching
them they would not suffer their miserable country to be vtterly
destroyed, nor permitt that the name of the prouince,

which thorow them had so long 
                     •
                  lorished should now thus despirefully
be extingueshid by the wycked crueltie of their forayne
people. Agayn there is sent an other legion, which in the
h
                     •••
                  est time comyng vpon the sodayne, made a great slawghter
of the enemies, and such as could eskape chased them ouer
the seas in to their owne conntry, which before wer wont to
waste and spoyle the country of Britanny wythout resistance.
Then the Romans toulde the Brytans playne, that it was not
for their ease to take any more such trauaylous iourneis for
their defence, and bydd them to practise their armour them selues,
and learne to wythstande their enemy, whom nothing els
did make so strong but their faynt and cowardous hartes. And
forsomuch they thought that wold be sum helpe and strength
vnto their loyal fellowes whom they wer now forced to forsake,
they buylded vp a walle of hard stone from sea to sea a right
betwene the two citties which there wer made, to kepe owt
the enemy, in the felf same place where Seuerus before had cast
the trench, (which walle euen to this day remaineth famous
and to be seene) with publick and priuat charges: the Britannes
also putting to their helping hādes. They then buylded it eight
fote broade and xij. high, right as it wer by a line from east to
weste, as it doth to this day playnly appeare, which being perfited,
they geue the people strayt warning to looke well to them
selues, they teach them to handle their wepon, and instructe
them in war like feates. Also by the sea side southward, where
their ships lay at harbar, least their enemyes should land there
aboutes, they makyth vp bullwarkes a longe one sum what distant
from the other, and this donne biddeth them fare well,
as mynded no more to retourne. As sone as they wer gonne,
the Scottes and Pyctes hauing intelligence that they had made
promisse they wold come no more, they takyng hart of grace
therof retourneth agayne to their wont busines: And first, all
that was without the walle they taketh for their owne. After

that they came to geue assault vnto the walle where the Britannes
with faynt hand and fearfull hart defending it, wer with
grapples, which they had diuised, pulled downe to the grownde,
and otherwise so assaulted, that they leauing both the cytties
and the wal also, wer dispercled and put to flight. The enemy
followeth, kylleth, and sleyth more cruel
                     •
                  y then e
                     •
                  er
he did before. For euen as the lambes of the wilde beastes, so
were they torne and mangled of their ennemies. Whereuppon
being dreuen out of their owne houses and possessions, they
falleth a robbing and spoyling one the other of them, encreasing
their outward misery with inward tumult, so far furth that
all the whole country was brought to that exigent, that they
had none other sustenance, but that they gotte by hunting and
killing of wild beastes.
            
            
               
                  How in the time of Theodosius the younger the Britannes sowght helpe of Boëtius then consull of Rome, but could not obtaine it and howe at that time Palladius was sent to the Scottes (which beleyued in Christe) to be their Byshop.
               
               The 13. Chapter.
               THe yere of the incarnation of our Lord 403.An. 403. 
                  Theodosius
the younger succeding Honorius, was made Emperour
of Rome, which he gouerned 27. yeres being
the xxv. Emperour after August. In the eight yere
of whose Empire,Palladius the first bishop of Scotland: 
                  Palladius was sent of Celestinus bishop of
the Roman church to the Scottes which had receiued the faith
of Christe, to be their first bishop.An. 411. And the 23 yere of his raigne,
Boetius one of the pears and patricians of Rome was now
the third time made consul with Symmachus. The poore leauing
of the Britanes, directed vnto him their letters, where of
this was the beginning. To Boetius thrise cons
                        •
                     ll the Mourning
of the Britannes. In the processe of which epistle they thus setteth
furth their pittyfull estate. The Barbarous enemy driueth

vs vpon the sea: the sea againe vppon the enemy: betwene these
twaine riseth two maner of deathes, either we are killed or
drowned. And yet for all their sute, they could obtaine no ayde
of him, as he which had then both his handes full of busines
and battaile at home with Bleda and Attila kinges of the Hunnes.
And though the yere before Bleda was murdered by the
wyhe treason of his brother Attila, yet he alone remained so
vntolerable an ennemy vnto the world, that he wasted all most
all Europe, spoyling and ouerthrowing both cities and castles.
About the same time there arose a great famine in Constantinople,
after which folowed also the pestilence: and a great part
of the wal of the said citye fel vnto the groūde, with 57. turrettes.
And many other cities also being ouerthrowen with earth
quake, hunger, and pestilence beside, consumed many a thousand
both of men and beastes.
            
            
               
                  How the Britones being forced by hungar droue the Barbarous people owt of their country. VVhereof ensewed plentif of corne, riott, pestilence, and the losse of the whole country.
               
               The 14. Chap.
               IN the meane season hūgar more and more preuailing
against the Britones, (in so much that
many yeres after it left tokens and remembrance
of the hurt it did in the country) droue many
of them to yelde them selues into the handes
of the robbers. Other there were which could neuer be
brought there vnto, but rather then they would so doe, from
the hilles and brakes where they lu
                     •
                  ked, many times inuaded
their ennemies, as trusting so much the more in the help of
God, how much the lesse hope they had of ayde of man. And
by such meanes first of all, both resisted and ouerthrew them,
which many yeres together had liued by the spoyle of the coū
                  try.
Whereby for the time they drewe homeward with shame
inough, intending not longe after to returne. The Pictes then

and long time after kept them selues quiet at home, saue only
that they would make now and then inuasions into the land,
and driue away bouties of cattell. After that (they leauing
their pilling and spoiling) the country drew to a quietnes, ther
ensued such plentif of grayne as neuer was sene the like before,
as far as any man could remember: whereof the people
grew to lose and wanton liuing, whereof all maner of lewdenes
followed strait after, specially cruel
                     ••
                  , hate of truth and loue
of lying: in so much that if any were gentler and more
geuen to truth then other, the other wold wurke him all the
hurte and spite they could, as a common enemy of the country.Ry
                        •
                      and euil life the Britains destructiō.
This did not only the seculars but also the clergy it selfe,
and the heddes therof, geuing them selues ouer to dronkennes,
pride, contention, enuy, and such other wickednes, casting
vtterly from them the swete yoke of Christe. In the meane
season a bitter plage befell among them for their corrupt liuing
consuming in short time such a multitude of people,
that the quicke wer not sufficient inough to bury the dead.
And yet for al that, they remained so hardened in syn, that neither
their frēdes death, nether the 
                     •
                  eare of their own could cure
the moreyn of their soules, which dayly perished thorow their
synfull liuing. Wherby a greater stroke of goddes vengaunce
ensewed vppon the whole synfull nation. For being now infested
againe with their ould neighbours, they deuised with
them selues what was best to doe, and where they might seeke
reskew to withstād and repell the force of the Northen nation.
And they agreed all with their kyng Vortigerius to demaund
ayde of the Saxons beyonde the seas. Which thing doutlesse
was don by gods owne appointement, that the wicked people
might be therby plagued, as by the ende it shall most manifestly
appeare.
            
            
               
                  How the English and Saxons being sent for in to Britanny, did first cleare the coūtry frō the Pictes, and Scottes but shortly after ioyning them selues in leage with them, turned their weapon vpon their fellowes that sent for them.
               
               
               The. 15. Chap.
               THe yere of the incarnation of our Lord 4
                     •
                  29.An. 429. 
                  Marcianus
with Valentinian the 46. emperour after August,The first arriuall of English mē in to Britanny
raigned vij. yeres. In whose time the people of the English
or Saxons, being sent for of the sayd kyng in to Britanny,
landed there in iij. longe shipps, and by the kynges commaundement
is appointed to abide in the east part of the land, as to
defende the coūtry like frendes, but in dede, as it proued afterward,
as minding to destroy the country as enemies. Wherefor
encountring with the northen enemy, the Saxons had the better.
Wherof they sending word home in to their country as also
of the batfulnes of the lande and the cowardnes of the Britannes,
the Saxons sent ouer a greater nauy and number of
men better appointed for the warres, which being now ioyned
with the former bande, drew to a stronger army then all the
power of the Britannes was able to ouercomme. These by the
Britannes wer allowed a place to dwell among them, with that
cōdition that they should war for them against their enemies,
and should receiue waiges of the Britannes for their trauailes.
These that cam from beyond the seas, wer iij. of the strongest
natiōs in Germany. That is, the Saxōs, English, the and the Vites.
Of the Vites cam the people of Kent and of the Ile of Wite,Saxons, English and Vites.
and they which in the prouince of the West Saxons or called
vnto this day the nation of the Vites right ouer against the
ile of wite. Of the Saxons, that is of that region which now is
called of the ould Saxons, descēdedThe people of Essex, of Sussex, and of the westcountre. the east Saxons, the south
Saxons and the west Saxons. Of the English, that is of that
country which is called England, and from that time to this is
thought to stande in the middest betwene the Vites and the
Saxons, descendeth the easte English, the vplandish English, the
Marshes and all the progeny of the Northumbers, that is, of

that people which inhabiteth the north side of the flud Humber.The English mē occupied at the first all England except kent, Essex, Sussex, and parte of the westcountre.
The chiefe capitaynes of the Saxons ar sayd to haue ben
ij. brothers, Hengistus and Horsus, Of the which Horsus being
after slayne in battaill of the Britannes, was buried in the east
partes of kent, where his tombe bearing his name is yet to
shew. They wer the sonnes of one Vetgissus whose father was
Vecta, whose father was Voden, of whose ishew many kynges of
sundry prouinces had their originall. Now then great companies
of the sayd nations dayly flocking in to this Iland, they
begā to grow so strōge, that the people of the coūtry which sent
for them stode in great feare of their powessance. And sodaynly
taking leage with the Pictes whom they had now dreuen
farder of,The Redshankes. beganne to turne their force vppon the Brytannes.
And first they require of them more plenty of vittayles, and
pycking matter of falling owt with them, threateneth them
that except they wold prouide them better store,The first spoilyng of Britā
                     ny by the English men. they wold
break of wyth them, and spoyle all the country about. And as
much as they then promised, they after in dede performed. To
be short, the fire once kendled in the handes of the Paganes,
tooke iust reuenge of the wyckednesse of the people: not much
vnlike vnto that fire which being kendled of the Caldees consumed
the citty of Ierusalem. So allso this fire of vengaunce,
the wycked conquerour kendeling it, or rather God the iuste
iudge disposing it, raiged first vppon the citties and countrey
next vnto it, after from the east sea vnto the west, ouer whelmed
all the whole Iland, with out any resistāce made to quēch
it. Both publick and priuat houses were ouerthrowne to the
grownd, the priestes wer slayne standing at the aultar, the bisshops
with their flock wer murdered, without respect of their
dignitie, nor was there any that wold bury the slayne. Sum of
the miserable leuinges being taken in the hilles wer there kylled,
other being sterued with hungre, wer fayne to creape out
of their caues, and buy their vittall at their enemies hands,

with sale of their liberte for euer, if yet they wer not killed owt
of hand. Other fled ouer the seas with a heauy hart. Other taryeng
still in their country in feare of death and lack of foode,
liued full miserably in the mountaines, woddes, and cliffes.
            
            
               
                  How the Britannes obteyned the first victory of the English by the helpe of Ambrosius a Romane.
               
               The. 16. Chapter.
               BVt after that the English men hauing nowe
dryuen owt and disperkled the lande dwellers,
wer come back agayne, the Britannes by litle
and litle begannne to take strength and couraige
vnto them, comyng out of their caues,
in which they lay hidde before, and with one
vniforme consent calling for heauenly helpe, that they might
not for euer vtterly be destroyed. They had then for their capitaine
a Romane called Ambrosius Aurelianus a gentle natured
man, which only of all the blud of the Romans remayned
then a liue, his parentes being slayne, which bore the name of
the kynge of the country. This man being their Capitaine,
they assembled them selues together, and prouokyng the victoures
to the fight, through gods assistance, atcheiued the victory.
And from that day forward, now the men of the country,
n
                     •
                  w the enemye had the victory, vntill the yere that Bathe
was beseiged, where they gaue their enemies a great ouerthrowe,
which was about the xliiij. yere of their comyng in to the
land. But of this we shall speake more here after.
            
            
               
                  How Germanus the bishop, sayling with Lupus in to Britanny ceased first the tempest of the sea, after the stormes of the Pelagian heresies by the power of God.
               
               The. 17. Chapter.
               A Few yeres before the comming of the Saxonnes in to
the lande,Counsell of the catholike the Pelagian heresies being browght in, by
Agricol
                        •
                     
                   the son of Seuerian
                        •
                     s a Pelagian bishop, did

sore corrupte the faith of the Britannes.bishops in Fraunce for extirping of Pelagian
                        •
                      heresy. But the Britānes being
neither willing to receiue their lewde doctrine as blasphemous
against the grace of God, neither able to refute their wylye and
wycked persuasiōs, they deuiseth this holsom coūsel, to seeke for
ayde of the byshops of Fraunce, against these their spiritual enemies.
And they calling a cōmon counsell cōsulted among them
selues, whom of them all it wer best to send to helpe their neybours
faith. By the assent of them all ther was chosen ij. worthy
prelates Germanus Altisiodorensis, and Lupus bishop of the cite
Trecassa, which should passe ouer in to Britanny to confirme
them in the faith, which with reddy obedience accepting the
commaundement of the Synode, tooke shipping thether
ward, and had very prosperous windes vntill they were halfe
way ouer betwene Fraunce and Britanny. Then sodenly as
they wer sayling, the diuell much enuyeng that such men
should goe to recouer the people out of their daūger and winne
them to the right faith of Christ, he rayseth such tempestes
and stormes against them, that a mā could not know day from
night. The sayles ar not able to beare the boysterous fury of
the winde, the marinours being in despair gaue ouer, the ship
was guided rather by the prayer of the good, thē pollice of the
master. The holy bishop Saint Germane at the beginning hereof
was a sleepe,Tempest ceased by prayer and holy water. thē 
                  Lupus and the other wakeneth and calleth
vpon him, as in whose prayers they had a speciall trust. Who seing
the present perill they wer in commaunded them all to fall
to prayer. He him selfe hauing a greater trust in God, then he
had feare of the tempest, calleth vpon Christ, and taking in the
name of the Trinite of a few sprinkles of water, casteth it in to
the sea. And forthwith the rage of the stormes breketh, the surges
falleth, God being called vppon differreth not his help, the
euill sprits ar chaced away, the ayer returneth to his naturall
course, and the wind which of late blustered all against them
now with a mery gale blowing all together with them sett

them shortly after a lande in the place where they them selues
desired. Thether a great multitude of people being assembled
receiued the priestes of God, of whose cumming the wicked
spirites gaue warning long before they landed, which afterward
when they wer expelled out of the obsessed bodies by
the commaundement of these holy seruauntes of God, they
declared bothe the whole order of the tempest whiche they
had raysed and the great daunger which they had wrought
the sayd good bishops, and did not denye but they wer ouercomed
by their merites and commaundement. In short time
after their ariuall, they filled the Ilande with their good name,
their preaching, and their vertues. And the worde of God
was preached by them not only in their churches, but also in
the open stretes and in the country, in such sort that in all
places both the sound, and faithfull catholikes wer confirmed,
and they that before swarued out of the right faith wer amended.
And in short time thourough their authoritie; vertue,
and learning, they brought all the whole country vnder obedience
to their doctrine. The authors and head professours of
hereticall errour lay lurking all this while, and like the wicked
sprites, much spighted to see the people daily to fal from thē.
At lenght after longe aduisement vsed, they taketh vpon them
to trye the matter by open disputation, which being agreed
vpon they come forth richely appointed, gorgiously apparailed,
accompained with a number of flattering fauoures hauing
leifer to committ their cause to open disputing,An open disputatiō betwene Catholikes and heretikes of the pelagian secte in the yeare of our lorde 400. thē to seeme to
the people whom they had subuerted, to haue nothing to sayin
defence thereof. Thether resorted a great multitude of people
with their wynes and children. The people was present both
to se and iudge the matter: the parties therewer farre vnleke of
cōditiō. In the one side was the faith, on the other mās presumptiō:
on the one side meekenes, on the other pride: on the one
side Pelagius, on the other Christ. First of all, the blessed priest

                  Germanus and Lupus gaue their aduersaries leaue to speake,
which vainly occupied both the time and eares of the people,
with naked wordes. But after the Reuerend bishops poored
out their flowing wordes confirmed with scriptures out of the
gospelles and Apostles: they ioyned with their owne wordes
the wordes of god, and after they had said their owne minde,
they read other mens mindes vppon the same. Thus the Vanite
of heretikes is conuicted, and falsehed is confuted, so that
at euery obiection they were forced in effecte to confesse their
errour, not being able to answer them. The people had much
to doe to kepe their handes from them, yet shewed their iudgement
by their clamours.
            
            
               
                  How Germanus restored the blinde daughter of the Tribune to her sight, and after cumming to Saint Albanes shrine did both from thence take sum relikes, and left other of the Apostles or other Martyres there.
               
               The. 18. Chap.
               THis don, sodainly a certaine man of the dignitie of
the Tribunes commeth forth among them, offeringe
them his daughter of x. yeres oulde to be cured, which
was blinde. They bid
                     •
                  e them haue her to the aduersaries. But
they their oune conscience fearing them to take such an enterprise
in hand, ioyneth their praiers together with their parentes,
desiring the priestes to doe their cure vppon the gyrle.
Which seing their aduersaries to yelde, maketh their praiers for
her. And after Germanus full of the holy goste, calleth vppon
the Trinite, and strayte loseth from his nek a litle bugget whiche
he had by his side full of the relliques of the martyres,Relikes of holy Martirs. and
in the sight of them all putteth it to the eyes of the mayden:
which done she strait receiued her sight. The parents much
ioyeth ther at, the people ar all amased at the sight of the miracle.
After that day the saied errors were so pulled out of the
mindes of all men, that with all hart and desire they embraced

the doctrine of the bishops. Thus these damnable heresies
being suppressed, and the authors thereof vtterly confuted, and
all mens myndes instructed with the purite of the faith, they
went vnto saint Albanes,
                  The faith and deuotion of Christen bishops about the yere of our Lord. 400. to geue god the praise and thankes by
him. Wher Germanus hauing reliques of the Apostles and of diuers
Martyres, making his prayer cōmaunded the toumbe to be
opened, entending their to leaue those precious treasures.
Thinking good that the members of the Sainctes gotten in
diuers countries shoulde be buried together in one tumbe, as
being like of merites, they reioyced together with god in heauen
                     •
                  
which being there lefte with much honour he toke of the
dust of the place where the holy Martyrs bloud was shead, and
caried it away with him. Which thinges being thus disposed, a
very great multitude of people was that day conuerted vnto
our Lord.
            
            
               
                  How he being driuen through sycknes to remaine there, did both quench a great fire with his prayer, and was by a vision him selfe healed of his infirmitie.
               
               The 19. Chap.
               AS they were cumming back, it happened by the diuells
procurement, that Saint Germane by meanes
of a sore fall he had, brake his legge. Litle knew the
diuell that by the affliction of the bodye (as it was
in Iob) the merites of the holy man should be thereby the more
encreased. Whiles for the time by the reason of his weaknes
he was faine to tarry stil in one place, the next house he lodged
in, was by chaunce set on fire, so that after it had quickly consumed
the houses about thetched with reede, it was now coming
through the blowing of the winde to the house where this
good man was harboured. Many came running in great haste
to the Bishop,The like Seuer
                        •
                      Sul pi
                        •
                     ius writeth of willing him to make awaye and saue him selfe.
Whō he rebuking through cōfidence in his faith, would not
remoue out of the place he was in. The people al frighted with
feare and dispaire came running to quench the fire. But that

the power of god might appeare the playner,S. Martin. In epist. 2. presixa prologo, in vitā B. Martini. the fire still consumed
what so euer the people sought to saue, but what
the sick man lying in his bed did keepe, that the fire as being
a feared of the holy mans lodging skipped, both aboue and
beneth fearcely burning without stay, so that in the middle of
the raging flakes and flames the house which this weake man
kept, remained sound and vntouched. The people much
ioyed at the miracle, and reioyced in god to see his power to
saue, that their labour could not. Before the cottage of this
poore prelate laye there a multitude of people without number
some to be cured of the maladies of their soules, some of
their bodies. It can not be expressed what miracles Christe
wrought by his seruaunt, and what cures this sick man did. In
the meane suffering no remedies to be applied vnto his owne
infirmities, on a certaine night he sawe a very beutifull persone
cladde all in white apparell, to stande by his bedds side,
which stretching out his hand semed to lyfte him vpp as
he laye in his bedde, and bid him stand vpright vppon his
feete. After which time his paines being asswaged he was
so restored vnto his helth, that as sone as it was day, he tooke
his iourney without feare.
            
            
               
                  How the sayd Bishops by the power of God ayded the Britannes in Battaile and so returned home.
               
               The. 20. Chap.
               IN this meane time the Saxons and the Pictes waged battaile
against the Britannes. Which being assembled together
in the campe and fearing much that they should not
be able to ouermatche them, thei required the helpe of the holy
bishops. Which comming into their campe, put their fearefull
hartes in such confidence, as though a great army had ben
come at that instant to ayde them. Wheruppon they being
their capitaines, Christ warred with them in their campe. This

happened in the xl. daies of lent,The xl. daies of Lēt. which were the more deuoutly
obserued, through the presence of the priestes: in so muche
that they being instructed with daily preaching many of the
countrye came daily to be christened. And the greatest part
of the army required their baptisme. Vppon Easter day they
made in the campe the likenes of a church with poles and
bouse, where they were solemnely baptised. By vertu of whiche
holy sacrament they became feruent in faith and bolde in
hope of goddes strength, which before were in dispaire of their
owne. The ennemies had worde of the maner and fourme
of their campe, and of all thinges done therein. Whereuppon
they thinking to steale vppon them and so easely obtaine the
victory ouer them, as vnwares and vnarmed, maketh all the
haste they could toward them. But yet by skoutes their comming
was knowen in good time. And now the holy daies of
Easter being past, the greatest part of the hoste goeth freshe
frō baptisme to their armour. Among thē Sain
                     •
                   Germane making
him selfe as a capitaine, pieketh out a certaine of light
souldiours, and going forth with them placeth them priuely
in a vally that was beset with hilles on euery side: by the which
it was thought the ennemy wold passe vnto the Britānes cāpe.
Shortly after commeth on the same way the army of the Saxons,
which when they that wer set in the ambush perceiued to
approche, Saint Germane being with them,S. Germain putteth to flight an liōsi
                        ••
                     . of insidels by singīg of lleluia. geueth warning
vnto them all, that as they heard him begynne, all they should
cry and aunswer the same. And sodainly breaking out of the
ambush, the enemy not being ware of them, the priest cried
out thrise together Alleluya. All the rest strayt aunswereth the
same. The Ecko wherof, through the sounde of their voices
rebounding back from the hilles made such a sound, as though
they had ben thrise as many more in number then they wer.
Wherwith their enemies wer so amased, as though not only
the hiller, but heauen it selfe also did cry
                     •
                   out and fight against

them. Where uppon they fled with all the speede they could
make, casting away their weapon, and harneys, and thinking it
inough if they might with their naked bodies eskape the daunger.
Many of them for feare and haste wer drowned in the
riuer which was betwext home and them. The innocent army
behouldeth the reuenge of their enemies, and seith them
selues to haue the Victory without battaile. The souldiers gathereth
vp the spoile, and with great ioye acknolegeth god only
to be the geuer of that ouerthrow. The bishops them selues
triūpheth in God to see the enemy put to flight without bludshed,
and the Victory to haue ben gotten by faith in God and
not by force of man. This the Iland being sett in good order,
the enemies both visible and inuisible being ouercommed,
the bishop returneth home warde: to whom God gaue
prosperous passage both for their owne vertues sake, and also
at the intercession of the blessed martyr saynt Albane.
               
            
            
               
                  How the Pelagian here
                        •
                     ies begynning to spryng againe Germanus returning to Britanny with Seuerus cured a lame young man, corrected the heretikes, restored the faith.
               
               The. 21. Chap.
               NOt longe after was there worde brought owt of the same
Iland that the Pelagian heresies beganne of new to
grow and multiplye, by meanes of certaine whiche began
againe to set furth the same. Againe therfor ar directed to
the bishop the prayers of al the clergy that he wold go through
with the cause of God, which he had taken in hād before. Whose
petition he accepting retourneth again wyth prosperous
windes in to Britanny, with one Seuerus a man of great holynes,
as the which was the disciple of Lupus bishop of Trecassa
and was ordeyned bishop of Treuers, and preached first vnto
that part of the Germans the word of God. In this meane season
the wycked sprittes flieng about the Iland did foreshew euery
where (so forced and constrayned) that Saynt Germane
was comyng. In so much that Elafius one of the cheifest of the

Iland with out the report of any manifest messanger, hasted to
the seas side, their to meete the holy men at their ariuall, bringing
with him his son which in the flower of his youth was benummed
of his leg: which was so shrunke in to his thigh warde,
through the dryth of his sinowes, that he could not set his
fote vppon the ground. With this Elafius cam a great multitude
of people to receiue the holy prelates: which as sone as they
cam a lande, fell a preaching to the people after their wont mā
                  ner.
They finde the people as touching their faith in the self same
stay they lefte them, they learneth the fault to remayne in a
few, after whom they seeke, and finding them owt they condē
                  ne
them. This donne Elafius falleth downe at the feete of the
byshops, offering them his sonne, whose pitefull case neded no
prayers to entrete for the relief thereof. Euery man of him selfe
pityed the young man, especially the priestes, who altogether
(according to the pitie conceiued) beseched the clemency of
God. And forthwith Saynt Germane takyng the younge man
to him, made him sitt downe: he 
                     •
                  ealeth his knee that was
thus bowed inward, and with his blessed hād sercheth thourow
all the affected place, as farre as the greif went. And beholde ech
parte as sone as he touched it, receiued helth, and the sinowes
returned to their naturall course, so that in sight of them all, the
younge man is restored sounde vnto his father. The people ar
all astonyd at the sight of so straunge a miracle, and in all their
harts the catholik fayth therby confirmed.Heretikes banished the countre, sett it in rest and quiet. After that he preacheth
to the people of the redresse of the said heresies. And by
the assent of them all, the first authors thereof ar condemned, to
be banished the land, and ar deliuered vnto the priestes to be cō
                  ueyed
beyound the sea: that by this punishement both the country
might be ridd of them, and they of their heresy. Wherby it
came to passe, that in that places the fayth longe time after remayned
sound and vndefiled. All thinges thus ordered the holy
priestes retourned with like good spede as they came. Saynt

                  Germane after this went to Rauenna to treate for peace for the
people of litle Britanny in fraunce, and there wyth great reuerence
being receiued of Valentinian the emperour and Placidia
his mother he deceased vnto Christ, whose corps wyth an honorable
company was conueyed vnto his owne church not
wythout miracles donne by the way therby. Not long after
Valentinian is kylled of the souldiars of Etius patricius, whom
he had slayne before the syxt yere of Marcianus raygne, with
whom the west empire decayed and came to ruine.
            
            
               
                  How the Britannes being free from all foraine warres, fell at warres with in them selues and to all other myscheifes.
               
               The. 22. Chap.
               AT this time the Britannes wer at peace with all other
forayne ennemies but yet at warres with in them selues.
Their citties and townes lay waste which the ennemies
had destroyed: and they which had eskaped the handes
of the enemies, wer slayne many of them of their owne felowes.
But hauing yet as freshe in mynd the late calamites and slawghters
they sustayned, their priestes peres, and subiectes kept thē selues
sumwhat in order. But after their death, the generation that
followed, litle knowing and lesse regarding the stormes paste in
their fathers dayes and hauing respecte only to that present prosperous
estate in the which they then liued, wer so set to breake al
good orders of truth and iustice, that skant any tokē or remembrance
thereof remayned, but only in few ant that in very few.
Among many other of their horrible doinges, which their owne
historiographer Gildas, doth lamentably set forth in writing, he
sayeth of thē thus, that they neuer tooke care to preache the gospell
of Christ vnto the English and Saxons which inhabited the
land among them. But yet the goodnes of God did not so
forsake his people, whom he foreknew to be saued. But prouided
for the sayd nation of the English much more worthy preachers,

by whome they might be brought vnto his fayth.
            
            
               
                  How Saynt Gregory the Pope sent Saynt Augustine with certaine religious men to conuert the Englishmen, and with letters of exhortation encouraged them in their enterprise.
               
               The. 23. Chap.
               THe yere of chincarnatiō of our Lord 582. Mauritius the
54.S. Gregory sendeth S. Augustin to preache the faith to English men. Emperour after August raigned Emperour of Rome
21. yeres.An. 
                        •
                     . 96. The x. yere of whose raygne, Gregorius being a
mā of the greatest vertu and learning of his time, was thē bishop
of the Romane and Apostolick see, which he gouerned xiij. yeres,
vj. monethes, x. dayes. Which the xiiij. yere of the raygne of
the sayd emperour, and about the hūdreth and fiftyth yere of the
English mēs coming in to Britāny, being moued by inspiratiō
of god there vnto, sent the seruaunt of God, S. Augustine and
certaine other mōkes which feared god with him to preach the
word of God vnto the nation of the English men. Which obeying
the bishops cōmaundement, when they beganne to take the
sayd enterprise in hand, and had allready trauailed part of the
way, they bethought them selues it should be better for them to
returne home againe, then to goe vnto that barbarous and saluage
countrie, whose language they knew not. And thus by
common assent they determined to do, as being the more surer
way. Wher vppon they sendeth Augustine backe againe to the
Pope (whom he had appoynted to be bishop ther if they wer
receiued of the English men) humbly to require him that they
might not go forward in that so vncertaine, so perilous, and
paynfull peregrination. Whom he yet exhorted by letters, that
putting their trust in the helpe of God they should procede in
their good purpose, of the which letters this is the coppy. Gregorius
the s
                        •
                     ruaunt of the seruauntes of God &c.
                  A letter of S. Gregory exhorting S. Augustin to pursue For so much as
better it wer neuer to begynne a good worke, then after it is
once begonne to goe from it againe, yow must nedes (my
deare sonnes) now fullfill the good worke which by the helpe

of God yow haue taken in hand.his iourney to England. Let therfor neither the trauail
of the iourney, neither the talke of euil tōgued mē dismay yow.
But with all force and feruour make vp that yow haue by the
motiō of God begōne, assuring your selues, that after your great
labour eternal reward shal follow. Be yow in al pointes obediēt
vnto Augustine wōh I haue sent back vnto yow, and appoynted
him to be yower Abbate, knowyng that shall much profitt yower
soules, which yow shall do vpon obedience of his commaundement.
Ower almighty Lord defend yow with his grace,
and graunte me to see the frute of your labours in his kyngdom
of heauē: and though I can not labour my selfe wyth yow, yet I
may enioy part of yower reward, for that I haue a wil to labour.
God kepe yow helthy my deare beloued children, dated the. 23.
of Iuly, ower Lord Mauricius Tiberius raigning, ower most
vertuous emperour, in the xiiij. yere of his empier, the xiij. yere
after his Consullship, Indictione 14.
            
            
               
                  How he sent to the bishopp of Arells a letter to receiue them.
               
               The. 24. Chap.
               HE sent also at the same time letters vnto Etherius archbishop
of Arells that he should fauorably entertaine
Augustine going in to Britāny of the which letters this
is the tenor. To the Right Reuerend and most holy, his brother and
felowe bishop Etherius, Gregory the seruaunte of the seruauntes of
God. Though with such priestes as loueth god, religious men
nedeth no commendation, yet bycause oportunite to write did
serue, we thought it good to directe our letters to your brotherhood:An other letter of S. Gregory to the Archebishop of Aerls.
aduertising yow that we haue sent Augustine the bearer
herof wyth other seruauntes of god accompanyeng him for the
helth of soules: whom it behoueth yower holines to helpe and
comfort as the holy order of priesthood requireth. Ant to thentēt
yow may be the better willing so to doe, I haue willed him to
discouer vnto yow the cause of his iourney, not dowting but
that knowen, yow wil gladly shew him what comfort you may.

We commend also vnto your charitie ower common son Candidus
priest, whom we haue sent to ouersee ower church belonging
to ower patrymonye. God kepe yow in safete reuerēd brother.
Datum vt supra.
               
            
            
               
                  How that Augustine cumming in to Britanny first preached vnto the kyng of kent in the Ile of Tenet, and so being licenced of him cam after in to kent to preache.
               
               The. 25. Chap.
               AVgustine being muche encouraged wyth the comfort
of S. Gregorie returned to preache the word of God
with the seruauntes of Christ which wer with him
and came in to Brytanny. Ethelbert at that time was kyng of
kent a man of greate powessance, as the whiche had enlarged
the fruntures of his empier as far as the greate flud Humber
by the whiche the west and northe Englishe ar diuided.The ile of Tenet At
the easte ende of kent there is the Ile of Tenet. 600. miles
in cumpasse, according to the estimation of Englishe
miles, whiche Ilande is parted from the lande by the flud
VVantsome whiche is of iij. furlonges bredthe and in ij. places
only passable: for bothe the heddes of him runeth in
to the sea. In that Iland was Augustine set on land, and
his fellowes, to the number of almost forty persons. They
tooke withe them certayne Frenche men to be theyr interpretours
according as Gregorye had commaunded. And sendinge
vnto the kynge Ethelbert, they sent him worde, that they came
from Rome, and that they brought him very good tydinges,
that is to wytt, that such as shoulde followe and obey his doctrine,
they shoulde enioye an euerlasting kyngdome in heauen
with the true and liuing God. Whiche hearing this,
commaunded that they shoulde tarry in the said Iland, hauing

                     
                     The first face, shewe, and maner of preaching the ghospel to vs Englishmen,
by S. Augustin our Apostle, in the presence of Elbert
then kinge of kent &c, An. 596.
                  
                  
all thinges necessary ministred vnto them, vntill they shoulde
heare farder of his pleasure. For the brute of Christian religion
had come before vnto him, as the whiche had maried a
Christian woman of the countrye of Fraunce named Bertha,
whome he maried with these conditions taken of her parents,
that it shoulde be laufull for her to kepe vnbroken the rites of
her faythe and religion, wyth her bysshope Luidharde by name,
whome they appoynted her, to assiste and helpe her in matters
of her faythe. Wythin fewe dayse herof the kynge came
vnto the Iland: and sitting a brode, he bid Augustine with
his fellowes to come to common wyth him. He wold
not suffer him to come vnto him into any house, least if they
wer skilfull in sorcery they might the rather deceiue him and
preuaile against him.Our faith begann with Crosse and procession. But they came not armed with the force
of the diuell, but endewed withe the strength of God carying
before them in place of a banner, a Crosse ofsyluer and the image
of ower Sauiour paynted in a table, and singing the letanies,
prayed bothe for themselues, and also for them to whome and
for whose sake they came thether. And when they sitting
downe as the kyng did byd them, preached vnto him the worde
of life, and also to all his houshoulde there present, he answered
them saying yow geue vs very fayer wordes and promisses:
but yet for that they ar straunge and vnknowen vnto me, I
can not rashly assent vnto them, forsakyng that auncient
religion whiche this longe both I and my people haue obserued.
But for so much as yow ar come so far to thentent yow
might part vnto vs suche knowleadge as yow take to be right
true and good, we will not seeke yower troble, but rather wyth
all courtesey receiue yow, and ministre yow such thinges as
ar behouefull for yower liuelioud. Nether do we let, but that
yow may wynne vnto yower profession wythe yower preaching
as many as yow canne. He allowed them therfore a lodging

in the cittye of Cantorbury, whiche was the head cittye of
his dominion, and as he promised, prouided them of necessaries,
and freely licenced them to preach. It is sayd that as they approched
neare the citty, hauing the crosse and image of our
kyng and Sauiour Iesus Christ caried as their maner was, before
them, they songe all in one tune this letany following. VVe
beseche the o Lord for thy great mercy sake that thy furye and thyn
angre may be taken from this citty, and from thy holy house, bycause
we haue synned. Alleluya.
               
            
            
               
                  How the sayd Austen liuing in kent did follow the primatiue church both in teaching and liuing, and of Caūterbury the place of the kinges abode was created Bishop.
               
               The. 26. Chapter.
               AFter they wer now entred in to their lodging, they began
to expresse the very Apostolik order of liuing of
the primitiue church,The life of our Apostles
and first preac
                        •
                     ers. seruing God in continuall prayer,
watching, and fasting, and preaching the worde of life to
as many as they could, despising the commodities of the worlde,
as thinges none of their owne, taking of them whom they
instructed only so much as might serue their necessities, liuing
them selues according to that they taught other, and being
ready to suffer both troubles and death it selfe in defense of
the truth they taught. Wherebye many did beleue and wer
baptised, maruailing much at the simplicite of their innocent
liuing, and the sweetnes of their heauenly doctrine. There
was at the east ende of the citty an auncient church buylt in
the honor of saint Mar
                        •
                     ine, made while the Romans wer
yet dwelling in England, in the which the quene (which as we
haue sayd was a Christen woman) did vse commonly to pray.
They also resorted commonly to the sayde church and began

there first to syng seruice,Our first Apostle sayed masse. The first Christening of Englishemen in Caunterbury. say masse, pray, preache, and christen,
vntill such time as the kyng being conuerted vnto the faith they
receiued more ample licence to preach where they would, and
either to buylde of new or repayre owld churches. But when
the kyng him selfe being much delighted wyth the purite of
their life and thexample of their godly conuersation, as also
with their swete promises (which to be true thei proued by the
working of many miracles) did beleue and was baptised, there
began more and more dayly to resort vnto their sermons and
renouncing the rites of their owld gentilite, to ioyne them selues
by the fayth to the vnitie of the holy church of Christe. Of
whose faith and cōuersion though the king much reioyced, yet
he would force none to becomme Christian, but only shew
him selfe in outward apparance more frendly vnto the faithfull
as companions of one kingdome of heauen with him. For
why? he had learned of these his masters that the seruice of
Christ must be voluntary and not forced. And without any
farder delay he appointed out for his sayd doctours a place and
see semely for their degrees in his head citty of Cantorbury, and
gaue them possessions necessary for the maintenance therof.
            
            
               
                  How he being created bishop did aduertise Gregory the Pope of such thinges as he had don in Britanny, and required his counsell vppon certaine incident cases,
               
               The. 27. Chap.
               AFter this the seruaunt of God Augustine came to Arles,
where of Etherius Archebishoppe of the sayd citty,
he was created Archebisshop of the nation of the Enhlish
men, according as S. Gregory the Pope had commaunded.
And returning vnto Britanny, he sent forthwith Laurence
priest and Peter monke vnto Rome, which should make relation

vnto saint Gregory, how that the English men had receiued
the faith and he made their bishop,This chapter is ful of much good lerning and godly instructiōs. and also required his
aunswer vppon certaine doubtes necessary for him to be informed
of, wher of with out delay he receiued aunswer. Which
we thought good to put in to this our history.
               The interrogatories of Augustine bishop of the church of
Cantorbury. First how the bishops should behaue them selues
among their clergy, and how the offeringes of the faithfull vppon
the aultar should be distributed. And what is the bisshops
office in the church. Gregory the Pope aunswered. The holy
scripture testifieth as I am sure yow know, and specially the
Epistles of Saint Paule vnto Timothe, in the which he goeth
about to enstructe him,The Sea Apostolike. after what sorte he ought to be conuersaunt
in the house of God. The maner of the see Apostolik
is, to geue commaundement vnto suche as be made bishops,
that all maner oblations that ar geuen be diuided in to iiij. portions.
And the one therof geuen vnto the bishop towards his
hospitalite, thother to the clergy, the third to the poore, the
fourth to the reparation of the churches. But for so much as
you being brought vp vnder regular discipline,S. Augustin our Apostle was a mōke. must not by
the order of yower rule, liue a part from yower clerg
                     •
                  e, in the
church of the English which is as yet but newly entered in to
the faith of Christ, you must follow that trade and forme of
lyuing, which was vsed in the primatiue church among the
fathers, amonge whom there was none that sayd that to be
his owne which he possessed, but al their thinges wer cōmon.
And if there be any amonge the clergy out of holy orders
which can not liue chaste,The clergy ou
                        •
                      of holy orders taketh wiues. they shall take wiues and haue their
stipend allowed them without. For of the same partes of
which we haue spoken of before, we know it is written, that it
was diuided to euery man according as he had nede. You must
also think and prouide for their stipend: and they ar to be
kepte vnder the ecclesiasticall rule, and seene vnto, that they

liue honestly, and plye their psalmo
                     •
                  ye, and kepe both hart,
tongue and bo
                     •
                  y from all vnlaufull chinge through the grace
of God. As for them that liueth after the common 
                     •
                  ort,
what nede I to speake, ether what portions they shall geue,
ether what hospitalite they shall kepe, ether what worke of
mercy they shall fulfill? Seing it is commaunded that all which
is superfluous, should be employed vppon godly vses, according
as our Lorde the master of vs all doth teach vs, Quod superest
date eleem
                        •
                     sinam & omnia munda erunt vobis,
                  Luc. 11. of that which
is left geue almes, and all shalbe cleane vnto you.
               
                  Augus
                        •
                     ines demaunde. Where as there is but one faith, why be
there so many sundry customes of churches? And one custome
of masses is obserued in the holy church of Rome, an other
in Fraunce?
               
                  Gregorius pope answereth. Yower brotherhood knoweth the
custom of the church of Rome in the which you wer brought
vp.The order of the English seruice chosē out of other diuers countres for the best. But it pleaseth me that if you haue founde any thing be it
other in the church of Rome, Fraunce, or any other, that may
more please god, that you cheuse that, and plant in the English
churche which as yet is but late come to the faith, the best orders
that you can cheuse, and gather out of them all. For the
thinges ar not to be loued for the place, but the place is to be
loued for the good things tha
                     •
                   ar in it. Cheuse then out of
eche church, and that that is most godly, most religious, moste
best in any of them, that being gathered together as it
were in a boundell deliuer vnto them, and inure them there
vnto.
               
                  The question of Augustine. I praye you how shall he be punished
which taketh any thing away from the churche?
               
                  Gregorius aunswereth.
                  Of church 
                        •
                     obberies. That you may consider by the person
of the these. For there be some which hauing otherwise to liue,
yet steleth, and some other there be, which are driuen thereunto
by nede. Whereby some must be merced with fines, some

must be punished with stripes, and 
                     •
                  ome fauorably, some sharply
corrected. And when sharpe punishement is excercised, it
must be done in charite, not in fury. For therfor the man is punished
that he might not be damned in hel fire. And so we must
chastise our brothers offending, as the good fathers doth their
carnall children, whom though they punish for their fawtes,
yet they seeke to haue them their heires, whom they punish,
and their possessions they kepeth for them, whom they seme to
chasten in their anger. This charite therfore is euer to be kept
in mind, and according to it correction is so to be measured,
that the minde excedeth not the rule of reason. Thow shalt
also tell them, that they must make restitution of such thinges
as ar taken from the church. But god forbid, that the churche
should looke to receiue with encrease of gaine such earthly
thinges, as hath ben taken from them.
               
                  The question of Augustine. Whether ij. german brothers may
marry two systers which be many degrees from them?
               
                  Gregorius aunswereth. That may be done lawfully by all
meanes, for there is nothing found in the scripture to the contrary.
               
                  The question of Augustine. Vnto what generation may the
Christians mary with their kindsfolke?
               
                  Gregorius aunswereth. It is permitted by a certaine law of the
Romanes that brothers and sisters children may laufully be
ioyned together in wedlock. But experience sheweth that of
such wedlocke their can growe no children, and the holy lawe
forbiddeth that we should reuele the turpitude of our kindered.
Wherefor it is necessary that it be the third or the fourth
generation that should be permitted to marrye. As for the
second must in any wise forbeare one from the other.
To marry with our steppe mother, it is a greuous offen
                     •
                  e, for
it is written in the law.Leuit. 18. 
                  Thou shalt not reuele the tupitude of thy
father. The sonne can not 
                     •
                  euele the turpitude of his father.

But bycause it is written,Gen. 2. 
                  They shal be two in one fleshe, he that
presumeth to reuele the turpitude of his steppe mother, whiche
was one flesh with his father, he truly reueleth the turpitude of
his father. It is also forebidden the to marry with thy brothers
wife, for that by her former mariage she was one flesh with
thy brother, for whiche cause Iohn Baptiste was behedded
and suffered holy martyrdome. To whom though it was not
sayd, that he should deny Christe, yet was he killed for the confession
of Christe. For in that oure Lorde Iesus Christe sayd
I am the truth, for that he was killed for the truth, he shed his
bloud also for Christ. And whereas there be many of the
English people, which whiles they were yet infideles, were thus
vnlawfully coupled, when they commeth to the faith they are
to be warned, that they forbeare, and take it to be a right greuous
offense. Teache them to feare the dredfull iudgementes
of God, least for vnlaufull carnall loue they runne in dawnger
of hell fyre. And yet for this are they not to be kept from
the communion of the body and bloud of our Sauiour Christe,
least you may seeme to punish such thinges in them, which
they committed by ignorance before their baptisme. For at
this present time the holy church with a zele doth punish some
thinges, some other of a mekenes it doth tolerat, at some
other it winketh vppon consideration. Yea it so beareth and
dissembleth, that the euill which it hateth, by bearing and dissembling
it redresseth. All such as commeth to the faith, ar
to be warned that they committe no such thing, and if they
then doe, they are to be restrained from receiuing the sacramēt.
For as they are sumwhat to be borne withall which of ignorance
doth offend, so they are sharply to be corrected, which wittingly
feare not to syn.
               
                  Augustines question. If the bishops ar so far a part one from the
other, that they can not conueniently assemble together, whether
one may be ordained a bishop without the presence of other

bishops?
               
                  Gregorius aunswereth. In the church of England in which
thou only art as yet a bishop, thou canst ordaine none, but
without other bishops. For when come there any bishops oute
of Fraunce which might assist you in ordaining bishops? We
will therefore you ordaine bishops, but so that they may not
be one far from an other, that there be no such necessitie, but
that they may hereafter come together at the creation of other.
The Curats also whose presence may do good ought easely
come together. When then by the helpe of god, the bishops
shall be so made that they shall not be far a sunder one from
the other,Of creatīg of bisshops. there shall be no bishop created without iij. or iiij.
bishops assembled together. For in spirituall matters howe
they may be wiselye and prouidently disposed, we may take example
of carnall matters. We see when mariages ar solemnized
in the worlde, other that ar maried ar called there vnto that
such as were married before, should ioye with such as are married
after. Why then may it not be like in this spirituall ordinance
(in the which by spirituall ministerie a man is ioyned
vnto God) that such then should resort together, whiche ether
may reioyce of the worthines of him that is made bishop, or
may pray together vnto god for his continuance?
               
                  Augustines question. How shall we deale with the bishops of
Britanny and Fraunce?
               
                  Gregorius answereth. We geue the none authorite ouer the
bishops of Fraunce, for that of auncient time, of my predecessours
the bishop of Arles receiued his palle,The See of Rome. whom we must
not bereue of his authorite. And if it chaunce you therfor to go
to Fraunce, you shall treate with the said bishop of Arles, how
such defaultes as ar in the bishops may be redressed. Who if he
be negligent in the execution of ecclesiasticall discipline, you
must moue him and prick him forward there vnto: to whom
also we haue written, that ioyning with you being there present

he will do his endeuoure, to reforme the maners of the
bishops in such thinges, as ar contrary to our Lordes commaundement.
You by youre owne authoritie haue nothing to
doe in sitting vppon the bishops matters. But yet by courteously
entreating them, by counselling them, by geuing good
example for them to follow, you may reforme to vertue the
mindes of the euell disposed. For why? It is written in the law,
he that passeth through an other mans feilde, shall not thrust
his syckle in to his corne, but rubbe the eares with his hande,
and so eate them. Neither canst thou thrust the syckle of iudgment
into the corne that is committed vnto an other mans
charge, but with the example of thy well doing, thow mayst
rub of the chaffe of syn from gods corne, and by treating and
persuading with them, conuert them to the body of the church
of Christ, as a man doth the meate he eateth, in to his owne.
But what so euer ther is to be don by authori
                     •
                  e, let it be don by
the sayd bishop of Arles: least that order should be broken
which was ordayned by the auncient institution of oure forefathers.The primacy of Caunterbury in England.
As for all the bishops of Britany, we commit thē vnto
your charge, that the vnlerned by holsom doctrine may be
instructed, the weake by good persuasions may be strengthened,
the froward by iust authorite may be corrected.
               
                  Augustines question. Whether a woman that is great with
childe may be baptised? Or how long after she is brought a
bed, shall she tarry er she be receiued in to the church? And the
childe that is borne, how longe shall it tarry er it be baptised
lest it be preuented by death? Or how long after she is brought
a bed, shall her husband forbeare her carnall company? Or if
she be in her monethly desease, whether she may cum to the
church or be receiued to the mystery of holy communion?
Or the mā after he hath carnally knowen his wife, whether he
may enter in to the church before he hath washed him self with
water, or receiue the mystery of the holy communion? Of all

the which the rude English nation had nede to be informed.
               
                  Gregorius answereth. I doubt not but you haue ben required
counsell in their matters, and I think also I haue made
you already aunswer herein. Yet that which youerselfe could
say and thinke herein, I think you wold haue it confirmed
with my aunswer. The woman with child, why should she not
be christened, seing to be teeming is no synne before the eyes
of allmighty God? For our first fathers, when they had synned
in paradise by the right iudgment of God, they lost the
immortalite which they had receiued. And for so much as
God wold not vtterly destroy mankynd for his syn in punishment
of his syn, he tooke from him the benefite of immortalite.
And yet of his mercy and goodnes he reserued vnto
him the encrease of issue. That then which of the gift of God
is reserued vnto the nature of mā, by what reason should it be
restrained from the grace of baptisme? For in that sacrament
by the which all syn is vtterly taken away, it is great folly to
think any man to be restrayned from the gift of that grace
which is willing to receiue it. When the woman is deliuered,
how many daies after she shall cum to the church it is plaine
to be knowen by the commaundement of the ould testament
which saith thus.Leuit. 12. 
                  The woman which hath borne a male childe shall
remaine xxxiij. daies in the blud of her purification
                        •
                      she shall towch
no holy thing nor shall enter into the sanctuary, vntil the daies of her
purification be fulfilled. But if she haue brought fourth a femal child,
lxvj. dayes she shall remaine in the blud of her purificatiō. Which yet
is to be knowē that it is taken in mistery: for if the same hower
that she is deliuered she should cum to the church, she should
run in no danger of gods displeasure. For it is the pleasure
of the flesh not the paine that causeth the syn. The plesure is
in begetting the childe, but bearing is the paine and trauaile.
Wher vppon it was sayed vnto oue
                     •
                   first mother which first

brake gods commaundement. I shall multiply thy pangues and
paines and thou shalt bring fourth in sorowe.
                  O
                        ••
                     . 3. If then we forebid
the womā which is deliuered, to cū to the church, we make as
though her paine wer her syn. By no waies then it is forbidden
to christen ether the woman that is deliuered, or the childe
wherof she is deliuered, yea the very first hower ether of the
deliuery of the one, ether of the birth of the other, if any of
them both be in perill of death. For the grace of the sacramēt,
as it is to be geuen vnto the liuing with great discretiō, so
is it to be offred without delay to thē which draweth toward
their death: lest while time conuenient to geue the mystery of
our redemption is looked and taried for, by meanes of delay
the partie dye before he may receiue the sayed benefit. Nether
shall the man carnally accompany with his wife, vntill the
child that is borne be weaned. But now by a corrupte custom,
the wemen refuse to nourse the children borne of their owne
body: which seme to haue ben found out only of incontinence:
for therfore they refuse to nourse their owne children,
by cause they will not forbeare the company of their husbandes.
Wherfor such as of an euill custome do put out their children
to nourse, shall not lye with their husbande vntill the
daise of her purification be fully complet. Also in the time of
of her flowers they ar forbid to cōpany with their husbande.
So that the ould law doth punish thē which hath to doe with
a woman being in that case. Which woman yet neuerthelesse
is not then forbidden to cum to the church, because the superfluite
of nature can not be imputed for syn: and for that she
suffereth that against her will, it is no reason she should be restrained
from cūming into the church. For we know that the
womā which was deseased with the bluddy flix coming hūbly
behind our lord,Luc. 8. touched the hem of his garment, and by
and by she was cured of her said infirmite. If then the woman
which had the bluddy flix, might laufully touch the garment

of our Lord, why may not she enter into the church which
suffereth her monethly flours? But you will say: as for her, her
malady forced her to seeke remedy, this other is taken of
her customable sycknes.Of natural infirmities. Consider this with thy selfe deare
brother, that all that we suffer in this mortall flesh by feblenes
of nature, it was by the iust iudgement of God ordained after
our syn. As hunger, thrist, heate, cold, werinesse, procedeth of
the infirmite of nature. And what other thing is it to seeke
foode against hunger, drinck against thirst, open ayre against
heate, garmente against colde, rest against wearinesse,
but to take medicine againste sycknes? So vnto the woman
that monthly course of her body is a desease. If then
she did well presume which being sycke touched the garment
of our Lorde, that which is graunted to one woman, why
should it not be graunted vnto all other, which by nature ar
greued with like sycknesse? Nether shall she be forebidden in
the sayd daies to receiue the holy sacrament: but if of a great
reuerence which she hath there vnto, she will not presume to
receiue it, she is the more to be praised: but if she doe receiue
it, she is the lesse to be iudged.Note. For it is the point of well disposed
mindes there to acknoledg their fault sum times, where
there is none in dede. For many times that is committed without
fault, which yet proceded of a fault. Where vppon to eate
when we ar hungry is no faute, and yet hungar began and
sprange first of the syn of our first father. And that mounthely
custome is no syn to the woman, for that it happenyth naturally.
But yet bycause nature is so corrupted, that without
the mans will, it semeth to be defiled, it had his first originall
of syn, and remaineth as a punishment, to thintent man might
now know what he is becum through the iustice of God by
syn. And that man which did cōmit sinne with his wil, should
feele the punishment of syn against his wil. And therfor wemen
when they do consyder them selues herin, if they mekely

refuse to cum to the sacrament of the body and bloud of
Christ, they ar to be commended of their good consideratiō:
But if of a good custome, of a religious lif, they haue a feruent
desire to cum vnto the holy misteries, they ar not to be
forbidden, as I haue sayd before.Differēce betwene the new testament and the old lawe. Math. 15. For as in the ould testament
outward workes ar to be obserued, so in the new testament
that is not so muche regarded which is outwardly don,
as that which is inwardly intended. For where as the lawe
forbiddeth vs to eate many meates as vncleane, yet in the gosspell
our lord sayeth: not that which entereth in to the mouth, defileth
the man, but that cummeth out of the mouth that defileth the
the man: And shortly he sayeth expounding the same: out of the
harte cometh euil thoughts. Where it is sufficiētly declared that to
be vncleane before God which springeth out of the root of an
vncleane hert. Wheuppon Saint Paule also saieth, that to the
cleane all thing is cleane: but vnto the vncleane and the infidele nothing
is cleane.
                  Ad Titū. 1. And strayt after he putteth the cause of that vncleanes:
For their minde and conscience (sayth he) is defiled. If then
the meat be not vncleane vnto him which hath not an vncleane
mind, why then that which the woman hauing a pure
mynd doth suffer of nature, shal be imputed vnto her as impurite?
As for the man which slepeth with his owne wife,
shall not cum in to the church except he be washed with water.Leuit. 15.
The law commaundeth the olde people, that the man which
hath had to doe with his wife, shal both wash him selfe with
water, and not enter the church before the going downe of
the son. Which saying yet maye spiritually be construed: for
then spiritually the man hath to d
                     •
                  e with the woman, when
the minde doth delite him selfe with vncleane thoughts of vnlaufull
lust. And except this fire of lust be quenched, he shall
not think him self worthy the company of the faithfull brethern,
which findeth him selfe possessed with vnchaste desires.
Though of this thinge diuers countries ar of diuers myndes,

and sum vseth one thing, sum an other, yet the maner of the
Romans was euer of auncient time, after the company of
their owne wyues both to purify them selues in the bath, and
of reuerence a while to forbeare cumming in to the church.
We say not this for that we take mariage to be syn.VVhether in the acte of mariage be any sinne. But for
that the very laufull company of man and wife is not without
pleasure of the flesh: and that pleasure can not be all together
without sum syn. For he was not borne of aduoutry
or fornication but of laufull wedlocke which sayeth:Psal. 50. 
                  Behold
I am begotten in iniquite, and my mother hath conceiued me
in syn. He which knewe him selfe to haue ben conceiued
in syn, mourned to remember his synfull byrthe.
For the tree doth beare in his braunches, the corrupte humours
which he drew of the roote. In the which wordes yet he
dothe not call the carnall company of man and wife synne,
but the pleasure therein. For there be many thinges, whiche
of them selues be lawfull and allowable, and yet in the doing
of them we ar sumwhat defiled. As oftentimes being angry we
punish other mens faultes, whereby the calmnes of our mind is
troubled: and though it be well done that we doe, yet is it not
well that in doing it our minde is putt out of quiet.Psal. 30. For he was
angry with the vice of the offenders, which said, Myne eye is
troubled with anger. For whereas the minde can not lift him self
vp vnto the light of contemplation, except it be still and quiet,
therefore he sorowed to see his eye distempered with anger.
For while he was forced to looke downeward to punish the
transgressours, he was forced also to be withdrawen from the
contemplation of thinges which are aboue. So then it is a
commendable thing to be moued with anger against synne,
and yet is it a grief and a hinderance to the well disposed minde: for
in that he hath ben angry, he knoweth that he hath offended.
Wherefore, to come to the purpose, the right vse of carnall
company betwene man and wife, is to come together for

procreation of children, not for lust and pleasures sake. And if
any man doth vse his wife not for carnall pleasure, but to the
ende of procreation only, this man truly is to be left vnto his
owne discretion, both for comming vnto the church and also
for receiuing of the holy sacrament of the body and bloud of
our Lord. For he is not to be kept ether from the one or the other,
which being in the fire yet can not be burned. But when
on the contrary, not the desire of issue, but the pleasure of the
body beareth the chiefest rule in the worke of copulation, they
haue both cause to bewaile their frailte. For thoughe the worde
of god did graunt them so much, yet doth it not so graunt it
them, that they should be out of feare of offence.1. Co
                        •
                     . 7. For as saynt
Paule writing to the Corinthians sayeth, he that can not liue
chaste let him haue his wife, so he strayt sayeth farder, I say this as
tolerating, not commaunding. There is no toleration of that
which is laufull of it selfe. Wherfore in that he vseth this worde
tolerate, he sheweth it to be faulty. It is well to be pondered that
our Lord entending to speake vnto the people in the mounte
of Sina gaue commaundement they should first abstaine from
wemen.Exod 19. And if the purite of the body were there so earnestly
required, where our Lord by meanes of his creature did speake
vnto men, that they whiche should heare the worde of God
should be free from wemē, how much more the wemen which
receiue our Lord almighties body, shall seke to preserue in thē
selues the clennes of the bodie, least they may take hurt by the
greatnes of that vnestimable mistery?
                     
                        ••
                      Regū. 21. Herof also is it said by the
priest vnto Dauid as touching his seruaūts, that if they wercleane
from wemē they should eate of the sew bred, which otherwise
they should not be suffered to take, except Dauid would
say that they wer pure from wemen. Thē the mā bathed in the
water after the carnall knowledge of his wife may be admitted
to the sacramēt, whē it is tried that he may come to the church.
               
                  Augustines question. Whether after the illusion which is wont

to befall vnto a man in his dreame, a lay man may receiue the
body of our Lorde, or a priest may say masse?
               
                  Gregorius answereth.
                  Of nightly pollutiōs or i
                        •
                     
                     lusions. The testament of the ould law, as we
haue aboue sayd, saithe him to be defiled, and suffereth him not
to enter the church before euening, and not but first bathed.
Which thing the spirituall people otherwise vnderstanding,
shall take it in like sense as we haue aboue declared. For he is
deluded as it were by dreame, whiche being tempted with vnclenesse,
is defiled with true imaginations in his thought. But
he washith him selfe with water, that is, he washeth away with
teares the filth of his thoughtes: And except the fire of temptation
go out, let him take him selfe guilty as it were vnto the euening.
But in this maner of elusions, there is a difference to
be had. For a man must narrouly search and discusse him selfe,
of what cause this thing commeth into his minde, when he is
a sleape. For sometimes it commeth of surfet, sometimes of superfluite
or weakenes of nature, and somtimes also of vncleane
thoughtes. When it commeth of the superfluite or infirmite of
nature, it is nothing at all to be feared. For the minde in this 
case more soroweth that it hath willingly suffered, then that it
hath any thinge wittingly committed. But when it hath risen
thourow inordinat excesse of diet, wherby the vessels of theseminall 
humours ar replenished, the minde thereby is not cleare
and voide of fault: yet it is not guilty of so great fault, that the
mā thereby is to be withholden, ether from receiuing of the sacrament,
ether from saying of masse. Bicause it may happē that
ether it is holy day, ether of necessite the partye must say masse,
for that there is no other priest to be gotten in that place.
And if there be other at hand, yet the illusion comming
only of surfet, is no sufficient cause to make a man forbeare the
receite of the holy mysteries. Yet from the offering of the holy
sacrifice he ought (as I thinke) meekely forbeare, though not
from receiuing
                     •
                   except the minde withall be defouled with some

vncleane phantasies. And though the partye do not remember,
that in his dreame he sustayned any such phantasies, yet by
his owne iudgement he is not guyltles, if in the dayes before, he
remembreth he had offended in gluttonous feding of the body.
 But if it riseth of any foule thoughtes, which he had wakyng,
the offence is open and manifest of it self. For he doth see owt
of what roote that pollution did spring. For the euell that he
wittingly thought vppon, that vnwittingly he committed.
 But here agayne we must consider, whether that thought
sprang of suggestion, of delite, or of consent. For by these three
all maner of synne is fulfilled. Suggestion is by the diuel, delite
by the flesh:Suggestiō Delight. Consent. consente by the spirite: The diuell was the first
prompter to synne. Eua as it wer the flesh took delite therin.
Adam as it wer the spirite consented. And herin is requisite
great discretion, that the mynde as iudge ouer him selfe should
discerne betwext suggestion and delite, betwext delite and
consent. For when the wycked fend doth rayse the first motions
vnto synne in ower harte,How sin bredeth in the hartes of mē. if there follow no delite therin
in the mynde, there is no synne at all committed. But when
the flesh begynneth to take delite therin, then synne begynneth
to springe: If then aduisedly he doth agree thereunto,
then syn is perfyted. So that in suggestion is the begynning, in
delite the feeding, in consent the finishing of synne. And it
ofte chaunceth that the euill, that the diuell soweth in the
thought, the flesh therin deliteth, add yet the soule doth not
agree ther vnto. And though the flesh can fele no delite without
the soule, yet the soule stryuing against the pleasures of
the flesh, is against his will hampred with the plesure of the
flesh in such sorte, that with reason he doth gaynsaye and not
agree vnto it, and yet is bound with delite, but so that he much
lamenteth his bande. Wher vppon that principall champion
of the heauenly army S. Paule, bewayled him selfe saying:Rom. 7. 
                  I
fynd a law in my lymmes, repining against the law of my mynd and

leading me away prisoner in the law of synne which is in my lymmes.
If he wer prisoner, then he did not fight: and if he did fight
why was he prisoner? He then stryued wyth the law of his
mynd, against the which the lawe of his flesh dyd fyght. Then
if he fought, he was not in bondes. Man therefore is both bonde
and free: free throwgh righteousnes which he loued, and
bonde throwgh the delite, which he boare against his will.
These be the aunswers of holy pope Gregory vnto the demaundes
of the reuerent bishop Augustine. The epistle which he
had addressed vnto the byshop of Arles, and sent after to Vergilius
the successor of Etherius here followeth.
            
            
               
                  The Epistle of S. Gregorie vnto the byshop of Arles that he should ayde Augustine in the worke of God.
               
               The. 28. Chapter.
               
                  GRegorius the seruaunt of the seruauntes of God sendeth
greeting vnto the reuerent and his holy brother Vergilius
bisshop. With what affection ower brothers cumming
of their owne accorde vnto vs ar to be enterteyned, it
may thereby well appere, for that many times we ar wont to
byd them vnto ower house for charites sake. If therfor it chaunceth
yower brother and myne Agustine byshop to cum
vnto yow, I pray yow receiue him with such harty and frendly
enterteynement, that both he thereby may honorably be comforted,
and other tawght how brotherly charite is to be mayntayned.
And for that it often tymes chaunceth that they which
be far of, shall soner learne by reporte of other such thinges as
ar to be reformed where we ar, then we ower selfes, if it be so
that yow heare by him of thinges among yower priestes or
other, worthy to be redressed, sytting in examination of the
parties faultye wyth him, make diligent search and scrutenye
thereof. And in such thinges as offendeth God and prouoketh
his wrath, shew yower selfe so houfull and harde to be entreated,
that both to the feare of other, the offendours be punished,

and the innocent throwgh false surmises be not oppressed. God
kepe yow in helth Reuerend brother. Geuyn the xx. of August,
the xviij. yere of the raygne of our good lord and Souerayne
Mauritius Tiberius Emperour. Indictione quarta.
               
            
            
               
                  How the sayd Gregory sent vnto Augustine a palle with a letter, and more preachers.
               
               The. 29. Chapter.
               FArder more the sayd Pope (for so much as Augustine had
aduertised him that ther was a great haruest and few workemen)
sent him wyth his sayd legates, more preachers,
of which the chiefest wer Mellitus, Iustus, Rufinianus: And by
them also he sent all such thinges which wer necessary for the
furniture ad ministery of the church: As holy vesselles, aultarclothes,
ornamentes for the churches: Apparell also for the priestes
and clergy. Also reliques of the holy Apostles and martyres
and many bookes. He sent him also letters by the which he
signifieth vnto him that he hath sent him a palle, and enstructeth
him what order he should kepe in making of Byshops in
the country of Britanny: of which letters this is the tenor. To
his most reuerend and holy brother Augustine bishop, Gregorius
the seruaunt of the seruauntes of God. Though such as
labour in the worke of God, may assuredly hope that god
doth reserue for them vnspeakeable reward in the kyngdom
of heauen, we neuerthelesse stand bound temporally also to
honour and reward them: that they may be meanes therof be
the more earnestly bent to take paynes in fardering the honour
of God.A palle from the Pope to Augustin the first Bishop of Caunterbury. And for so much as by the goodnes of God and
yower trauail, the new church of the English people is brought
vnto the fayth and grace of Christ, we graunte vnto yow the
vse of the Palle, that to weare such times only as yow say Masse:
And we licence yow to ordayne xij. Bishops in such places
as be vnder yower iurisdiction: but so that the Bishop of London

be euer here after consecrated of his owne Synode, and
receiue his palle of this holye and Apostolike see wherin I by
the aucthoritie of God doe now serue. Also we will that you
send a bishop to the citte of yorke, whom you shall think
worthy of that prelacie, so that if that citty with the country
about receiueth the worde of God, the sayd bishop be authorised
to make twelue bishops more, and he him selfe be their
Metropolitane. For we entend to geue him also a palle by the
grace of God, if we liue: whom neuer the lesse we will to be
subiecte to yower dispositiō. But after yower death so to haue
the ouersight of the rest of the bishops whom he shall make
him selfe, that he be in no case subiecte vnto the aucthorite of
the bishop of London. Betwext the Bishops of London and
York let this be the difference, that he be highest,The priuil
                        •
                     ges of the Bysshops of yorke and London. that is first
ordayned. All thinges that is don for zele of Christe, is to be
donne with common counsell and mutuall concorde, so that
they may wyth one mynde dispose their doinges, and which
they haue disposed accomplish without variance. We will farder
that vnto yow be subiecte, not only the byshops which
yow shall make your selfe or such as shalbe made by the bisshop
of yorke, but also all the priestes of Britannie
                     •
                   to thentent
that of yowr liuinge and life they may receiue a paterne both
to beleue and also to liue a right: and executing their officies
both in soundnes of faith and integrite of lif they may attayne
to the kyngdom of heauen when it shall please God to call
them. God kepe yow in helth reuerend brother. Geuen the xx.
of August the xix. yere of the raigne of our Soueraine Lord
and Emperour Mauritius Tyberius the xviij. yere after his consuship,
Indictione quarta.
               
            
            
               
                  The copy of a letter sente by S. Gregory to Mellitus the Abbat going to Britanny.
               
               The. 30. Chap.
               
                  AFter the sayd legates wer gon, and wer now in their
iourney toward Britāny, the holy father Gregorius sent
letters after them worthy memory, in the which he opēly
declared, how earnestly he tēdered the helth of our country.
Writing thus. Vnto his deare beloued son Mellitus abbat,
Gregorius the seruaunt of the seruauntes of God. After the departure
of you and the company which was with you, we wer
in dought what becam of you, for that we could heare nothing
how you sped in yower iourny. When then God shall
bring you vnto our reuerend brother Augustine bishop tell
him, what I haue of longe time deuised with my selfe of the
cause of the English men.Holy water, aultars and relikes. That is to with that not the temples
of the Idols, but the Idoles which be in them be broken, that
holy water be made and sprinkled about the same temples, altars
buylded, relikes placed. For if the sayd churches be well
made, it is nedefull that they be altered frō the worshipping of
diuels in to the seruice of God: that whiles the people doth not
see their temples spoiled, they may (forsaking their error) be
moued the more ofte to haunt their wont place to the honor
and seruice of God. And for that they are wōte to kill oxē
in sacrifice to the diuells, they shal vse the same slaughter now,
but chaunged to a better purpose. It may therefore be permitted
them, that in the dedication dayes or other solemne daies
of martyrs, they maketh them bowers about their churches,
and feasting together after a good religious sorte, kill their oxen
now to the refreshing of them selues, to the praise of God,
and encrease of charite, which before they wer wont to offer
vp in sacrifice to the diuells: that whiles sum outward comfortes
ar reserued vnto them, they may thereby be brought the
rather to the inward comfortes of grace in God. For it is doutlesse
impossible from men being so rooted in euell customes,
to cut of all their abuses vppon the sodaine. He that laboreth
to clim vpp vnto a highe place, he goeth vpward by steppes

and pases, not by leapes. So vnto the childrē of Israel being in
Aegipt our Lord was wel knowē. But yet he suffered them to
doe sacrifice vnto him still in offring vp of beastes vnto him,
which otherwise they wold haue offered vpp vnto the diuels,
as they wer wont to doe in the land of Egypt, that altering
their intente, they should leue sum, and also kepe sum of their
ould sacrifices: that is, that the beastes which they offred before,
they should now offer still. But yet in offring them vnto
the true God, and not vnto the diuels they should not be the
same sacrifices in all pointes as they wer before. These be the
thinges which I think expedient you declare vnto our sayd
brother: to thentent that he being there may consider with
him selfe, how ech thing is to be disposed. God kepe you in
helth dearly beloued son in Christ. Geuen the xv. day of Iune
The xix. yere of the raigne of our soueraine Lord, Mauricius
Tyberius emperour: and the xvij. yere after his consulship. Indictione
quarta.
               
            
            
               
                  A letter of S. Gregorie to Augustine exhorting him that he should not glorie in him selfe of his vertues, and miracles.
               
               The. 31. Chap.
               ABout this time he sent Augustine an epistle touching
such miracles as he had knowen to be done by the said
Augustine. In the which epistle he exhorteth him, that
he should take no pride of minde therefore. I know (saith he)
deare brother, that it pleaseth god to shewe by thee great miracles
amōg the people, which by thee he hath called to his faith.
Wherevpon it is nedefull that of that heauenly gifte, both thou
ioyest with feare, and fearest with ioye. Thou hast to ioye for
that by meanes of the said miracles the Englishmens soules are
wonne to the faith. Thou hast to feare, leste through the miracles,
which be don by thee, thy weake mind be lifted vp in presumption
falling as farre inwardly by vaine glory, as thou arte
by outward praise puffed vp. We must remember that the disciples

returning with ioy from their preaching when they saied
vnto their heauenly master,Lucae. 10. 
                  Lorde in thy name the very diuells
were obedient vnto vs, it was by and by aunswered vnto
them. Doe you not reioyce tereat, but rather reioyce for that your
names are written in heauen. For they had fastened their mind
vppon a priuate and temporall ioye when they ioyed of their
miracles. But Christ calleth them backe from priuate ioy vnto
commune, and from temporall to eternall, when he said:
Ioy for that your names are written in heauen. For not all the chosen
of god doth miracles, but yet all their names are written in
heauen. For why? They which be the disciples of the truth,
ought to ioye in nothing, but only in that good thing, which
all other good shall haue, as well as they, and whereof they all
shall haue ioy without ende. This therefore remaineth deare
beloued brother, that of the thinges whiche by the power of
god thou workest outwardly, thou exactly euer discusse thy
selfe inwardly, and thourouly vnderstand both thy selfe who
thou arte, and what plenty of grace god hath bestowed vppon
that countrie, for whose sake, (to thentēt it might be the rather
conuerted) thou hast receiued the gift of working miracles.
And if thou remember, that thou haste at any time ether by
worde or dede offended god, haue that euer in thy remembraunce,
that the ofte thinking vppon thy synne may presse doune
the mounting pride of thy hart. And what so euer grace
thou ether hast or shalt receiue, to worke miracles, think it geuen
thee not for thine owne sake but for theirs, the minister of
whose saluation thou art ordained.
            
            
               
                  How Saynt Gregorie sent letters and presentes to king Ethelberte.
               
               The 32. Chapter.
               THe said holy pope Gregorie at the selfe same time sent
vnto king Ethelberte a letter with rich presentes of diuerse
sortes, doing vnto the king temporall honours,

which through his helpe was growē in knowledg of the glory
of heauen. The coppy of the said letter is this. Vnto the right
honorable and his most worthy sonne, Ethelbert king of the
English, Gregorie bishop.A godly letter of S. Gregory to Ethelbert the first Christen kinge of english men. God almighty, for this cause dothe
calle good men to the gouernaunce of his people, that by their
handes he may distribute the giftes of his mercy and grace, vnto
all such ouer whom they haue the gouernaunce. Which
thing we know to haue ben done among the nation of the
English, ouer whom you are chosen to haue the rule, that by
the giftes of God employed vppon you, the like benefites of
grace might by your meanes be geuen to all such as are vnder
your dominiō. And therfor O Noble Son labour diligently to
kepe the grace which you haue receiued from god: and seeke
with spede to set forth the faith of Christ to your subiectes.
Haue a good zele to procure the conuersion of as many, as
you can possibly: forbid the worshipping of Idoles: ouerthrow
their temples: edifie the maners of your people with exāple of
your owne integrite, with wordes of exhortation, feare, fayer
speach, and well doing, that he may be your rewarder in heauen,
whose knowledg and name you make to be enlarged vppon
the earth. He also shall make your memory the more famous
vnto your posterite, whose honour you seke and maintaine,
among your people. For so Constantinus being sometimes
a most vertuous Emperour him selfe, and calling his subiectes
from the wicked worshipping of Idoles, brought them all with
him selfe vnder the obeysance of God almighty, our Lord Iesus
Christe. Whereby it was brought to passe, that his name was
of higher renoune then any of the princes, that went before
him, and so much in glorie excelled all his auncetours, howe
much also he passed them in well doing. Wherfore let your
highnes also seeke now to publish vnto the kinges and countries
subiecte to your dominion, the knowledg of one god, the
Father, the Son, and the holy Goste: to thentent thereby you

may passe in honorable fame the aūcient kinges of your natiō:
and how much the more you trauail to do away sinne in your
subiectes, you may haue so much the lesse fear of your own sinnes
before the dreadful bench of Gods iustice. Our right reuerend
brother Augustine bishop being brought vp in rule of religiō,
hauing good knowledg in the holy scriptures, and a man
through the grace of god of much vertue, what so euer he shall
aduertise you to doe, gladly heare it, deuoutly doe it, diligently
remember it. For if you will heare him in that he speaketh
vnto yow in Gods behalfe, God also shall the soner heare him
speaking and entreating for yow. If otherwise (as God forbid)
yow refuse to geue eare and heede to his wordes, how can God
heare him praying for yow, whom yow despise to heare speaking
to yow from god? Wherfor with all yowr harte ioyne yower
selfe with him and assiste him in gods busynes with all
such authorite, that God hath geuen yow, that he may make
yow partaker of his kyngdom, whose fayth yow in your kyngdom
cause to be receiued and obserued. We will also yower
highnes to know, that (according as we ar taught in the holy
scriptures by the very wordes of God) the end of this world draweth
onward, and the kyngdom of the sayntes of God shall follow,
which neuer shall haue ende. And the ende of the world
approching many thinges shall fall vppon vs, which haue not
ben heard of before, that is to witt, chaunge of the ayer, terrible
sightes from heauen, tempestes contrary to the order of the times.
All which shall not yet fall in ower dayes. Wherfor if yow
shall know any of these to happen in your land, let not yower
mynd be dismayed therwyth. For therfor shall there be signes
sent before the end of the world to thentent we should the more
diligently tender the helth of ower soules, liue euer in dowte
and feare of death, ready prepared by good workes for the cumming
of Criste our Iudge. Thus much haue I sayd in few wordes
right honorable Son, intending to speak more at large, as

I shall heare the fayth to be enlarged in your kyngdom. Then
shall I be so much the more encouraged to speake, how much
the greater comfort I shall conceiue by the conuersion of your
country. I haue sent yow small presentes, which yet shall not seme
small vnto yow, if yow shall accepte them as halowed wyth
the blessing of S. Peter. All mighty god make perfecte in yow
his grace according as he hath begonne. And send yow both
longe life here vppon the earthe: and that ended, eternall life in
his kyngdom of heauen. The grace of God kepe yower highnes
in safte my dere Son. Datum vt supra.
               
            
            
               
                  How Augustine repayred the church of our Sauiour and buylded the abbay of S. Peter the Apostle.
               
               The. 32. Chap.
               
                  AVgustine after he had obtayned to haue a bishops see
appoynted him in the kinges citty, as is aboue sayd,
through the ayd of the kyng, he recouered there a churche,
which was there of owld buylt by the Romans which wer
Christianes,Christes church in Caunterbury and did dedicate it to the name of our Sauiour Iesus
Christ, and there made a house for him and his successors.
And not far eastward from the citty he buylded aThat monastery is now called the Augustines, if it
                        •
                      stande yet. monastery
in the which kyng Ethelbert through his aduise buylded a new
church in the honor of Saynt Peter and Paule, and enriched it
with sundry gyftes, in which both the body of Augustine him
selfe and of all the bishops of Cātorbury, and of all the kinges of
kent wer wont to be enterred. Which church yet not Augustine
him selfe, but Laurentius his successor did consecrat. The first
Abbat of that monastery was one Petrus a priest, which being
legat vnto Fraunce was drowned in a creake called Amflete and
burned after a homly maner of the inhabitours of the same
place. But ower Lord entending to haue it knowen, how worthy
a man he was, made that euery night there appeared a light
from heauen vppon the place, where he lay buried: which when
the neyghbours about had espyed, gathering therby that he was
some good and holy man, and searching out what and from

whence he was, remoued his body from thence and buried it
honorablye in the towne of Bulleyne, in a place of the churche
conuenient sor so worthy a person.
            
            
               
                  How Edilfrith kyng of the Northumbers wasted Britanny and conquered the Scottes.
               
               The. 33. Chap.
               ABout this time Edilfrith a man very valiaunt and much
desirous of renowne was king of Northumberland: one
that more wasted the Land of Brytanny then any of
the English Princes. So that it semed he might be cōpared vnto
Saul kyng of the Iraelites, saue only in that he was voide and
ignorant of Gods religion. For none of all the coronells, none
of all the kinges did conquer more of the lande of Britanny,
ether makyng them tributary, ether dreuing them cleane
owt of the countrye and planting the Englsh in their places,
then did this Edilfrith. To whom that might be wel applyed
that the Patriarke Iacob sayd, when he gaue his sonne Beniamin
his blessing in the person of Saul, Beniamin like a rauening wolfe,
in the morning shall eate his pray and at night shall diuide
the spoyle. Wherby Edanaden kyng of Skottes much grudging
to see him goe forward after this sorte, assembled a mayne and
a strong army agaynste him. But the sayd Edelfrith encountering
him in the field with a few men gaue him the ouerthrow,
and in that famous place of Degsastone, disconfited his great army.
In which field Theobald brother to Edilfrith was slayne, with
that parte of the army wherof he was generall. This battell was
foughtē in the yere of our lorde 603. and the xj. yere of his raygne,
which lasted xxiiij. yeres, and the first yere of the raigne of
Phocas then Emperour of Rome. From that time forward vnto
this present neuer was there king of Scottes, which durst meete
the English men in the field.
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF the churche of Englande.
            
               
                  Of the life, lerning, and death, of blessed Pope Gregory.
               
               The. 1. Chapter.
               IN the yeare of the incarnation of our Lord
605.An. 605. the hollie pope Gregory (when he had
most gloriously gouerned the see of the Roman
and Apostolique churche. 13. yeares. 6. moneths
and. 10. dayes) departed this lyfe, and was
translated to the eternall seate of the kyngdome of heauen.
Of whome it becometh me in this our historie of the churche
of England more largely to speake: bycause by his diligence he
conuerted our nation, that is, the Engleshmen from the powre
of Satan, to the fayth of Christ. Whome we maye well, and
also must call our Apostle. For as sone as he was high Bishop
ouer the whole wordle,S. Gregory Bishop ouer the whole worlde. 1. as head thereof. and appointed gouerner of the churches
lately conuerted to the belefe of the trueth, he made our
nation the churche of Christe, which had ben euer vntill that
time the bondsclaue of Idolls. So that we maye lawfully pronownce
of him the sayng of the Apostle: That althowgh he
were not an Apostle to others, yet he was vnto vs.S. Gregory our Apostle. 1. Cor. 9. For the signet
and token of his Apostleship, we are in our Lorde. This Gregory
was a Roman borne, his fathers name Gordian, his pedegre of
awncient stocke not only noble, but also religiouse. For Felix
somtime bishop of that same see Apostolique, a man of greate
renomme in Christe, and the churche, was his greate grandfathers
father. This nobilite of religion he kept, and maintayned,
with no lesse vertue, and deuotion, then his parents, and auncient
kinsfolke had done befor him. But his woldly nobilite he

forsoke alltogether and by the speciall grace of God turned
the same to the purchasing of eternall glorie in heauen.S. Gregory a religious mā. For
changing sodenly his secular habite he wēt into a monasterie:
Where he began to lyue in such grace of perfection, that vnto
his mynde (as often after he was wont to wytnes with weeping
teares) all transitorie things were already subiecte, that he
far surmounted al worldly workes, that he was wont to thinke
of nothing, but heauenly things, yea, that being yet clogged
with his erthly bodie, he now by contemplation did passe the
verie naturall bounds of his flesh, and that he derely loued death
also, whiche to most men is a paynfull payne, as an entraunce
of lyfe to him, and reward of his labour. All which things
he sayd of him selfe, not craking of his encrease in vertues, but
rather lamenting the lacke, and decaye of thē. In which defecte
(as he was wont to saye) he thought himselfe nowe to haue
fallen by reason of his ecclesiasticall charge, and occasion of
greater care. For talking on a time secretly with Peter, his deacon,
when he had recompted the olde giftes, and vertuous graces
of his minde, strayght way he sayde sorowfully. But nowe
alas, by the meanes of this my ecclesiastical charges, my mynde
is encombred againe with secular affayres, and after the good
quyet and rest whiche it had, is nowe defiled againe with the
dust of earthly busines. And when condescending to manie, it
wandereth and roueth aboute owtward matters, after desiring
inward good thowghtes, it returneth therunto no dowbte, the
weaker. Therfore I weigh with my selfe what I doe now suffer,
and I weigh also well, what I haue forgone. And when
I behold, what I haue lost, this that I suffer wexeth more greueouse.
Thus sayde this holie man of a greate and passing humilitie.
But we must thinke that he lost none of his monasticall
perfection by anye occasion or trowble of ecclesiasticall
charge or office of a Bishop: but rather that then he did much
more good, and profited more in vertue by the laboure of

conuerting manye to the faythe, then he hadd done before
with the priuate quiet of his owne conuersation onlye. For
euen being bisshopp, he ordered his house like a monasterye.
For as sone as he was taken owte of the monasterye, and
ordayned to the ministerye of the aulter, being afterwarde
sent as legate from the see Apostolike to Constantinople,
he for all that,S. Gregory the popes legat at Constantinople. in the earthly princes palace liued so, that
he neuer intermitted his purpose of heauenly conuersation.
For he toke with him certaine brethern of the monasterie
(which for verie brotherly loue folowed him to that Imperiall
citie) for the better keping, of his regular obseruance: that alwaie
by their example (for so he writeth) he might be fastned
as with a stronge cable or anker to the pleasaunte porte of prayer,
when soeuer he were tossed withe the raging whaues of
wordly cares, and might also strengthen his minde by daylie
conference, and reading with them, whensoeuer it shuld be
shaken with secular affaires. And truly he was by these mens
companie not only defended from the assaultes of the worlde,
and earthly troubles, but also more and more stirred vp to the
exercises of heauenly life. For they exhorted him, that he
would discusse and expound with some godly and misticall
interpretation the booke of blessed Iob, which was enwrapped
with manie greate obscurities. Neither could he denie them his
paines, which of brotherly loue moued him to this profitable
laboure: but hath therfore meruelously declared in 35. bookes
of Expositions, how this worke of Iobes historie, first is to be
vnderstāded according to the letter, them how it may be referred
to Christe, and the sacramentes of the church, last in what
sense the same may be applied to euerie particular faithfull
man. Which worke he began to write, while he was legate in
Constantinople, but he finished it afterward when he was Bisshop
of Rome. This blessed man, being in Constantinople
supressed an heresie of the state of our resurrectiō (which then

there arose) in the very beginning, by the force of catholike
trueth, and verite.S. Gregory represseth an heresy ri
                     
                        •
                     ing in Constantinople. For Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople
began to preache a false doctrine, which was, that our bodies
in the glorie of the resurrection shuld be so subtile, as is either
the winde, or ayer: so that it should not be possible to feele', or
touche them. Which when S. Gregory had heard, he proued
this opinion to be quite contrary to the right faith by the reason
of truth, and also by the example of the resurrection of our
Lorde. For the right, and catholike faith beleueth, that our bodies
being exalted in the glorie of immortalitie, shal in dede be
subtile by the effect of spiritual poure, but yet not withstāding
able to befelt, and touched for the truth of our nature: according
to the example of the bodie of our Lorde of which now
rosen from death him selfe sayde to his disciples: Touche ye and
see, for aspirite hath nor flesh, nor bones as ye see me haue.
                  Luc. 24. In the assertion
of this faith the right reuerend father Gregory did laboure
so much against this vpstert heresie, quenched the same
with such diligence, and so vanquished it by the healp of the
vertuous Emperour Tiberius Constantinus, that from thence
forth noman was founde,The workes of S. Gregory, which durst be a styrrer vp againe,
or mainteiner therof. He made also an other excellent booke,
which is called the Pastorall. Wherin he declareth plainly,
what manner of man he ought to be, which should be chosen
to rule the churche. And how the rulers therof ought to lyue
them selues, and with what discretion instruct euery one of
their hearers, and also with how great consideration they shuld
daily weigh their owne weakenes. Moreouer he wrote. 40. homilies
vppon the Gospell, which he hath diuided by equall
nūber into 2. volumes. He made also 4. bookes of dialogues, in
which at the request of his Deacon Peter, he hath gathered
the vertuous dedes, of holy men, which him selfe could either
knowe in Italie, or heare of, for their same, to the example of
good lyfe for all the posterite. That like as in his bookes of Expositions

he teacheth, in what vertues a man must laboure, so
by the describing of holy mens miracles he might shewe, what,
and how greate the excellencie of those vertues is. Furdermore
bicause
                     •
                   the first and last partes of Ezechiel the prophet semed
obscure and darke, he hath fully shewed by 22. Homilies,
how much light, and good matter is within them. That I nede
not speake of his smal booke of answers, which he wrot back to
the questiōs of S. Austin the first bishop of Englishmen, as I haue
declared before,Lib. 1. cap. 27. placing the whole booke it self in this mine
historie. Neither of his other littell booke of Synodes, or Coū
                  cels,
which he hath made moste profitably, conferring with the
bishops of Italie for the necessarie affaires of the church. Nor of
his familiar letters, sent vnto diuers men. Surely it is my thinke,
maruaile, that he should write so manie, and such great volumes
being (as he saith of him self) almost in al his youth vexed with
the paines of his bowells, and entralles, by the weakenes of his
stomake euer more sickly, and made faint and feble with agues
though not verie feruent for the time, yet with quotidians
continually trubling him. But in these his greate griefes counting
carefully with him selfe, that the scripture saithe,Heb. 12. 
                  Euerie
sonne which is receiued, is scourged before, the harder he was kept
downe with these present aduersities, the more certainly did
he lifte vp himselfe, with the hope of euerlasting comforte.
And this muche haue I sayde hitherto in the praise of his excellent
witte, which could not, no not with so greate weakenes
of the bodie, be any thing debated. Now whereas other bishops
bestowed their laboure in building of churches, and decking
the same with gold and siluer, this man gaue him selfe all together
to the gayning of soules.S. Gregory a great almes mā. Whatsoeuer monie he had, he diligently
distributed, and gaue the same to poore men, that his
righteousnes might remayne worlde without end, and his horne be exalted
in glorie for euer.
                  Psal. 111. Who might truely saye of himselfe that
saying of blessed Iob:Iob. 29
                        •
                     
                   
                  The eare hearing did bring me to blesse, and

the eye seing did beare witnes for me, bycause I had delyuered the
poore man crieng out, and the fatherles childe, who had no helper. The
blessing of the perishing man came vppon me, and the heauy harte of
the wydowe did I comforte. I haue put on iustice, and decked me
theer with as with a garment, and pretiouse crowne in my iudgement.
I haue ben an eye to the blinde, and a foote to the lame. I was
a father of poore men, and the cause which I knewe not I diligently
sought for. I dyd breake in peaces the iawes of the vniuste man and
euen out of his teath pluckt I the praye: And a litle after. Yf I
haue denied (saith Iob) to poore men what they haue asked, and haue
made the eyen of the widowe looke longe for her healpe: Yf I haue eaten
my meate alone, and the poore fatherles childe hath not eaten thereof
with me. For euen from myne infancie mercie hath growen with
me, and out of my mothers wombe hit was borne with me. &c.
Moreouer to this good S. Gregories piete, and perfecte righteousnes
this pertaineth also that he hath made our nation by
preachers which he sent hither, partetaker nowe of eternall libertie,
taking vs from the teeth of our old ennemie the dyule.
For which our faith, and saluation reioysing with himselfe, and
commending the same with worthie prayse, he saith thus in
his exposition of blessed Iob:A ioyfull 
                        •
                     eioysing of S. Gregory touching the conuersiō of Englād to the faith. 
                  Beholde the tongue of Britannie,
which ons knew nothing but to rore rudely hath of late begonne to
sing the Hebrewe Alleluya in geauing praise to God. Beholde
the Ocean sea ons rough and high, but now milde, and calme obeyeth
to the feate of holie men, and the furiouse fluddes thereof, which earthly
Princes with force could neuer fraye the same for feare of God
the poore priestes doe binde with bare wordes. And that Ocean sea
whiche neuer feared the mightie hostes of infidels and heathen souldiers,
doth now trēble at the tongues of humble faithful men. For wheras
by good preceptes, and heauenly wordes, yea and with manifest miracles
too, the grace and knowledge of God is powred into it, by the terrour
of his diuinitie it is so bridled, and kept lowe that now it feareth
to be troubles
                        •
                     me, and most ernestly desireth to come to the glorie of immortalitie.
                  
By which wordes this holye father Gregory doth de
clare that S. Austin, and his companie brought the Englishmē
to the knowledg of trueth, not only by preaching to them
in worde, but also by shewing them heauenly signes, and miracles.
This holie Pope Gregory amongest his other doinges,
caused that in the chappels of the blessed Apostles Peter and
Paule, masses should be said ouer their bodies.Masse said at the shrines of S. Peter and Paule in Rome. In the celebratiō
of which masses he added these three words and petitiōs ful of
greate goodnes and perfectiō: Dies
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nostros in tua pace disponas, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab aeterna dānatione nos eripi, et in electorū tuorū iubeas grege
numerari. Which is to saye: And dispose our dayes in thy peace:
cōmaunde vs to be takē frō eternal dānatiō, and to be numbred
in the flocke of thine electes. He gouerned the church of
Christ in the reygne of the Emperoures Morys and Phocas.
But in the. 2. yeare of this Phocas Empire departing owt of this
life, he went to the true lyfe which is in heauen. His bodie was
buryed in S. Peters churche before the Vesterie, the xij. daye of
Marche. With the which bodie he shall ryse agayne herafter in
glorie, with other Pastors of the holie church: In his tūbe was
writen such an epitaphe, as foloweth:

                     This corps,An Epitaphe apon S. Gregory our Apostle. o earth, taken of the, take now agayne to keape
                     Vntyll the same the lord shall styrre, to lyfe from deathfull sleape.
                     His spirite aboue the starres is gon, where death shal not it presse.
                     VVhich rather was a waye to him, the true lyfe to possesse.
                     The chefest Byshop buryd is, in this sepulchre here
                     VVhich euer, and in euery place in goodnes dyd appere.
                     The hungrie man with foode he fedde, the naked he arayde.
                     VVith sacred sermons Christen sowles, from Satans powre he stayed.
                     He dyd in worke, what thinge in word, soeuer he dyd teach.
                     That he might be a sample set, to men while he dyd preache.
                     The English land to Christe he turned by vertues force and guyde.
                     Making by that new nation, all Christendom more wyde.
                     Toy howe, thy care, thy studie was, good Pastor and thy paynes
                     
                        Of thy poore flocke vnto thy Lord, to bring the greatest gaynes.
                     VVith these thy triumphes then, reioyse Gods chosen capitaine.
                     For now rewarde of thy good workes, thow surely dost obtayne.
                  
I must not here with sylens passe ouer the reporte wich we haue
heard by our elders and auncesters, of S. Gregory, how, and
vppon what occasion he was moued to bestowe suche diligent
laboure in the conuersion of our cuntrie.The occasion why S. Gregory sent preachers vnto our countre. Men saye therfore,
that on a certayne daye when manie marchantes came
to Rome, and brought into the market place dyuers wares to
be sold, and manie also came thither to bye, that emongest
them Gregory him selfe came to cheapen, and vew the market.
Where when emongest other thinges he had spydde younge
men set to be sold of white skinne and comly countenance,
with decent order, and colour of their heare, beholding them a
while, he demaundyd at last owt of what region, or land they
were brought? And it was answered that they came owt of the
yle of Britannie, where the inhabitantes were all of that beutie.
Then asked he whether the people of that ylande were Christen
men, or yet lyued in the paynims errors? And answer was
made, that they were all paynyms. Then this good man heauely
syghing from the botome of his harte, Alas, quoth he, it is a piteouse
case, that the author of darknes shuld possesse suche
bryght beauted people, and men of so fayre a face shuld inwardly
beare so fowle a soule. Than enquyred he an other thing
farder, what was the name of that nation, or people? And when
answer was geeuen, that they were calledAngli. 
                  Angles, or english.
Truely not without cause, quoth he, they be called Angles. for
they haue anAngelicam. 
                  Angels face. And it is mete suche men were partakeners,
and inheretors with the Angels in heauen. But what
is, quoth he, the name of the prouince, whence they came? The
marchantes answered, that the people of that prouince were
calledOf yorkeshere. 
                  Deyres. Marry quoth he, they maye iustly be named
Deiri 
                  Deyres. For they shalbe takenDeira eru
                        •
                     i 
                  From the yre of God, and called

to the mercie of Christ. But what is quoth he, the kinges name
of that prouince? Whē it was answered that his name was Alle,
S. Gregory, alluding to the name, sayde: Alleluia must be sounge
in that Princes dominions to the prayse of Almightie God
his creator.Siclegit Polya lib. 1. Hist. Augl. And furthwith going to the Byshop of the Roman
and Apostolike see (for himselfe was not yet chosen Byshop
thereof) he besowght him, that he wold send into Britanie, and
to the Angles there, certayne ministers of the worde, by whome
they mowght be conuerted vnto Christ saying, that himself
was ready to do this dede by the helpe and ayde of God, but yet
so, that it shuld first please the Pope Apostolike to permitte,
and allow the same. Which his request whē he could not then
obtayne, (for if the Bishop would haue graunted him that he
asked, yet the Romans coulde not had suffred him to departe
so farre from the citie) afterward, as sone as himselfe was Bysshopp,
he browght it to passe, and fulfilled this good worke,
which he had before so lōge desyred, s
                     •
                  nding forth dyuers preachers,
but himselfe helping at home with prayer, and godly exhortatiōs,
that their preching might be fruteful, and take good
effect. This much according to the opinion whiche we haue
heard from our auncieriters I thowght best to put in the historie
of our Church.
            
            
               
                  How Austin exhorted the Briton Bysshops to the catholike vnitie, and accord with a miracle done before them: and howe he profecyed what vengeance shulde fall on them if they despised his wordes.
               
               The 2. Chap.
               ABowt this tyme Austin by the ayde and healpe of
king Elbert called together the Byshops and doctours
of the greatest prouince, and nearest to him, whiche
were the Britons, to cōmune with thē, into a place whiche vntyl
this daie is called Augustin zat,
                  About South Hamptō. as ye would saie the powre
and strength of Austin, being in the borders of the Vectias, and
west Saxons. There he began with brotherly admonition to
perswade thē to be at peace, and catholike vnitie with him, and

to communicate with him for Gods sake the laboure of preching
the gospell to the heathen of England. For as yet they
kept not the Easter sondaye in dew time, but from the. 14. to
the. 20. moone. Which compte is concluded in the cōpas of. 84.
yeares. They vsed moreouer manie other thinges contrarie to
the vnitie of the church. Which when they had ben with longe
discours declared, and these men neyther for prayers or exhortations,
neyther for rebukes or threttes of Austin, and his companie
would geaue their assent, but rather preferred their own
traditions before all other churches whiche throwgh owt the
whole worlde agreed with Austin in Christe, then this holie
father made an end of so lōge and troblesome stryfe, saying in
this wyse. Let vs praye vnto God,Psal. 67. 
                  which doth make men all of one
minde and accord to dwel in his fathers howse, that he will vowchsafe
to signifie vnto vs by some heauenly signes, whiche tradition
is to be folowed, and by what wayes we must spedely
walke to the entrance of his kingdome. Therfore let here be
browght forth some sicke body,Our Apostles Faith cōfirmed by a miracle. and by whose praiers he shalbe
healed, let his fayth be beleaued, and his godly doinge be folowed
of vs all. To this when his aduersaries had graunted althowgh
verie vnwillingly, there was presented a certaine blind
Englishman. Who being offred to the Briton priestes, when
by their ministerie he was not holpen, 
                     •
                  e coulde be cured, at
the length S. Austin compelled by iust, and greate necessitie fel
on his knees to the father of our Lord Iesus Christe, beseching
him, that he would restore sight to this blinde person, that had
lost it, and that by the corporall illumination, and bodely lightning
of one man, his spiritual grace mought enkendle light in
the hartes of manie faythfull. And forthwith the blynde man
sawe: and Austin was praised of the people as a trew precher of
all trueth and veritie. Then these Britons confessed in deade,
that they vnderstod, that to be the true waye of ryghteousnes,
which Austin had preched and shewed thē. But yet they sayde,

that they coulde not alter and change their olde customes and
ordinances without the consent and licens of their clerges and
people. They desyred therefore that they myght haue a
seconde Synode of a greater multitude. Whiche when it
was appointed to be so, there came by reporte seauen
Briton Bisshops, and many other well lerned men specially
oute of their greatest monasterie at Bangor, where at that
time Dynoth was Abbot. These men being now redie to goe
to the forsaide Synode came first to a certaine holy and wise
man (which lyued there about an Anchoretes lyfe) to aske his
counsel, whether they ought at Austins preaching and exhortation
leaue their traditions, or no? Who answered them: if he
be a mā of God, folow him. But how shal we proue (sayd they)
that he is a man of God? The Anchoret answered: our Lord
sayth, take ye on yow my yooke, and lerne ye of me. For I am milde,
and humble of haerte.
                  Matth. 
                        •
                     1. Yf therfore this Austin be milde, and humble
of harte, it is likely that him selfe beareth the yooke of
Christ, and will offer you the same to beare. But if he be curst,
and proude, it is certaine, that he is not of God, neither must
we much esteme his wordes. Then they enquired againe of
him, how they might know whether this Austin were proude,
or no? Marry quoth he, prouide ye that he with his compaine
come firste to the place of the Synode, or counsell house.The general
                        •
                      rule of our Sauiour euil construed in a particular case.
And if when ye approche nere, he ariseth courteously to you,
thinke ye that he is the seruant of Christe, and so heare ye him
obediently. But if he despise yow, nor will vouchesafe to ryse
at your presence, which are the more in number, let him likewise
be despised of yowe. And truly as this Anchoret bad
them, so did they. For it happened that when they came thither
S. Austin was alredy there
                     •
                   and sate in his chayre. Which when
they sawe, straight waye wexing wrothe they noted him of
pride, and therfore endeuored to ouerthwarte and gainsaye,
what soeuer he proposed. His oracion briefly was thus: Although

though (dere brethern) in manie other points ye doe contrarie
to our custome,Thre 
                        〈◊〉
                      proposed to the B
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     n or w
                        ••
                     ch bishop
                        •
                     . or rather contrarie to the custome of the vniuersall
churche of Christe, yet not withstanding if ye will in
these 3. thinges consent, and obey vnto me: that is, to celebrate
the Easter in dew time, to accomplish the ministerie of baptisme
(by which we are borne againe to God) according to the
maner of the holie Roman, and Apostolike churche, and last
of all to preache with vs to this English natiō the word of our
Lord
                     •
                  ll your other ceremonies, rites, fashions, and customs
though they be contrary to oures, yet we will willingly suffer
thē, and be content to beare with thē. But they answered, that
they would doe none of the thinges requested, neither would
compre him for their Archebishop: sayeng with them selues:A wrong
                        •
                      and 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     te surmise.
Nay, if he would not so muche as rise to vs, truely the more we
shoulde now subiecte our selues to him, the more woulde he
hereafter despise vs, and set vs at naught. To whome the good
man of God S. Austen thretfully proficied, that, if they would
not take peace, and be at accord with their brethern, they
should receaue and feele warre from their enemies. And yf
they wold not preache to the English men the waye of lyfe,
they should suffer at their hande, and by their power the
vengeance of death. Which thing in al pointes came so to passe
as he forsayed, by the secret working of Gods iudgement.A true prophecy of S. Augustin out Apostle. For
it happened afterward, that the most mighty king of English
men Edilfrede (of whome I haue spoken before) gathering a
greate armie, made at the citie, which the English men call
Legacester, but the Britons better Carlege, a foule slaughter of
this vnfaithfull, and naughty people. For being now redy to
geue the onset of the fight, when he had spidde their priestes
(which came together to praye to God for the souldiers warringe)
stand a parte from the rest in a sure and safe place, he
demaunded, what they were, and to what end they came thither?
Now the most parte of these priestes were of the monasterie

of Bangor, where was sayde to be so great a number
of monkes,The monastery of B
                        •
                     gor in wales. that this monasterie being diuided in to seauen
companies, with eche companie his seuerall assigned ruler,
none of these compaines had lesse then 3. hundred persons,
who all did euer lyue by the labour of their owne handes.
Manie therefore of them after their 3. dayes fast, came with the
rest to thafforsaide armie, to pray for the souldiers:Fasting and praying in schismatikes auaileth not. hauing also
by them a defendour named Brockmal, who should keape, and
preserue them from the weapons and strokes of their enemies,
while they were thus ernestly bent to their prayers. This the
cause of their comminge thither, when king Edelfrede had vnderstoode,
he sayd: Yf these men crie and call vppon their God
against vs, truly although they haue no armoure, yet they fight
against vs, who with their wicked wordes, and hatefull curses
persecute vs. Therefore he commaunded his souldiers first to
assault them. And so he vanquished after, the other parte of this
detestable hoste, but yet not without greate losse of his owne
men. It is reported, that there were slaine in that warres of
them which came to praye, aboute a thousande, and two hundred
men, and only fiftie to haue escaped by flight. For Brockmale
at the first comming of his ennemies fled straight with
all his souldiers, and whome he ought to haue defended, lefte
them all naked and bare to the strokes of the sworde. So in this
manner was fulfilled the prophetie of holye bishop Austin.
Who was himself longe before that taken out of this life to the
kingdom of heauen. And thus these vngratiouse, and false people
suffred the punishment of temporal death, bicause they had
refused, and despised the holsome counsell of perpetuall life,
and saluation offered them.
            
            
               
                  How the saide Austin made Mellite and Iustus Byshops, and of his death.
               
               The. 3. Chap.
               
                  IN the yere of thincarnation of our Lord. 604.An. 604. Austin. Archebishop
of Britannie consecrated ij. Byshops, Mellite and
Iustus. The one, that is, Mellite to preache to the prouince
of theEssex and the countre about London. Este Saxons, which are separated from kent with the
Tems. And are fast ioyned to the Este sea. Whose chiefe citie
is London, of situation nere sette vppon the banckes of the
fludde called the Tems
                     •
                   a princely mart towne, of manie people
arriuing thither by sea and lande. In the which countrie at
that time raygned Sabereth Elberts nefue by his syster Ricula.
Although this Sabereth was himselfe vnder the dominion of
the same Elbert, who was (as I haue before saide) king ouer all
the Englishmen, euen vnto the end of the fludde Humber.
               Now as sone as this prouince by the preaching of Mellite had
receaued the worde of trueth,Mellite the first bishop of London. S. Paules church. king Elbert builded in the citie
of London S. Powles churche, where Mellite, and his successours
euer after should haue their bishops see. The other, which
was Iustus, Austin ordeined bishop in kent, in a citie of Caunterbury
diocesse, which the Englishmen called Rotchester, by
the name of the chiefest citisen, or ruler thereof.Iustus the first Bisshop of Rochester. Which is in
distaunce from Caunterbury towne aboute 24. miles westwarde.
In the which citie king Elbert builded S. Andrew the apostles
churche, and gaue manie goodly and diuers giftes to the
bishops of bothe these churches, that is, S. Paules in London,
and S. Andrews at Rotchester. Like as he gaue also others to the
bishop of Caunterbury. and moreouer he added territories and
possessions therto, for the better maintaining of them that lyued
with these bishops.The death of S. Augustin our apostle. After this the derely beloued mā of god
holie father Austin died
                     •
                   and his bodie was laied by the church
of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paule, (of which church I
haue made mention before) without the dore therof, bycause it
was not yet finished, nor dedicated. But as sone as the churche
was dedicated, his body was brought in, and decently buried
in the north porche of the same churche.

                     
                     Kinge Elbert the first Christen king of Englishmen, buildeth S. Poules in Londō and S. An 
                           •
                        rewes in Rochester for the ij. first bisshops of both those Secs, Mellitus and Iustꝰ.
                  
               
               Wher also wer interred the bodies of all the Archebishops folowing,
except ij. only, that is, Theodore and Berthwold. Whose
bodies were layed in the church it selfe,Memories of soules departed. bycause the porche
could receiue no more. This church hath almost in the middest
of hit an aulter dedicated in the honour of S. Gregory the Pope.Agendae eorum.
at the whiche aulter euery saterday their memories are solemnely
celebrated by the priest of that place. In the tumbe of this
same Austin was writen such and epitaphe as foloweth.
               Here lyeth and resteth blessed S. Austin,The epitaphe vpō S. Augustine toū
                     be in Caunte
                        •
                     bury. the first Archebisshop
of Caunterbury who was sent hether of holye S. Gregory
Bisshop of Rome, and strengthened of God by working of
miracles. VVho conuerted king Elbert and his royaulme
from the worshypping of idols to the faith of Christe: and so
fulfilling in peace the dayes of his office, he dyed the. 26. of

Maye, in the raygne of the same king Elbert.
            
            
               
                  How Laurence with his other Bysshops warned the Scottes of the vnitie of the catholike churche, and specially to folowe the same in celebrating the Ester. And how Mellite came to Rome.
               
               The. 4. Chap.
               AFter the death of S. Austin Lawrence succeded in the
Bysshoprik.Laurence the secōd Archebisshop of Caunterbury. Whom S. Austin himselfe while he lyued
had ordeyned therto, lest that after he was deade the
state of this churche, rude as yet, and lately conuerted mought
begin to wauer, and fall, yf hit shuld haue lacked a Pastor and
ruler neuer so lytle while. Wherin he folowed the example of
the first pastor of the churche, that is, of the moste blessed, and
Prince of thappostles S. Peter. who when he had layed at Rome
the foundation of Christes churche, consecrated Clement
for his successor, who had euer before ben his healper in preching
the gospell. This Laurence being nowe Archebisshop
sawe howe ioylely the fundations of this his churche dyd encrease,
which were wel and strongly layde. And he endeuoured
to lyfte vp the same to their perfayte highnes, bothe by often
wordes of holie exhortatiō, and also cōtinual exāples of deuoute
and godly workes. And truly he hofully cared not only for
the newe churche, wich was now gathered of Englishemē, but
also for the churche of the old inhabitantes of Britannie, and
of the Scottes too. who harboured in Ireland the next yle to
Britanny: for the which people also he laboured as a true pastour
and prelat. For as sone as he knewe the lyfe and profession
of the Scottes in their forenamed cuntrie, to be skarce Ecclesiasticall,
and well ordered in manie pointes (lyke as was the
Britons at that tyme in Britannie) specially bycause they celebrated
not the solennitie of Ester in dew tyme, but (as I haue
before shewed) thowght that they must obserue and celebrate
the daye of our Lords rresurectiō from the. 4. mone to the. 20.
he,Our first Christen I saye with the other Bysshops wrote vnto them an exhorting

epistle,Bishops labour to reconcile the Scotts from their schisme to the Catholike vnit
                        •
                     
                   beseching and praying them to receaue and kepe
the societe of peace, and vnitie of Catholike obseruation,
with that churche of Christe which is spredde ouer all the
whole wordle. The beginning of this epistle was suche: To
our derest beloued brethern the Bysshops and Abbottes throwgh out
all Scotland, Laurence, Mellite and Iustus Bysshops, and seruantes
to them that serue God greating. VVhen as the see Apostolique
                  The see Apostolike. 
                  (according
to thaccustomable maner therof to send into all places of the
wordle) directed and sent vs vnto these west quarters, to preache the
word of God to paynim people and to hethen men, it happed, vs to entre
into this yle which is called Britannie. VVhere thinking that all that
dyd beare the name of Christen men walked according to the customed
waye of the vniuer sall churche, we honored with greate reuerence as
wel the Britons, as the Scottes. But after we had wel proued and tryed
the Britons to swarue from the same, we yet iudged the Scottes for
better men. Marye nowe we haue lerned by Bysshop Dagamus comming
to this before mentioned yland, and we doe vnderstand by the
Abbot Columban of Fraunce, that the Scottes do nothing differ from
the Britons in their cōuersation. For Bysshop Dagamus coming to vs,
wold not only not eate with vs, but not so muche as eate his meate in
that house where we were. &ce. This Laurēce with the other Bysshops,
sent also letters worthie and mete for his degree, to the
Briton priestes. With which letters he hofully sowght and earnestly
laboured to confirme and strenghthen thē in the catholike
vnitie: but how muche he hath auailed therin these present
dayes do now well declare. About this tyme came Mellite
bysshop of London to Rome,Mellite the first B. of London trauaileth to the Pope for instructiōs. &c. there to commune and counsell
with the Apostolike Pope Boniface for necessarie causes of the
the English churche. And when as this right reuerent
Pope had called a Synode of the Bishops of Italy, to appointe
some order, as concerning the life of monkes, and their quiet
state, Mellite him selfe sate amongest them, the 8. yeare of the
raigne of Focas the Emperour, the 13. Indiction, and the 27. daye

of February, that what thing so euer were regularly decreed the
re he also subscribing therunto might confirme them with his
authorite, and returning to Britannie might bringe them with
him to the English churche, as precepts and rules to be kept,
and obserued. As also beside these rules, certain epistles which
the same Bishop of Rome wrote, and directed to the derely beloued
in Christe, Archebishop Laurence, and all the clergy: and
with other letters which he wrote likewise to king Elbert, and
all the English men. This is the same Boniface which was the
4. Bishop of Rome after S. Gregory. Who by ernest suit obtained
a temple of the Emperour Focas for the Christians.
Which temple of auncient time was euer called by a Greke
name Pantheon, as who wold saye, the temple of all Goddes.
Out of which temple this Boniface casting forth all filthines,
and purging hit cleane,This church stan
                        •
                     eth in Rome at this daye, and is called S. Ma
                        •
                     ia rotunda. made a church therof in the honour of
our ladie the blessed mother of God, and all the holy martyres
of Christe, that the number of diuels being shutte out thence,
the blessed companie of Saintes might haue there a perpetuall
memorie.
            
            
               
                  How when the kinges Elbert and Sabareth were deade, their successours brought vp againe idolatrie. Whereuppon Mellite and Iustus depart out of Britannie.
               
               The. 5. Chap.
               IN the yeare of thincarnation of our Lorde 613.An. 613. (which was
the 21. after that bishop Austen, aud his compaine were sent
to the English nation to preache) Elbert king of kent after
his temporall reigne, which he had kept most gloriously the
space of 56. yeares, entred into eternall blisse of the kingdome
of heauen. Who was the third king of the English men, and
reyned our all the South prouinces,The first English kinges of Britanny. Suss
                        •
                     x and Hāpshere. which are separated from
the North by the fludde Humber, and the borders adioyning
therto. But he was the first of all the kinges that entred in to
the kingdome of heauen. For the first English king, was Elli
king of the South Saxons, the second Celin king of the VVest

Saxons whome they called Cewlin. The third, as we haue sayde,
was Elbert king of Kēt.The west coūtrie suffolck, nortfolck and Cā
                     bridgshere. After him the fourth was Redualt king 
of the Este English. Who while king Elbert yet liued, was chief
gouerner of his countrie, and royalme vnder him. The fyueth
was Edwine, kinge of Northūberland, that is, king of all 
the inhabitants about the north parte of the fludd Hūber. This 
king being a prince of greater powre thē all other that ruled in
Britannie, raigned both ouer the English men, and Britons to,
except the people of Kent, and added moreouer to the English
dominions and kingdome, the Briton Ilandes called Meuanie,
which lye betwex Ireland and Britannie. The sixth was Oswald
king also of Northūberland a most Christen prince.
Whose dominions were as large. The seuenth was Oswy his
brother, keping the kingdome almost within equall boundes
for a certaine time. But after, he cōquered for the most part the
Pictes and Scotte; mē which dwelled in the North quarters of
Britāny: and made thē tributarie. But we wil speak of that here
after. King Elbert died the 24. day of February, the 2. yere, after
that he had receiued the faith, being ful past: and is layde in S.
Martins porch, within the church of the blessed Apostels Peter
and Paul, wher also Quene Bertha is buried. Which king beside
other his deades that he boūtefully bestowed vpō his subiectes,
gaue and appointed them by the coūsel of wise mē certaine lawes
and iudicial decrees according to thexāple of the Romans:
which being writē in the English tōgue are vntil this day kept
of thē and as occasiō serueth practised.Temporall awes o
                        •
                      kinge 
                        〈◊〉
                      the 
                        〈◊〉
                      christen kinge of kent. In which his lawes and
decrees he first and chiefly ordeined, what amends he ought to
make, which had by thefte taken away anie thinge from the
churches, bishops, or other orders. Wherein the king prouided
a safegard, aud surtie for them, whom, and whose doctrine he
had now receiued. This Elbert was the son of Irminrike
whose father was Octa, and Octaes father Orrich, called also
Oiske. Of whom the kinges of kēt are wont to be called Oiskinges.

This Orriches fathers name was Hengist, who with
his Oiske being sent for of Vortiger, first entred into Britannie,
as I haue shewed before.
               But after the death of Elbert, when Eadbald his sonne had taken
on him the rule of the royalme, he greately hindered, and
dammaged there the younge springes and tender encreases of
the churche. For he would not only not accept and mainteyne
the faith of Christ, but he was also polluted and defiled
with suche a fornication, as the Apostle witnesseth neuer to
haue ben heard of amongest the gentils, which is, that he had
married his fathers wife. With which ij. heynouse factes he
gaue occasion to his subiectes to returne to their former filthe
and vomit,Reuolting from the faith in kent. which vnder his fathers raigne or for fauour or feare
of the king had yelded to the lawes of Christen faith and
chastite. But the scourges of God, and vengaunce from heauen
wanted not, to the punishing and correcting of this vnfaithfull
kinge. For he was plaged with often frensy of minde,
and raging fury of an vncleane sprite.Vengeaū
                     ce from God. Nowe besides all this the
death also of king Sabareth, king of the Este Saxons muche
encreased the trouble, and persecution of the churche. Who departing
hence to the euerlasting kingdome of heauen, left his
iij. sonnes remaining yet paynims, heyres of his temporall
kingdome in earth. After the death of their father they began
straightwaie and openly to folowe idolatrie, which while their
father liued, they semed somewhat to haue relented: geuing also
free licence to al their subiects to worship idols. These princes
on a certaine time when they sawe the bisshop in the churche,The people do cōmunicat 
                        〈◊〉
                      Masse.
after he had celebrated the solemnites of the masse geaue
the people the sacrament, being puffed vpp with barbarouse,
and rude folie, saide (as the common reporte is) thus vnto him:
Why doest thou not geaue vs also some of that white breade,
which thou diddest geue our father Saba, (for so they were
wont to call their father Sabareth) and which thou doest not

yet cease to geaue the people in the churche? To whome
he answered: Yf ye wil be washed in that holsome font, wherein
your father was, ye maye likewise eate of this blessed breade,
whereof he was partakener. But if ye contemne the lauetorie
of life, ye can in no wise taste the breade of life.The blessed sacrament, bread of life. We will
not (said they) enter into this font of water, for we knowe we
haue no nede thereof. But yet neuertheles we will eate of that
breade. And when they had ben often and ernestly warned
off the bishop, that it could not be, that without holy purging,
and clensing by baptisme any man might communicate of this
most holie oblation, they at last in their furie and rage sayde to
the bishop: well, if thou wilt not consent to vs in so smalle a
matter as we aske of the, thou shalt not hensforth abide in our
prouince and dominions. And straightway they expelled him.
Commaunding him,Mellit the first Christen bishop of London expelled from thē
                     ce. and all his companie to depart their royalme.
Who being expelled thence went into kent, to common
there with Laurence, and Iustus his fellow bishops, what were
best to be done in this case. And by cōmon consent it was concluded,
that better it were for them all, to returne into their
countries, and there to serue God with a free minde, and quiet
conscience, then to abide with those barbarouse men, or liue
amongest such rebelles of the faith, without all fruit or profit.
Therfore Mellite, and Iustus departed first, and came to
the coastes of Fraunce purposing there to expecte, and attende
for the issue of these matters.Reuoltig from the faith in London
                        •
                     
                   So shortly after, these kinges,
which had driuen from them this preacher of trueth fell freely
to idolatrie, and worshipping of diuells. But yet not without
the vengeance of God. For on a time waging battaile against
the Genissans, they with their whole armie were slaine.The vengeaūce of God ensuing. But although
the authors of this misscheffe were thus destroied, yet
could not the common people ons stirred to naughtynes be amended,
and reuoked to the simplicite of faith, and charite,
which is in Christ.
            
            
               
               
                  How Lawrence chastened by S. Peter conuerted king Edbald to Christe, who immediatly after called backe Mellite and Iustus to preache.
               
               The. 6. Chap.
               WHen Laurence was now ready to forsake Britannie,
and goe after Mellite and Iustus, he
commaunded the night before he went, his
bed to be brought forth, and layed in S. Peter,
and Paules churche, of which churche we haue
oftentimes spoken. Where, when after manie
his praiers, and teares powred out to God for the state of
the church, reposing his body to rest, and sleaping in his bedde,
the blessed Apostle S. Peter appeared to him: who scourging
him with sharp stripes a greate while in the close and secret
night, chalenged him with Apostolicall auctorite, and asked,
why he would forsake the flocke, which he himselfe had committed
vnto him? and to what shepeherd, renning now awaye,
he would leaue the sheape of Christe besette in the middest
of wolfes. Hast thou, quoth he, forgotte myne example,
who for the lytle ones of Christe, which he commended
to me in witnes and token of his loue, dyd suffer fetters,
strypes, enprisoninges, afflictions, and att the laste
death it selfe, yea the death of the crosse, by infidels, and the
enemies of Christe, that I mought be crowned with him? By
these S. Peters strypes, and with these his exhortations Lawrence
the seruant of Iesus Christe being styrred vp, and encouraged,
came boldly to the king erly in the morning, and loosing
his garment shewed him, how sore he was beaten, and
pitifully his flesh was torne. The king amased therat meruayled
much with himselfe. And enquyred who durst be so bold as
to whyp and scourge such a man, as this Lawrence was. But as
sone as he had heard, that for his owne healthes sake and saluation
this bysshop had suffred so greueouse beatinges, yea and
that of the Apostle of Christe, he feared much. And afterward

abandoning all worship and honour of ydols, renouncinge also
his vnlauful mariage he embraced the fayth of Christe. and
being baptised he endeuored to keape and mayntaine the state
of the churche in all pointes to his vttermoste power. Moreover
he sent into Fraunce, and called home Mellite and Iustus
commaunding them to returne to their churches and freely instructe
their flock. Thus the yeare after their departure they
returned againe, Iustus to Rochester, where he was bishop. But
as for Mellite the Lōdoners wold not receaue, although he was
their bysshop, chosing rather, to obey idolatrouse bysshops then
him. And truly king Edbald was not a Prince of so greate
power and strenght as was his father, that he might restore this
bysshopp to his churche notwithstanding the paynim Londiners
resistaunce,Kent returneth to the faith. but for his owne part, and all his subiectes,
frō the daye, that he was conuerted to our Lord, he submitted
himselfe to the precepts of God. Moreouer he buylt a chappell
in the honour of our ladie the blessed mother of God
within the monasterie of S. Peter head of thappostles. Which
chappell Mellite the Archebisshop consecrated.
            
            
               
                  How bishop Mellite quenched with his prayer the fyre burning the citie of Caunterbury.
               
               The. 7. Chap.
               FOr in the raygne of this king Edbald the holye Archebishop
Laurence departing hence to the kyngdome of
heauen, and being buryed, the seuenth daye of Februarie
in the churche and monasterie of S. Peter thappostle fast by
his predecessour Austin, Mellite who was bishopp of London,
sate in the See of Caunterbury churche, third Archebysshopp
after S. Austin: when as Iustus was yet a lyue, and bishopp of
Rochester. Which ij. Prelates because they dyd rule and gouerne
the English churche with greate labour, and diligence, receiued
eftsoones exhorting epistles from Boniface Bysshop of
the Roman and Apostolique see. Who after Dersd
                        •
                     dit (otherwise

wise called Theodatus) gouuerned the Church in the yeare
of our lord 618.An. 618. 
                  Mellite was often troubled with infirmities
of the bodie, and muche greaued with the gowte, yet notwithstanding
euer hole and sounde of mynde. Who passing ouer
spedely all erthly thinges, hyed him fast to the blysse of heauen
which is euer to be beleued, euer to be wysshed for, and euer to
be sowght for. He was also noble by byrth, but muche more
noble for the excellencie of his mynde. I will reherse one token
of his vertue, by which a man maye easely gesse the rest.
When vppon a certaine tyme the citie of Caunterbury by negligence
was takē with fyre, and began to waste and consume
awaye by muche encreasing of the flames, so that no helpe of
man, no castinges of water theron was able to quēche or staye
it, the greatest parte of the citie being at length nere burnt and
the furiouse flashes extending them selues euen to the Bysshops
place, this good bysshop seing mans healpe now to fayle,
and trusting only in the ayde and succoure of God, commaundyd
that the myght be carryed out of his howse and sette against
these fierce flawes of fyre percing and flyeng all rounde aboute.
Now where the greatest rage of this burning was, there
was the place of martyrdome of the. 4. hollie crouned Saintes.Martyrium heat orum quatuor Coronatorum.
Whan then the byshop by his seruantes was brought forth, and
sette in this place, here he began withe prayer,The praier of the righteous man much auaileth. Iacob. 5. sycke as he was,
to dryue awaye the peryll of fyre: which the stowght strength
of stronge men with muche labour could not before bryng to
passe. And beholde the wynde that blew frō the Southe wherby
this fire was first kendled and blasted abrode, now sodenly
bent against the Southe, first tēpered his blastes, for feare of hurting
the places ouerryght in thother side, and after quyte quenching
the flames, ceasing, and extinguisshing the fyre, made all
calme and wel againe. And truly this good man of God, which
dyd feruently alwaye burne with the fyre of inwarde charite,
and was wont with his often prayers, and hollie exhortations

to dryue from himselfe and al his, the daunger of ghostly temtations,
and trowble by spryghtes of the ayre, might now iustly
preuaile against the wynde, and easely cease these worldy flames,
and obtayne that they hurted nor him, nor his: Who after
he had ruled the churche. v. yeares deceased hence to heauen,
in the raygne of king Edbald and is buryed with his predecessours
in the oftmentioned monasterie, and churche of S. Peter,At the Augustines 
                        •
                     n Caunterbury.
the yeare of our Lord. 624. and the. 22. daye of Februarie.
            
            
               
                  How Pope Boniface sent Iustus Mellites successor a palle and an epistle.
               
               The. 8. Chapter.
               TO whome Iustus succeded inmediatly in the Byshoprike,
who was Bysshopp of Rotchester. Ouer whiche
church he appointed for him Romanus, and consecrated
him Byshop.Auth
                        •
                     rite from
                        •
                      Rome to make Byshops. For nowe had Iustus receyued authoritie to
ordeyne Byshops, from the hygh Byshop Boniface, successour
of Deusdedit, as we saied before. The forme of which authorite
is as foloweth: To our derest beloued brother Iustus, Boniface
sendeth greating.A letter of Pope Bon
                        ••
                     ace to Iustus the. iiij. Archeb. of Cau
                        ••
                      terb. How godly, and how ernestly yow haue,
dere brother, laboured for the Gospell of Christ, not only the
tenour of your epistle directed vnto vs, but also the perfection,
and end of your doinges, haue well and fully declared. For almightie
God hath not forsaken eyther the glorie of his name,
or the fruyte of your labour. Wheras himselfe faythfully ha
                     •
                  h
promised the prechers of his Gospell, sayng:Mattb. 2
                        •
                     . 
                  Behold I am with
yow alwayes euen vnto the end of the wordle. Which thing especially
his clemencie hath shewed in this your ministerie, opening
the hartes of the gentiles, to receyue the singular mysterie
of your preching. For he hath made moste honorable the
state of your dignitie by his grace and goodnes, while that
himselfe hath prepared you so fertell fruytes vsing moste prouidently
his talentes committed to yowe, geauing yowe this
gyfte, that yowe may now assigne and shewe whole countries

plentifully multiplyed in the fayth by yow. And this is geauen
you in recompence, bycause you persisted continually in this
ministerie of preching appointed to yowe, looking with lawdable
pacience, for the redemption of that people to whome
yow were sent, and that they might geate some good by your
merytes, and labour: whose saluation is nowe begonne wytnessing
our Lord, sayeng:
                     
                        •
                      atth. 10. 
                  He that shall stand, and perseuere
to the end, he it is that shalbe saued. Ye are therfore saued by the
hope of patience, and by the vertue of longe suffring, so that
now the hartes of infidels being purged, and healed from their
naturall, and superstitiouse desease may receyue the mercye of
their Sauiour. For after we had read the letters of oure dere
son king Adelwald, we vnderstode with what greate lerning,
and instruction of holy scrypture yow haue browght him, to
the belefe of thundowbted faithe, and trewly conuerted him
to Christe. Wheruppon we presuming and putting sure affiaunce
in the greate mercie of God, doe hope, and beleaue, that
not only king Adelwaldes subiectes, but also all the next dwellers
and inhabitauntes abowt him shall receiue by your preching
parfect saluation, and life euerlasting. To the entent that
as it is writen: the reward of your p
                        •
                     rfit and ended worke, be geuen
yowe from our Lorde, the geauer of all good thinges. And at the
length the vniuersall confession of all nations, receiuing the
veritie of Christian fayth, maye manifestly declare,Psal. 8. 
                  that their
sounde hath gon for the ouer all the earth, and their wordes euen to
the vttermost partes of all the wordle. Wherfore of our bounteousnes
we haue sent yow by the bearers of our present letters a
palle. Which we geue yow lycence to vse only in the celebration
of the moste holy mysteries: graunting yow moreouer by
the grace, and mercye of our Lorde, the ordeyning of Bishops,
when occasion shall require. For so the gospell of Christe by
the preching of manye, maye the better be spredd ouer all nations,
that be not yet conuerted. Let therefore your brotherly

charite keape with a pure minde, and sincere intention this
authorite, which it hath nowe receiued by the bountifulnes of
the see Apostolique. In remembrance and token whereof
yowe shall here receiue, to your vse as prelat there, this
Robe which we send you. It remaineth that calling continually
for the mercye, and grace of our Lorde, you endeuoure
to be such a man, as maie vse the rewarde of this our graunted,
and geauen autorite worthelye, and not to anye daunger, or
losse of sowles: but rather that yow maye be able to shewe, and
present thesame hereafter, before the iudgement seate of the
hiest, and most assured Iudge to come, with the gaine of manie
sowles to God. Who keape and preserue yow alwayes in healthe
most derely beloued brother.
            
            
               
                  Of the raigne of king Edwyne: and how Pauline comming thither to preche the gospell, first baptised his daughter in Christian faith, an others with her.
               
               The. 9. Chapter.
               ABout this time the people also of Northumberlande
(that is, the English men which dwelled towarde the
Northsyde of the fludde Humber) receiued together
with their king Edwyne, the worde of faith by the preching of
Pauline, of whome I haue sumwhat spoken aboue. To the
which king in a good abodement of receiuing the faithe was
graunted both possibilite of the kingdome of heauen, and also
greater poure by thincrease of his kingdome on earthe. For he
had subdued all the coastes of Britannie, whersoeuer anie prouinces
or of Englishmen or Britons were inhabited: which
thing no one kinge of English men had done before him.Hebride
                        •
                      Insulae.
Moreouer he added (as we haue shewed before) the Meuian yles
to the Englishe kingdome. Of which yles the first that is nerest
the South, and in situation larger, and for the plentifulnes of
corne more fertyle, hath dwelling rome for the number of. 960.
families to the estimate of English men. The seconde hath space

of grounde but for 300. tenements, or somwhat more. Now
the occasion that these peoples came to the faith, was suche:
The before named king Edwine was ioyned in affinite to the
kinge of kent, by the marriage of Ladie Edelburge, otherwise
called Tate, daughter to king Elbert. Which Ladie when king
Edwine woed sending thether his embassadours, answer was geuen
by her hrother Edbald then king of Kent, that it was not
lawfull for a Christian woman, and virgin to be maried, or
spoused to a paynime, leste the faith and sacramente of the king
of heauen might be profaned by the companie of suche a
king as knew not the trew worshipping of God. Which answer
when the embassadours brought backe to kinge Edwine he
promised, that in anie case he wold doe nothing that shuld be
contrarie to the Christian faith, which this virgin professed,
but rather permitte that she with all the men and women, priestes
or seruāts which came with her, shuld keape and obserue
after the Christiās maner their faith, and customes of their religion.
Neither did he denie, but that himselfe also would receaue
the same religion, so that after the examination of wise men, it
were founde more holie then his, and meter for God. Then
vppon these conditions this virgin was promised, and sent also
vnto kinge Edwine. And according to appointment made the
man of God Paulinus was ordained Bishop, and chosen to goe
with her, to confirme her, and her companie, that they might
not be polluted with the felowship of painimes. Who did so
by his daylie exhortations, and ministringe the blessed sacramē
                  te
vnto thē. This Paulinus was made bishop by Iustus tharchbishop
of Caunterbury aboute the 21. daye of Iulie, the yeare of
our Lorde. 625.An. 625. Being ordained he is directed in company with
the aboue mentioned virgin vnto king Edwine, as if he had ben
her bodely compagnion: but the vertuous bishop, entended
wholly in his harte nought els then to call that countrie, to
which he wēt, to thacknowleadging of the truth, that according

to the sayeng of the Apostle,2. Cor. 11. 
                  he might exhibet, and present hit as a
chaste virgin to the true and only spouse, which is Christe. When he
was now commen into this countrie, with the healpe and ayde
of God he laboured ernestly to keape them, which came with
him, from falling frō their faith. And sought also how he might
possibly conuert by preching some of those painims to faith,
and grace. But as the Apostle saith: Although he lōg laboured in
preching the word of our Lord to them,2. Cor. 4. yet the God of this worlde
so blinded the hartes of th
                        •
                     s
                        •
                      infidels, that the light of the gospell,
and the glorie of Christe could not shyne before them. The
yeare folowing, there came into this cuntrie a desperate ruffian
named Ewmere: sent thither by Euichelme kinge of the west
Saxons.A traiterous facte. Who entending to dispatche kinge Edwine
both of his kingdome, and life to, brought priuely vnder
his garment a double egged short swerd, to this entent dipped
in poyson, that if the stroke of the swerde were not forceable
enough to kill the king out of hand, yet it might be healped
forward with the infection of the poison. He came
therfore on Ester Sondaye vnto the king, who laye at the ryuer
Deruent, where was the courte then. He entred ther into
the palace as an embassadour, which had earnest message
from his prince, and when with craftie speache he had a litle
made the prince attent to his fained embassaye, he steppeth
forth sodenly, and drawing his swerd from vnder his garment
flew to the kinge.Exāple of a trusty subiect. Which when Lilla, the kinges moste faithful
seruant sawe, and hauing no buckler readie at hand wherewith
he might defend the king from present deathe, stept
straightwaie with his owne bodie betwen the kinge, and the
stroke. But this murderer strooke his swerd so farre, and
feercely in them bothe, that through the bodie of this seruaunt
now quight slayne, he wounded the king himselfe greuously.
Which thing when he had thus donne, being straightwaye besette
with the weapons of the kinges garde, euen in that tumult

to, with the same bluddy swerd he slewe an other, whose
name was Fordhere. Now it happened, that the same night
of holye Ester Sonday, the Quene brought furth, and was deliuered
of a daughter, whose name was Eanfled. For the which
childe when the king in presence of the bishop Pauline gaue
thankes to his Goddes: the bishop contra
                     •
                  ie wise began to praise,
and geaue thankes to our Lorde Christe, and sayde to the
kinge certainly, that he had obtained by his prayers of Christe,
that the Quene might be deliuered safely, and without greate
griefe. With which his wordes the king being much delyted,
promised that he would renounce all idols, and euer after
serue Christe, if so be that Christe would nowe graunte
him his life, and health, and victorie also in his warres, whiche
he purposed to haue against this king Euichelme, who had
sent in such sorte this Ruffian, and manqueller, that had wounded
him. And in pledge of perfourming this his promise
he assigned and graunted to bishop Pauline this his daughter,
to be Christened. Who was baptised first of all the Northumberlannes,The first Christening of Englishmen in North
                        •
                     mberland.
with xij. other of the kinges familie vpon whitsondaye
folowing. At which time the king also being recouered
of his wounde, that he had lately taken, made an armie,
and marched forth against the West Saxons, at the whiche
battayle he slewe, or els tooke presonners all them whome
he vnderstoode to haue conspired to his deathe. So retourning
home to his countrie victour, and conquerour, yet would
he not by and by, or without farder counsell receiue the Christian
faithe: although truly he worshipped not idols from
that daye, that he promised he would serue Christe. But sought
euer after diligently of the right reuerend father Pauline the
reason, and trade of faithe, and conferred with his counsellers
and nobles, whom he knew to be wisest, what were best, as they
thought, to be done in these matters. And moreouer (as he
was by nature a very wyse man) sitting oftentymes alone.

for a great space, in muche sylence of outward voyce, but in his
inward thought commoning with himselfe, he discussed, and
debated in his mind dyuersly, what he should doe in this case,
and what religion were best to be folowed.
            
            
               
                  How Pope Boniface exorted this king with his letters to the faythe.
               
               The. 10. Chap.
               ANd beholde in the middest of these cogitations, he
happely receiued from Boniface bishop of the see Apostolique
letters exhorting him to the faith. The copie
of which is suche: To the most puissant prince Edwine king of the
Englishmen Boniface Bishop, and seruant to them that serue God
&c. Althowgh the hye secret powre of Gods diuinitie can not
be expressed by wordes,A letter of Pope Boniface to kings Edwin exhorting him to the faith. or speache of man (for it consisteth
by the greatnes therof, of so vnspeakable, and so vnserchable
an eternitie, that no force nor strength of wytte is able to
comprise or compasse, how great it is,) Yet for as muche as the
goodnes of God, opening the gates of our hartes to the knowlege
of him, dothe mercifully poore into mens myndes by secret
inspiration suche thinges as he will shalbe spoken of himselfe:
we haue thought good to extēde our priestly care and deutie,
in vttering vnto yow the riche store of our Christē belefe,
that bringing lykewyse vnto your vnderstanding,Matt. 28. the gospell
of Christe, which he commaunded to be preched to all nations,
we myght brinche vnto you the cuppe of life and saluatiō.
The goodnes therfore of the hyghest maiestie of God, (who
with his only worde, and commaundement hath made, and
created all thinges, the heauen, the earthe, the sea, and all that in
them is, setting a decent order wherin they shuld consiste) by
the counsell of his coeternall worde, and the vnitie of the holie
ghoste,Genes. 1. &. 2. made man of a peece of earth to his owne image and
lyknes, and gaue him moreouer suche a prerogatiue of excellencie,
that he preferred him and set him ruler ouer all his other

creatures, assuring him beside of an euerlasting perpetuite, so
that he kept the bounde of his commaundements. This God
the father, the sonne, and the holie ghoste, which is the inseparable
Trinite, all mankind from the Este to the weste worsshippeth
with holsome confession, and adoreth with a sure
faythe, as the creator of all thinges and their maker. To the
which God yea the hye honours of Empire, and the puissant
powres on earth are lowly subiecte, bycause by his only ordenance
and disposing, all kingdoms be geauen and graunted.
Whose mercifull goodnes encreasing alwayes, and ayding eche
his creatures, hath vouche safed most merueylously to enkendle
with the heate aud feruour of the holie ghost the cold hartes
of those nations which enhabite the vttermost partes of the
earthe, that they also mought knowe him, and beleaue in him.
For we thinke your hyghnes hath fully heard, and vnderstandeth
by this tyme (the cuntrie lyeng so nere) howe our Redemer
of his mercie hath wrought wonderfully in the illumining
of the most excellent Prince our dere sonne, kinge Audubald,
and all his subiectes. And we with a certaine longlooking
of heauenly hoope, trust, that the lyke miracle and gratiouse
gyfte shalbe geauen to yowe also from God aboue, and specially
wheras we vnderstande the Souerayne Ladie your wyfe
(who is a parte of your bodie) to be illumenyd with the hope
of eternall lyfe by the regeneration of holie baptisme. Wherfore
we haue thought it good to exhorte yowe in these our
present letters most ernestly, and with all affection of inward
charite, that abandoning all idoles, detesting the worsshipp and
honour of them, forsaking the fond foolishnes of your Goddes
temples, and despising the deceytfull entisementes of your
false sothsayinges, ye wyll now beleue in God the father Almyghtie,
and his sonne Iesus Christe, and in the holie ghoste:
that beleuing so, ye maye be absolued, and loosed by the
working powre of this blessed, and inseparable Trinite, from

the bondes and captiuite of the dyuel, and herafter be made
partakener of lyfe euerlastinge. Now yf ye long to knowe in
how great fault, and offence they are, which worshyppe idols,
and embrace the wicked superstition of them, thexamples of
their destroying and perditiō (which are estemed as Gods) can
sufficiently informe yow, of whome king Dauid in his psalmes
sayth thus:Psal. 95. 
                  All the Godes of the gentyles are dyuels but our
Lorde hath made the heauens. And agayne: They haue eyes, and see
not: they haue eares, and heare not: they haue noses, and smell not: they
haue handes, ans feele not: they haue feete and walke not. Therfore all
suche are made like vnto them, as do put anie hope or confidence in
them. For how can they haue vertue or powre to healpe anie
man, which are made of a corruptible matter, and wrowght by
the hādes of your inferiours, and subiectes? And how culd thei
get anie abilite to hurt, or healpe, wheras mans arte and crafte
only, hath applyed a deadly similitude, and lykenes of a bodie
to thē: who (were they not moued by yowe) themselfe coulde
neuer waggene walke, but lyke a stone set fast in one place,
so are they buylded vpp: hauing no vnderstanding in the
wordle but be dull with insensiblenes hitselfe, and starcke deade.
Therfore we can not by any discretion and iugement
finde owte, vppon what blindnes, and deceite of minde, ye
worshipp, and obey those Godes, to whome your owne selues
haue geauen the image, and representance of a bodie. Yt behoueth
you then, to receiue nowe the signe of that holie crosse
by which mankinde was redemed: and execrating all dangerous
deceites of the dyuell, shake from your hart his subtiltie,
and guyle, who euer maliceth, and enuyeth at the workes of
Godes goodnes. Yt behoueth yowe also to set handes on
these Godes, which hetherto ye haue made your selfe of one
metal or other. Ye must, I saye, teare thē, rent them, and squasshe
them to peeces. For the verie dissoluing and breaking of
them, that neuer had lyue sprite, or breathe in them, nor could

not by any meanes take of their makers sense, and feeling, the
breaking, I saye, of them shall playnly shew yow, that in deade
it was nothing at all, which yow haue hitherto so reuerently
worshipped. Wheras yow are your selfe far better, then they
be. For yow haue receiued of our Lorde a lyue sprite: and
Almightie God hath browght yow, althowgh by manie ages,
and diuers degrees, and kindreds, from the stocke of the first
man Adam. Whome God himselfe made, and gaue life vnto.
Come yow therfore to the acknowleging of him, that
hath created yow, that hath breathed into yow the sprite of
life, that for your redēption hath sent his only begotten sonne,
who should take yow owt of originall sinne, and reward yow
after, with the ioyes of heauen, being now delyuered from the
diuels powre, and malice. Receiue ye therfore the wordes of
the prechers, and harken to the gospell of God whiche they
shew yow: that beleuing, as we haue alredie sayde in God the
father, and Iesus Christ his sonne, and in the holie Ghost, that
blessed, and inseparable Trinite, forsaking al honour and worshipp
to diuels, and expelling from yow the ernest entising of
that poysoned, and your most deceytfull enemie, ye maye be
borne againe by water, and the holie ghost, and by the only
healpe, and bountifulnes of God, dwell with God (in whome
ye shall beleaue) in all brightnes of euerlasting glorie. And
here we haue sent yow the blessing of S. Peter heade of thapostels,
and your good guide, and gouernour: that is, a sherte laide
with gold, and a cloke of the finest sorte we haue from Ancyra.
Which we beseche your hyghnes to acept with so good a
hart, and will, as ye vnderstande it is sent from vs.
            
            
               
                  How this Pope exhorted the Quene also that she shuld diligently, and ernestly seeke for the kinges saluation.
               
               The. 11. Chap.
               THis bishop sent also letters to the Quene. And the transcript
of that epistle, which this holie and Apostolike
Pope Boniface directed from Rome to Quene Edelburge

wyfe to kinge Edwyne was suche.A letter of Pope Boniface vnto Edelburge Quene of 
                        •
                     orthumberberland. 
                  To the most high and
veriuous Princesse Quene Edelburge, his dere daughter, bishop Boniface
seruant to thē that serue God. The boūtifulnes of our redemer
by his greate prouidence, hath offred mankinde (whome by the
shedding of his owne pretiouse bloude he hath deliuered from
the bonde, and captiuite of the dyuel) sundry waies, and manie
healpes, by which they might be saued: insinuating by diuers,
meanes into the mindes of gentiles the knowledge of his name:
that therby they might be Christened, and acknowledge
their creatour. Which thinge that it hath ben by the gifte of
God bestowed on your honour, the mysticall regeneration of
your purifying in baptisme doth plainly declare. And truly our
hart hath ioyfully reioysed for this greate benefite of our Lordes
bountefulnes to yow: who hath vouchesafed to enkendle a
sparke of right religiō in you being now cōuerted to him, that
therby he might after easely enflame with the loue and knowleadg
of him self, the harte and mindes not only of your most
renomed, and dere husbād, but also of al your subiectes. For we
haue lerned by thē which came to declare vnto vs the laudable
conuersion of our most gratious, and wel beloued son kinge
Audubald, that your honour also (after ye had receiued the wō
                  derful
sacramēt and veryte of Christiā faith) do shyne and excel
in good workes, and such as be euer pleasaūt in the sight of
God. Therfore let your highnes refraine alwaies, and diligētly
kepe you self from worshipping of idols frō thalluremēte of tē
                  ples
and from fond south saynges. And so persisting with a sure
and vnchāgeable deuotiō in the loue of your redemer watch ye
and labour, neuer ceassing to bestow your paines cōtinually to
thēcrease, and enlarging of Christiā faith. For when as for our
fatherly charite we had enquired sumwhat of the state of youre
derely beloued husband, we vnderstoode that he serued and
obeyed so far furth to the abomination of idolatrie, that he
wold not yet shewe anie obedience, or geue eare to the voice

and counsell of Gods preachers, which newes was vnto vs no
small griefe, that a parte of your owne bodie shulde remaine in
this sorte alienated from knowledge of the highest, and the inseparable
holy Trinite: wherefore as becometh a father to doe,
we haue differred no lenger to send vnto you (our daughter in
Christe Iesu) our good counsell and frendfull warninge. Exhorting
you that whereas ye are now your selfe endued with
Gods grace, and diuine inspiration, ye differ not henceforth to
be instant at all times, warning him in season, or out of season,
and still calling on him, vntill he also by the healping hand of
our Lord, and Sauiour Iesus Christe may be coupled with you
in the number of Christians: that you may so much the better,
and with a surer bond of societe accōpany him, and hold the lawes
and rightes of wedlock with him.
                     
                        ••
                     . 2. For it is writē: They shalbe
ij. in one fleshe. and how can it be sayd, that there is vnite of coniunction
betwene yowe, yf your husband by the darknes of detestable
errour shall abide still alienated from the brightnes of
your faith? Ceasse not therfore to aske with continuall prayer
of the greate mercie, and longe suffringe of our Lorde, the benefite
of his illumining, and conuersion, that whom the knotte
of carnall affection hath made now as one bodie, those also the
vnitie of faith may preserue in perpetuall societe after their dedeparture
out of this life. Be you then instant most vertuous
daughter, and with endeuour hasten spedely to mollefie
the hardnes of his harte with godly remembraunces, and diuine
precepts. Shew him plainly how excellēt a misterie it is that
you by beleuing haue your self obtained. And how meruailous
a rewarde you shall haue hereafter, bicause yow are nowe regenerat
by baptisme. Enflame his colde stony harte with ofte expressing
the manyfolde graces of the holy ghost. That,
he settinge a side by suche often exhortations this bodely
and earthly worshipping of Idols, the heate, and warmeth of diuine,
and heauenly faith maye inflame his vnderstandinge.

That it maye truly appere to be fullfilled in you, which is spoken
in holy scripture.1. Cor. 7. 
                  The infidel and vnbeleuing man, shal be saued
by the faithfull and beleauing woman. For vnto this end you haue
your selfe receiued mercye of our Lorde, and fauour, that
you should render, and yelde vnto him as your Redemer, the
multiplied fruyte of your fayth, and other good giftes, which
he hath credited to you. Which thinge that you may fulfill
by the gratiouse healp of his goodnes, we cease not to aske
with our daylie prayers. In these therfore our premises shewing
you the deutye of our fatherly loue, and charite we exhorte
you, that hauing the opportunitie of a bearer, ye wil spedely
declare vnto vs those thinges, which the myghtie powre
of God shall vouchesafe to worke merueylously by you in
the conuersion of your husband, and al your subiectes. That we
(which carefully long, and hartely looke for happy newes of
the saluation of you, and all yours) by this your tydinges may
be comforted, and made glad, and perfectly knowing the light
and brightenes of Gods fauour and mercie to shyne amongest
you, we maie with ioyfull confession geaue full, and whole
thankes to God the geauer of all good thinges, and to blessed
S. Peter the chefest of his Apostles. In the meane time we haue
here sent you the blessing of S. Peter your patrone, and heade
of the apostles. That is a looking glasse set in siluer, and
a combe of yuery gilted with golde. Which we praie your
goodnes as well to accept, as ye vnderstand it is sent vnto you.
            
            
               
                  How king Edwine was prouoked to receiue the faith, by a vision appearing to him in bannishment.
               
               The. 12. Chap.
               THus much did Pope Boniface by his letters, for the
conuerting of king Edwine, and all his countrie, which
king was also well holpen, and almost forced to receaue
the faithe, and marke diligently the holesome preceptes

of Christian doctrine by an oracle, and vision from heauen.
Which the goodnes of God vowchesafed to shewe
him, while he laye bannished in kinge Redwaldes courte, king
of the east Englishmen. For when bishop Pauline had well
perceaued that the princes haughty courage could hardly be
brought to the lowly humblenes of Christianite, and that it
would styfly be bowed and bent to beare the mysterie, and
burden of Christes crosse: when he remembred also, how he
had nowe laboured a longe tyme bothe with preaching to
the people, and with praying to Gods mercie for the saluation
of king Edwine, and all his subiectes: at the lenght hauing
lerned in sprite (for so it is most lykest to be,) what was
that vision, which had longe before ben shewed to the kinge
from heauen, he made no delayes at all, but came spedely to
the kinge, and warned him to fulfill and accomplishe his vowe,
whiche in the vision that appeared to him he had promised
to doe in case he were deliuered from his present miseries
and restored againe to his raygne, and kingdome. Nowe was
this vision suche, as foloweth: At what time king Edelfryde
Edwines predecessour with greuouse pursuing put Edwine
to flight,A vision, by the which Edwin the first Christen king of Northū
                     berland was called to the faithe. and made him lye pryue, and lurke in diuers places
of other realmes for manie yeres space as a bannished man:
at the lenghth Edwine came to king Redwald, besechinge
him, that he would saue him, and defend his life from the
traynes, and ernest serche of this his dedly ennemie. Who
gladly entertained hym, and promised to fullfill this his requeste,
and petitiō. But after that king Edelfride had heard say that
Edwine was seene in that prouince, and vnderstood that he liued
ther, and dwelled familiarly with all his cōpany, forthwith
he sent out his Embassadours to king Redwald, with a greate
somme of monie, to procure Edwines deathe. But it preuailed
nothing. Thē sent he the second tyme, and the thyrd tyme also
offring greater gyftes, and more plentifully bothe gold and

syluer thretning him at the laste warres, yf his request were
accomplished. Then king Redwald other dreading the threts
or corrupted with the brybes graunted his request, and promised
that he would put Edwyne to death himselfe, or els yealde
him vp to thimbassadeurs. Which thing when a certayne
faythfull frend of Edwynes had marked and well vnderstoode,
he entred incontinent to the chamber where Edwyne purposed
to take his rest. For it was now an houre within nyght
and calling him forth, told him what the king had promised to
doe against him: sayeng in the end this muche: I shall therfore
(yf it so please yowe) leade yowe owt of this prouince, and
bryng yow into suche a place, that nother king Redwald, nor
yet king Edelfryde shalbe able to fynde yowe. To whome Edwyne
answered in this maner: Sir, I thanke yow most hartely
for this your greate gentlenes. But I can not folowe your counsell
herin. For first, I must not breake my promesse, which I
haue made to so greate and mightie a Prince as is king Redwald,
especially wheras he hath done me no harme, ne wronge,
nor hath as yet shewed anie hatred, or displeasure towardes me.
And truly if I must of necessite dye thus, I had rather he shuld
put me to deathe, then anie baser man or person of lesle nobilite.
Agayne whether I pray yow shuld I flee nowe, who haue
so many yeares, and so long tyme walked lyke a vagabounde
through all prouinces of this yle of Britannie, only to auoyd
and eschewe myne enemies snares, and assaultes? Now when
this his frend was gone, Edwyne remained without alone and
sytting sadly before the palace begāne to be troubled with manie
stormes, and vexations of thoughts, as a man not witting
what to doe or whither to goe in this so ruefull case. After he
had ben longe vexed with inwarde, and priuie troubles of
mynde, burning inwardly with close fyre of secret sorowe, behold,
in the greate sylence, and quyet of the mydde nyght
he sawe a man vtterly vnknowen to him bothe for visage and

countenaunce, and also for his aray and apparell to approche
and drawe toward him. Whome bycause he had espyed thus at
a blushe, and so straungely desguised, he was not a lytle a frayde.
The straunger cometh euen vnto him, greteth him and
asketh him, wherfore he sate so soroufull on the stone abrode
watching, and all alone at that howre especially when other
men were within at rest, and in their depe sleape: Then Edwyne
lykewise demaundyd of him, what he had to doe therwith,
yf he passed ouer the nyght within dore, or els without. To
whome this mā answered, and sayde: Thinke ye not but that I
know the cause of your heauynes, and watche. And also of this
your solitarie syttinge with out dores. For I know certainly
who ye be, and wherfore you are so sad, and soroufull. And also
what myscheffe yow feare shortly shall befall you. But tell
me of fryndshippe, what reward would you geaue him, that
shuld now rydde yowe quyte out of all these sorowes, and
trowbles and persuade king Redwald, that neyther he himselfe
shuld hurte yowe, nor yealde yowe vp to your enemies, that
they myght slaye yow? When Edwyne answered that he
would geaue all that he possible could to anie suche a one for
reward of so good a turne, this mā added moreouer and sayde:
But what if besyde this, he do warrant you, that ye shalbe a
kinge, and all your enemies vanquished, yea and that in suche
sorte that you shall not only excell all your auncient progenitours,
but also far passe in powre all the kinges of Englishemen,
which haue euer ben in this coūtrie. Here Edwyne being
made more firme, and constant by ofte questioning doubted
not to promis, that in all pointes, and at all tymes he wold be
answerable with worthie thankes geauing to the man that
shuld bestowe on him such greate benefites. Then this man
spake the thyrd tyme and sayde: But tell me againe, what yf besyde
all this, the same man, which sheweth yow now before,
truly, and vnfaynedly, that yow shall hereafter surely, and vndoubtedly

doubtedly haue suche and so greate benefites, can geaue yowe
also better coūsell, and more profitable for your sowles health,
and saluation, then euer any your parentes, and auncesters
heard of, could ye then consent, and obey him, and harken to
his holsome sayenges? Here Edwyne promised owt of hand
without anie lenger delaye, that he would altogether followe
his lerning, and doctrine which both could, and would deliuer
him presently from so manie miseries, and so greate daungers
as he was in, and exalte him afterward to the raygne and souerantie
of his countrie. Which his answer was heard, and taken.
Then this man straightwaye, which had so long talked with
him, layde his right hande vpon Edwines heade, and said: when
these thinges therfore shall happen herafter in suche sorte to
yowe, remember well this tyme, and this our talke. And differ
not at that time to fulfil and accomplishe this, that yow do
nowe promesse me. Which being sayde, by and by he vanished
awaye. To the entent that Edwine might vnderstand and perceaue,
that it was no man, but a ghoste which appeared to him.
Now when this younge prince was lefte alone, and sate there
solitarie, reioysing with himselfe for this gentle consolation,
and good comforte, but yet very careful, and muche counting
with himselfe who it shuld be or whence he shuld come which
had thus spoken, and talked familiarly with him: beholde his
forsayd frende came againe, and greating him cherfully, Arise
Edwine (sayde he) and come in. Let passe this your carke
and cares. Set your harte at rest, and take your quiet sleape.
For the kinges minde is chaunged. Neither dothe he purpose
nowe, or intend to doe yow any wronge, but rathe
                     •
                   to defend
yowe, and accomplishe his promised fayth vnto yowe. For after
he had shewed the Quene in secret that his purpose, which
I told yowe of before, 
                     •
                  he dehorted him moste ernestly, and
withdrew him from so euill, and so deadly an intention, saying
that it was in no wise mete for suche a king, of so greate

prowe
                     •
                  e, and honour, as he was, to sell his best, and derest
frend, being now browght into straightes and miserie, for a
litle gold. Nor that he should breake his faith, and promesse,
which owght to be more estemed then al treasures, or not bide
by his word for the coueit, and loue of monie. But to be shorte
the king did euen as his Ladie had counselled him to doe. For
he not only not betrayed, and yelded to thembassadours this
his banished man Edwine: but helped him rather to the kingdome.
For as sone as these embassad ours were thus with deniall
departed home againe, he gathered incontinētly a myghtie
armie to conquer king Edelfrede. Whome he slewe without
difficultie (bicause he marched forth against him hastely and
with a weake and vnordred oste) in the borders of the Marchland
men, at the Este syde of the riuer called Idle. For in deade
kinge Edelfride had not time, and space enowgh grawnted
him to gather all his force together, and to ioygne his powre
with well disposing his hoste, and sowldiers in order. In this
skirmishe Renier king Redwalds sonne was slayne. And thus
Edwin according to the oracle which he had receiued, not only
auoyded the dawnger of his most dedly enemie, but also by
his death succeded in thonor of his Souerainte, and kingdome.
Now therfore to returne againe vnto my purpose, thowgh
Bishop Pawline seriously preched the word of God, yet kinge
Edwine slacked and lengered to beleaue him. Vsing yet for a
certaine space, at diuers competent howres to sitte solitarie, (as
I haue sayde before) and diligently to compte with him selfe,
what were best to be donne and what religion was best to be
folowed. At which solitary meditation of the prince this good
and godly bishoppe Pawline entred on a daye in to the palace,
and cominge to the kinge, laied his right hand on his heade
and asked hym, whether he remembred that sygne, or no?
The king sodenly trembled therat for feare. And when he
wold haue fallen downe at Paulinus feate, the bishoppe lyfted

him vppe, and spake after a familiar sorte thus vnto him: Behold
o Soueraine Prince, by the bountifull hand and powre of
our Lorde, and God, you haue eskaped the hande and vengeance
of your moste hated, and dredfull enemie. Behold also, by
his most gratiouse goodnes you haue obtained the Soueraintie
of raigne, and rule of the kingdome. Remember now therfore
the third thinge, which yowe promised him, and differ no
lenger to performe, and accomplishe the same, by receauing his
faithe, and keaping his commaundements, who hath deliuered
you from your temporall aduersities, and exalted you to the
honour, and maieste of a king. Whose holy will yf you will hereafter
obey and euer more doe his pleasure, which by me he
preacheth, and declareth to yowe, he will also deliuer you from
the perpetuall tormente of hell, and make you partakener
with him in heauen of eternall kingdome, and blesse without
end.
            
            
               
                  What counsell king Edwyne had of the nobles and peares of his royalme, for the receiuing of Christian faithe: and how one of his Bisshops profaned and brake downe the Idols aulters.
               
               The 13. Chapter.
               WHich worde when the kinge heard, he answered
immediatly bothe that he would, and also
that he was bounde to receaue this faithe,
which B. Pauline had preched, and taught. But
yet I thinke it good, (quoth he) first to confer,
and common herof with my frendes, the nobilitie,
and peares of my realme: that if they shall happely thinke
herein, as I doe, then we maye be Christened all together in
the founte of lyfe. Whereunto when Byshop Pauline agreed
king Edwyne calling the states together consulted with them.
And asked seuerally eche of them, what maner of doctrine
this semed to be, which vntill that daye had neuer ben head
of before? And how they liked the honour, and worshipping

of this new God whiche was preached nowe emongest
them? To whome Bishop Coyfi first of all his Bishops answered:
Maye it like your highnes to proue, and trie well what maner
of doctrine this is which now is preched vnto vs. But this
muche shall I surely saye, and as I certainly knowe, protest, and
confesse vnto yowe, that the religion which vnto this daye we
haue euer obserued and kept, hath no vertue, nor goodnes in
hit at al. For none of your graces subiectes hath ben at anie time
more ernest, and diligent in worshipping of our Godes then I
haue ben: and yet not withstanding manie of them, haue receiued
of your graces bounteousnes more ample benefites, then I
haue, manie of them more hygher dignities, then I haue: and
manie of them haue ben better prospered in all they tooke in
hand to doe, or sought to gette, then euer I was.A carnall re
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     ct of 
                        •
                     n a
                        •
                     hen Bishop occasi
                        •
                     n o
                        •
                      good. But yf the
Gods coulde ought haue done, they wold haue rather hoolpen
me, who at all times serued them so dewly. Wherfore it remaineth,
that if these thinges which be now newly preched to vs
shalbe founde after good examination, the better, and of more
strenght, and stedfastnes, that then without longer delaye we
hasten to receiue, and embrace them. To this persuasion, of bisshop
Coyfi an other of the nobles consenting sayde by and by:
Suche semeth to me, dere Soueraine, the lyfe of men present
here in earthe (for the comparison of our vncertaine time, and
dayes to lyue) as if a sparowe beaten with winde, and wether
shuld chaunce to flie in at one windowe of the parlour, and flitting
there a litle aboute, straight waye flye out at an other, while
your grace is at diner in the presence of your dukes, Lordes,
Capitaines, and high garde. The parloure it selfe being then
pleasaunt, and warme with a softe fyre burning amidest therof,
but all places, and waies abrode troubled withe tempeste,
raging stormes, winter windes, hayle, and snowe.
Nowe your grace considereth, that this sparrowe while it was
within the house felt no smart of tempesteouse winde or rayne.

But after the shorte space of this faire wether, and warme
ayre, the poore byrd escapeth your sight, and returneth from
winter to winter againe. So the life of man appeareth here in
earth, and is to be sene for a season: but what maye, or shall folowe
the same, or what hath gon before it, that surely knowe
we not. Therefore if this newe lerning can enfo
                     •
                  me vs of
anie better suertie, my thinke it is worthie to be folowed.
Thus or in like manner sayd the rest of the elders, and the kinges
counsellers, no doubte, by the holie inspiration of God.
Only bishop Coyfi was not content to rest him here, but sayd
moreouer that he would with diligēce note Pauline and marke
what he said of that God, whome he preached. Which thing
when he had so donne according to the kinges will, and pleasure,
he returned againe, and with a lowde voice sayde. I vnderstoode
certes longe a goe, that in verie dede, it was right
nought which we worshipped as God. For the more curiously
that I sought for the trueth in worshipping our Godes,
certainly the farder was I from it, and the lesse I founde hit.
But now doe I plainly perceaue and knowe, that in this Pawlinus
preaching and teaching is that trueth, and veritie, which
is able to geaue vs the greate giftes of life, of saluation, and of
blisse euerlastinge. Wherfore I counsell, and exhorte yowe my
most Soueraine and dere Prince, that we may out of hande
curse our temples and abandon them. And burne downe with
fyre our Idolatrous aulters. Which we haue heretofore erected
in vayne, and consecrated without all fruite, and profitte. But
that I maye be shorte, and come nere my purpose: the kinge
gaue his full, and plaine consent to this holye man bisshop
Pauline. Willing him to preache the gospell freely. And himselfe
renouncing there all idolatrie, promised that he would
receaue, and embrace the faith of Christe. And demaunding
then, of this before sayd Coifi, bishop of his sacrifices, who
should first profane the aulters, and destroye the temples of Idols,

with all the grates, and barres wherwith they were enuyroned?
Marry (quoth he) I will. For who maye better then I,
which ons by folishnes worshipped, and highly estemed them?
Therefore to the good example of all other, I will now my selfe
through the wisedome of God (that is one, only, and true
God) geauen vnto me, beate downe, and vtterly destroye the
abomination of our temples. So sorsaking in this wise all superstitiouse
custome, and vaine dreade, he besought the king to
graunte him harnesse, and armoure, and therewith a greate
courser, and mighty couragious stalyon horse. On which he
mounted lustely, and with all spede rode forth to batter, and
beate downe to grounde the idols. Now was it not laufull for
a bishop of the sacrifices either to were harnesse, and armoure,
or to ride on other then a mare. But Coyfi made smalle compte
thereof. For being alredie well harnessed, and strongly girded
with a swerd about his loynes, sitting fast on the kinges
courser and stought stalyon, he tooke also in his hand a speare,
and so did marche and sette fourthe against the pernitiouse
idols. Which sight when the people sawe, they thought he had
ben madde. Yet he for all that staied not. But as sone as he approched
nere the tēple, profaned it, casting thereon the speare,
which he held in his hand, and muche reioysing now, bycause
he knew the true worshipping of God, commaunded the companie
which was there with him to destroye the temple, to fyre
the idolatrouse aulters, and breake the barres, grates, or whatsoeuer
ornamentes were theraboute. And truly the place where
those Idols sometime were, is now to be seene, not far from
Yorke at the ryfing of the riuer Derwent. And is at this present
day called Gormund in Gaham. In which place, the bishop
Coyfi by holy inspiratiō of the true God, polluted, and destroyed
the aulters of false Goddes, which himselfe before had solemly
consecrated.
            
            
               
                  How king Edwine and all his subiectes were made Christians, and in what place bisshop Pawlyne baptised them.
               
               
               The 14. Chap.
               THen king Edwyne,The first Christendom of the English Prince in Northū
                     berland, or in the North countre. with al the nobilite of his countrie
and most parte of the commons receiued Christes
fayth and came to the lauetorie of holie regeneration
the xj. yeare of his raygne. Which was the yeare of our Lorde
627. and aboute the 180. after the entrance of the english men
into Britannie. He was Christened at Yorke on Ester Sondaye,
which was the xij. of Aprill. in S. Peter thapostles church.
Which he had in al spede set vp of wood, while he was catechised,An. 627.
and instructed there in the fayth agaynst his Christening.
In this rite of Yorke he appointed a Bysshops See, for byshop
Pawline his informer, and teacher. At whose request, and petitiō
as sone as himselfe was Christened,The Cathedrall church of Yorke. he buylded in that same
place a greate temple of stone, for an ample and large Cathedral
church in the middest wherof he would haue enclosed this
his owne propre oratorie, which himselfe had first made of
woode while he was instructed to the fayth, and before he
was yet baptised. Layeng therfore depe foundations aboute
this his first oratorie, he began to buylde there a fayre churche
fowre square. But before the wall therof came to his iuste
hyghnes, the king was slayne by cruell deathe and lefte that
royall worke to be endyd and parfyted by kyng Oswald his
successour. Now Pauline from that time. 6. yeares after that is,
to the end of king Edwynes raygne preched the word of God
continually (by his good leaue and fauour) throughe out all
that prouince. And they beleaued him, and were Christened,
who were preordinated to lyfe euerlasting: emongest whome
was Offride, and Eadfride, king Edwynes sonnes. Which he
had in his banishement by dame Quenburge daughter to Cearle
king of the Marshes. After whome, his other children,
which he had by Queene Edelburge were baptised, as his sonne
Edilhune, his daughter Edilfride and an other of his sonnes

called Buskfrea, of which the ij. first were taken oute of this
mortall lyfe in their infancie or tender youthe, and buryed in
the church of Yorke. Iffy also Offride his sonne was Christened
too, with manie other of the nobilitie, and diuers honorable
men. And (as it is reported) then was the feruour of faithe
and ernest desyre of holie baptisme so greate emongest
the people of Northumberland, that on a certaine time, when
bishop Pauline came with the kings, and Quenes maiestie, to
the courte, or princes palacie at Adregin, he stayed there with
them. 36. dayes only occupied in catechising and instructing
the people in Christe his faithe, and afterward baptising them:
in eche of the which dayes he did nothing els from morning
to euenynge, but instructe them with the word of God, and
teach thē the faith, and saluation in Christe Iesus, which flocked
thither out of all places and villages theraboute. Whome
after he had thus informed, and taught, he baptised in the fludde
Elene. For that was the next nere water, which he could
conueniently vse for baptim. This towne Adregin in the time
of the kinge and aftercommers waxed rude, and deserte. And
an other was buylt vp for hit in a place called Melwyn: And
this muche dyd byshop Pawline in theIn northū
                     
                        •
                     erlād Bernicians prouince.
But in the coūtrie of theIn yorkeshere. Deires, where he laie most cōmonly
with the kinge, he baptised in the fludde Suale, which renneth
fast by a village adioyned to Cataracte. For as yet there
could not be buylded oratories, fountes, or places of baptisme,
in this newe begon, and late founded churche. But yet was
there buylte a greate church in the coast and champyon called
D
                     •
                  wne. Where was an other of the kinges courtes, and palace.
Which church the painims that slewe king Edwine b
                     •
                  rned afterward
with the whole village. In sted of the which palace the
kinges euer after made their mansion place in the country called
Loides.Aultar of stone. But the aultar of the before mentioned churche
eskaped the fire, bycause it was made of stone. And is kept to

this present daye in the monasterie of the right reuerend Abbot,
and priest Trunwulfe standing in the wodde Elmete.
            
            
               
                  How the prouince of the Este English receiued the fayth of Christ.
               
               The. 15. Chap.
               NOw had king Edwine (by common reporte) suche
a zele, and ernest deuotion toward the Christian faithe
that he perswadid Carpwald kinge Redwalds sonne,
and king of the Est English, to lea
                     ••
                   of the vaine superstition
of idols, and to come with his whole royalme and embrace
the true faythe, and receaue the sacramentes of Christe his
churche. For his father king Redwald before him was Christened
in kent but alas in vaine. For returning home againe
he was seduced by his wyfe, and certaine other peruerse doctours.
And being in suche wyse depraued from the sincerite,
and purenesse of fayth, his end was worse then his beginning.
For he would seme, after the maner of the olde Samaritanes to
serue both Christe, and his owne false Godes to, as he dyd before.
And in one temple he had erectyd an aultar for the sacrifice
of Christe and an other litle aultar for burnt sacrifices
to his Idols and dyuels. The which temple Aldwolfe kinge
of that prouince after him ( who lyued in this our
                     •
                  age) sayde
that it dured so, vnto his time, and witnessed that he sawe it
himselfe in his childhoode. Truly this before named king
Redwald was a noble prince of byrthe, althowgh vile and base
in his actes and deades. For he was king Tityls sonne, whose
fathers name was Woffa, of whome the kinges of the east english
men are called Woffinges. But king Carpwald not long
after he had ben Christened, was slayne by a gentile, and paynim
named Richbert. And frō that time. 3. yeares after, the prouince
liued in gent
                     •
                  lite falling from Christian religion vntyll
at the last Sibert king Carpwalds brother toke the kingdome,
a man in all pointes lerned and most Christian. Who whiles
his brother was yet alyue, lyuing bannished in Fraunce was

Christened there, and instructed in the holy mysteries of our
faythe of which he went about to make all his royalme partakener,
as sone as he came to the crowne. To whose good endeuour
herin bishopp Felix dyd moste ernestly fauoure, and
with greate praise applie himselfe.The coū
                     tres of Suffolk, Norfolck and of Cā
                     bridg sheres (then called, the East english) counerted to the faith. Who when he came from
Burgundie (where he was borne, and toke holie orders) into
Britanny to Honorius tharchbishop, and had opened this his
desire and godly purpose vnto him, the Archebishopp gladly
gaue him licence and sent him furthe to preche the worde of
God vnto the foresayde Este English. Wher certes his zele and
vertuous desire proued not in vayne. For this holie husbande
man and happie tiller of the spirituall filde founde in that nation
plentifulnes of fruite, and encrease of people that beleaued
him. For he browght all that prouince, beinge now delyuered
by his healpe from their long iniquite, and vnhappines,
vnto the fayth, and workes of iustice, and in the end reward
of perpetuall b
                     •
                  isse, and happines for euer, according to
the good abodement of his name, whiche in Lattin is called
Felix, and in our Englishe tounge soundeth happie.Dūmocke He was
Byshopp in the cite of Dummocke afterward. Where when he
had ruled the churche of Christe. 17. yeares in that dignite, and
in that prouince he endyd his life in peace.
            
            
               
                  How Pawlyne preched in the prouince of Lindisse, and of the state of king Edwynes raygne.
               
               The. 16. Chap.
               BVt Byshopp Pawlyne continued styll,Lincolne shere. and at this tyme
preched the worde of God in the prouince of Lindisse,
which is the next toward the South bancke of Humber,
bending euen vnto the seas side where he first conuerted to
our Lord the maior of Lincolne whose name was Blecca,Prefectum Lindecoli
                     
                        •
                     ae ciuitatis withal
his howseholde. In the which citie he buylt a well wrowght
churche of stone: the rouffe whereof eyther for long lacke of
reparations, or by the spoyle of enemies is nowe cast downe.

But the walles thereof stand yet to be seene at this present daie
and yearly some or other miracles are wont to be showen ther
to the greate good, and comforte of them which faythe fully
seeke therfore. In this churche after Iustus departure hence
vnto Christe, Pawlyne consecrated Honorius, Archebishopp
of Caunterbury, as I shall shewe more conueniently herafter.
Nowe as towching the faythe, and belefe of this prouince, a
certaine preist, and abbot, a man of good credit, and to be beleued,
whose name is Deda, of the monasterie of Peartan told
me that one of the elders of that couent (as he reported him
selfe) was baptised with manie other of the people there, at
none daye by bishop Pawline in the presence of king Edwine,
and in the fludde of Trent, nere the citie Thwolfing acester. the
which father, and elderly man, was wont to describe Paulinus
personne, saying that he was a taule man, sumwhat crooked
backe, and blacke of heare, lene in face, and hauing a hooked
and thinne nose, in countenance bothe dredful, and reuerent.
Who had in his chappel one Iames by name, who was a deacō,
and an industrious and diligent mā, noble certes and of greate
fame in Christ, and the church. Who liued also euē vnto our time.
But in those dayes such was the peace, and tranquillite
through out all Britannie which waye soeuer king Edwynes
dominions laye, that (as it is yet in a cōmon prouerbe) a weake
womā might haue walked with her new borne babe ouer al the
yland euen from sea to sea, without anie dammage, or danger.
Moreouer this king did so muche tender his subiectes and the
welth of the commons that in most places where he sawe fay
                  
                     •
                  e,
clere wel springes breaking out by the highwaies syde, he enclosed
them in quicke sett boures for the refreshing of wayfaring
men hauing by, greate brasen basens to bathe, or washe in.
Which basens either for feare of the kinges displeasure no man
durst touche farder then to his owne present vse, and necessite:
or no man wold take them awaye for the loue, and good will

they boore to their prince. Who was for the time of his raigne
so honoured and loued, that the triumphing banners, and flagges
were borne before him not in warre only, but in peace too,
whersoeuer he went abrode, or rode with his garde in progresse
aboute the greate cities, townes, and sheres of his dominions.
Yea euen when he passed through the stretes to any
place, there was carried before him that kinde of flag or stremer,
which the Romans calle Tufa, and the English men now
a Thuuffe.
            
            
               
                  How king Edwyne receaued letters of exhortation from Pope Honorius who sent therwith a palle to bishop Pauline.
               
               The. 17. Chapter.
               AT what time Honorius Boniface his successor was
bishop of Rome, and sate in the see Apostolike, when
he had vnderstoode that the kinge of Northumberland
and all his subiectes in that countrie were conuerted to
the faithe and confession of Christe by Paulinus preaching,
he sent the same bishop Pauline a palle, and letters
to king Edwyne exhorting him, and his subiectes with fatherly
loue and charite, to persist, or rather go forward in this
true faithe which they had now receiued. The tenor of which
letters is suche. To the most puissant prince and his most vertuous
sonne in our Lorde Iesus Christe Edwyne king of the English
men, bishop Honorius seruant to them that serue God sendeth greating.
                  The epistle of Pope Honorius to Edwyn the first christen kinge of Northū
                     berland.
So is your Christian loue, and integrite, fyred with the
flame of faith to the worshipping of your creator and maker,
that it shineth far and wyde, and being declared through all the
worlde bringeth furth fruyt of your doinge. And truly so doe
ye know your selfe best to be a king, when that after ye are
taught by the right and true preching, ye beleaue in almightie
God your king and creator. Worshipping him, adoring him,
and rendring vp to him the syncere deuotion of your hart, as
far forthe as mans weaknes, and poore abilite can attaine vnto.
For what other thinge I praye you, are we able to offer vnto

our God, then that persisting in good workes and confessing
him to be the author of mankinde we worship him, and spedely
render our vowes, and prayers vnto him? Therfore we exhorte
you our most derely beloued sonne in our Sauiour
Christe Iesu, as it is mete for a louing father to doe, that ye endeuour
al maner of wayes ye cā, with ernest will, and daily prayer,
to hold and kepe this, that the mercy of God hath wrought
in you, calling you, and all yours vnto his grace. And so shall
he which hath vouche
                     •
                  afed to bring you in this present world
from all errour to the knowlege of his holy name, prepare
for you in the worlde to come a mansion place in heauen.
Be ye therfore often occupied in the reading of S. Gregories
workes. Who was a man certes of blessed memorie, our
good predecessour, and your true precher, and Apostle. Haue
before your eyes continually the greate zele of his doctrine,
and good affection which he gladly practised for your soules
health and saluation. That by this meanes his ver
                     ••
                  ouse prayer
may both encrease your kingdome, and also prosper yo
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  eople.
And that in the end he may represent you all, as clene soules,
and without fault, before the throne of almighty God.
Now as concerning these thinges,Cōstitutions frō Rome touching the clergy. which your grace desyred to
be ordeined and appointed by vs for your priestes we haue
without all delay prouided the same, and truly the rather for
your syncere and vnfayned faithes sake. Which hath ben at diuers
times, and by diuers relatiōs, as also now by the bearers of
these our presentes, commendably declared vnto vs. We haue
therfore with the rest of our rules and orders sent here ij. palles
for the ij metropolitans of your countre, that is, for bishop Honorius,
and bishop Pauline. Willing and commaunding, that
when one of them is called out of this mortall lyfe to the mercie
of God, then shall his make and felowe which is yet a lyue
subro gate by this our authorite an other bishop metropolitane
in his place which is deceased, which thinge we doe graunte

vnto them, as well for your good affection to vs, and loue to
the truthe, as also for the distance of places, and of so greate
prouinces and cuntries, as lye betwene Rome and Britannie.
And last to thintent, that we might in all pointes shewe your
highnes, howe our consent, and agrement is euer more redie at
hand, to your deuoute zele, and ernest desyre of Gods glorie.
Who keape your grace alwaies in parfecte healthe, and prosperite.
            
            
               
                  How bishop Honorius who succeded Iustus in the byshoprike of Caunterbury, receiued from Pope Honorius a palle, and letters.
               
               The 18. Chapter
               NOW about this tyme died Archebishop Iustus, the
x. daie of Nouember. And Honorius was chosen in his
place. Who comming to Archebishop Pauline to be
appointed thereto, met him at Lincolne. And there was consecrated,
and instituted byshop of Caunterbury. And is nowe
numbred fifthe after S. Austin. To whome also Pope Honorius
sent a palle with letters, in the which he commaunded the
verie selfe same thinge, that he wrote before in his epistle to
king Edwine. Which is, that whensoeuer the bishop of Caunterbury,
or the bishoppe of Yorke were departed this life, then
the other which remained a liue, and is yet prelate of the same
degree should haue powre, and authoritie, to ordaine an other
priest in the Archebishops rome, which is now deceased. That
it mought not to be nedefull alwaies to trauaile, and toyle by
sea and by land as farre as to Rome, for the institution, and appointing
of an Archebishop. The copie of the Popes letters I
thinke not muche amis to be here inserted in our historie.
               To Honorius our derely beloued brother,The epistle of Pope Honorius to Honorius the Archebisshop of Caunterbury. Honorius sendeth
greating: Among manie other prerogatiues, and gratious giftes
which our mercifull Redemer vowchesafeth to geaue his poore
seruauntes, this doth he also bountifully graunte vs of his
mere liberalite, and goodnes, that by brotherly comforte and

frendfull letters, as it were by an inward looking on our hartes,
or an outward beholding of our mutuall visage, and coūtenaunces,
we represent, and shew in our selues a certaine loue, accord,
and vnite. For which gratiouse benefit we render thankes
vncessātly vnto his high maieste. And besech him in most suppliaunte
wise, to strenghtē and confirme you with his mightye
powre continually, that ye maye ernestly laboure alwaies in
preaching his holie gospell, and profit therein: that ye maye folowe
the rule, and steppes of your heade and master, blessed S.
Gregory: that Christe maye send by you greater encrease vnto
his church: And last that the soules alredy wonne, and cōuerted
by you and your predecessours (which hath proceded of the
first planting of blessed S. Gregory) maye in more ample wise
encrease in faith, and prosper in good workes, in the feare of
God, and parfecte charite. And so I trust the promises of our
Lord shall hereafter take place in you, and this his blessed voice
call you to eternall blisse and ioyefulnes:Matth. 11. 
                  Come vnto me, all ye
that laboure, and trauayle, and I will refreshe you.
                  Matth. 24. And againe: O
my good, and faithfull seruant, because thou hast ben faithfull ouer a
litle, I will appointe the ouerseer to a greate dele, come in, vnto the
ioyes of thy Lord and master. And thus much, derely beloued
in the waie of exhortation, we haue premised, of the abundance
of our charite, and loue towardes you. Now as concerning
the priuileges of your churches, we haue not differred to
graunte you such thinges, as we haue thought metest for you.
Therfore to answer your requestes herein, looke what authorite,
we in the stede, and place of S. Peter heade of the Apostles,
haue graunted you, by our expresse commaundement in letters
directed to our dere sonne Edwine your kinge we will ye
keape, and obserue the same. Which is: that when one of yowe
is departed this mortall life, the other which is lefte a lyue shall
assigne an other bishop in the departed Archebisshops rome
and dignite. And for the better doinge, and ordering herof, we

haue sent vnto eche of you a palle, that by the authorite of this
our commaundement, your orderly and due institution may
be acceptable in the sight of Almightie God. Wherin to condescend,
and graunte this muche vnto you, we were moued
by the longe iourny, and 
                     •
                  ediouse trauailing by see, and lande
from Britannie to Rome, that no hinderance may happen hereafter
to your churche, by anye pretenced occasion anie manner
of waye. But rather that you maye farder set forthe the
faithe and deuotion of the people committed to your charge.
Almightie God keape you in good health most derely beloued
brother. Geauen the xj. of 
                     •
                  une in the 24. yeare of the
raygne of our most gratiouse, and soueraine Lorde Heraclius
Emperour. Also the thirde yeare, of the most happiest Cesar
Heraclius the sonne. The 7. Indiction: the yere of our Lorde.
633.
            
            
               
                  Howe first this Pope Honorius. And after him the elected bishop Iohn sent letters to the Scottes for the keaping of Ester. And against Pelagius heresie.
               
               The 19. Chap.
               THis Pope Honorius sent letters also vnto the Scottes,
(whome he vnderstoode to erre in the obseruation of
the holy time of Easter, as I haue befor specified,) diligētly
exhorting thē, that they would not esteme or think their
owne small number wiser, then the churches of Christe, either
auncient, either newely conuerted which haue ben heretofore,
or be now at this present daye anie where through out all
the whole worlde, in celebrating any other Easter, then after
the co
                     •
                   accompte of Ester, and according to the vniforme
decrees 
                     〈◊〉
                   bishops in the wordle. Whiche haue vppon
that matter sate in Synodes, and cōcluded a certain order in generall
councels. To whome al
                     •
                  o for the
                     •
                   mending of the same
errour, Ihon Seuerinus successour, who next succeded Honorius,
when he was yet but elected, and nominated Bis
                     •
                  hop of

Rome directed letters of greate authorite and full of good lerning:
plainly prouing in thē, that the Ester Sondaye must be
compted, and obserued, from the. 15. moone, vnto the. 21. as it
was proued,The copie of a letter frō the clergy of Rome to the clergy of Scotland. and allowed by the Nicene Councell the first.
Moreouer he warned thē in thesame epistle, to auoyde, and
escheue, Pelagius heresie, whiche he vnderstode, dyd begin to
ryse, and springe againe amongest thē. The beginninge of
which epistle was thus: To our derest beloued, and the moste
vertuouse prelates, Thomian, Colūban, Chroman, Dimā, and
Bathan Byshops: Chroman, Herman, Lawstran, Stellan, and
Segian Priestes: to Saran, and all other doctours, or Abbotes of
Scotland: Hilarie, Archeprieste, and keaper of the vacant sea
Apostolique, Ihon deacon, and in the name of God elected,
and chosen Byshop of thesame holie see:Primicer
                        •
                     
                   and Ihon, the chiefe Secretarie,
and keaper of that sea Apostolike, and Ihon also seruant
of God, and Counseller of that same see &c. Your letters
whiche ye sent to holie Pope Seuerine, a man worthie of
happie, and long memorie, haue had as yet no answere made
to thē, for the matters, whiche ye required, bycause the Popes
holynes departed this lyfe before your letters, were browght
hither. Whiche we haue nowe openyd in this vacancie of the
holie see, lest the ignorance of so greate a question mowght
haue lasted longe, and ben vndiscussyd emongest yowe. In
which letters we haue read, and perceaued that certain of your
prouince labowring against the ryght faythe, doe goe abowte
to renewe an old heresie, refusing very ignorantly our Ester,
in which Christe was offred our true pascall Lambe to God
his father, and entending to celebrate thesame with the Iewes
in the. 14. moone. &c. By this beginning of their epistle it appeareth
plainly that at that time this heresie was but a lytle before
rysen in Scotlande: And also, that not all the countrie but
certaine of them onlye were infected therwith. Now when
these before mentioned prelates of Rome had shewed the customable

obseruation of Ester: thus in thesame epistle they
wrote of the pelagian heretikes, which were in Scotland: We
vnderstand also by your letters, that the poison of Pelagius
heresie beginneth nowe to springe againe emongest yow:Against the pelagian heresie. whiche
we moste ernestly exhorte, and counsell yowe vtterly to
forsake, and prouide that the poysoned infection of so dedly an
heresie sinke no farder into your myndes, but labour as ye
may vtterly to forgett it. For ye ought to remembre, howe
this execrable heresie hath longe sithens ben condemned. And
hathe ben abolished, and put owte of remembrance not only,
these. ij. hundred yeares, but is also yet at this present, daylie
condemned of vs, with continuall curses, and all they excommunicated
which folowe thesame. We therfore exhorte, and
request yowe, that ye suffer not their asshes to be stirred, and
blowen vp emongest yowe, whose strength and weapons be
burnt and consumed. For what Christen harte is there, whiche
detesteth not to death, and abhorreth their prowde intent
and wicked wordes, which dare affirme, that a man maye lyue,
and be withowt synne, euen of his owne voluntarie will, and
not throwghe the grace of God? And then to consider againe
the trueth hereof, it is blasphemie, and extreme foolishnes to
saye: that a man is withowt synne. For he can not possibly
be so. Neither euer any was, but only the mediator of God, and
man Christe Iesus our Lorde, who was a verie and true man
conceyued and borne withowt synne. For as for other men,
they are all borne in oryginall sinne. And doe beare the wytnes,
and token of Adams first preuarication, and breaking of
Godes commaundement, yea, althowghe they lyued without
actuall synne accordinge to the Prophete, saying: Behold, I was
conceiued in iniquite, and my mother hathe browght me forthe in
sinne. &c.
                  Psal. 50.
               
            
            
               
                  How after kinge Eduynes deathe, bishop Pawlyne returned to kent, and there toke the Bysshoprike of Rotchester.
               
               The 20. Chapter.
               
                  WHen king Edwyne had moste triumphantly
raygned ouer the English and Britons bothe,
the space of. xvij. yeares, (in some of whiche,
as abowt the number of. 6. yeares, he had himselfe
ben subiecte to Christe, and euer looked
for his raygne, and kingdome) Cardwell king
of the Britons made a rebellion against him, hauing ayde and
succor therunto, of Penda a stowght man, and of the kinges
bloud of Marshland. Ouer which nation afterward he had by
dyuers chaunces, and fortune, rule and gouernance, for the space
of xxij. yeares.An. 633. Nowe when they had thus ioyned battaile,
and entred fight with kinge Edwine in a great, large and plaine
field, called thereof Hethfilde, they slewe him there at the last,
the. 4. daye of October, in the yeare of our Lorde. 633. and of
kinge Edwynes age the. 47. yeare: whose whole hoste was other
presently murdered there, or shamefully put to flight. In the
which warres one of kinge Edwines sonnes, that lustie, and
warlyke yonge prince Offryde, was kylled, before his father died.
The other sonne Edfryde of verie vrgent necessite fled vnto
kinge Penda for succour. Of whome afterward against the
promised faythe, and his solemne othe, he was most cruellye
put to deathe in the raygne of kinge Oswald. At this tyme
there was a verie greauouse persecution in the churche, and a
fowle murder of the Northumberlandes, especially bicause that
one of the Capitaines, whiche caused this persecution, and aduersite,
was a painim: the other thowgh not a paynim, yet more
feerce and barbarouse, thē was any heathen, or paynim. For
kinge Penda with all the nation of the Marshland men was
wholly geauen to Idolatrie, and altogether heathen, and vnchristened.
But king Cardwell althowgh he had the name of
a Christian and professed that lyfe, yet was he in mynde, and
maners so rude, and owtrageouse, that he woulde not spare
eyther womens weaknes, or childrens innocencie, but

put all to deathe withe greauous, and bytter torments,
according to his bestly cruelty and vnmercyfull tyrannie.
Wasting a longe time, and raging oure all the prouinces,
purposing moreouer with himselfe to exterminate out of
the borders of Britannie the whole nation of Englishmen,
and to extinguish the verie name of them. Neither did he ought
esteme or anie thing reuerence, and honor the Christian religion
which the English men had. So that vnto this daye the Britons
maner, and custome is, to set light by the faithe, and religion
of English mē. Neither will they in anie one pointe more
communicate with them, then they wold with heathens, and
painims. Kinge Edwynes head was brought vnto Yorke. And
afterward carryed into S. Peters churche, (which churche he
himselfe had begon to buylde, but his successour king Oswald
finished hit, as we haue before declared.) And there layed in S.
Gregories chappell. By whose disciples, and of whose preachers
he had in his lyfe time receiued, and lerned the word of true lyfe.
Thus was the state of Northumberlande muche troubled
with this greate slaughter, and cruell persecution. Seing therfore
there was none other remedie, nor anie saftie could befounde,
but only by flight, bishop Pauline accompaning the
good Quene Edelburge, with whome not longe before he
came into that cuntrie, tooke shipp, and returned againe to kent.
And was there verie honorably receiued of Honorius the Archebishop,
and of kinge Edulbald. His guide, and gouerner in
iorning vnto kent was Bassus one of the strongest of kinge
Edwynes chiefe garde. This bishop brought awaye with him
from the cuntries of Northūberlande Eanfride king Edwynes
daughter, and Wulcfrea his sonne. Iffy also Offrides sonne, and
nephue to king Edwyne. Which ij. yonge princely childrē this
tender mother for feare of kinge Edbald, and Oswald sent into
Fraūce, to be brought vp in king Dagoberts courte. Wher they
both died in their infancie. And were buried in the high church

with such honour, as is mete for kinges sōnes, and innocēt babes
of Iesus Christe. He brought moreouer away with him much
pretious plate of king Edwynes: amongest which was a greate
goldē crosse and a goldē chalice cōsecrated for the ministerie of
the aultar, which are yet both reserued, and to be seē at this day
in the Cathedral church of Caunterbury. Now was the see of
Rotchester vacāt at this time. For Romanus bishop therof, sent
frō the Archebishop Iustus legat to Pope Honorius, was drowned
in the tēpest, going to Italie.Crosse and chalice of good. Thē bishop Pauline at the offer
of bishop Honorius, and at king Edubaldes request toke
that charge on him, and kept Rotchester dioces, vntill, at his
full and rype age, he quietly departed this transitorie lyfe, and
was receiued into the blesse of heauen, with the godly fruite,
and reward of his labours, and trauailes, that he suffred here on
earthe for Christe his truthe, and Gospell. Who at his decease
lefte in his churche of Rotchester his palle, which he had receifrom
the Pope of Rome. And in his Archebishoprike of Yorke
he lefte Iames his deacon a good and godly mā. Who liuing
long after in that churche by preching and baptising toke manie
prayes out of the diuels teathe, and wonne manie soules vnto
Christe. Of whose name the village hath a name at this
daye, in which he for the most part abode, and dwelled nere
vnto Cataracte. Who bycause he was conninge in songe, and
musycke, and also in the office and seruice of the quyre, when
that contrie was more quiet, and the companie of faithfull began
a litle and litle to encrease againe, set vp a schole emongest
them, and professed to be a master of church musyke,Churche musike first practised in the North. and
singinge, according to the fashion, and maner of the Romās,
and the Diocesans of Cāterbury. Which thinge whē he had so
don a longe time, with greate profyt, at the lenght (that I may
vse the worde of scripture) being a man well strooken in age,
full of yeares, and hauing seen manie good dayes, he walked
the wayes whiche his fathers went.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
            
               
                  How the first successours of kinge Edwin did both forsake the faith of their nacion and also lost their kingdome. Moreouer how the most christen kinge Oswald restored bothe.
               
               The. 1. Chapter.
               KYnge Edwin beinge in battaile, the sonne of
Elfrike his vncle by his fathers syde, called
Osrich, who after that he had hearde Paulin
preache, receaued the faith, succeded him
in the gouernance of the Deirans: of the
whiche prouince he had the petigree of his
parentage, and the firste beginninge of his kingdome.
But the realme of the Bernicians (for the nation of Northumberland
had been deuided of olde time into these two countries)
was ruled by Edelfrides sonne, named Eanfride, who had
of that prouince the beginning of his kinred and kingdome.
For during all the time of Edwines raigne the sonnes of kinge
Edelfride, who (as we saied before) raigned before Edwin,
were banished with a greate numbre of noble young gentill
men, and so liued amonge the Scottes, or Redshankes:
where they wer instructed accordinge to the Scottes doctrine,
and had receiued the grace of baptisme. These younge princes
after the death of their ennemie kinge Edwin retourninge in
to their countrie, Osrich the eldest of them toke the kingdome
of the Deirans, and Eanfride the seconde sonne the kingdome
of the Bernicians: but alas as bothe had now receiued the yles
of an earthly kingdome, so likewise bothe in geuing and abandoning
them selfes to the diuell, lost the diuine mysteries of
the heauenly kingdome, wherein they were instructed, and
yelded them selues againe to be defiled with the former olde

filth of Idolatrie.Apostasie from the faith punished. This apostasie remained not longe vnpunished.
For Kadwallader the king of Britons with wicked
force, but with worthy vengeaunce slew them both the next
sommer ensuing, sodeinly issuing out with all his host. At
what time he murdereth first Osrich vnprepared and his whole
armie pending themselues miserably with in the suburbes of
their owne citie. Then afterward when by the space of a whole
yere hauing possessed the prouinces of the people of Northumberland,
not as a king that were a conquerour, but as an
outragious cruell tyranne destroying them, and with tragicall
slaughter renting them in pieces: he put Eanfride also to death
coming vnto him very vnaduisedly with twelue chosen
souldiers minding to intreate vppon peace. That same
yere continueth vntill this daye vnhappy and hatefull to all
good men, as well for the Apostasie of the English kinges forsaking
the religion of Christe, as also for the king of Britanes
furiouse tyrannie. Wherefor the historiographers and writers
of that time haue thought it best, that the memorie of those
Apostate kinges being vtterly forgotten, the selfe same yere
should be assigned to the raigne of the king that folowed next,
which was Oswald a man dearely beloued of God. Who after
that his brother Eanfride was slaine, coming vnlooked for
with a small armie, but fenced with the faith of Christe, the
Britons cursed capitaine and that victorius hoste, whereof he
made his auant that nothing coulde be able to withstand it,
was vanquished and slaine in a certain place which in the English
tonge is called Denises Burna, that is to say, the riuer of
Denise.
            
            
               
                  How by the signe of the Crosse, which the same kinge set vp when he fought against the Barbarous Britons, he cōquered thē: and among diuers other miraculous cures a certaine yownge man was healed of a desease in his arme.
               
               The. 2. Chap.
               
                  THe place is shewed vntill this daye, and is had in greate
reuerence, where Oswald when he should come to this
battayle did set vp a signe of the holy crosse, amd beseeched
God humbly vppon his knees that with his heauenly
helpe he would succour his seruauntes being in so great a distresse.A crosse erected by king Oswald.
The report also is, that ( the crosse being made with quicke
spede, and the hole prepared wherein it should be sette) the
kinge being feruent in faithe did take it in hast, and did put it
in the hole, and held it with both his handes, when it was sett
vp, vntill it was fastened to the earth with duste which the
souldiars heaped about it. Nowe when this was done he
cried out a loude to his whole armie: Let vs all kneele apon
our knees, and let vs all together pray ernestly the almighty,
liuing, and true God, mercifully to defend vs from the proude
and cruell ennemy: for he knoweth, that we enterprise warres
in a ryghtfull quarell for the saulfegard of our subiectes. All did
as he commaunded them. And thus in the dawning of the
day they marched forth, encountred with their enemie, and
(according to the merite of their faith) atchieued and wonne
the victorie. In the place of which prayer manifold miraculous
cures are knowen to be done, questionlesse in token and remembraunce
of the kinges faith. For euen vntill this present
day many men do customablye cut chyppes out of the veraye
tree of that holy crosse which casting into waters and geuing
thereoff to sick men and beastes to drinke, or sprinckling them
therwith, many forthwith are restored to their helth. That place
is in the Englishe tongue named heauen feld and was so
called long before, not without a sure and a certaine fore
sight of thinges to come, as signifieng vndoubtedly, that
in the same place a heauenly memoriall was to be set vp,
a heauenly victorie should be gotte, heauenly miracles should
be wrought and remembred euen vnto our dayes.

                     
                  
               
               
                  This place is nere to that wal which stādeth toward the northeast,
wherwith the Romaines did ones in time past cōpasse all
whole Britaine frō sea vnto sea to kepe of the inuasions of forenners
as we haue declared before. In the self same place the
religious mē of Hagstalden church (which is not far frō thēce)
haue now of long time been accustomed to come euery yere,
the eue and the day that the same king Oswald was afterward
slaine to kepe Diriges there for his soule,Diriges ouer night and Masse in the morning for the dead. and in the morning
after psalmes being saied solemnely to offer for him the sacrifice
of holy oblation. This good custome longe continuing
the place was made more holy, and is now much honoured of
al men by the reason of the church that was lately builded and
dedicated in the same place. And not without a cause, considering
that no signe of the Christen faith, no church, no aultar
was sett vpp in all the whole countrey of the Bernicians,
before that this vertuous warrier, moued wyth harty deuotion
of vnfained fayth dyd sett vpp this baner of the holy Crosse,
when he should fight agaynst his cruell ennemie. It shall not
be beside owr purpose to recounte of many which were done,
yet one miracle more mightely wrought at this holy Crosse.
One of the religiouse men of the foresaide church of Hagstalden,
called Bothelme, who lyueth yet at this daye, a few yeres
past, when by chaunce in the night he went vnwares on the
yse sodaynely falling downe brake his arme, and began to be so
vexed with greauous anguishe thereof, that for vehemency of
payne he was not able to bryng his arme to his mouth. This
man hearing that one of the brethren had appointed to go vp
to the place of the same holy crosse, prayed him that at his returne
he would bring him a piece of that blessed wood, saying
that he beleeued that by Gods grace he might haue his helth
thereby. He dyd so as he was desired: and when he was come
home agayne about euening, the brethren being sett at the table
to eate, he gaue the deseased party some of the old mosse,

wherewyth the ouermoste part of the wodde was couered.
Who sitting also then at table, and hauing at hand no better
place to laie vp the gift wherewith he was presented, put it in
to his bosome. After going to bed, and forgetting to laye it a
side he lett it lye all night in his bosome. At midnight he waked
and feling a colde thing lying nere to his side, sturring
him selfe to finde what that should be, sodenly he findeth his
arme and hand hole and sounde, as if he had neuer had the desease.
            
            
               
                  Howe the same kinge at his owne request receiued Aidan of the Scottishe nacion, and gaue him a byshops see in the yle of Lindisfarne Now called Holy Ilond.
               
               The. 3. Chap.
               SHortly after that the same Oswald was come to the
Crowne he being desirous, that all the people, which he
began to rule, should be instructed in the grace of Christē
faith, wherof now he had very great proufes in vanquishing his
forein ennemies, he sente to the Peeres of Scotland, among
whome he lyuing in banishment, and the souldiours whiche
wer with him wer Christened, making a request vnto thē that
thei wold send him a prelate, by whose doctrine and ministerie
the realme of Englād which he ruled might both learne the giftes,
and also receiue the sacramēts of our Lordes faith. Neither
was this godly request denied him. For bishop Aidan was directed
straight vnto him, a mā of maruailous mekenesse, godlinesse,
and modestie: and one that had a zele in Gods quarrell, although
not in euery point according to knouledg. For he was
wont to kepe Easter sunday from the fourtenth day after the
chaūge of the mone, vntil the twētith: according to the custome
of his country, wherof we haue diuers times made menciō.
For the north part of Scotlād, and al the Redshanks did in that
maner euen at the same time solemnise Easter sunday, thinking
that in this keeping of Easter they folowed the aduertisement
writen by the holy praise worthy father Anatholius
                  
which how well it was done of them, the skilfull in Christen
religion are not ignorant. Truly the Scottes, which dwelt in
the southe coastes of the yle of Ireland, had long a gone learned
to keepe the fest of Easter by the Canonicall approued
custome, being aduised thereto by the Pope sitting in the see
Apostolike. To this bishop Aidan king Oswald appointed
holye Ilond for his see and bishoprick, according as he had
him selfe desyred.Holy Ilond. This place with flowing and ebbing is
twyse euery daye like an yle enuyroned with the surges of
the sea, twyse made to stand as maine lande, the bankes being
voided againe of the sea waues.A rare zele to the preaching of Gods word in a wordly prince. By the vertuous aduise of
this good bishop, the kinge glad and ready to follow the same,
muche enlarged the Church of Christe throughe his dominions.
And in this most godly endeuour bothe of the Prince
and of the bishop this was a gracious and pleasaunt sight, that
whereas the bishop was vnskillfull of the English tonge, and
the kinge by reason of his longe banishement in Scotland,
vnderstode and spake the scottish very well, when the bisshop
preached the faith of Christ, the king was interpreter
of the heauenly worde to his dukes and subiectes. Hereupon
for the space of a longe time people flocked out of Scotland
into Britaine, and such as were called to the high degree of
priesthod, began with great and feruent deuotion to preache
the worde of faith to those prouinces of England, which
king Oswalde gouerned, baptising all such as beleued. Therefore
churches wer builded in places conuenient: the people reioycing
assembled together to heare the woord of God, possessions
and territories wer geuen by the kinges bountifulnesse
for the foundation of religiouse houses: the litle children of
England and elder folkes wer by the Scottes their instructours
trained and traded vp in obseruation of regular discipline.
For they wer for the most parte mōkes all such as came
to preache. Aidan the bishop himselfe was a monke, of the

yle which is called Hydestinate. The house of his religion
was no small time the head house of all the monasteries almost
of the northren Scottes and of abbyes of all the Redshankes
and had the soueraintie in ruling of their people,
Which yle in very deede belongeth to the right of Britaine,
being seuered from it with a narow sea: but by the free gifte
of the Redshankes who inhabited those partes of Britanie, it
was now lately bestowed vpon the Scottishe monkes in consideration
of their vertuous sermons and painefull preaching,
whereby they receiued the faith of Christ.
            
            
               
                  When the nacion of the Pictes (otherwise Redshankes) receaued the Christen faith.
               
               The. 4. Chapter.
               FOr in the fiue hundreth three score and fifte
yere of our Lordes incarnation (at which time
Iustine the younger succeding I ustinian
had receiued the gouernaunce of the Romayne
empire,An. 563. a priest and abbot notable by
his habit and religious life called Columban cam from Ireland
into Britany to preache the woord of God to the Redshankes
that dwelt in the North, that is to say to those that by high
and hideous ridges of hylles wer disseuered from such Redshankes
as dwelt in the south quarters. For the southerne,
Redshankes, who had there dwelling places in the same mountaines,
did long before (as they say) receiue the true faith
and abandonned idolatry, at what time the woord was preached
vnto them by the right reuerend bishop and blessed
man, Ninia a Briton borne. Who was at Rome perfitly taught
the faith, and misteries of the truthe. Whose see the English nacion
hath enen now notable for the name and church of
Saint Martin the bishop, where he also doth rest together with
many holy men. Which place appertaining to the Bernicians

prouince is commonly called Ad candidam casam, at the white
cottage, for somuch as ther he made a church of stone after an
other facion, then the Britons wer wont to builde. Columban
came to Britanie when the most puissaunt king Bride Meilocheus
sonne raigned ouer the Redshanks, in the ninth yere of
his raigne, and did by his learning and example of life conuert
that nacion to the faith of Christ. In consideration whereof
the aforsay de yle was geuen him in possessiō, to make a monasterie.
For the yle is not greate, but as though it wer of fiue families
by estimatiō. His successours kepe it vntil this day, wher
also he lieth buried dying at the age of lxxvij. yeres, about xxxij.
yeres after that he cam into Britain to preach. But befor that he
trauailed to Britaine, he made a famous monasterie in Irelād
whiche for the great store of okes is in the Scottish tong called
Dearmach, that is to say, a fild of okes: of both the which monasteries
very many mo religious houses were afterward erected
by his scholars both in Britaine, and also in Ireland. Of all the
which the same abbey that is in the yle where in his bodye
lieth buried, is the head house. This yle is alwayes wont to haue
an Abbat that is a priest, to be the ruler: to whō both the wholle
countrey and also the bishops them selfes ought after a straūge
and vncustomed order to be subiect, according to the example
of the first teacher, who was no bishop, but a priest and a monke.
The report is, that some things ar written by his scholars cō
                  cerning
his lyfe and sayings: but yet what maner of man so euer
he was, we know this of him for a surety, that he left successours,
men that excelled in great continence, in passing charite,
and vertuous trade of religious lyfe. In obseruing the
high feast of Easter they trusted to vncertaine compasses,
and no maruaile consydering that no man sent vnto them, the
decrees made in generall counsayles for the keping thereof.
Yet they diligently obserued all such workes of deuotion
and chast conuersation as they could learne in the prophets, in

the ghospels, and the Apostles writings. This keping of Easter
continued no small time with them, that is to witt, vntill the
seuen hundreth and sixteneth yere of our Lordes incarnation,
by the space of an hundreth and fiftie yeres after, they receiued
the faith. But when the right reuerend and holy father and
priest Egbert came to them from England, liuing in Christes
quarell in exile in Ireland, being a man very well learned in
the holy scripture and singular for the perfett lyfe, which he
had lead many yeres together, they were reformed by him, and
brought to kepe Easter on the true right and laufull day. Neuerthelesse
they did not alway before that time solemnise and
keepe the feast of Easter vppon the fourtenth daye after the
chaunge of the moone according to the Iewes custome (as some
men supposed) but on the same day, though in an other weke
then it was conuenient. For they knewe (as Christen men
do) that the resurrection of our Lorde, whiche was on the
firste daye of the weke ought allwayes to be celebrated on
the first daye of the weke also: but as ignoraunt and highvplandysh
men they had not learned when the same first daye
of the weke whiche nowe is named Sounday shoulde come.
Yet for as muche as they continued in perfecte charitye, they
deserued to attaine the perfitte knowledg of this thing, according
as the Apostle promiseth saying:Philip. 2. 
                  And yff ye be off
an other mynds, God will reueile that also vnto yowe. But hereof
we shall treate more at large hereafter in a place conuenient.
            
            
               
                  Of the lyfe of Aidan the bishop.
               
               The 5. Chap.
               FROM this yle therefore and from this couent
of monkes founded by holy Columban,
Aidan was sent and consecrated bishop
to instructe Englande in the fayth of CHRISTE,
at what tyme Segenius abbot and priest

was head of the same monasterie.The exā
                     ple of a true preacher, and avertuous Bishop. Wherein among other lessons
of liuing he left the Clerkes a most holsome example of
abstinence, and continence. This thing did chiefely commend
his doctrine to all men, that the learning whiche he
taught was correspondent to the life that he lead. And why?
He was not desyrous after wordly goods, he was not enamoured
with present Vanitees. His ioye and comforte was
foorthwyth to distribute to the poore that mette him all that
was geuen him of kinges or other wealthy men of the worlde.
He vsed to trauayle continually bothe in the citye
and in the countrey, neuer on horse backe, but allwayes
on foote, except peraduenture greate neede had forced him
to ryde. And in his trauaile what dyd he? Forsoothe whome
so euer he mette, riche or poore, incontinent abyding
for a time with them, either he allured them to receiue the
faythe if they were out of the faythe, or strengthened them in
the faythe, if they were in it, exhorting them eftsoones no lesse
in workes then wordes to almesse geuing and other good
deedes. And his religious lyfe so farre passed the slackenes
and key colde deuotion of oure time, that all they whiche
went with him, were they professed into religion, or were
they laye brethern,Siue adiōsi siue Laici. gaue them selfes continually to contemplation,
that is to saye, bestowed all their tyme either in reading
scripture, or in learning the psalter. This was the dayly exercise
of him and his brethren to what place so euer they came.
And if by chaunce it had happenned (whiche yet happened
seldome) that he were bidden to the kinges banket, he went in
accompained with one or two clerkes, and taking a shorte repast,
he made spedely hast to read with his brethren, or els wēt
other where forth to pray. Euery deuout mā and womā being
at that time taught by his ensamples tooke vp a custome al the
whole yere through,VVensday and fridayes fast. sauing betwene Easter and whitsonty
                  
                     •
                  e
apon wensday and friday to continew in fasting vntill

three of the clocke in the after none. If rych men had done any
thing amysse, he neuer for hope of honour, or feare of displeasure
spared to tel them of it, but with sharpe rebuking amended
them. If any gesse or straunger had come vnto him, were he
neuer so worshipful, he neuer gaue mony but only made them
good chere. As for suche gyftes as in monye were liberally
geuen him by ryche men, he dyd eyther (as we haue sayed)
geue them in a dole for the reliefe of the poore, or els he layed it
out for the raunsomyng of those that had been wrongfully
solde: finally many of such, as by mony he had redemed,
he made after his scholers, bringing them vpp in learning and
vertue and exalting them to the highe dignite of priesthod.
The report is that (when kynge Oswald desired first to haue
a Prelate out of Scotland, who might preach the fayth to him
and his people) an other man of a more austere stomacke was
first sent: Who when after a lyttell while preaching to the
Englishe nacion, he did nothing preuaile ne yet was wyllingly
heard of the people, he returned into his country, and in the
assemble of the elders, he made relacion, how that in teaching
he could do the people no good to the which he was sent, for
as much as they were folkes that might not be reclaymed, of a
hard capacite, and fierce nature. Then the elders (as they say)
began in counsaile to treate at lōge what were best to de done,
being no lesse desyrous that the people should attayne the saluation
whiche they sought for, then sory, that the preacher
whom they sent, was not receiued. When Aidan (for he also
was present at the coūsaile) replyed against the priest of whom
I spake, saying. Me thinketh brother, that you haue ben more
rigorous, then reason would with that vnlerned audience, and
that you haue not according to the Apostles instruction, first
geuen them milke of milde doctrine, vntell being by litle and
litle nourished and weaned with the worde of God, they were
able to vnderstand the more perfect misteries, and fulfill the

greater commaundementes of God. This being saied, al that
were at the assemble, looking vpon Aidan debated diligently
his saying, and concluded that he aboue the rest was worthy of
that charge and bishopricke, and that he shoulde be sent to instruct
those vnlerned paynims. For he was tried to be chiefely
garnished with the grace of discretion, the mother of all vertues.
Thus making him bishop they sent him forthe to preach.
Who when he had taken his time, euen as before he was knowen
to be endued withe discretion, so did he afterward shewe
him selfe to be beautified with all other vertues.
            
            
               
                  Of kinge Oswaldes wonderfull religion and passing piete.
               
               The. 6. Chap.
               KInge Oswald and that parte of the Englishe nation of
whome he was the Soueraine gouuernour, beinge
from thence forthe instructed by this right Reuerend
prelats doctrine, did not only learne to hope for the heauenly
kingdome vnknowen to his graundfathers, but also cō
                  quered
(more then any of his auncetours did) earthly kingdomes
by the power of the same one almighty God, who made
heauen and earth. Brefely all the nations and prouinces of
Britanny, which spake foure diuers languages, that is to saie,
the Britons, the Redshankes, the Scottes, the English, became
subiect vnto him. And yet being aduaunced to so royall maiesty,
he was euer notwithstanding (which is maruailous to be
reported) lowly to all, gracious to the poore, and bountifull
to all pilgrimes and straungers. The report is that at a certain
time, when on the holy day of Easter the kinge and the foresaied
bishop were sitt downe to diner, and a siluer dish replenished
with princely deintees was sett on the table before them,
being now ready to saie grace, sodenly entered in his seruaunt,
to whom was committed the charge to receiue the needy, and
tolde the king, that a very great numbre of poore people flockinge
from all places did sitt in the Courte, looking for some

almes from the kinge. Who by and by gaue commaundement
that the delicates whiche were sett before his owne person,
should be bestowed on the poore, and the dishe of siluer broken,
and by peecemeale parted amonge them. At the sight whereof
the bishop who sate by the kinge, being delited withe such
a worke of mercy, toke him by the right hand and saied: I praie
God this hande be neuer consumed. Which thinge came euen
so to passe, as in his blessing he desired. For where as after that
he being slaine in battail, his handes with his arme were cut of
from the residew of his body, so it is that his handes to this
time continue vncorrupted
                     •
                   and are reserued in a siluer shrine in
S. Peters church, wher with worthy honour, they are worshipped
of all men in the kinges cyte,That Cite is now called Bābrough whiche hathe his name of a
lady sometime Quene, called Bebba. By this kinges trauail the
prouinces of the Deirans, and the Bernicians, which did so deadly
hate one the other, were reconciled and ioyned together,
in one allegeaunce and amitie, like as they were one people.
This kinge Oswald was kinge Edwines nephew by his sister
Achas side. And it was mete, that so noble a predecessour shuld
haue so worthy an heyre as wel of his religion, as of his realme,
and that of his owne kinred.
            
            
               
                  How the cuntry of west Saxons receiued the worde of God by Berinus preaching, and Agilbertus and Eleutherius his successour.
               
               The. 7. Chapter.
               THe west Saxons (who of old time were called Genisse)
receiued the faith of Christ in the raign of Cynigilsus,
                  The west countre of Englād as the dio ceses of Salisbury of Exceter, of Bathe and VVelles, and of Hāpsher.
Berinus the bishop preaching to them the worde: who
came into Britanie by Pope Honorius appointment, promising
in his presence that he wold sowe the seedes of the holy
faith in the hart of the vttermost coastes of England, whether
no teacher had of any time gone before him. In consideration
wherof at the commaundement of the same Pope Asterius
the bishop of Geane did consecrat him bishop. But at his arriuall

into Britany, and first entering into Geuisse, finding that al
the inhabitants there were very paynims, he thought it more
expedient, to preach the word of God among them, rather then
in trauailing further to serche for such as he shuld preach vnto.
And thus at his preaching of the gospell in the forsaid prouince,
when the king him selfe being newly taught the faith was
Christened with his nation, it happened at that tyme, that Oswald
the most holy and very victorious king of Northumberland
was present.The first Christening in the west countre. Who coming then to take his daughter to
wife, toke him first out of the holy font for his godson, not
without the meruailous and swete prouisiō of almighty God.
After this solemnitie both the kinges gaue the same bishop
the citie of Dorcinca for his bishoprike, where after that
he had builded and dedicated churches,Dorchester in Bar keshere. and by his paines
brought much people to our Lord, he went to God, and
was buried in the same citie.VVinchester. Many yeares after when Hedde
was bishop he was translated from thens to the citee of Venta
and laid in the churche of the blessed Apostles S. Peter
and Paule. After the death of this kinge his sonne Senwalch
succeded him in his kingdome:Apostasie from the faith punished. who refused to receiue the
faith and sacramentes of the kingdome of heauen, and shortly
after lost the greate rule of his wordly kingdome also. For taking
an other wife, and casting of the sister of Penda kinge of
the Marshes his true wedded wif, he was by Penda assauted with
battaile, deposed from his kingdome, and constrained to flye
to the king of the east English men, who was called Anna,
with whom liuing in banishment by the space of three yeres
he learned the faith. For this kinge with whom he lyued in
banishment, was a vertuous man and blessed of God with plentifull
and holy issue, as we shall declare hereafter. But when
Senwalch was restored to his kingdome, there came out of Irelande
into his prouince a certaine prelate named Agilbertus, a
frenche man borne, yet hauing made long abode in Ireland because

he read there the scriptures. This bishop of his owne accorde
came to serue the prince and to preach him the word of
life. Such was his lerning and industry, that the king entreated
him to remaine with him, enduing him with a bishoprik in his
dominions which at the princes request he accepted, and ruled
the same people many yeres with priestly authoritie. At the
lenght the king, who could only speake the Saxon tonge, being
wery of that foren language that Agilbertus vsed, did priuely
bring into the prouince an other bishop of his owne language,
named VVini, the which also was made bishop in fraunce. And
diuiding the prouince into two dioceses, gaue him a bishops see
in the citie of Venta, which the Saxons cal Vintancester.
                  VVinchester, Wherfor
Agilbertus being highly displeased, because the king did this
without his counsayle, returned againe into fraunce, and after
that he was aduanced to the bishoprike of the cite of Parris,
there he died an old man, and very aged. But not many yeres after
his departure out of Britāny Wini also was by the same king
deposed from his bishoprike, frō whēce he departed to the king
of the Marshes called Vulfhere, and of him he bought with mony
the see of the cite of Londō and cōtinued there bishopto the
end of his lif. Wherby the prouince of the west Saxōs lacked no
small time a bishop. At which time the forsaid king of the west
Saxons being very often disquieted in his mind for the great
losse and spoile which in his kingdome he susteined by his enemies,
called at last to his minde how he had wickedly expelled
him out of his realme, by whom he had receiued the faith of
Christ, vnderstanding withall that by want and lacke of a bisshop
he wanted also the helpe and grace of almighty God.
Therfore he sent embassadours into fraunce to Agilbert besee
                  
                     •
                  hing
him that he wold returne and resume againe his bishoprike,
offering with all to make satisfaction for that which was
past. But Agilbert excusing him selfe, alleaged that he could in
no wise repaire thither, because he was bound to abyde at his

bishoprike, whiche he had in his owne countrey and diocesse:
Neuerthelesse to thēd he mought somwhat helpe him who did
most earnestly desyre him, he sent thither in his stede a certaine
priest Eleutherius by name his own nephew, who should be made
a bishop for him, if it were his plesure, affirming that he deemed
him to be well worthy of his bishoprike. This Eleutherius
was honourably receiued of the people and the kinge, who
entreated also Theodore then Archebishop of Caunterbury
that Eleutherius should be consecrated their bishop. In whiche
function he liued and laboured many yeares, beinge the
only bishoppe of that prouince, appointed so by a Synodall
decree.
            
            
               
                  How Earconbert king of kent gaue commaundement to destroye ydolls, and of his daughter Eeartongath, and also of his kynse woman Edelburg virgins dedicated to God.
               
               The. 8. Chap.
               IN the 640.An. 640. yere of the incarnation of our Lord, Eadbaldus
king of kent passing out of this life left the gouernance of
the realme to his sonne Earconbert. Earconbert did prosperously
raigne xxiiij. yeres and certaine moneths. This was
the first king of England,Idols first threwen downe in England. who of his princely authoritie commaunded
that the idols, which were in all his whole realme
should be forsaken and destroyed: and moreouer that the fast
of fourty dayes, should be kept. And that this his authoritie
mought not lightly be contemned of any man, he appointed
mete and conuenient punishments for the transgressours thereof.
Eartongath this princes daughter, as a worthy childe
of such a father was a virgin of greate vertu. She serued god
in a Monasterie all dayes of her life that was builded in the
countree of Fraunce by an honourable Abbesse, called Fara in
a place named Brige. For in those dayes, when many monasteries
were not yet builded in England many were wont for
the loue of religious life to go to the religious houses of Fraunce,

sending also their daughters to the same to be brought
vp, and maried into heauenly bridegrome:Virgins in Monanasteries. especially to the
monasterie of Briḡe, and in Cale, and also Andilegum. Among
whom was Sedrido daughter to the wife of Anna king of the
east English (of which king Anna we haue made mention before)
and Edelburg, the sayd kinges naturall daughter, who being
straungers and alians, were yet both made abbesses of the
same monasterie in Brige by reason of their worthy vertues.
This kinges elder daughter Sexburg wife to Earconbert king
of kent had a daughter named Eartongath and of her we will
now treate. The inhabitans of that place are wont euen at this
day to tell of many vertuous dedes and miraculous signes,
wrought by this holv virgin. We only will be contented to
speke somewhat shortly of her departure out of this worlde,
and passage to a better lyfe. The time and houre of her calling
to God being at hand, she began to visit in the monasterie the
celles of the sicke: especially of such her sisters, as either for age,
or for vertuous conuersation were most notable. Vnto whose
prayers lowly commending her selfe, signified vnto them
the houre of her death approching, according as she had learned
by reuelation. The reuelation (as she reported) was such.
She said, she had seen a company of men apparelled in white
enter into the same monasterye, of whom asking what they
sought for, or what they would there, it was answered her that
they were sent thither, to thend they might take with them
that golden coyne, which came from kent to that place. And
on the same night, in the last part thereof, that is to saye when
the sonne began to rise, she passing ouer the darkenesse of this
present world, went vp to the light that is aboue. Many of the
brethren of the same monasterie which were in other houses,
reported that they heard euen at the same moment, the melodie
of angels singing together, and the noyse as though it were
of a very greate multitude coming into the monastery: whereuppon

uppon they by and by going foorth to knowe what maner a
thing it were,The like is writen of S. Antony beholdīg in cō
                     pany of other the soule of Amos 2 religious eremite caried vp into heauen the Angels accōpaynīg with melody. saw that there was an exceading greate light, sent
downe from heauen which ledd and conducted that holy soule
deliuered out of the pryson of the flesh to the euerlasting ioyes
of the heauenly countrye. Beside all this they reported of
other miracles, which were shewed by the hand of god that very
night in the selfe same monastery. But we passing to other
miracles doe leue these to the religious persons of this monastery
to report. The honorable body of Christes virgin and
spouse, was buried in the church of S. Steuen, that first blessed
martyr. And it was thought good three dayes after the buriall,Hist. tri. part. lib. 1. cap. 11.
that the stone wherwith the graue was couered, should
be layed asyde, and reered vp higher in the same place. At
the doing whereof so pleasaunt a smell,S. Hierom also writeth the like of S. Antony in the life of Paule the Eremite. and so swete a sauour
came from the bottom of the earth, that to all the brethern
and sisters that stode by, there semed as though there were
storehouses, and cellars of balme naturall opened. Yea furthermore
Edelburg aunte by the mothers side to this Eartongath
(of whom we haue treated) euen she also in great chastitie
of body preserued the glory that god loueth, which resteth
in perpetuall virginitie: and how vertuous a virgin she was, it
was better knowen after her death. For when she was Abbesse,
she began in her monastery to build a church in the honour of
all the Apostles wherein she willed her body to be buried. But
the worke being wel nere half done she died, and was buried in
that very place of the church, (though yet not finished) where
she desyred. After whose death the Brethren more intending
vpon other thinges, the whole building of this churche
ceased forseuen yeres space, which being expired, they determined
vtterly to leaue of the buylding of it, for the excessiue labour
and charges therof, yet they appointed to translate into
the church, (which was builded vp and dedicated) the bones
of the Abbesse that were taken owt of that place, for which

purpose opening the graue they founde her body so vncorrupted
as it was free from the corruption of carnall concupisence:
and so when they had wasshed it ons againe, and cladde
it in other attire, they translated it into the church of S. Steuen
the martyr. The day of whose byrthe was there customably
kept solemne in great glory the seuenthe daye of Iuly.
            
            
               
                  How that many miracles in doing of cures were wrought in the place where king Oswald was slaine.
               
               The. 9. Chapter.
               OSwald the moste Christian kinge of Northumberlande
reigned nine yeres, that yere also being reckened, whiche
both by the deadly crueltee of the king of Britaine
and also throughe the wicked Apostasy of the two kinges of
Englande is to be accursed and not to be had in memory.
For (as we haue declared before) it was agreed vpon by one
accorde of all writers, that the name and memory of those that
forsoke Christ his fayth, shuld be vtterly rased owt of the rolle
of Christian kinges, neither any yere of their raigne regestred.
At the full end of these nine yeres Oswald was slayne in the
field in a cruell battaill by the same paynim people and paynim
king of the Marshes, by whom also his predecessour Edwyne
was killed, in a place whiche in the English tong is called
Maserfelth, in the eight and thirtith yere of his age, on the first
day of the moneth of August. How great the fayth of this
king was in God, of how harty and feruent deuotion, it well
appeared after his death by sundry miracles, for to this daye
cures of the deseased both men and beastes are daily wrowght
in that place, where he was slayne of the miscreantes and hethen,
fighting for his countrey. Hereof many caried awaie the
very dust, where his body fell downe on the earth, whiche casting
into water, they cured therby many infirmites. This was
of so many and so ofte practised, that by carying the earth awaye,
a hole was lefte so deepe, that a man mought stand vpright

right in it.Opera illo. rum sequū
                     tur illos. And no maruayle at all, that sicke persons are healed
in the place, where he dyed, who allwaies, duryng his lyfe
bestowed most of his time in almes geuing,Their workes de folow them, Apoca. 14 in comforting the
needy and helpyng the poore. And verely many and sundry
miracles are reported to be done by the dust of the place where
he dyed. But we shall be contented to reherse only two which
we haue heard of our auncitours and elders. Not long after
the death of this prince it fortuned a man on horsebacke to
iourney that waie,Miracles at the place where kinge Oswald was slaine where the prince was slayne, whose horse euen
abowt that very place, began sodenly to become tyred, to
stand styll, to hang downe his hed, to fome at the mouth, and
at the length, after great and excessiue payne to fal down right:
the man lighted of, and laying some strawe vnder his horse, taryed
by to see whether the horse would mend or els dye owtright.
The poore beast being of long tyme troubled withe
greauous paine, toumbling and turning it selfe nowe on the
one side, nowe on the other, walowed at the length to that
same place, where this kinge of worthy memorie was slayne.
Incontinent the paine ceasing, the horse leaft the inordinat
motions of his body, turning it selfe as if it had ben wery on
the other side, and foorth with as perfitly whole on bothe sides
arose vp and began to grase: at the sight wherof the owner of
the horse, as a man of a quick witt, vnderstoode that some straunge
and singular holinesse, was in that place where his horse
was vpon the soden so healed. Putting therfore a marke in the
place, he leapt on horseback, and rode to the ynne, whither he
purposed to trauaile. Here he found a damsell neece to the
good man of the house of a long time deseased with a greuous
palsey, whereof hearing his ofte and the whole house holde
much complayning, he began to tell them of the place where
his horse was healed. What nede many wordes? They set her
on a carte, and brought her to that place, laying her downe
therin. Wher hauing rested and slept for a small tyme, waking

she found her selfe whole and perfectly cured of that palsey.
She called for water, she washed her face, she dressed vp
her heare, she couered her head with a linnen clothe, and with
them, who brought her on carte, she retourned on foote.
            
            
               
                  How the dust of that place preuailed against fyre.
               
               The. 10. Chap.
               AT that tyme a certayne other trauailer came out of Britaine,
as the brute is making his iourney ner to that same
place, wherin the forsaid battaile was fought. Vewing the
place he espied one plat more greene and pleasanter to the eye
then was the residue of the field. Wherof he gessed the cause
should be that in that place some one man holyer then the rest
of the armie had ben slayne. Therfore he toke awaie withe
him some of the dust of that earth, knitting it vp in a lynnen
cloth, and demyng with him selue, as in dede it came after to
passe, that the same dust might be medicinable for sicke persons.
This man ryding on his iourney came that euening to
a certaine village, where taking vpp his inne, and finding the
neighbours of the parish at feast with the ofte, being required
sate down also with thē at the banket hanging vpon on of the
postes of the wal, the linnen cloth with the dust, which he had
brought. The feast and chere encresing, cuppes walking apase,
the gestes with mirth so far forgott thē selues, that a great fier
in the middes of the house being made, the sparkles flying vp
aloft, and euery man intending to mirth, the roufe of the house
being made but with slender twigges and thatched, was sodenly
sett all on a light fyre. Wherat the gestes being disamaied
rāne al out of dores, not able to saue the poore house being
now all on fyer and ready to consume. To come to the purpose,
the whole house being consumed with this fyre, that post alone
wheron the dust hanged, (inclosed in a cloth) continued,
safe from the fyre, and therwith not hurt at al. At the sight of
this miracle al maruailed much and with diligent enquire and
examination founde out that this dust came from that place

where king Oswaldes bloud was shed. After that the miracles
were manifestly knowen and bruted abrode, much people began
to resort therto: where after much haunting, many obteined
helth and cures of deseases both for them selues, and for
others.
            
            
               
                  How that a light sent downe frō heauen stoode al a whole night vpon king Oswalds reliques: and how that they which were possessed with euill spirites, were healed by the same relikes.
               
               The. 11. Chapter.
               OF all other miracles I suppose it must in no wise be left
vnwritten, how heauenly a miracle was shewed when
king Oswalds bones were found out, and translated to
the church wherin they are now reserued. This was done by the
industry of the queene of the Marshes, Offride by name, who
was his brother Oswines daughter which Oswin after Oswalds
raigne came to the croune, as we shall declare in the processe
that foloweth. Ther is a famous monastery in the prouince
Lindissi named Beardanan,
                  Lincoi
                     
                        •
                     eshere. which the same quene and her husband
Adilrede did greatly loue, honour, and reuerence, wherin
she desyred to lay vp her vncles honorable bones. When the
chariot was come, wherin the same bones were brought toward
the euening, the men that were in the monastery, would not
gladly receiue these bones, into the forsaid monastery: because
although they had knowen that he was a blessed man, notwithstanding
forasmuch as he was a forrain borne, and toke
vpon him to be their king, they hated him also after his death,
like as they did of long time by his lyfe. Wherby it came to passe,
that, that same night the relikes that were brought thither,
did remaine still without: yet was there a great pauilion stretched
out ouer the chariot wherin the relikes were: but the shewing
of heauenly miracle did manifestly declare, with how
great reuerence those bones ought to be receiued of all faith
full people. For all that night long a pillour of light, reaching

from that chariot vnto he auen, stoode so, that it was plainly
seen in al places almost of the same prouince of Lindisse. Wherfore
when the morning was come, the brethern of that monastery,
who on the day before had denied began now to desyre
earnestly, that the same holy relikes, might be laied vp in their
house. These bones were after enclosed in a shrine, which they
had prouided for that purpose. The shrine also was placed in
the church with honour conuenient: And to thend that the
holy mans princely personage might alwaie be remembred,
they erected ouer his tūbe his standerd, made of gold and purple:
Also whereas the very water wherin they washed his bones,
they poored out into a corner of the vestrey, from that day
forward it came to passe, that the earth it selfe, which receiued
that holy washing, had also especiall grace to driue awaie diuels
from the bodies that were possessed. Furthermore in processe
of time, when the forsaide Quene abode in the same monastery
there came to salute her a certaine honorable Abbesse, which liueth vntill this day: her name is Edilhild sister to the blessed
man Edelwin and Aldewin, the first of the which was a bishop
in the prouince Lindisse, the second was the Abbot of a monastery,
the which is called Peartane not far from the place where
that Abbesse had her monastery. This abbesse cōmoning with
the Quene, after they begā to fal in talke of Oswalde, among other
matters she saied, that she also had seene, on the very same
night a light vpon his relikes whiche in height reached vp to
heauen. Wherunto the Quene added that many sicke folckes
were now healed with the very dust of the pauiment, on the
which the water of his wasshing was poured out: Then the Abbesse
desyred to haue some deale, of the dust geuen her, and as
sone as she receiued it, she knit it vp in a cloth, laied it vp in a litle
casket, and retourned. Not longe after, when she was
in her owne monastery, a certaine straunger came thither,
who in the night was wonte diuers times sodenly to be troubled

with a foule sprite, and that most greuously. This geste
when he had ben liberally entertayned, after supper went to
bedd, and sodenly being possessed with the diuell, began to crye
out, to gnash with his teeth, to fome at the mouth, and to cast
fourth his body violently, flinging some partes one waye, and
some an other. And when no man was able either to hold or
to binde him, a seruant ranne, and knocking at the gate tolde
the abbesse. Who forth with going forth with one of the
nunnes, to the place where the brethern laye, she called forth a
priest, requiring him to go with her to the pacient. Wher when
at their coming they sawe many men present, labouring to kepe
downe the partty vexed, and to stay his inordinat motions
and yet preuailing nothing, the priest adiured hym, and
did what he could for the appeasing of the rage, that this piteous
creature was in: but the priest himselfe for ought he
could doe auailed the party nothing. At last when it semed
ther remained no health,Gregory B. of Nisso, brother to S. Basill reporteth of miracles wrought by the duste lying vpon Martyrs tum
                     
                        ••
                     s. In vita Theodori Martyr
                           •
                        s.
                   or hope of amendement in the madde
body, the Abbesse by and by, remembring the aforesaid dust
commaunded forthwith a maide who serued her, to go and
bring her a little coffer, wherein the dust was reserued: who
going as she was commaunded, as sone as she entred into the
court of the house, (in the inward part wherof the mā that was
possessed with the euill sprit, was tormented) bringing the saide
dust, the person possessed sodenly helde his peace, and layed
downe his head, as though he were fallen a sleape: setting euery
part of his body as though he wolde rest. Al they who stode
about the patient, were whist, aud being attentiue kept sylence,
carefully looking w
                     •
                  at end the matter would haue. And
behold, after a quarter of an houre, or there about, the man
that was before disquieted, arose vp all quiet, and with fetching
a greate sigth said, euen now, I fele my selfe whole, and
now I come to my witte againe. They which stode by demaunding
how this had happened, he answered: Incontinent

as sone as this virgin, with the little coffer whiche she
brought was come nigh to the court of this house, all the wicked
sprites that troubled me departed and appeared no more.
Then did the Abbesse geue him a litle piece of that
dust. The priest prayed ouer him, and departed. He passed
thus, the rest of that night in most quiet rest: neither did he
suffer all the night after any trouble or vexation at all.
            
            
               
                  How a litle childe sitting hard by Oswaldes tombe, was healed of an ague.
               
               The 12. Chap.
               SHortly after this time there was a certaine little boye in
the same monastery,Paulinus a lerned bisshop of Nola in S. Augustins time reporteth sundry miracles of health restored to sick persōs at the tū
                     be of S. Felix. Natali 6. the like writeth S. Basill of the 40. Martyres. S. Ambrose of the bodies of S. Geruasius and Protasius. li. 10. epist. ad sororem: epist. 85. et serm. 19. who had a great while ben sore sicke
of a feuer. Who on a day looking heauely for the course
of his feuer, one of the brethern, coming to him, sayd: wilt
thou my son, that I shall teache the, how thou maist be deliuered
of the griefe of this sickenesse? Ryse goe into the church,
and when thou comest to Oswalds sepulture, sit downe there,
and abiding quietly cleaue vnto the tumbe, beware thou goe
not from thence, nor stirre out of the place, vntill the fitt of
feuer shall be past: then will I come and bringe the foorth
from thens. The childe did as the religious man had counsailed
him. And when he was sitting hard by the holy mans tumbe,
the sicknes did in no wise presume to attache him, but fled
incontinently from him, as daring not kepe any course with
him neither the next daye, nor the third daye, no yet any time
afterward. That this was so done, the religious man, who came
from thence reported to me, and saith furthermore, that at
the tyme of his talke with me, that younge man, on whom
when he was but a child this miracle of health was done, was
yet alyue in the same monastery.All lerned stories ar
                        •
                      full of such examples. And it is not to be wondered
at, that the prayers of that king now reigning with God maye
doe muche with him: Who hauing sometime the gouernance
of a temporall realme, accustomed him selfe to continuall and
earnest prayer for the euerlasting kingdome. Finally men report,

that he had oftentimes continued in prayer from midnight
mattins, vntill it were day,Kinge Oswalda greate praier
                        •
                      Holy men worke miracles by intercession. and by the reason of his common
custome of praying, or geuing god thankes, he was wont
alwaies, whersoeuer he did sitt, to haue his handes vpright vppon
his knees. Yea it is is said also, that he ended his life, as he
was saying his deuotions. For whiles he was compassed about
with the artillary,O rare example of a Christen Prince. and assayled of his ennemies, and sawe
that he should be slaine immediatly, he made his prayer to god
to saue those souldiers soules, which were in his armye. Of the
which occasion came vp this prouerbe: God haue mercy on
their soules, quoth Oswald, when he died him selfe.
                  An olde uerbe. His bones were
conueyghed and buried in the monastery, whereof we speake.
And whereas the king who killed him commaunded that his
head and his handes with his armes cut of from the body, shuld
be hanged vp on poles, a yeare after, Oswine, his successour
in the kingdom came with his armie, and toke them away, burying
his head in the churcheyarde of holy Iland churche,
and laying vpp his handes with his armes in the cytee of
Bebba.Bābrough
               
            
            
               
                  How a certaine man in Ireland being at the pointe of death, was by his relikes restored to life.
               
               The. 13. Chap.
               THe renowne of this famous man hath passed not only
ouer all the borders of Britaine, but also spreading the
beames of holesome light farre beyonde the Occean
sea, came to the coastes of Germany and Ireland likewise.
The right reuerent bishop Acca was wonte to tell, that in his
iourney to Rome, as he passed through Friselande, and abode sometime
there in the house of VVillibrorde, that holy bishop of
Friselande with his prelate VVilsride he heard him oftentymes
reporte, what were done in that prouince by the meanes of the
religious relikes of this most vertuous king. At what tyme
also he being but yet a priest ledde a pilgrimes life in Ireland

for the loue he had to the euerlasting countrey, he reported that
the bruite of this kings holines was then farr abrode sowen in
that yle also. One miracle, whiche he rehersed among other,
we haue thought good to write in this owr present historye.
In a tyme of mortalytie (sayd this man) which by a greate death
destroyed Britayne, and Ireland, a certayne scholer whose
auncetours were scottes, was stroken with the same pestilence,
a man skilfull certesse in the studye of learning, but one that
vsed no diligence, and tooke no labour at all for the attayning
of his owne euerlasting saluation. Who when he saw him selfe
to be at deaths doore, trembled and was troubled in sprite, for
death so nye approching, fearing, (as his lewde life deserued)
to be throwen down into the doungeon of hell. And therwith
he cryed to me being lodged not far of, and fetching depe and
sorowfull sighes, in a trembling and lamentable voyce, made
thus his mone vnto me. Yow see, (quoth he) that now by the
increase of my bodely greefe, I draw to the poynt of deathe.
And I know surely that by and by after the deathe of this my
body, I shall be taken awaie to the euerlasting death of the
soule, and that I must endure the torments of hell: for that trauayling
in the reading of holy writt,A lesson for vngodly studēts and occupied alwaies in
diuine study, I became yet rather a slaue of sinne, then a keper
of gods holy commaundements. But, if God of his mercifull
goodnes, will graunt me any leysure to liue, I purpose to amēd
my sinfull manners, and dispose from hence foorth my whole
life, to the will and pleasure of almightye God. Yet I knowe
that I haue not deserued either to haue or to hope for so much
truce and respyte to liue: except peraduenture by the help of
such, as haue faithfully serued God, he will of his tender mercy
vouchsafe, to forgeue me so wretched and miserable a synner.
For we haue heard it commonly reported, that there hath ben
in your nacion a king of wonderfull holinesse called Oswalde,
the excellencie of whose faith and vertue, yea after his deathe,

was well knowen by working of many miracles. I besech yow
therfore, if yow haue any of his relikes left with yowe in your
keping, bring it to me, because it may so be, that God will haue
mercy vpon me through his merits. To whome I made this
answere: forsooth I haue of the tree,The goodnes of God and our faithe worketh miracles by holy relikes. whereupon his head was
sticked, after that he was flayne of the paynims, and if thou
wilt beleue assuredly, the mercifull goodnes of God by the merite
of so worthye a person, may both graunt the longer tyme
to leade this life, and also make the a meete man, to enter into
the life euerlasting. Who answering me incontinent, that he
did perfectly beleue so, I called for water, and blessing it, I cast
in a chyppe of the forsayde oken tree, geuing of the water, the
sicke man to drinke. Foorthwith he began to amend, and
recouering his health, lyued along tyme after, and being tourned
to God, in al hart and deede, did openly declare to all men,
wher euer he came, the graciousnesse of our mercifull maker,
and the glory of his faithful seruaunt.
            
            
               
                  How that Thamar when Pauline was deade succeded him in the bishoprike of Rochester, and of the meruaylous humilitie of Osuuius whom Oswin killed cruelly.
               
               The 14. Chapter.
               THis blessed kinge being exalted to the kingdome of heauen
his brother Oswin a young man, about thirty yeres
old toke on him in his steede the gouernaunce of the earthly
kingdome, and ruled the realme withe greate disquietnesse
and trouble, the space of eight and twenty yeres. For first
the paynim, and mighty king Penda had warre against him.
Then the paynim people of the Marshes, which slewe his brother
made him battaile. Also his owne sonne Alcfride did lykewise
rebell and resist him. Last of all Adilwalde his nephew,
sonne to Oswald withstoode him. In the second yere of this
Oswins raigne, that is to witt in the. 644.An. 644. yere after the incarnation
of owr Lord, the right reuerent father Pauline, somtime
bishope of yorke: but then gouerning the diocese of Rochester,

went to God the twentieth day of October. He was byshop.
19. yeres and two monthes, and one and twentie dayes:
and was buried in the chappell of the blessed Apostle S. Andrewe,
which king Edilbert builded vp euen from the foundation
in the same cytee of Rochester. In whose place the archebishop
Honorius aduanced Thamar, a kentish man, a man
comparable to any of his auncestours bothe in vertue of life,
and excellencie of learning. Oswin at the beginnying of his
reigne, had a partaker of his estate royall named Osuuius, who
descended of kinge Edwines bloud, that is to say, the sonne of
Osrike, of whom we haue made mention before, a maruaylous
deuoute and godly man, who seuen yeres together ruled the
prouince of theYorke shere. Deirans, in most plēty of things, and with the
loue of al his subiects. But Oswin who gouerned the other part
of Northumberland, toward the north, to witt the prouince of
the Bernicians,Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit. Lucanus lib. 1. cold not long liue peasibly with him: but rather
forging and encreasing causes of debate murdered him at lēgth
most cruelly. For vpon these variaunces an armie beyng on
bothe partes assembled, Osuuius seyng hym self to weake, to
ioygne battayle withe Oswin, thought it more expedient, to
breake of warr at that time, and refrayne vntill better occasion
serued. Therfore he discharged the army, which he had gathered
together cōmaunding euery man to returne home againe.
The field where they met, is called VVilfares downe, and standeth
almost ten myle, from the village of Cataracton toward
the west. Osuuius conueighed him selfe out of the waye,
with only one that was his most faithfull souldiour named
Condher to one Hunwald an Earle, whom he toke for his very
frend. But alas he was much deceaued: for being by the same
Earle betrayed withe his forsaid souldiour vnto Oswin by
by his lieutenant Edelwin he slew him most cruelly and traiterously.
This was done the xx. of August, in the ninthe yere
of his reigne, in a place whiche he called Ingethl
                        •
                     ng, wher, for

the satisfaction of this heynous acte,Praier for the dead. there was afterwarde
a monastery buylded, in the which daily prayers
should be offered vp to God, for the redemption of bothe the
kinges soules, as well the murderer, as the partye murthered.
               King Osuuius was of countenance beautifull,The commendati
                        •
                      of kinge Osuuius. of stature
high, in talke courtyous and gentle: in all pointes ciuill and amiable:
no lesse honourable and bounttfull to the noble, then
free and liberall to persons of lowe degree. Wherby it happened,
that for his outward personage, inward hart, and princely
port he had the loue of all men. Especially the nobilitie of
all countres frequented his court, and coueted to be receiued
in his seruice. Amonge other his rare vertues, and princely qualites,
his humilitie and passing lowlynesse excelled. Wherof we
wil be contented to recite one most worthy example. He had
geuen to bishop Aidan a very faire and proper gelding: which
that vertuous bishop,Bishop And an 
                        ••
                     ero S. Martin
                        •
                      who gaue halfe his doke to a naked poore man. (though he vsed most to trauail on foote)
might vse to passe ouer waters and ditches, or when any
other necessite constrained. It fortuned shortly after, a certain
poore weake man met the bishop, riding on his gelding, and
craued an almes of him. The bishop as he was a passing pitefull
man, and a very father to needy persons, lighted of, and gaue
the poore man the gelding gorgeously trapped as he was.
The king hearing after hereof, talked of it with the bishop, as
they were entring the palace to diner and saied. What meaned
you my Lord to geue awaie to the begger that faire gelding,
which we gaue you for your owne vse? Haue we no other
horses of lesse price, and other kinde of rewardes to bestowe
vpon the poore, but that you must geaue awaie that princely
horse, which we gaue you for your owne ryding? To whom
the bishop answered. Why talketh your grace thus?A charitable saying, but now more like to be mocked at, then to be folowed Is that
broode of the mare derer in your sight, then that sonne of God
the poore man? Which being said they entred for to dyne. The
bishop toke his place appointed. But the knge coming then

from hunting, would stand a while by the fyre to warme him.
Where standing and musing with himselfe vpon the wordes,A rare and strā
                     ge humilite of a kinge.
which the bishop had spoken vnto him, sodenly put of his
sworde geuing it to his seruant, and came in greate hast to the
bishop, falling downe at his feete, and beseching him not to be
displeased with him for the wordes he had spoken vnto him,
saying he would neuer more speake of it, nor measure any more
hereafter what or how much he should bestow of his goods
vpon the sonnes of God, the poore. At which sight the bishop
being much astonned, arose sodenly and lifted vp the king telling
him that he should quickely be pleased, yf it would please
him to fitt downe, and cast awaie al heauynesse. Afterward the
kinge being at the bishops request mery, the bishop contrary
wise began to be heauy and sory in such sorte, that the teares
trickled downe by his chekes. Of whom when his chapleyne
in his mother tonge, which the king and his court vnderstoode
not, had demanded why he wept: I know said he, that the
king shall not lyue long. For neuer before this time haue I seen
an humble king. Wherby I perceiue, that he shall spedely be taken
out of this life, for this people is not worthy to haue such
a prince and gouernour. Shortly after the bishops dredful abodement
was fullfilled with the kinges cruel death, as we haue
before declared. Bishop Aidan him self also was taken awaie
out of this world and receiued of God the euerlasting rewardes
of his labours euen on the twelfthe day after the kinge,
whom he so much loued, was slaine, that is to wit, the 30. daye
of August.
            
            
               
                  How that bishop Aidan both tolde the shippemen of a storme that was to come
                        •
                      and also gaue them holy oyle wherewith they did cease it.
               
               The. 15. Chapter.
               HOW worthy a man this bishop Aidan was, God the
high and secret iudge of mens hartes, by sundry miracles
(the proper workes of his maiesty) declared to all

the world. Thre of the which it shall be sufficient presently to
recite, for remembraunces sake. A certaine priest called Vtta 
                     •
                  
man of great grauitye and truth, and one that for his qualites
was much reuerenced and estemed of men of honour, at what
time he was sent into kent to fetch Eanflede kinge Edwines
daughter, who after the death of her father had ben sent thither,
to be maried to king Oswin, appointing so his iourney,
that he minded to trauail thither by land, but to retourne with
the yoūg lady by water, he wēt to bishop Aidā
                   beseching him
to make his humble prayers to god to prosper him and his,The deuotiō of our primitiue church.
who were then taking their iourney. The bishop blessing them
and committing them to the goodnes of god, gaue them also
hallowed oyle, saying: I know that when you shall haue shipping,
a tempest and a contrary winde shall rise vpon you sodeinly.
But remember that you cast into the sea, this oyle that I
geue you, and anon the winde being laied, comfortable fayer
weather shall ensue on the sea, which shall send you home againe
with as pleasaunt a passage as you haue wished. All these
thinges were fulfilled in order, as the bishop prophesied. Truly
at the beginning of the tempest, when the waues and surges of
the sea did chiefely rage, the shipmen assayed to cast ancar, but
all in vaine. For the tempest encreased, the whaues multiplied
so faste, and water so filled the shippe, that nothing but
present death was looked for. In this distresse the priest at the
length remembring the bishop wordes, toke the oyle pot, and
did cast of the oyle into the sea, which being done (according
as the vertuous bishop had forsaide) the sea calmed, the bright
sonne appeared, the ship passed on with a most prosperous viage.
Thus the man of God by the sprit of prophecy, forshewed
the tempest to come, and by the same holy Spirit, though bodely
absent appaised the same. No common reporter of vncertain
rumours, but a very credible man, a priest of our church
Cynimund by name shewed me the processe of this miracle: who

saied that he had hearde it of that same Vtta the priest, in whome
the miracle was wrought.
            
            
               
                  How the same man by prayer ceased the fyre that ennemies had put to the kinges citee.
               
               The. 13. Chap.
               AN other miracle worthy temembraunce, wrought by
the same father, is reported of many, such as were moste
likely to haue perfect knowledge of it. At what time
Penda capitain of the Marshes, inuaded the prouince of
Northumberland (this Aidan being bishop) and wasting and
spoyling the whole countre,Bābrough euen vnto Bebba the cite of the
kinges owne abode, being not able neither by battaile neither
by siege to winne it, minded to sett it a fire, and had for that
purpose, caried thither in certaine chaines and gables (cut of by
mayne force in the suburbes of the cyte) a great quantitye of
beames, rafters, postes and small twigges, wherewith he had
compassed that part of the cyte that adioyneth to the land, in a
great height, and the winde now seruing at will, the fire was
kindled and the cite began to consume, this reuerent prelate
Aidan, being then in holy Ilond, about two myles from the cite,
whether oftentimes he vsed to departe to kepe his secret trade
of deuotions and solitary contemplacions (as euen to this
day the place is well knowen) beholding the flakes of fire,Theodoret in his Philotheus reporteth of a great army of the Persiās destroyed at Nisiba by the praier only of lames then a holy Bis
                        •
                     hop of that cite. and
great smoke ouer the cyte, lifting vp his eyes and handes to
heauen, with teares (as it is reported) cryed out, and sayed: Behold
O Lorde how great mischeif Penda worketh? Which
wordes of that blessed man being pronounced, the windes
being turned from the cyte, turned backe the light fyre againe,
vppon them who had kindled it. In so much that some being
hurte, all made afraied, they were fayne to leaue the assault
of the cyte which they sawe to be holpen by the hande of
God.In vita lac
                        •
                     bi Nisibensis.
               
            
            
               
                  How the post of the church, whereunto that holy bishop leaning departed this life, could not be burned, when all the rest of the church burned: and of his inward life.
               
               
               The. 16. Chap.
               THis vertuous bishop Aidanus at what tyme he shoulde
depart this worlde, hauing laboured in the office of a
bishop xvij. yeres,Bāorough remained in a village of the kinges
not far from the cyte of Bebba: for hauing there a church and
a chamber, he vsed oftentimes to stay and abyde there taking
from thence his yourney rounde about the countre to preache
the word of God, as he did in al other tounes subiect to the kinge,
not resting longe in any place as hauing no possessions of
his owne, but his church only and a small plotte of grounde
lying there aboute. Being therfore sicke, they pitched him a pauilion,
fastening it hard to the church wall, on the west syde
thereof. In this pauilion leaning to a post ioyned to the out
side of the church to fortefy it, he gaue vp the ghost in the
xvij. yere of his bishopricke, the last day of August. His body
was from thence caryed to holy Iland, and in the church yarde
of the monastery buried. But shortly after a greater church there
being erected, and dedicated in the honour of the most blessed
prince of the Apostles S. Peter, his bones were transposed
thither, and layed at the right side of the aultar, with much honour
as that vertuous bishop deserued. Finanus a holy man directed
thither, from the Ilond and monastery of Hij in Scotland,
succeded Aidan, and was bishop a long tyme. It fortuned
not long after that Penda king of the Marshes or Vplandish
english men, inuading the coastes of Northumberland with a
mighty armie, destroying with fire and sworde all that he mette,
burned also that village and the church wherein that holy
man Aidan died. But behold al the rest of the church burning,
that only poste whereunto this holy man leaned at the moment
of his departure, could by no force of fyre be consumed.
The miracle being knowen and 
                     •
                  , the church

was builded vp againe, in the selfe same place, and the post also
to fortefy the wall as before. Which being done not long after
by the ouersight of the inhabitants, the village and churche
also, chaunced to be sett all on fyre, that poste yet escaping the
flame and fyre as before. And wheras the fyre passed through
the holes of the post, whereby it was fastened to the churche
wall, yet the church burning the poste could not be hurt.God whiche by the shadowe of Peter healed the sicke worketh the like in the dead rel
                        •
                      kes of holy men. Whereupon
a third churche being, builded, that poste was no more
sett withowt, to bolster vpp the wall as before, but for remembraunce
of the miracle it was had into the church, and layed as
a threshold for people to knele vpon, and make their deuoute
prayers to almighty God. And it is well knowen that sithen
that tyme diuers haue in that place ben cured of deseases, and
with water, wherein chippes cut from that poste haue ben dipped,
many haue recouered health.Act. 5. This much haue I written
of this holy man and of his workes not yet commending in
him his wronge and euill accustomed obseruation of Easter
according to the coūte of the Iewes, but detesting that in hym
vtterly, as also I haue euidently declared in my booke De temporibus.
But as it behoueth a true historiographer, I haue reported
of him and of his doings, suche thinges as were cōmendable,
and might profit the readers. As that he was a man of
greate charity and quyet, of great contynency and humilitie, a
conquerer of wrathe and couuetousnes and one that was far
from all pride and vaine glory. Againe I commend in him
his greatindustry both in keping and in teaching the commaundements
of God, his diligent reading, continuall watching,
his priestly grauitye in rebuking the proude and haughty, and
mild demeanour in comforting the weake, and refreshing the
nedy. And to be short, I commend him as one that laboured all
dayes of his life (as of his most nere acquaintance I vnderstād)
to obserue and fulfill all that was writen and commaunded in
holy scriptures the Prophets and Apostles. These thinges in

that holy prelate I do much embrace and commend, as things
vndoubtedly pleasing almighty God. But that he obserued
not Easter in his due time, either as ignorant therof, or witting
it well, yet being lead with the authoritye of his countre, not
acknowleadging it, this I neither commend nor allowe. Yet
in this very point this I allowe in him, that in his manner of
obseruing Easter he beleued, reuerenced, and preached no other
thing, then we doe, that is the redemption of mankynde
by the passion, resurrection and ascension of Christ Iesus the
mediatour betwene God and man. And therfore he obserued
his Easter not (as many falsely do suppose) altogether with the
Iewes, that is the fourtenth day of the moone, what so ever day
it fell vpon, but he kept it euer vpon a sonday reakoning from
the fourtenth day of the moone to the twentith: and that for
the faith vndoubtedly which he had in our lordes resurrectiō,
beleuing it to be in the first fery after the sabooth day in hope
of our resurrection to come, which the holy churche beleueth
shall happen vpon the same first fery, that is vpon a Sonday,
euen as owr lorde arose vpon a sonday, as the scripture testifieth.Ioan. 20.
               
            
            
               
                  Of the life and death of the vertuous kinge Sigebert.
               
               The. 18. Chap.
               ABout this tyme,Norfolck Suffolck and Cambridg shere. after Carpwalde Redwaldes successor,
Sigibert his brother a vertuous and deuoute man
raigned ouer the East english natiō. This prince while
he liued in Fraunce flying the emmyte of kinge Redwald, was
there baptised. Wherevpon after his returne coming to the
Crowne, and desyring to folow that godly order and trade
which he had sene practised in Fraunce, set vp a schole to bring
vp children by the helpe and ayde of Byshopp Felix whom he
toke owt of kent for that purpose, appoynting them masters
and teachers after the maner of the kentish men. This kinge
was so flamed with the loue of heauen, that leauing at the laste

all affaires of his realme to the gouuernement of his cosen
Egrick, who also before had part of his dominion with him,
he entred to a monastery whiche he had made for him selfe,King Sigibert becometh a monke.
where being shoren in, he bestowed his tyme to the atchieuing
of the eternall kingdome of heauen. Wherein hauing with
much deuotion warfared a longe time to God, the vplandishe
english men withe their olde Capitain Penda inuaded his dominions.
His people after long resistaunce finding them selues
to weake, beseched Sigibert for the encouraging of their
souldiars, to come forth in to the field with thē. Which when
of his owne accorde he woulde not agree vnto, they plucked
him by force owt of the monastery, and brought him against
his wil vnto the field, hoping that the souldyars in the presence
of their olde valiaunt Capitain, would lesse think vpon flight,
and running away. Notwithstanding the vertuous man remembring
his profession, being sett in the middest of the army,
caryed only a litle rodde in his hande. Thus of the cruel
hethen he was killed, withe kinge Egrick, and the whole army
discomfited. Anna sonne to Guido of the kinges bloude succeded
in the kingdome, a man of great vertu, and the father of
a blessed issue, as we shall hereafter in his place declare. This
kinge also was afterward slayne of the selfe same Penda Capitain
of the Marshes or vplandish enhlishmen then heathen
and vnchristned.
            
            
               
                  How Furseus builded a monastery amonge the Eastenglish men, and of his visions and holynesse which also his 
                        ••
                     esh remaining after his death vncorrupted dothe witnesse,
               
               The. 19. Chapter.
               IN the time that Sigibert gouuerned yet the east partes of
England, a holy man called Furseus came thither out of Ireland,
a man notable bothe for his sayings and doings, of
great vertu, and much desiring to wander and trauail in Gods
quarell, where so euer occasion serued. Coming therefore to
the east coastes of England he was reuerently receiued of the

saied kinge, where poursuing his godly desire of preaching the
worde of God, he bothe conuerted many infidels, and confirmed
the faithefull in the faith and loue of Christ, by his painefull
preaching and vertuous examples. Falling here in to
sicknes,S. Paule was comforted also by a vision from God to be stedfast in preaching the worde he had from God a vision by the ministery of Angels,
wherin he was warned to go forth cherefully in his paine
full preaching of the ghospell, and perfeuere in his accustomed
watching and praying bicause his ende and death was
certain, though the houre thereof were most vncertain, according
to the saying of our Lorde. VVatch therfore bicause ye knowe
not the daye nor the houre.
                  Act. 2
                        •
                     . With this vision being much confirmed
and encouraged,Mat. 25. he hastened with all spede to builde
vp the monastery in the place kinge Sigibert had geuen him,
and to instruct it with regular discipline. This monastery was
pleasaūtly situated for the woddes and sea adioyning, being erected
in the village of Cnobherburg, and enriched afterward
by Anna kinge of that prouince and many other noble men,
with sundry faire houses and other ornaments. This Furseus
came of the noblest race of the Scottish nation, nobler yet of
minde, then of bloud. From the very time of his childehood, he
gaue him selfe to reading of holy scripture, and monastical
discipline. Especially, as it becōmeth holy and perfit men, what
soeuer he lerned to be acceptable to God, he was hoful and dili
gent to execut and perfourme. Brefely, in processe of time he
builded him selfe a monastery, wherein he might with more
leasure and liberty attend to cōtemplation and spiritual deuotion.
In the which monastery being striken with sicknesse, he
was taken out of his body, as the booke writen of his life doth
sufficiently testifie. In the which traunce continuing from euening
vntil the next morning, he was brought to the sight of
the Angelicall company and to the hearing of their blessed
praises and thankes geuings to God. Among other thinges
which he heard them singe, he was wonte to tell of the versicle

                  I bunt sancti de virtute in virtutem.
                  Psal. 83. Holy men shall procede
from vertu to vertu. And againe. Videbitur Deus dcorum in Syon.
The God of Goddes shall be sene in Syon. This holy man
being restored againe to his body, was within three daies after
taken out againe, at what time he sawe not only greater ioyes
of the blessed company of heauen, but also beside great conflictes
of the wicked sprits, which very busely went about to
stoppe him of his iourney toward heauen with their often accusations,
auailing yet nought against him, the holy Angels
warding him and defending him. Of all the which thinges
who listeth more at large to be instructed, as with what spiteful
suttelties the wicked sprits replied alwaies against him not only
his doings and superfluous wordes, but also his very thoughtes
as if they had them writen in booke, also what gladd and
heuy tydinges he lerned of the Angels, and other holy and iust
men appearing then vnto him, let him reade the litle booke
which is writen of his life, and he shal receaue thereof (I doubt
not) much spirituall comfort and instruction. Amōg the whiche
yet one thing there is that we haue thought good and profitable
to many to expresse in this our history. At what time in
his traunce he was caried vp to heauen warde,Note the sc
                        ••••
                     . spirituall fires whiche shall burne the
                        •
                     wde. he was commaunded
of the Angels who caried him to looke downe in to the
worlde. Which when he did, he sawe as if it were a darke
and obscure vally vnderneath him. Also in the ayre foure seuerall
fyres, not farre distant one from the other Asking therefore
the Angells what fyres those were, it was tolde him that
those were the fyres which should burne and consume the
worlde. The first fyre they saied, was the fyre of lying, which
we all incurre when we do not fulfill the promis which we
made in baptim: that is, to renoūnce the diuell and all his workes
The second fyre is of couetousnes and desire, when we preferre
the riches of the worlde before the loue of heauenly matters,
The third is of strife and debate, when we sticke not to offende

the mindes of our euen Christiās, euen in trifling and superfluous
matters. The fourth is of wickednes and impiete,
thinking it a light matter to injury, beguile or vse violence toward
our wekers and inferiours. These foure fyres encreasing
by litle and litle so farr at the lenght extended, that ioyning
altogether they grew to a great and houghly flame. Which
approching nigh vnto him fearing he cried to the Angel, Lorde,
beholde the fyre draweth to me. To whom the Angell saied,Euery mā shall receiue according to the workes of his body. 2. co. 5.
Feare not. That which thou hast not kindled, shall not
burne the. For though this flame seme to the terrsble, great, and
hougy, yet it trieth euery one according to the desertes of his
workes. For the worldly desyre that eche one hath shall burne
(and purifie) in this fyre. And as a man burneth in his
body by vnlaufull pleasure, so departed out of his body he
shall burne by due and deserued paine.The paines of Purgatory. Then he sawe one
of the thre Angels, whiche in bothe his visions had
ben his guides, to go before and diuide the flames from
him. The other two warding him on eche side from the danger
of the fire also. He saw againe the diuelsThe diuel fighteth with sinn against man. Reade S. Paul Ephes. 6. b. 12. &c. 16.
                   and wicked sprits
flyeng through the fire, fighting with fire against the Iuste. After
folow the accusations of the wicked sprits against him, the
defence of the Angels for him, and a greater sight of the heauenly
company. Amonge the which many of his owne nation
of Scotland appeared, vertuous priestes in their life time, and
men of great opinion of holynesse, of whom he lerned diuers
thinges very profitable both for him selfe and for other, which
would lerne of him. Who after they had ended their cōmunication
departing vp to heauen again with the other blessed
company, thre Angels remained with Furseus to reduce him againe
to his body. In their returne, as they approched to that
great foresaied fyre, the Angell parted the fire from him, as before,
yet when this man of God had entred the waie made betwene
the flames, certain of the wicked sprits snatching vp one

of them which they tormented in the fires, threwe him at him,
and touching him, burned his shouldet and cheke. The man of
GodAs God is said in scripture to bende his bowe to strik with sword, etc. Psal. 7, so here the writer applieth carnal termes to spiritual matters, the names of fire to sinne, of throwing by the diuels to the charge of sinne. &c. knew well the person, and remembred that at his death
he had taken of him a garment of his bequethed him. But the
holy Angell taking away spedely the tormented soule, threw
him againe in to the fyre. Whereat the wicked sprit saied, repell
him not now whom ye receiued before. For as ye tooke the
goods of this sinner, so ought ye also take parte of his paynes
and tormentes. Vnto whom the Angell answering, saied, he toke
it not of couetousnes, but for the sauing of his soule: with
this the fire ceased. And the Angel turning to the mā, said. That
which thou hast kindled hath now burned in the. For if thou
haddest not taken the mony of this man dying in his sinne, the
torment of his fire had not touched the. And here in many
wordes the Angell taught him, what was to be done concerning
their saluation which did repent. The man liuing longe
time after, bore the signe of that fire which he suffred in soule,
visible and euident to all men in his shoulder and cheke. And
the flesh maruailously openly shewed that, which the soule priuely
suffred. He endeuoured euer after, as he was also wont before,
to preache bothe by worde and example to all men the
trade and duty of a vertuous life. The maner of his visions
he communicated only to such, who of vertuous desire and
holy zele desired the same.
               It remaineth yet (touching this man) that we recite here the
credible reporte of an auncient brother, of our monastery, who
saieth he heard of a very trusty and vertuous man, that he had
sene this Furseus in the prouince of the East costes of England,
and had heard of his owne mouth these visions. Reporting
moreouer, that in the most sharp frost of depe winter, that holy
man sitting but in a slight garment, as he recounted these visions,
through the great feare, and pleasure also conceiued by
the remembraunce thereof, he would sweat as if it had ben the

hottest daye in the middest of sommer.
               To returne to our principall purpose, this holy man hauing
preached the worde of God many yeares in Scotlande, and not
being able to endure any longer the commotion of the people,
leauing all that he had, departed from his natiue countre and Ilond
that he was borne in. From thence he came to the easte
coast of England, preaching there the worde of God, and erecting
at last (as we touched before) a noble Monastery. Al whiche
thinges duly perfourmed, intending vtterly to abandonne
all worldly cares and troubles, he leste also the busy gouuernement
of the monastery committing that charge of soules to
his brother Fullanus and to Gobbanus and Dicullus priestes: taking
vpō him the most solitary life of an Anchoret. He had an
other brother called Vltanus who also after longe proufe and
triall in the monastery, went vnto a wildernesse and lead an
Eremites life. To him he went alone, liuing one whole yeare
with him in continency, prayers, and daily hand labour. The
countre being after much disquieted by often inuasions of ennemies,
and monasteries them selfes being in danger, leauing al
thinges in good order, he sailed in to Fraunce. Where being honourably
receiued of the French kinge Clouis the second, and
of Erkinwald then preuost of Perone he builded a monastery
in a place there called Latiniacum. Where not longe after falling
sicke he died. Whose body Earkinwald the preuost taking
thence kept it in the porche of his church vntell the church it
selfe was consecrated in Perone. Which being solemnely done
within six and twēty daies after the body was brought thither,
and being remoued from the porche to be layed by the high
aultar, it was founde as whole and vncorrupted as if the man
had but that houre departed. Foure yeares after a litle chappell
being erected at the east syde of the aultar wher the body shuld
more honourably betoumed, being takē vp againe to be transposed
thither it was founde in like maner without any blemish

of corruption. In the which place it is well knowen that his
merites haue much ben renowned by sundry miracles wrought
by the allmighty power of God. Thus much of the incorruption
of his body we haue brefely touched, that the reader might
more clerely vnderstande, of what excellency and vertu this
man was. All which thinges, and of other his vertuous companyons
in the booke writen of his life, he that readeth, shall
finde more ample mencion made.
            
            
               
                  How after the death of Honorius, Deusdedit succeded, and who in that time were bishops of Rochester and in the east partes of England.
               
               The. 20. Chap.
               IN this meane Felix the bishop of the east englishmen departing
this worlde, hauing ben their bishop. 17. yeares, Honorius
the Archebishopp of Caunterbury created in his place
Thomas one of his deacons, borne in the prouince of Giruij,
after whose death liuing in that bishoprick fyue yeares, he substituded
in his roome, Beretgilsus, surnamed Bonifacius a kentishman
borne. Honorius also the Archebishop, the measure of
his life expired, passed to a better in the yeare of our Lord, 653.An. 653.
the last daye of October. Whom Deusdedit a west Saxon borne
succeded, after a yeare and a halfe, the see being vacant all that
tyme. For whose creation and consecration Ithamar byshop
of Rochester came to Cannterbury. He was consecrated
the. xxiiij. of Marche, and gouuerned that see. ix. yeares. iiij. moneths
and two dayes. After whose departure Ithamar consecrated
in his place Damianus a Sussex man borne.
            
            
               
                  Howe the Marshes or vplandish englishmen (that is the sheres of Lincolne, Couentry Lichefield and worceter) receaued the Christen faith vnder Penda their kinge.
               
               The. 21. Chapter.
               AT this time the Middelenglishmē
                  The first Christening of the Marshes or middleland english men An. 6
                        •
                     0. (that is of the sheres aboue
named) receiued the Christen faith and the sacramentes
thereof vnder Penda their kinge sonne to Pendam that
cruell and vnmercifull hethen. This being a vertuous young

man worthy of the name and person of a kinge, was of his father
put in gouuernement of that countre. Who coming after
to Oswin kinge of Northumberland, requiring Alcfled his
daughter to wife, could in no other wise obtaine his suite, vnlesse
he would as that countre was, receiue the Christen faith,
and be baptised. Hereupon the ghospell was preached vnto
him. Who hearing the promis of euerlasting life, the hope of
resurrection and immortalite of the soule, yelded him self gladly
to be Christned though he shoulde not spede of his suite.
To this he was muche persuaded by Alcfrid king Oswins son,
who had maried his sister Cymburg kinge Pendan his daughter.
Thus then he with the Erles and kinghtes that waited vpon
him and all their seruauntes were baptised of Finanus the
bishopp in a famous towne of the kinges,By Barwick. called Admurum.
From whence he returned home with much ioye and comfort,
accompained with foure priestes notable bothe for lerning
and for vertue, whiche shoulde instruct and baptise his people.
These priestes were called Cedda, Adda, Betti, and Diuna, who
was a scottesman borne, the other thre english. Adda was brother
to Vtta that holy and vertuous priest that we mencioned
before,Ad Capreae Caput. and Abbot of the monastery called Cubeshead. These
foresaied priestes entring the prouince of the middleland with
the Prince preached the worde of God, and were gladly heard.
Whereby many daily as well noble as of the base forte renouncing
the filth of idolatry, were clensed in the fonte of life. Neither
king Pendam father to this young prince did withstande
or gainsaie the preaching of the ghospell in his dominions, yf
any would heare it. But hated in dede and persecuted all such,
as bearing the name of Christians, liued not according to the
faithe they professed:A true saying of an Heathen. saying commonly that suche men were
wretched and worthely to be spited whiche regarded not to
please their God in whom they beleued. These thinges began
two yeares before the death of kinge Penda the younger who

being after slayne, and Oswin a moste Christen kinge succeding
him in the crowne, Diuna one of the foure foresaied priestes,
was consecrated of Finanus, and created bishop of all the
middle or vplandish english men. For the scarcety of priestes
made, that ouer all that people one Bishop was sett. Who winning
to the faith in short time a great multitude of people, in
Fepping died, leauing for his successour Ceollach a Scottish man
also borne. Who not longe after leauing the bishoprike, returned
to his countre the Iland of Hij where the chief and principall
monasteries of Scotland were. To him succeded Trumher
a vertuous man and brought vpp in religion, an Englishman
borne, but consecrated byshopp of the Scottes, in the
raigne of kinge VVillher, as we shall hereafter more at larg declare.
            
            
               
                  How the East Saxons at the preaching of Cedda, receiued again the faith
                        •
                      which vnder kinge Sigibert they had loste.
               
               The 22. Chapter.
               AT this very time the east Saxōs by the meanes of kinge
Oswin receiued againe the faith,The coū
                     tre about London. which before expelling
Melitus the first bishop of Londō out of the coū
                  tre,
they abandonned. Their kinge then was Sigbert, succeding
to Sigibert surnamed the litle. This Sigbert being a nere and familiar
frende of kinge Oswin then king of the Northumbrians
came by that occasion oftentimes to Northumberland.The persuasion of kinge Oswin vvith the heathen kinge Sigbert. At
which metinges the vertuous kinge Oswin vsed eftsoones to
persuade with him, that such could not be Gods which were
made with mens handes, that wodde or stone coulde not be
any quicke matter to make a liuing God, the pieces and remnants
whereof either were wasted with fire, or serued to make
vessels for the vse of man, or otherwise being naught worthe,
were caste forth, troden vnder foote, and turned into earth.
God rather, saied he, must be vnderstanded to be of maiesty
incomprehensible, to mens eyes vnuisible, almighty and euerlasting,

who made bothe heauen and earth and all mankinde,
gouerned them also, and should iugde the whole worlde in equite,
whose mansion place is euerlastinge. Finally that al such
as would lerne and perfourme the will of their Creatour,
should vndoubtedly receiue of him euerlasting rewarde therefore.
These and such other godly aduertissemtēs being frendly
and brotherly from time to time made and repeted to king
Sigbert by Oswin, he began at lenght his other frendes agreing
therunto, to sauour them and beleue them. Whereupon aduise
being taken with his company, and all bothe consenting and
pricking him fore ward,By Barwick he was baptised of Finanus the bisshop
in the cite of Admurum, nigh vnto the walle wherewith
the Romanes parted Britanie from the Scotes, xij. miles from
the East sea. Kinge Sigbert, being nowe a citezen of the euerlasting
kingdome, returned to his earthly kingdome, requiring
of kinge Oswin to haue with him some lerned men and preachers
to conuert his countre to the faithe. Who sending for
Cedda and an other vertuous priest out of the midle land, directed
them to the east Saxons to preache there the faith, Where
hauing through out the countre preached a longe time the
worde of life, and made vp a greate haruest to Christe,
Cedda departed home againe, and came to holy Iland to talke
with Finanus the bishop: who hearing the prosperous successe
of the ghospel and the free course it had, calling vnto him two
other bishops,Cedda the secōd Bishop of London, and Essex. Chemesford and Tilberi. he consecrated and ordained Cedda bishop
of the East Saxons. Cedda being made bishop returned to his
prouince and began with more authorite to perfit the worke
he had begonne erecting in diuers places churches, making
priestes and Deacons, who in preaching and baptising might
aide him, especially in the cities of Ithancester and Tileburg, the
one stāding vpō the Tems, the other vpō a brāche thereof called
Pente. In which two places assembling together diuers
newly Christened, he instructed them after the rulers of religious

persons, as farre as their tender capacite could then conceiue.
Thus when the heauenly discipline and holy deuotion
daily increased to the great ioye of the prince and the comfort
of all the people, beholde by the instinct of the olde enemy
of mankinde, this vertuous Prince by the handes of his owne
alliaūce was murthered. The cruel executours of this hainous
acte were two german brothers. Who being examined vpon
what motion they committed that detestable fact, they answered,
for no other cause but for that they hated the prince for his
ouermuch elemency and mekenes in pardoning his enemies,Vertu per secuted of the euill, euen to death.
and forgeuing al offences done at the intreating of the parties.
This lo was their grudge conceiued against the kinge, for
which they murthered him: truly because deuoutely and sincerely
he obserued the commaundements of God. Though yet
in this his giltlesse death a true faulte of his was punished, according
as the holy bishop Cedde had foretolde him.Enormous crimes in the righteous sooner punished. For this
Prince hauing in his courte one that liued in vnlauful wedlocke,
and being therfore excommunicated of the bishop (not being
able by any other meanes to let that wicked coupling, or
amend it) and not onely he but all other also that would either
kepe him company or eate with him, the Prince neglected vtterly
this sentence of the bishop.Excommunication. It fortuned the prince being
inuited of the excommunicated man to a feast, going thither,
mette in the waie the bishop, at whose sight the kinge being
much afeared, lighted of from his horse (as the bishop also
incontinently did) falling downe before the bishops feet, and
asking pardon. The bishop being offended with the kinge (for
the euill example he gaue) touching him lying on the ground
with the rodde he helde in his hande, protested vnto him with
a lowde voice, and with bi
                     •
                  hoply authorite, saying:So Peter pronoū
                     ced Ananias to death Act. 5.
                   I tell
you, bicause you woulde not refraine from the house
of that wicked and damnable person, in that house you shall
die. Yet it is to be thought that such a death of so vertuous

a man, did not only wipe awaie this fault, but also increased
his merit. Bicause he was slaine for vertues sake and for obseruing
Gods cōmaundements, as by the cōfession of those which
slew him it appeared before. To this Sigbert, Suithelme sonne to
Sexbald, succeded in the kingdom, and was baptised of the bisshop
Cedda in the prouince of the east englishmen, in a towne of
the kinges called, Rendlesham. Edelwald kinge of the east english
brother to Anna their former kinge, was godfather to this
Suidhelme.
               
            
            
               
                  How the same Bisshop Cedda, obtaining a place to builde a monastery of kinge Oswald, by fasting and praier did consecrat it to God: and of his death.
               
               The 23. Chap.
               THis man of God Cedda being bishop of the east Saxons,
vsed yet oftentimes to visit his owne countrie of
Northumberland and preache the gospell there. Edilwald
sonne to kinge Oswald who raigned in parte of Northumberland,
ouer the people called Deiri, perceauing this bisshop
to be a holy, wise and vertuous man, required him to take
of his gift a piece of ground toward the building of a monastery,The foundation of monasteries.
wherein he and his people might resort to heare the worde
of God, to praie, and to bury their dead. For he beleued he
should much be comforted and holpen by their good prayers
who should in that place serue God. This kinge had in his house
Celin brother to bishop Cedda, a man of no lesse vertu, who
preached and ministred the sacramentes (for he was a priest) to
him and all his court. By whose meanes he came to the knowleadg
of Cedda, and was induced to loue him. The holy bishop
at the kinges request, chose out a place to erect a monastery in
the high and desert mountaines. Where before that time were
rather starting holes for theues or dennes for wilde bestes,
then mete mansion places for men. Hereby the prophecy of
EsaieEsaiae. 35. semed to be accomplished, saying, that in the poisonned couches
of dragons, swete grasse and rushes should growe, meaning that

the frutes of good workes should blossom and springe, where
before bestes or men bestly liuing made their abode. This vertuous
bishop desiring by prayer and fasting to purge as though
it were the place from the former filth of iniquites there committed,
and so to set vpon the foundation of the monastery,
obtained licence of the kinge all the Lent that then approched
to remaine in that place to fast and praie there after his
maner. In all which time, fasting euery daie, except the Sondayes
vntell the euening,Fasting in Lent vntell euening. as the maner is, he receiued then but a
litle bread with one egge, and a litle milke mingled with water.
For, as he saied, the custome of them of whom he lerned the
trade of monasticall life, was that in the new erecting of any
monastery or church, the places should be first consecratedConsecration of holy places. to
God with fasting and prayer. In this his fast, ten daies yet only
remaining of the fourty, the kinge sent for him vpon occasion
of certain affaires. But to the entent that so godly a purpose
might not be interrupted by occasion of the Princes busines,
though he brake of him selfe, yet he intreated Cinbellus his
priest and naturall brother, to make an ende of that he had begonne.
Which being of him gladly and vertuously fulfilled, he
erected the monastery now called Lesting, geuing vnto it, the
same rules and order of religion as the monkes of Holy Iland
vsed, where he was brought vp in. Thus gouuerning both his
bishopricke and this monastery many yeares, at the length as
he visited the monastery in the time of a plage, falling sicke
there with other died. He was first buried abrode, but after a
church being there builded of stone in the honour of our Lady
he was taken vp and layed at the right side of the aultar. The
bishop at his departure left the monastery to be gouuerned of
his brother Ceadda, who after also was made bishop, as we shall
anon declare. For foure german brothers (which is a rare thinge)
Cedd, Cymbill, Celin, and Ceadda wer al vertuous priestes, and
two of them bishops. When it was knowen in Northumberland

that their bishop was dead and buried, thirty brethern of the
monastery which he erected amonge the east Saxons, came to
the place where he died. Desiring by the body of their father
either to liue, or (if it so pleased God) to die and be buried there.
Who being gladly receiued of the brethern, in that time of
mortalite,Intercessiō of Saints. were all taken out of this life, except one litle boye,
who (as it is well knowen) was saued by the praiers of the bisshop.
For liuing many yeares after, and studying holy scripture,
he lerned at lenght that he had not ben yet baptised. Whereuppon
being forthwith christened, afterward was promoted to
priesthood, and proued a profitable member to the church. Of
whom we doubt not to pronounce but that (as I saied) he was
by the speciall intercession of that blessed bishop (whose bodye
of charite he came to visit) saued from the danger of death, bothe
that he might thereby escape eternall death, and might be
occasion also of life and saluation to other by his doctrine.
            
            
               
                  How the prouince of the Marshes, receiued the faythe of Christ, Penda their kinge being s
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     en. And howe Oswin vowed for the victory against Penda twelue farmeplaces to the building of monasteries.
               
               The. 24. Chap.
               IN those daies king Oswin after often and cruell inuasions
of the heathen vnmercifull Prince Penda, forced of necessite
offred him many and most precious iewells with an infinit
summe of treasure to redeme quiet and peace to his countre,
and to cease the continuall wasting and cruel spoyles that
he made. But the heathen and barbarous tyran yelding nothing
to his request and petition, but pursuing his deadly enterprise
and protesting vtterly to extinguish the whole nation from the
highest to the lowest, the vertuous kinge Oswald called for
helpe of God against the barbarous impiete of his ennemie, vowing
and saying, sith the infidell regardeth not our presentes,
let vs offer thē to our Lord God who will vndoubtedly regard
them. And withal
                     •
                   h
                     •
                   vowed, that is he had the vpper hand of

his enemy, his young' daughter should be consecrated to God
in perpetuall virginite,Vowes to God. and twelue farme places withe the landes
appertaining should be conuerted to the erecting of monasteries,
which being saied he prepared him self to battaill with
a very small army. The army of the heathen is reported to
haue ben thirty tymes more in quantite, conteyning thirty
whole legions well appointed and gouuerned withe olde tried
and valiaunt capitaynes. Against all the which kinge Oswin
with his sonne marched forth boldely though with a very smal
army (as we saied) yet with a sure confidence in Christ. His other
sonne Ecfrid was at that tyme kept in ostage in the prouince
of the Mercians vnder Quene Cinwise. Edelwald son
to kinge Oswald who ought of all reason to haue stode withe
his countre and vncle kinge Oswin, forsoke bothe, and became
a capitain vnder the heathen prince. Although when the field
was begonne, he departed a side, and getting him to a holde
by, expected the euent of the battaill. Thus meting and coupling
together the thirty capitaines of the heathen prince were
all put to flight and slaine, and with them almost all other whiche
from other countres came to aide them. Amonge the
which was Edilher brother to Anna Kinge of the east english,
then raigning after his brother, who also had ben the chiefe
and principall motiue of the battaill. And whereas the field
was fought nye to the riuer Iuuet, it did at that tyme so ouerflowe
al the bankes, and fieldes about that in the flight more of
the enemies were drowned in the water, then slaine with the
sworde. This noble victory being by gods helpe so miracuiously
obtained, incontinently king Oswin rendring due thankes
therefore, and perfourming the vowe he had made, gaue
his daughter Elfled which was yet scant one yeare olde, to be
brought vp and consecrated to perpetuall virginite, and the
twelue possessions which he promised, for the erecting of monasteries,
where in stede of worldly tillage and cōmodites, religious

monkes by continuall deuotion might labour to purchase
eternall rest and peace for him and the countre.The foundation of monasteries. Of the
which twelue farmes six he appointed in the prouince of the
Bernicians, and six other in the prouince of the Deirans. Eche
farme contained ten housholdes, which made in all six score.
The daughter of Oswin entred the monastery of Hartesilond,
                  VVitby.
there to be brought vp vnder Hilda the Abbesse in religiō and
perpetuall virginite. Who two yeres after, purchasing a farme
of ten housholdes, builded for her selfe a monastery in a place
called Stranshalch. In the which monastery this kinges daughter
was first brought vp as a lerner, but was after her selfe a lady
and teacher of monasticall life, vntell at the age of threscore
yeres this vertuous virgin passed to the blessed mariage of her
heauenly and longe desired spouse, Christ her Sauiour. In this
monastery she, her father Oswin, her mother Eanfled, and her
grandfather kinge Edwin and many other noble personages
are buryed in the churche of S. Peter the Apostle. This battaill
kinge Oswin kept in the countre of Loide the thirtenth yeare
of his raighn, the xv. daie of Nouember, to the great quyet and
commodite bothe of all his dominions, and of the aduersary
part also. For his owne countre he set at rest and deliuered
from the cruell inuasions of his deadly enemies, and his aduersaries
the Marshes and midleenglish men he brought to the faithe
of Christ, their wicked head being ones cutt of.
               The first bishop (as we saied before) bothe of the Marshes
and of all the midleenglishmen and also of those of holy Iland
was Diuna, whiche died in the countre of the middleenglish
men. The second bishop was Cellach, who leauing at length
his bishoprick yet liuing, returned to Scotlād. Both these were
Scottishmen. The third bishop was Trumher an englishman
borne, but instructed and made byshopp of the Scottes: who
was also Abbat of Ingethling monastery builded in the place
where kinge Osuuius was slaine. For Quene Eanfled cousen

and alliant to Osuuius required of kinge Oswin (who hadkilled
Osuuius) in parte of satisfaction of his vniust murther, the
erecting of a monastery for the vse of the holy man Trumher,
who also was of kinne to Osuuius. To thentent that in that
monastery daily praier might be had for the helth and saluatiō
of bothe kinges, aswell the slaine, as of him that slewe. This
kinke Oswin raigned thre yeares after the death of kinge Pendam,
ouer the Marshes and ouer the south people of England,
subduing also the nation of the Pictes for the most parte to the
allegeaunce of the english men. At what time he gaue to
Penda (sonne to Pendam the hethen) because by mariage he
was now his cosen, the kingdome of the south Marshes contayning
(as men saie) fyue thousand familes, diuided by
the riuer Trent from the Northmarshes whose lande contayneth.
7000. familes or housholdes. But the same Penda
the next spring after was trayterously slayne by the treason
(as they saie) of his owne wife, in the very tyme of Easter.
Thre yeares after the victory of Oswin and the death of Pendam
the hethen, the Nobilitie of the Marshes Immin, Eaba,
and Eadbert rebelled against kinge Oswin, auauncing to
the crowne VVulfher sonne to Pendam a younge man, whom
vntell that tyme they had kept preuy: Thus expelling the
gouuernours sett ouer them by kinge Oswin who was not
their naturall kinge, they recouered agayne valiauntlye
their liberty and their landes, liuing from that time forewarde
free vnder a kinge of their owne bloude, and seruing ioyefully
the true king of all kinges, Christe our Sauiour to be at
lenght partakners of his euerlasting kingdom in heauen. This
VVulfher raigned ouer the Marshes xvij. yeres. His first bishop,
as we saied before, was Trumber, the second Iaroman, the third
Ceadda, the fourth-VVinfride. All these in continual succession
were bishops of the Marshes vnder kinge Wulf her.
            
            
               
                  How the controuersy about the obseruation of Easter was moued against those which came out of Scotland.
               
               
               The. 25. Chapter.
               IN the meane while after the death of Aidan Finā
                   succeded
in the bishoprik of Northumberland, sent and consecrated
of the Scottes. Who in holy Iland builded a church mete
for a bishops see. Yet not of stone, but of oken tymber and
thatche worke, as the maner of Scottes was. This church afterward
the most reuerend father Theodore Archebishop of
Caunterbury dedicated in the honour of S. Peter the Apostle.
Eadbert also the bishop after of that place couered the churche
bothe the ruffe and the walles with lead. About this time a great
controuersy was moued touching the obseruation of Easter.
The bishops of Fraunce and kent affirmed,A cōtrouersic about theob seruatiō of Easter. that the Scottes
obserued the Sonday of Easter contrary to the accustomed
maner of the vniuersall church. And amonge them one Roman
a Scott borne but yet instructed in the truthe in Fraunce
and Italie, and therefore an earnest and stoute defender of
the true obseruation of Easter. Who couplingand disputing
of this matter with Finanus the bishop, induced many to the
truthe, and enflamed other to a farder serche and examination
of the question, but with Finanus him self he could nothinge
preuaile, but rather exasperated him, being a hasty nature man,
and made him an open aduersary to the cause. Iames that reue
                  
                     •
                  ent
deacō of tharchbishop Paulin, with al such as he cōuerted
to the faith, obserued the true and catholike time of Easter. Eā
fled also the quene, king Oswins wife with al her train and cō
                  pany
obserued after the same maner according as she had sene
it practised in kēt, bringing with her one Romā out of kēt a catholike
priest. By this variaunce it happened oftētimes that in
one yere two Esters wer kept. As the king breaking vp his fast
and solēnising the feste of easter, the Quene with her cōpany
cotinued yet the fast, and kept palme Sūday. Yet this diuersite
of obseruing Easter, as longe as Aidan liued, was of all men

tolerated, knowing very well that though in obseruing easter
he folowed the custome of those with whom he was brought
vp, yet he beleued as al holy men did, and kept vnitie and loue,
with al. Vpon which consideration he was beloued of all men,
euen those which varied from him in that opinion and was
reuerenced not only of the meane and common sort, but also
of Honorius the Archebishop of Caunterbury and of Felix the
bishop of the east english. But after the death of Finanus, which
succeded him, Colman being made bishop sent also out of Scotland,
the controuersy began to increase, and other variaunces
touching externall trade of life were stirred vp. By occasion
wherof many begā to fear and doubt, lest bearing the name
of Christiās,Gal. 2. 
                  they did rūne (as the Apostle saieth) or had runne in
vaine. This controuersy reached euen to the princes thē selues,
to king Oswin and his sonne Alcfrid. For Oswin being brought
vp and baptised of the Scottes, and skilfull also of their tounge
thought the maner which they obserued to be the best and
most agreable to truthe. Contrary wise Alck frid, the kinges
sonne being instructed of the lerned man VVilfrid, preferred
worthely his iudgement before al the traditions of the Scottes.
This VVilfrid for better instruction and lerninges sake had
trauailed to Rome, and liued also a longe time with Dalphinus
the Archebishop of Lyons in Fraunce, of whom also he tooke
benet and collet. To this lerned Prince Alcfrid gaue a monastery
of fourty families, in a place which is called Humpum.
                  Tonsurae ecclesiasticaecoronā suscepera
                        •
                     . The
Scottes before were in possessiō of that monastery: But bicause
after the decision of this controuersie they chose rather of
their owne accorde to departe and yelde vp the place, then to
chaunge their accustomed maner of obseruing the Easter, it
was geuen by the prince to him, who bothe for lerning and
vertu was worthy thereof. About this time Agilbert bishop of
the west saxōs, a frēde of Prince Alcfrid and VVilfrid the Abbot
came to the prouince of Northumberland, and staied there

with them for a space. Who in the meane while at the request
of Alc srid made VVilfride a priest. He had in his company also
at that time one Agatho a priest. At their presence therfore
the question being renewed, and much talked of, they
agreed on bothe sides, that in the monasterie of Stranshalch
where that deuout and vertuous woman Hilda was Abbesse,
a Synod should be kept for the decidyng of this question, and
other then in controuersy. To this Synod came bothe the
kinges Oswin the father and Alcfrid the sonne. With king Oswin
stode bishop Colman with his clergy of Scotland, Hilda
also the Abbesse with her company, among whom was Cedda
that reuerēt bishop lately consecrated of the Scottes (as we haue
touched before) who in that assemble was a most diligent
interpreter on both sides. For the other opinion which kinge
Alcfrid folowed, Agilbert the bishop stode, with Agatho and
VVilfrid priestes. Iacobus and also Romanus two other lerned
men stode of that side. First then kinge Oswin, (premising that
it behoued those which serued one God, to kepe one order and
rule in seruing the same, nor to vary here in celebrating the heauenly
sacramentes, who looked all for one kingdom in heauen,
but rather that the truthe ought to be serched out of all,
and folowed vniformely of euery one) commaunded his bisshop
Colman first to declare what his obseruation was, whence
he receiued it, and whom he folowed therein. The bishop aunswered
and saied. The Easter which I obserue, I haue receiued
of my forefathers, of whom I was sent hether bishop, who all
being vertuous and godly men haue after the same maner obserued
it. And this obseruation, that you maye not thinke it a
light matter or easely to be reiected, is the selfe same, which S.
Iohn the Euangelist the disciple whom Iesus specially loued
with all the churches vnder him obserued. These and such
like wordes when bishop Colman had spoken, the kinge commaunded
Agilbert the bishop to speake his minde also, and to

bringe forthe the beginning and author of his maner of obseruing
Easter: vnto whom Agilbert answered: Let I bes
                     •
                  che
you, my scholer VVilfrid priest speake herein for me. For we
and all that here sitt be of one minde, and obserue herein the
ecclesiasticall tradition vniformly. Beside he shal better expresse
to your highnes the whole matter speaking him selfe the english
tounge, then I shall be able vsing an interpreter. Then
VVilfrid, the kinge commaunding him, spake in this wise. The
Easter which we obserue, we haue sene in like maner to haue
ben obserued at Rome, where the blessed Apostles Peter and
Paule, liued, and preached, suffred, and are buried. This maner
we haue sene to be obserued in all Italy and Fraunce, passing
through those countres partly for study, partly on pilgrimage.
This maner we knowe to be obserued in Afrike, in Asia, in
Aegypt,
                  Vniuersalitie prescribeth. in Grece, and through out all nations and tounges, of
all the worlde where the church of Christ taketh place, after
the self same order and time, beside only these fewe and other
of like obstinacy, the Pictes I meane and the Britons, with
whom these men from the two fardermost Ilondes of the Oceā
sea, and yet not all that neither, do fondly contend against the
whole worlde. Here Colmanus the bishop interrupted and saied.
I maruail much you terme our doing a fond contention wherein
we folow the example of so worthy an Apostle, who only
leaued vpon our Lordes brest, and whose life and behauiour
all the worlde accompteth to haue ben most wise and discrete.
Vnto whom Wilfrid answered, and saied. God forbid we shuld
charge S. Iohn with fondnesse or lacke of wit. For he in his obseruation
kept yet the decrees of Moyses lawe literally, according
as the whole church folowed yet in many thinges the Iuish
maner: for why? The Apostles were not able vpon the soden
to blotte out all customes and rites of the lawe instituted
of God him selfe,The primitiue church at the firste did not abrogat all Iuish ceremo
                     
                        ••
                     ies. as all that come to the faith must of necessite
abandonne Idols inuented of the diuell. And this forsothe

they were forced to beare a time withall, lest the Iewes
which liued amonge the gentils might be offended. For in the
like consideration also S. Paul did circumcide Timothe,Actor. 16. 21. 18. offred
bloudsacrifices in the temple, shaued his head at Corinth with
Aquila and Priscilla: truly to no other intent, but that the Iewes
might not be offended. Vpon this consideration Iames
saied vnto Paule. You see brother, how many thousandes of the Iewes
haue receiued the faith,
                  Act. 21. 
                  and all these are yet zelous folowers of the
lawe. Notwithstanding the light of the ghospell now shining
through out the worlde, it is not nowe necessary, no it is not
lawfull now for any Christen man to be circumcided, or to
offer vp bloudy sacrifices of bestes.E
                        ••
                     o: 12. S. Iohn therefore according
to the custome of the lawe, in the fourtenth daie of the first
moneth at the euening began to celebrat the feste of Easter, not
regarding whether it fell out the Sabaoth daie or any other fery
of the weke.Io
                        •
                     n. 20. But S. Peter preaching the gospell at Rome, remembring
that our Lorde arose the first daye after the Sabbaoth,
geuing thereby to vs certain and assured hope of our resurrection,
he vnderstode the obseruation of Easter in such
sorte, that according to the custome and commaundements of
the lawe he looked for (euen as S. Iohn did) the rising of the
Moone at euening, in the fourtenth day of his aage, in the first
moneth. And at the rising thereof at euening, if the morow after
were Sonday (which then was called, the first day after the
Sabboth) he began in that very euening to obserue the feste of
Easter, as all we do euen to this daye,This maner is obserued nowe vnifor mely in al Christendome. 
                  beginning on Easter eue.
But if Sonday were not the next morow after the fourtenth
day of the chaunge of the Moone, but the sixtenth, seuenteth,
or any other daye of the Moone vntell the one and twentith,
he taryed for the Sonday, and the Saterday before vppon the
euening he began the most holy solemnite of Easter. Thus
it came to passe that Easter sonday was kept only either the
fiftenth day of the chaunge of the Moone in the first moneth,

or the one and twentith, or in some daye betwene (as the sonday
fell) and no daye elles.
               Neither dothe this new obseruation of the ghospell and of
the Apostles breake the olde lawe, but rather fulfill it. For in
the lawe it is commaunded that the passeouer shoulde be solemnised
from the euening of the xiiij.Exod. 12. daye of the chaunge of
the moone of the first moneth vntel the xxj. daye of the same
moone. Whiche obseruation all the successours of S. Iohn in
Asia after his death, and the whole vniuersall church through
out the whole worlde hath embraced and folowed. Againe it
was by the Nicene councell not newly decreed,Russinus lib. 10. 
                        ••
                     
                   but confirmed
(as the ecclesiasticall history witnesseth) that this is the true
obseruation of Easter, and of all Christen men after this accompt
to be celebrated. Whereby it is clere my Lord Colmā,
that you neither folowe the example of S. Iohn (as you suppose)
neither of S. Peter, whose tradition wittingly you withstande,
nor the law, nor the ghospel in the obseruation of your
Easter. For S. Iohn obseruing the Easter time according to 
the lawes of Moyses, passed not vpon the Sonday, as you do,
which kepe your Easter allwaies vpon a Sonday. Againe S.
Peter celebrated the Easter vpon the Sonday from the fiftenth
daye of the chaunge of the moone, vntell the xxj. daye, whiche
you folow not, which kepe it so vpon the Sonday, that you reaken
from the xiiij. daie of the chaunge vnto the xx. So that
oftentimes you beginne your Easter in the xiij. daie of the
change at euening, which neither the olde lawe obserued, neither
Christ in eating his passeouer, and instituting that moste 
holy Sacrament in remembraunce of his passion vsed, but on
the xiiij. daie. Againe the xxj. daye of the moone which the 
lawe expressely commaunded, you do vtterly exclude from the
celebrating of your Easter. Thus as I said, in the obseruation of
that most excellēt festiuite, you neither agree with S. Iohn, neither
with S. Peter, neither with the law, neither with the gospel.

To these Bishopp Colman replied, and saied. How thinke ye?
Did Anatholius that holy man and so much commended in
the ecclesiasticall history before of you alleaged,Eusab. lib. 7. cap. 28. Hi
                        ••
                     o. thinke or teache
contrary to the lawe and the ghospell, writing that Easter
ought to be obserued from the xiiij. daie of the moone vnto
the xx. Is it to be thought that our moste Reuerend Father
Columba and his successours, vertuous and godly men, who after
the same maner kept their Easter, either beleued or liued
contrary to holy Scripture? especially their holynesse being
such, that God hath confirmed it with miracles? Truly as I
doubt not but they were holy men, so I wil not feare to folow
allwaies their life, maners, and trade of discipline. In good sothe,Vide Eus
                        •
                     
                     bium lib. 7 cap. 28. His
                        •
                     . eccle.
quoth VVillfrid, It is well knowen that Anatholius was a
right holy man, very well lerned, and worthy of much praise.
But what is that to you, who vary also from his decrees and
doctrine? For Anatholius in his Easter (according to the truth)
accompted the vsuall compasse of xix. yeres, whiche you either
vtterly are ignorant of, or if ye know it, yet though it be through
all Christendom obserued, ye sett light by it. Againe
thoughe he obserued the Easter Sonday sometime vpon the
xiiij. daye of the moone, yet he accompted the same daye at
euening to be the fiftenth of the chaunge, after the accompt of
the Aegyptians. So vpon the xx. daye he kept the Easter, that
at the sonne setting, he reaconed it for the xxj. Which his rule
and distinction, that ye be ignorant of, it is manifest by this,
that same time ye kepe your Easter cleane before the full of the
moone, euen the xiij. daye of the chaunge. As touching your
father Columba and those whiche folowed him, whose holy
steppes ye pretend to folow, as the which haue ben confirmed
by miracles, to this I may answer that in the daye of iudgment
whereas many shall saie vnto Christ, that they haue prophecyed, cast
out diuells,
                  Mat
                        •
                     h. 7. 
                  and wrought miracles in his name, our Lord wil answer,
that he knoweth them not. But God forbidd that I shoulde so

iudge of your fathers. For it is our duty of such as we knowe
not to deme the best. Therefore I deme not but they were
men of God, and acceptable in his sight, as the whiche loued
God though in rude simplicite, yet withe a godly intention.
Neither do I thinke that the maner of their obseruation coulde
be much preiudiciall against them, as longe as they had yet receiued
no instructions to the contrary. But rather I verely suppose,
seing such cōmaundemēts of God, as they knew, they willingly
folowed, they would also haue conformed thēselues to
the Catholik iudgemēt, if they had ben so informed. But nowe
Sir you, and your cōpanions, if hearing the decrees of the Apostolike
see, or rather of the vniuersall church and that also confirmed
in holy write, you folow not the same, you offend and
sinne herein vndoubtedly. For though your fathers were holy
mē could yet those few of one so smal corner of the vttermost
ilond of the earth, preiudicat the whole church of Christ dispersed
through the vniuersall worlde? And if your father
Columba (yea and our father, if he were the true seruaunt
of Christe) were holye and mightye in miracles, yet
can he by any meanes be preferred to the moste blessed
prince of the Apostles,Math. 16. to whom our Lorde sayed, Thou
arte Peter, and vppon this rocke I will builde my churche, and
hell gates shall neuer preuaile against her: and to thee I will geue the
kayes off the kingdome of heauen. Thus when VVilfrid concluded,Note the conclusiō of the kinge.
the kinge saied vnto bishop Colman: Were these thinges in
dede spoken to Peter of our Lorde? To whom the bishop answered,
yea. Can you then (saieth the kinge) geue euidence
of so speciall authoritie geuen to your father Columba? The
bishop answering, No, the kinge spake vnto bothe parties, and
sayed. Agree ye bothe in this without any controuersy, that
these wordes were principally spoken vnto Peter, and that
vnto him the kayes of the kingdome of heauen were geuen?
When bothe had answered, yea: the kinge concluded and saied.

Then I saye vnto you, that I will not gainsaie such a porter
as this is, but as farre as I knowe, and am able, I will couet
all pointes to obey his ordinaunces, lest perhaps when
I come to the dores of the kingdome of heauen, I finde none
to open vnto me, hauing his displeasure, whiche is so clerely
proued to beare the kayes thereof. Thus when the kinge had
sayed, all that sate and stode by of all sortes and degrees,
abandonning their former vnperfectenesse, confourmed
them selues to the better instructions whiche they had nowe
lerned.
            
            
               
                  How bishop Colman being ouercomed, retourned home, and Tuda succeded in the bishopricke. Also what trade of life those gouernours of the church lead.
               
               The. 26. Chap.
               THe controuersy being thus ended, and the assemble
dissolued, bishop Agilbert returned home. Bishop Colman
also seing his doctrine and secte reprouued, taking
with him such as would folow him, that is, such as refused to
accept the Catholike obseruation of Easter and the bearing of
a rounde shauen crowne (for of that matter also much disputation
then was had) returned vnto Scotland minding to deliberat
there with his countremen what to folow herein. Bisshop
Cedda forsaking the Scottes embraced the catholike tradition
and returned to his bishoprick. This controuersie was
moued in the yeare of our Lorde. 664. in the 22. yeare of kinge
Oswin,
                  An. 664. and in the xxx. yeare after the Scottes had ben bisshops
ouer the englishmen. For Aidan gouuerned the churche 17. yeares,
Finanus ten, and Colman thre. After the departure of Colman
in to his countre, Tuda was sett bishop ouer the Northumberlandmen,
instructed and created bishop amonge the
South Scottes, bearing after the maner of that countre, a rounde
shauen crowne, and obseruing the Easter after the Catholike

maner. He was a man of great vertu, and holynesse, but he
gouuerned the church a small time. For he came out of Scotland,
whiles Colman was yet bishop, teaching bothe in worde
and with example diligently the true faith in Christ. In holy
Ilond, at the departure of the Scottes, Eata a reuerend father
and most meke person was made Abbat ouer the rest of the
monkes which remained. Who before had ben Abbat of Mailros
at the suite of bishop Colman obtaining it of kinge Oswin
at his departure, bicause the same Eata had ben one of the xij.
scholers of bishop Aidan, which at his first coming in to England
he brought vp. For this bishop Colman was derely loued
of kinge Oswin for his rare wisedome and vertu. This Eata
not longe after was made bishop of holy Ilond. Bishop Colman
at his departing toke with him certain of the bones off
bishop Aidan. Part also he lefte in the church which he was
bishop of, laying them vp in the vestry thereof.
               But how sparefull personnes he and his predecessours were,Cōmendation of the Scottis
                        •
                      monkes, which gouerned first the ong
                        •••
                      church in the Northe cou
                        •
                     
                     tre.
and how greatly they absteined from all pleasures, euen
the place, where he bare rule, did witnesse. In the whiche
at their departure fewe houses were founde beside the church:
that is to saye, those houses only without the which ciuill
conuersation could no wise be maintained. They had no mony,
but cattaill. For if they tooke anye mony of riche men,
by and by they gaue it to poore people. Neither was it nedefull
that either mony should be gathered or houses prouided
for the receiuing and intertainement of the worshipfull and
welthy. Who neuer came then to church, but onely to praye
and to heare the worde of God. The kinge him selfe,
when occasion serued to resort thither, came accompayned
only with fyue or six persons, and after praier ended, departed.
But if by chaunce it fortuned that anye of the nobilite
or of the worshipfull refreshed them selues in the monasteries,
they contented them selues with the religious mens

simple fare and poore pittens, looking for no other cates aboue
the ordinary and daily diett. For then those lerned men
and rulers of the churche sought not to pamper the panche,
but to saue the soule,Vertu winneth aut
                        •
                     orite, viceleseth. not to please the worlde, butt
to serue God. Whereof it came then to passe that euen
the habite of religious men was at that time had in greate
reuerence. So that where anye of the clergye or religious
person came, he shoulde be ioyefully receiued of all
men, like the seruaunt of God. Againe if any were mett going
on iourney,Religious men in our primittiue church reuerenced they ranne vnto him, and making lowe obeissaunce,
desyred gladly to haue their benediction either by hand
or by mouth. Also if it pleased them to make any exhortation
as they passed by, euery man gladly and desirously harkened
vnto them. Vpon the Sondayes ordinarely the people flocked
to the church or to monasteries, not for bely chere, but to heare
the worde of God. And if any priest came by chaunce abrode
into the village, the inhabitaunts thereof would gather
about him, and desire to haue some good lesson or collation
made vnto them. For the priestes and other of the clergy
in those daies vsed not to come abrode in to villages,The behauiour of priestes in our primitiue church. but
only to preache, to baptise, to visit the sicke, or (to speake all in
one worde) for the cure of soules. Who also at that time were
so farre from the infection of couetousnes and ambition, that
they would not take territories and possessions toward the
building of monasteries, and erecting of churches, but through
the ernest suite, and almost forced of noble and welthy men
of the worlde. Which custome in all pointes hath remained a
longe time after in the clergy of Northumberland. And thus
much of these matters.
            
            
               
                  How Egberecht a holy man, english borne, lead a religious solitary life in Ireland.
               
               The. 27. Chapter.
               
                  THis very yeare of our Lorde 664.An. 664. a great eclipse of the
Son happened the third daye of Maye, about ten of
the clocke. In the which yeare also a sodain great plague,
consuming first the south partes of Britanny, taking holde
also in Northumberland with longe and much continuance,
wasted away an infinit number of men. In the which mortalite
the foresaied bishop Tuda, was taken out of the worlde,
and honourably buried in a monastery, called Pegnalech. This
plague perced also euen to Ireland. There were at that time in
the Iland diuers young gentle men and other of England,
which vnder Finanus, and Colmanus their bishops, had departed
a side thither, partly to study, partly to liue more straightly.
And some of those forthwith bounde them selues to the religious
habit, some other wandering rather about the celles and
closets of such as taught, folowed more their study and lerning.
All these the Scottes entertained gladly and cherefully,
geuing them not only their borde and their lerning free, but
bookes also to lerne in. Amōge these, two young gentlemen of
England were of great to wardnesse aboue the rest, Edelhum
and Ecgbert. Of the which two the former was brother vnto
Edelhum that blessed man, who in the age folowing liued also
in Ireland for studies sake, from whence with great lerning and
knowleadg returning home to his countre,Lincolne shere. he was made bisshop
of Lindisse, and ruled the church honourably a longe time.
These younge gentlemen liuing in the monastery (which
in the Scottish tounge is called Rathmelfig) all their companyons
being other taken away by the mortalite, or otherwise gone
abrode, remained bothe of them behinde, lying sicke of the
plage. Ecgbert one of the two when he thought his time was
come to die (as I lerned by the report of a most trusty and reuerent
olde mā which tolde me he heard the whole story at Ecgberts
owne mouthe) departed very erly out of his chamber,
where the sicke were wonte to lye, and getting him to a secret

commodious place, sate downe all alone, began diligently to
thinke on his former life, and being pricked with the remembraunce
of his sinnes, washed his face with teares, beseching
God from the bottom of his hart, to lende him life and time of
repentaunce, to bewaile and recompence with amendment of
life, his former negligences and offences.Vowes in sickenesse. Cononicall houres He vowed also, neuer
to returne home to his countre where he was borne, but to liue
as a pilgrim all daies of his life. Againe beside the ordinary
seruice of the canonicall houres (if sicknes or weakenesse of
body letted him not) to say euery daye the whole psalter to
the honour and praise of almighty God. Last of all to faste ones
euery weke, one whole daye and night. His vowes, praiers
and lamentinges thus being ended, he returned to his chāber,
and finding his felow a slepe, went also to bedde, to take some
reste. Which after he had a litle done, his felowe waking
looked vpon him, and saied. O brother Ecgbert, what haue ye
done? I had hoped, we should bothe haue passed together to life
euerlasting. But now vnderstand ye, ye shall haue your request.
For by a vision it was reueled vnto him, bothe what the
others petition was, and that he had obtained it. What nede
many wordes? Edilhum the night folowing departed. Ecgbert
recouered, and liuing many yeres after being made priest, leading
a life worthy of that vocatiō, after great amēdmēt of life,
as he desired, departed this worlde of late, to witt, in the yeare
of our Lorde 729. in the xc. yere of his age. He lead his life in
great perfection of humilite, mekenes, continency, innocēcy
and of righteousnes. Whereby he profited much bothe his
owne countre, and the place where he liued in voluntary banishment,
the scottes and the pictes, in example of liuing, in diligence
of teaching, in authorite of correcting, in bountifulnesse
of bestowing that which the riche gaue aboundantly
vnto him. Beside his vowes mencioned before, he made and
kept other as that thourough out the whole lent he neuer eate
more then ones in the daye: eating also then nothing els but

bread and thinne milke and that with a certain measure. His
milke was of one day olde, which the day before he would eate
it, he was wont to put and kepe it in a viole, and the night folowing,
skimming away the creme, with a litle bread to drinke
it vp. This kind of faste he vsed to kepe xl. dayes before Christmas,
and as longe after whit
                     ••
                  ntyde, all his life tyme.
            
            
               
                  How after the death of bishop 
                        •
                     da, VVilfrid in Fraunce, and Ceadda amonge the west Saxons were made bishops of Northumberland prouince.
               
               The. 28. Chapter.
               IN this meane tyme kinge Alcfrid sent VVilfrid his priest
vnto the kinge of Fraunce, that he might in his dominions
be consecrated bishop. Who sent him to be consecrated of
Agilbert (of whom we made mencion before,) being then bishop
of Paris, where he was consecrated withe great honour of
him and many other bishops meting for that purpose together
in a Manour of the kinge called, In compendio. Bishop VVilfrid
making some abode in Fraunce after his consecration kinge
Oswin folowing the example and diligence of his sonne kinge
Alcfrid sent in to kent a holy man, vertuous, sufficiently lerned
in holy scripture, and a diligent perfourmer of that he had lerned,
to be created bishop of Yorke. This man was a priest, and
called Ceadda, brother to the most Reuerend bishop Ceddi (of
whom we haue often mencioned before) and Abbat of the
monastery of Lesting. The king sent also withe him an other
of his priestes Eadhed by name, who after in the reign of kinge
Ecfrid, was bishop of Rhyppon. But they at their arriuall to
kent, finding the Archebishop of Caunterbury,Consecration of Bisshops with a number of other Bys
                        •
                     ops. 
                  Deusdedi
                        •
                     , departed,
and no man yet supplying his rowme, stroke ouer to
the west Saxons, where VVini was bishop, and of him this vertuous
man Ceadda, was consecrated bishop, hauing withe him
to assist and accompany him at the consecration, two other bishops
of the olde Britons, who continewed yet in their accustomed
obseruation of Easter beginning from the fourtenth

daye of the chaunge, contrary to the canonicall and right order,
as we haue often saied before. There was not at this tyme,
beside this bishop VVini,
                  The duty of a Byshop. any one true bishop and rightly consecrated
in all Britanny. Ceadda then being thus created and
consecrated bishop, began seriously to sett forthe the truthe of
gods word, to leade his life in chastite, humilite, and abstinence
to study and much teaching. For the which intent he visited
continually the cytes, townes, villages, yea and priuat houses in
his diocese, and that not making his iourney on horsebacke,
but going allwaies on foote, as the Apostles vsed. All this he
had lerned of the vertuous bishop Aidan, and of his brother bishop
Ceddi, whose vertuous examples he endeuoured him selfe
allwaies to folowe, and to teache the same to other. VVilfrid
also returning to England nowe a bishop, instructed much the
church of England and reduced them to the Catholike vnite,
touching externall rites and obseruations in many pointes.
Whereby it came to passe, that Catholike ordonaunces taking
place, and beginning daily to be more and more embraced, the
whole company of the Scottes, which then liued amonge the
english men, either yelded to the same, or els returned backe to
their countre.
            
            
               
                  Howe Wighard priest was sent to Rome, to be consecrated Archebishop of Caunterbury, and how he died there, according as by letters from the Pope it was specified.
               
               The. 29. Chap.
               AT this tyme the most worthy and renouned kinges of
England, Oswin of the North countre, and Ecgbert of
kent and the places adioyning, deliberating betwene
them selues, touching the paisible gouuernment of the church
(for kinge Oswin had nowe perfitly lerned, though he were
brought vp of the Scottes,The churche of Rome. that the church of Rome was the
Catholike and Apostolicall churche) by the choyse and consent
of the holy clergy of England called vnto them one Wighard
a priest, a man of great vertu and worthy to be a bishop,

one of the clergy vnder Deusdedit the deceased Archebishopp,
and sent him to Rome to be consecrated, to the intent that he
being made Archebishop, might consecrat and order other byshops
for the Catholike churches of Englishe men through
out all Britanny. But Wighard coming to Rome, before he
could be consecrated bishop, departed this life, whereupon the
Pope sent backe to kinge Oswin these letters.
               To our most honorable Son, Oswin, kinge of the Saxons,
Vitalianus Byshop, the seruaunt of those which serue God.A letter of Vitalianus the Pope to king Oswin.
               
               We haue receiued your excellencies wishefull letters, by
the perusall whereof, we perceiued your excellencies most godly
deuotion, and feruent zele to attaine euerlasting life, hoping
assuredly that as you now reigne ouer your people, so in
the life to come you shal reighn with Christ, for as much as by
his Souuerain helpe and grace, you are nowe conuerted to the
true, right and Apostolike faith. Blessed is that people, ouer
whom God hath placed a prince of such wisedom, vertu, and
desire of Gods honour. As the which not only serueth God
him selfe incessantly, but also laboureth to draw all his subiects
to the right vnite of the Catholike and Apostolicke faith, purchasing
them thereby vndoubted saluation of their soules. For
who hearing this ioyefull report of such a Prince, will not also
reioyse thereat? What Christen hart will not leape for ioye,
and cōceiue singular cōfort of so zelous furdering of the faith?
Truly cōsidering the happy cōuersion of your natiō to the seruing
of almighty God, I remēbre and see in you the oracles of
the diuine prophets accōplished, as it is written in Esay.Esai
                        •
                     . 11. 
                  In that
day the roote of Iesse standeth vp for a tokē to the people, him the natiōs
shal cal vpon. And againe. Heare o ye Ilandes, and harkē ye people
that dwell a farre of. And within a few wordes after the prophet 
crieth to the church It is not enough that thou shalt serue me,
in restoring the tribes of Iacob, and in cōuerting the dragges of Israel.
I haue geuen the for a light to the nations: that thou be my saluation

euen to the furdermost of the earth. And againe. Kinges shal see, princes
shall arise and shall adore. And a litle after. I haue geuen the for
a leage of my people, that thou shouldest raise vp the earth, and possesse
the scattered inheritages, and saye to those which laye hounde, come
ye for the: and to those wich sate in darcknes, be ye opened. And againe.
I the Lord haue called thee in righteousnes, and haue taken thy 
hand, and haue saued thee, and haue set thee to be a light vnto nations,
and to be a leage betwene my people, that thou maiest open the eyes of
the blind, and deliuer from bondes the bounde, the man sitting in darckenes
out of the prison. Beholde most honourable Sonne, by
the verdit of the prophets it is most clere, that not onely you,
but all nations shall beleue in Christ the maker of all thinges.
It behoueth therefor your highnes being now a parte of Christe,
to folow in all thinges and allwaies the sure rules and ordonnaunces
of the head of the Apostles, as well in obseruing
your Easter, as in all other thinges deliuered by the holy Apostles
Peter and Paule. Whose doctrine doth daily lighten the
hartes of all true beleuers, no lesse then the two lightes of the
element, geue light to the whole worlde. And after many other
wordes writen touching the vniforme obseruation of Easter
through out the whole worlde, it foloweth in the letter. As
touching one well furnished with lerning and other qualites
mete to be your bishop, according to the tenour of your letters
we could yet so sodenly finde none ready, the iourney being
so longe to you. Truly as soone as we shall espie out a mete person
and and worthy of that vocation, we shall direct him spedely
to your countre. That by his preaching and holy scripture
he may thouroughly roote oute all the wicked darnel of the
enemy out of your Ilond, by the helpe and grace of allmighty
God. The presents which your highnes directed to the blessed
prince of the Apostles, for his perpetuall memory, we haue receiued,
thanking therefore your highnes, beseching with all our
clergy, incessantly the goodnes of God, for your highnes preseruatiō
                  
and good estat. The bringer of your presents is departed
this life, and is laied at the entry of the blessed Apostles
towmes, we much lamenting and bewailing at his departure
here. Notwithstanding by the bearers of these our presents we
haue sent the iewels of holy Martyrs, that is, the relikes of the
blessed Apostles Peter and Paule, and of the holy Martyrs, S.
Laurens, Iohn and Paule, of S. Gregory, and of Pancratius, all to
be deliuered to your highnes. To your Lady and bedfelowe,
our spiritual daughter, we haue sent by the saied bearers a crosse
of golde hauing in it a nayle taken out of the most holy chaines
of the blessed Apostles Peter and Paule. Of whose godly
behauiour we vnderstanding haue all as farre reioysed, as her
vertuous dedes are before God pleasaunt and acceptable. We
beseche therefore your highnes to furder and sett forward the
conuersation of your whole Ilond to the faith of Christ. You
shall not vndoubtedly lacke herein the speciall protection of
our Lorde Iesus Christ the redemer of all mankinde who will
prosper you in all thinges to the encreasing of his true beleuers,
and planting of the catholike and Apostolike faith: For it
is written. Seke ye first the kingdome of God,
                  Matth. 6. 
                  and the righteousnes
thereof, and all these thinges shall be cast vnto you. Truly your highnes
seketh, and shall no doubt obtaine, and all partes of your Ilond
(as we wish and desire) shall be brought vnder your allegeaunce.
We salute your highnes with most fatherly affection,
beseching continually the mercy of God that it will vouchesafe
to assist you and all yours, in the perfourmance of all good
workes, that in the worlde to come ye may all liue and raigne
with Chrst. The heauenly grace frō aboue preserue alwaies
your highnes. In the next booke folowing we shall haue occasion
to declare who was founde and appointed bishop in place
of Wighard that died at Rome.
            
            
               
                  How the people of Essex and London in a time of plage retourning to Idolatry, by the diligence of Iarumanus their bishop, were soone brought home againe.
               
               
               The 30. Chap.
               AT this time Sigher and Sebbi kinges ruled ouer the people
of Essex and London after the death of Guidhelme
(of whom we haue spoken before), althoughe these were
also vnder the allegeannce of Wulfher king of the Middlelād
englishmen. This prouince being visited with that greate
plague and mortalite (which we mencioned before) Sigher
with the people ouer whom he ruled forsaking the sacramentes
of Christes religion fell to Apostasie. For bothe the kinge
him selfe, and many as well of the people as of the nobles,
louing this present life, and not seking after the life to come, or
els not beleuing any such life at al, begā to renew their temples
which stode desolat, and to worship idols, as though they could
therby escape the mortalite. But Sebbi his cōpanion with al vnder
him perseuered deuoutly in the faith, and ended his life in
great felicite, as we shal herafter declare. Wulfher the king vnderstanding
parte of his dominions to fal from the faith, for to call
thembacke againe, sent vnto them bishop Iarumannus, the successor
of Trumher, who by much labour and diligence being a
man of great vertu, painfull, and zelous, (as a certain priest
waiting then vpō him and helping him in preaching the
ghospell reported vnto me) brought them to the faith
againe, bothe the kinge and all his people. So that abandoning
and throwing downe their tēples and
altars, they opened againe the churches, confessed
gladly the name of Christ, and chose rather
in hope of resurrection to dye, then in
the filth of idolatry to liue. Which being
so brought to passe their priestes
and instructers returned home
withe muche ioye
and comfort.
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF THE HISTORIE OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
            
               
                  How after the death of Deusdedit, Wighart being sent to be made bishop, and dying there, Theodore was consecrated Archebishop, and sent in to England with a certain Abbat named Adrian.
               
               The. 1. Chapter.
               THe same yeare of the foresaied eclipse and pestilence
that soone after folowed, in which also
bishop Colman ouercommed by the generall
and vniforme sentence of the Catholikes,
returned home to his countre, Deusdedit the
sixt Archebishop of Caunterbury died, the xiiij. daye of Iuly.
Ercombert also kinke of kent departed this world the very same
moneth and day, and left to his sonne Ecgbert the Crowne
and kingdom, which he receiued and held by the space of ix. yeres.
At that time the See of Caunterbury being vacant a great
while, and the diocese desirous of a bishop, VVighart a vertuous
priest, a man very well lerned, skilfull of the Canons, rules,
and disciplines of the church, and an english man borne was
sent to Rome bothe by Ecgbert and also Oswin kinge of Northumberland
(as we haue mencioned before) and with him certain
presents to the Pope Apostolike, as great store of plate,
bothe siluer and golde. Being arriued to Rome in the time that
Vitalianus gouuerned the Apostolike see, and hauing declared
the cause of his coming to the saied Pope, within short space,
he and almost all his company were taken with the pestilence
and died. Whereupon the Pope with aduise and counsell enquired
diligently, whom he might direct for Archebishop ouer
the churches of England. In the monasterie of Niridan
not farre from Naples in Campania, there was an Abbat named
Adrian, an African borne, a man very well lerned in the scriptures,

thouroughly instructed bothe in monasticall discipline,
and in ecclesiasticall gouuernement, very skilfull of the greke
and latin tounges. This man being called to the Pope, was willed
of him to take the bishoprike vpon him, and trauail vnto
England. But he answering that he was no mete man for so
high a degree, promised yet to bringe forth one, which bothe
for his lerning and for his age were more worthy of that vocation.
And offred to the Pope a certain monke liuing in a
Nunnery there by called Andrew, who though he were of all
that knewe him, estemed worthy of tke bishoprike, yet for the
impediment of his weake and sickely body, it was not thought
good to sende him. Then Adrian being required againe to take
it vpon him, desired certain daies of respit, if happely in the
meane time, he could finde any other mete to supplie that roume.
At this time there was in Rome a certain monke of Adriās
acquaintaūce, named Theodore, borne at Tarsus in Cilicia a mā
bothe in prophane and diuine knowleadg, and in the greke and
latin tounge excellently lerned, in maners and conuersation
vertuous, and for age reuerend, being then lxvj. yeres olde.
Him Adrian offered and presented to the pope, and obtained
that he was created bishop. Yet with these conditions that Adrian
should accompany him in to England, bicause hauing
twise before trauailed in to Fraunce for diuers matters, he had
therefore more experience in that iourney, as also for that he
was sufficiently fournished with men of his owne. But chiefely
that assisting him alwaies in preaching the ghospell, he should
geue diligent eye and waite, that tis Theodore being a greke
borne, enduced not after the maner of the grekes any doctrine
cōtrary to the true faith receaued, in to the english church, now
subiect vnto him. This man therfore being made subdeacon,
taried yet in Rome iiij. moneths, vnte 
                     •
                  l his heare was full growen:
to take the ecclesiasticall tonsure rounde, which before he
had taken like vnto the Last church after the maner of S. Paule,

whereof we shall hereafter treate more at large. He was
consecrated bishop of Vitalianus then Pope,An. 668. in the yeare of our
Lorde 668. the xxvj. daie of Marche vpon a Sonday. After the
xvij. of May in the company of Adrian the Abbat he was directed
to England. Their iourney commenced first by see they
arriued to Marsilia, and so by lande to Arles, where deliuering
to Iohn the Archebishop letters of commendation from Vitalian
the Pope, they were receaued and enterteyned of him, vntill
that Ebroinus chief of the kinges Courte gaue them saulfeconduit
to passe and go whither they entended and woulde.
Which being graunted them, Theodore tooke his iourney to
Agilbert bishop of Paris, of whome we haue spoken before, and
was very frindly receaued of him and kept there a longe tyme.
But Adrian went first to Emmeson and after to Faron bishop of
Meldes,
                  The coū
                     tre abowt Lyons. and there continewed and rested withe them a good
space. For wynter was at hand and draue them to abyde quietly
in such conuenient place as they could gett. Now whē word
was browght to king Ecgbert, that the bishop, whom they had
desired of the Pope of Rome was come, and rested in Fraunce,
he sent thither straight waye Redfride his lieutenant to bringe
and conducte him. Who when he came thither, tooke Theodore
with the license of Ebroinus, and browght him to the porte
that is named Quentauic. Where they continewed a space, bicause
Theodore was weake, sicke and wery. And as sone as he
began to recouer health againe, they sayled to England. But
Ebroinus with helde backe Adrian, suspecting he had some
embassie of the Emperours to the kinges of England against
the realme of Fraunce wherof at that time he had speciall care
and chardge. But when he founde in dede that he had no such
thinge,The Augustins in Caunterbury. he dimissed him and suffred him to go after Theodore.
Who as soone as Adrian came to him, gaue him the monasterie
of S. Peter thapostle, where, (as I haue mentioned before)
the Archebishops of Cauntourbury are wonte to be buried.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
For the Pope Apostol
                        •
                     que had required Theodore at his departinge,Dominus Pap
                        •
                      Apostolicus.
to prouide and geane Adrian some place in his diocese,
where he and his company might commodiously continewe
and liue together.
            
            
               
                  Howe Theodore visited the countree, and howe the churches of England receaued the true Catholique faith, and began also to studie the holy scriptures, and how Putta was made bishop of Rochester for Damian.
               
               The 2. Chap.
               
                  THeodore came to his churche the 2. yere after his consecration,
the xxvij.The duty of a Byshop. day of may being sonday, and continewed
in the same xxi. yeres, three moneths, and xxvj.
daies. And straight way he visyted all the countree ouer where
soeuer any english people dwelled (for all men did most gladly
receaue him and heare him) and hauing still with him the cō
                  panie
and helpe of Adrian in all thinges, dyd sowe abrode and
teache the right wayes and pathes of good liuing,Theodore the first Primat of all England. and the canonical
rite and order of keping the feast of Easter. For he
was the first Archebishop, vnto whome all the whole churche
of the English nation dyd consent to submit them selues. And
bicause both he and Adrian, as we haue sayd, were exceding
well learned both in profane and holy literature, they gathered
a company of disciples or scholers vnto them, into whose breastes
they dayly dyd powre the flowing waters of holesome
knowledge. So that beside the expounding of holy scripture
vnto them they dyd with al instructe their hearers in the sciences
of musick, Astronomie, and Algorisme. In the tounges they
so brought vp their scholers,The felicite of the english churche, vn
                        •
                     er Theodor the Archebishop of Canterb. that euen to this day some of thē
yet liuing can speake both the Latin and Greeke tonge as well
as their owne in which they were borne. Neither was there euer
since the English mē came first to Britaine, any tyme more
happie than at that present. For England then had most valiant
and Christian princes, It was feared of all barbarowse and
forrain nations. The people at home was all wholly bent to

the late ioyfull tydinges of the kingdome of heauen. And if
any man desired to be instructed in the reading of holy scriptures,
there lacked not men expert and cunning ready to teache
him.Singing in churches through out all England. Againe at this time the tunes and notes of singing in the
Churche, whiche vntill than were only vsed and knowen in
Kent, began to be learned throwgh all the churches of Englād.
The first master of songe in the churches of Northumberland
(except Iames whome we spake of before) was Eddi surnamed
Stephen, who was called and browght from kent by Wilfride
a man most reuerend, whiche first among all the byshops that
were of the English nation, dyd learne and deliuer the Catholique
trade of life to the English Churches. Thus Theodore
vewing ouer and visiting eche where, dyd in conuenient places
appoynt bishops, and with their helpe and assistance together,
amended such thinges as he found not well and perfecte.
And among all other when he reproued bisshopp Chadd
                        •
                     , for
that he was not rightly consecrated, he made moste humble
awnswer, and sayde: If yow thinke that I haue taken the office
of a byshop not in dewe order and maner, I am ready withe all
my hart to giue vp the same, for I did not thinke my selfe euer
worthy therof, but for obedience sake being so commaunded I
dyd agree althowgh vnworthy to take it vpon me. Whiche
humble awnswere of his Theodore hearing, sayd that he should
not leaue his bisshopricque, but dyd himselfe supplye and
complete his consecration after the right and dewe Catholique
maner. The very same tyme in whiche after
the death of Deusdedit,
                  Byshop Chadd a man of great hū
                     blenesse. an Archebysshopp of Caunterbury
was sewed for, consecrated, and sent from Rome, Wilfrid
also was sent from England to Fraunce there to be consecrated.
Who bycause he retourned into kent before Theodore, did
make priestes and deacons vntill the time that the Archebisshop
himselfe came to his see. Who at his comming to the citie
of Rotchester where the see had bene nowe longe vacant by the

death of Damian, did appoint and consecrat byshop there, a
man better skilled in the ecclesiasticall discipline, and more
geuen to plaine and simple sinceritie of lyfe, than any thinge
politike in worldly affayres. His name was Putta, a good churche
man, and cunning in musike after the Romaine vse, which
he had learned of Pope Gregories scholers.
            
            
               
                  How Chadda afore mentioned was appointed bishop of the Marshes or middleenglishmen and of his lyfe, death, and buriall.
               
               The 3. Chap.
               AT that time was VVulpher king of the Marshes,Lincolne diocese, and Lichfield, and VVorceter. who
after the death of Iaruman, desired of Theodore to haue
an other bishop appointed for him and his. But
Theodore would not consecrate them a newe bishop, but desyred
king Oswin, that Chadde might be their bishop, who at
that time liued quietly in his monasterie at Lesting, and VVilfrid
ruled the diocese of yorke, and also of all Northumberlande,
and of the Pictes to, as far as king Oswines dominion dyd
reache. And bicause the said most reuerend bishop Chadde was
wonte alwaies to preache and doo the worke of the ghospell
more walking a fote wher he went, than on horsebacke, Theodore
willed him to ryde, when so euer he had any iourney to
take. But he refusing vtterly so to doo for the exceding desire
and loue that he had of that holy labour and trauaile, Theodore
himselfe did lifte him on horsebacke with his owne handes,
knowing him in dede to be a very holy man, and so cōpelled
him to ride whether nede required. Chadd heing thus made
bishop of the Marshes, the middle english men and ofLincolne shere. Lindisse,
he diligently gouerned the same after the examples of the
auncient fathers in great perfection of life. Vnto whom also
king VVulpher gaue the land of L. tenements to build a monasterie
with all in the place which is called Etbeare, which is
by a wood in the prouince of Lindisse, where vntill this daye
the steppes of monasticall lyfe which he began and placed there,

do yet remaine. The seate and chiefe mansion of the diocese
he held at Lichfield, where he dyed also and was buried, and
where vntill this day cotineweth the see of the bishops that succede
in the same prouince. This man had made himselfe not
far from the churche a certaine closet and priuate mansion, in
which as often as he was at leysure from the busynesse and ministerie
of the ghospell, he was wont to pray and reade secretly
with a fewe, that is to saye, vij. or viij. bretherne with him. And
when he had gouerned the church most worthely in that prouince
two yeres and an halfe, by the dispensation and appointement
of God aboue, that time came, which the Ecclefiastes
speaketh of:Eccles. 3. 
                  There is a time to lay abrode stones, and a time to gather
them together againe. For there came a plage sent from God,
which by the death of the body remoued the liue stones of the
churche from the earthly places to the celestiall building in heauen.
For very many of the churche of this most reuerend bisshop
were taken out of this life. And when his howre was come
to, that he should passe out of this worlde to our Lorde, it
happened on a certaine day, that he abode in the foresayd closet,
and had no mo but one brother with him, whose name was
Owen, all the reast of his felowes being retourned to churche,
as the cause and houre required. This same Owen was a monke
of great perfection, and one that had forsaken the world with
pure intent and hope of the rewarde of heauen, a man for all
pointes worthy to whome God in speciall wise might reuele
and shewe his secrettes, and well worthy to whose wordes the
hearers may giue credit. For coming with Quene Edildride
from the prouince of the East English, and being the chief off
her seruauntes, and gouernour of her house, for the great zeale
of faith that encreased in him determining with himselfe to
renounce the world, did in dede accomplysh the same not slackely
and negligently, but in such sort vncladd himself of worldly
matters, that forsaking all that euer he had, being clothed

but with plaine and poore apparayl and bearing an hatchet or
axe in his hand, came to the monasterie of the same most reuerend
father, called Lestinghe. For he signified that he would
entre into the monasterie not for ease and idlenesse, as some do,
but to trauaile and labour: which thing he well shewed and proued
in his doinges: for the leasse able and apte that he was for
the studie and meditatiō of the scriptures, the more diligēt and
painfull he was to worke with his handes. Finally his reuerence
and deuotion was such that the bishop accepted him for one
of his brethern to accompany him with the other fewe in the
foresaid closet. Where while they with in were occupied in reading
and prayer, he without dyd those thinges abrode that were
necessarie to be done. And on a certaine day as he was dooing
some such thing abrode, the reast being gone to churche,
as I began to say, and the bishop being alone in the oratorie of
the house, occupied in reading or prayer, this Owen heard sodainly
(as he after told) a most swete noyse of voyces singing
and reioysinge comming downe from heauen to the earth: the
which voice, he sayd, he first heard begynning from the south
east, that is, from whence the depth of winter comes, and then
by litle and litle drawinge nere him, vntill it came to the
roofe of the oratorie where the bishop was, where it entred, filled
it within, and compassed it all rownd about. Whereat geuing
earnestly mind to marke the thinge that he heard, he did
againe as it were about an houre after heare the same ioyfull
song go vp and ascend from the roofe of the said oratorie, and
retourne vp to the heauens the very same way that it came,
with vnspeakeable swetenes. Whereat as he mused a space and
was as it were astouned, imagining and deuising depely in his
minde what this might be, the bishop opened the oratorie
windowe, and as he vsed to doo, made a noyse and signe with
his hand, and bad some man come into him, if there were any
body without. Then came he straight way, to whome the bisshop

said: Go to the churche quickely, and cause those vij.
bretherne to come hither, and come you with them to.
And when they were come, first he admonished them to kepe among
them selues, and toward all faithfull folke the vertue of
charitie and peace, and also with vnweary continuance to folowe
the rules and orders of monastical discipline, which they
had either learned of him, and sene in him, or founde in the
doings or sayings of the former fathers. And then did he tell
them moreouer, that the day of his departing was very nigh at
hand. For that most louely geast, quod he, who was wonte to
visit our bretherne, hath voutsafed this day to come to me also,
and to call me out of this world. Wherefore go your waies
to churche againe, and speake vnto the bretherne that with
their prayers they both commend vnto our Lorde my departing,
and remember also with fasting, watching, prayers, and
good workes to preuent their own departing the houre wherof
is vncertaine. And when he had spoken these and mo like
wordes, and that the brethern had taken his blessing, and
wer gone forth very heauy and sad, he that only heard the heauenly
song, came in againe, and casting himselfe flat on the
ground, sayed: I beseke you good father, may I be so bold as to
aske you a question? Aske what you will, quod he. Then, quod
the other, I pray you tell me, what was that song which I heard
of that ioyfull company descending from heauen vpon this
oratorie, and after a time retourninge to heauen againe. He
aunswered and saied to him: If you haue hearde the voice of
the song, and vnderstoode the comming of the heauenly compaines,
I commaund you in the name of our Lorde to tell no
man herof before my death. They were in dede the spirites of
angelles, which came to call me to the heauenly rewardes,
which I haue alway loued and longed for, and after vij. daies
they haue promised to come againe and take me with them.
The which was in dede fullfilled euen as it was foretolde

him. For straight way was he taken with a feyntnes of bodye,
which daily grewe more greuouse vpon him and the vij. daye
(as it had bene promised him) after he had first forewarded his
departing with the receiuing of the bodie and bloud of our
Lord,How seling before death. his holy soule loosed from the prison of the bodie was
caried and lead (as we may well beleue) of the company of Angelles
to the ioyes euerlastinge. And it is no meruaile, if he
gladly behelde the day of death, or rather the day of our Lorde,
which daye he did alwaies carefully looke for till it came. For
among his manifold merites of chastitie and abstinence, of
preaching,The great feare of God in B. Chadd. of praier, of wilfull pouertie, and other vertues, he
was so far humbled to the feare of our Lorde, so much mindful
of his later end in all his workes, that (as a certaine brother
named Trumbert was wont to tell me, one of them that read
the scriptures to me, and was brought vp in his monasterie
and gouernement) if perhaps while he were reading, or doing
some other thing, there rose any sodaine great blast of wind, by
and by wold he cal on the mercy of our Lord, and beseke him
to haue pitie on mākinde. But and if there came a blast yet more
vehement, then wold he shut vp his booke and fall downe
on his face, and set him selfe more feruently to prayer. And if
any stronger storme or blustreing showre continewed long, or
that lightning and thunders did make both the earth and ayre
to shake for feare, then would he go to churche, and earnestly
set his mind to praier and saying of psalmes, vntill the ayre
waxed clere againe. And when some of his companie asked
him, why he did so: Haue ye not read, quod he: That our Lord
hath thundred from heauen,
                  Psal. 17. 
                  and the most high hath giuen his voice?
He hath sent out his arrowes, and scattered them abrode, he hath
multiplied lighteninge and troubled them? For our Lorde moueth
the ayre, reyseth vp windes, shooteth out lighteninges, thundreth
from heauen, to styrre vp the creatures of the earth to
feare him, to cal againe their hartes to the remembraunce of the

iudgement to come, to plucke downe their pride, and abate
their boldenes, and thus to bringe to their mindes that terrible
time, when both heauens and earth shall burne, and himselfe
come vpon the clowdes with great power and maiestie
to iudge both the quicke and the dead.
And therfore, quod he,
it behoueth vs with dewe feare and loue to yelde and giue place
to his warning from heauen that as ofte as he trowbleth the
ayre, and lyfteth vpp his hande as it were threatning to strike,
and doth not yet strike, we strayght way call vpon his mercie,
and boulting owt the very botome of our hartes, and casting
owt the dregges and relikes of synne, do carefully prouide that
we neuer deserue to be striken at all. With the reuelation and
relation of the foresayd brother concerning the death of this
bysshopp, the wordes also of Ecgbert the most reuerend father
do well agree, of whome we spake before. Whiche Ecgbert at
the tyme whē the sayd Chadda was a youngman, and himself of
lyke age to, dyd in Ireland strayghtly lead a monasticall lyfe
both together in prayers, continence, and meditation of the
holy scriptures. But Chadda being afterward retourned to
his countree, Ecgbert abode there styll as a pilgrime for our
Lordes sake vnto the end of his lyfe. Nowe a long tyme after
there came to visite him from England a certaine most holy
and vertuous man named Higbalde,
                  Lincolne shere. who was an Abbot in
the prouince of Lindisse. And as they talked together of the
lyfe of the former fathers, as is the maner of such holy men to
doo, and gladly wold wysh to followe the same, they fell vpon
mention of the most reuerend byshop Chadda. And than sayd
Ecgbert: I knowe a man yet remayning aliue in this Ilande,
which whē brother Chadda passed owt of the world, dyd see
a companye of Angelles descend from heauen, and take vp his
sowle withe them and retourned againe to the celestiall kingdomes.
Which vision whether Ecgbert meaned to be sene of
himselfe, or of some other, it is to vs vncertaine: yet while so

worthy a man, as he, sayed that it was true,Charite beleueth all things 1. Cor. 13. the thing it self can
not be vncertaine vnto vs. Thus dyed Chadda the vj. daye
of Marche, and was buryed first by S. Maries Churche, but afterward
his bones were remoued into the church of the most
blessed Saint Peter chiefe of thapostles, the same churche being
finished. In both which places in token of his vertu often
miracles of healing sicke folke are wonte to be wrought.Miracles at the tombe of S. Chead. And
of late a certaine man that had a phrenesie, and ranne vpp and
downe wandring euery where, came thither at an euening, and
by the ignorance or negligence of them that kept the place, lay
there all the night, and the next morning came owt well in
his wyt, and declared, to the great wonder and ioye of all men,
that there he had by the gyfte and goodnes of our Lorde gotten
his health. The place of the sepulchre is couered with a
wodden tombe made like a litle howse, hauing an hole in the
syde, at whiche they that come thither for deuocions sake are
wont to put in their hand and take owt some of the dowste.
The whiche they put into water and than giue it to drinke to
sicke beastes or men, whereby the grief of their sickness is anon
taken away, and they restored to their ioyfull desired healthe.
In the place of B. Chadda Theodore consecrated and ordeyned
VVinfrid a vertuowse and sober man, to rule and haue the office
of a byshop as his predecessours had before him ouer the
prouinces of the Marshes and myddle english and also of Lindisfar
dioecese.Lincolne dyocese. In all whiche countrees VVulpher (who yet
lyued) dyd holde the crowne and scepter. This VVinfrid was
of the clergy of the same byshop whome he succeded, and had
executed the office of deacon vnder him no small tyme.
            
            
               
                  Howe by shopp Colman leauing England, made two monasteries in Scotland, one for Scottes, and an other for the English men that he had browght with him.
               
               The. 4. Chap.
               IN the meane tyme byshop Colman who was a Scottish byshop,
lefte England and tooke with him all the Scottes that

he had gathered together in the Ile of Lindisfar,
                  Holy Ilōd and abowt
xxx. englysh men also, which were all browght vp in the orders
of monasticall lyfe and conuersation. And leauing in his
owne churche certaine bretherne he came first to the Ile of
Hij from whence he was first sent to preache the word of God
to the English men. Afterward he went to a certaine litle
Ile, which lieth on the west syde, cut of a good way from Ireland,
and is called in the Scottysh tonge, Inhisbowinde, that is
to saye, VVhitecalfe Ile, In to whiche he came, and buylte a
monasterie, and placed the monkes in the same, which he had
browght with him and gathered of bothe nations. Whiche bicawse
they cowld not agree together, for that the Scottes in
somer tyme when haruest was getting in, wold leaue the monasteries
and go wander abrode in places of their acquayntaunce,
and than at winter wold come againe and require to enioy
in cōmon such thinges as the english mē had prouided and
layed vp, Colman seking remedie for this discorde, and vewing
all places far, and nere, found at length in Ireland a mete place
for his purpose, called in the Scottish tonge Magio. Of that
grounde he bought a small parcell to buyld a monasterie
therein, of the Erle that possessed the same vppon this condition
with all that the monkes there abydinge shoulde remembre
in their praiers the Lorde of the soile, who lett them haue
that place. Thus the monasterie being spedely erected by the
helpe of the Erle and of all such as dwelled thereby, he placed
the Englishmen alone therein, the Scottes being leafte in the
foresaid Iland. The which monasterie vnto this day is holden
of Englishmen, and is the same which is commonly called Iniugeo,
being nowe much enlarged and amplified of that it was
at first. This monastery also (all thinges being since, brought
to a better order) hath in it at this present a notable company
of vertuous monkes, that come thither out of England,
and liue after the example of the worthy olde fathers,

vnder their rule and appointed Abbat, in great continencie and
synceritie, getting their lyuing with the labour of their owne
handes.
            
            
               
                  Of the death of king Oswin aud king Egbert, and of the Synode made at Hereford, at which the Archebishop Theodore was chiefe and president.
               
               The. 5. Chap.
               THe yere of the incarnation of our Lorde 670.An. 670. whiche
was the second yere after that Theodore came to England,
Oswy king of Northumberland was taken with
a greuous sickenesse, whereof he dyed, the yere of his age. lviij.
Who at that time bare such loue and affection to the Apostolike
see of Rome that if he might haue scaped his sicknes, he
purposed to go to Rome and to end his lyfe in those holy places
there, hauing for that purpose intreated bishop Wilfride to
be his guyde in his iourney, and promised him a greate somme
of mony to cōduct him thither. But he departed this life in that
sickenesse the xv. day of Februarie, and leafte Egfride his sonne
enheritour of the realme. In the third yeare of whose raigne
Theodore gathered a Councell of bishops with many other doctours
and prelates of the churche, suche as diligently studied
and knewe the canonicall statutes and ordinances of the fathers.
Who being assembled together, he began, with such minde
and zeale as became a bishop, to teache diligently to obserue
those thinges that were conuenient for the vnitie and peace of
the churche. The forme and tenour of whiche Synode is this.
               In the name of our Lorde God and Sauiour Christ Iesus
who raigneth and gouuerneth his church for euer,The first Synode or Conuocation of the english church. it semed
good vnto vs to assemble our selues together according to the
custome prescribed in the ecclesiasticall Canons, to treate of
necessarie affaires of the church, we the bishops vndernamed,
that is, I Theodore although vnworthy, appointed by the See Apostolike,
Archebishop of Caunterbury, our felowe priest and
brother the most reuerend bishop of the Eastenglish, B. Bisi,
                  
our felow priest and brother VVilfrid bishop of the Northumbrians,
by his deputed legates present. Also our felowe priestes
and brethern Putta bishop of Rochester, Leutherius bishop of
the West Saxons, and VVinfrid bishop of the Marshes or Middleenglish
men, we all being assembled together, and placed euery
one in order in the church of Hereforde, the xxiiij. of September,
in the first Indiction, I beseke you, saied I, most derely
beloued brethern, for the feare and loue of our Redemer, let vs
all in common treate and debate such thinges as appertaine to
the right faith, keging vprightly and straighly the decrees and
determinations of our lerned auncetours and holy fathers.
These and such like thinges for the preseruation of charite and
vnite amonge vs, and in the church when I had saied, and made
an end of that exhortation and preface.The determinations of the holy fathers to be folowed. I demaunded of eche
of them in order, whether they agreed to kepe those thinges,
which are canonically decreed of the auncient fathers of
old time. Whereto al our fellow priestes aunsweared, and saied.
It pleaseth vs all very well, that those things which the canons
of the holy fathers haue defined and appointed, we all do kepe
and obserue the same. And then straight way did I bringe furth
vnto them the booke of canons, and out of the same booke I
shewed, before them ten articles, which I had noted out of diuerse
places, bycause I knew them to be most necessarie for vs,
and I besought them, that the same mougthe be receaued
and kepte diligently of all men.
               The first article was, that we al in common do kepe the holy
feast of Ester on the sonday after the xiiij. day of the moone in
the moneth of Marche. The second that no bishop should haue
ought to do in an others diocese, but be contented with the
chardge of the people committed vnto him. The third, that no
bishop should moleste or anye wise troble such monasteries as
were consecrated and giuen to God, nor violently take from
thē ought that was theirs. The fourth, that monks shuld not go

from place to place, that is to say, from one monasterie to an other,
onlesse by the leaue of their own abbot,Vowe of obedience 
                        •
                      religiō. but should continew
in the obedience which they promised at the time of their
cōuersiō and entring into religiō. The fift, that none of the clergy
forsaking his own bishop shuld runne vp and down wher he
list, nor whē he came any whither, should be receaued without
letters of commendation from his diocesan. And if that he be
ones receaued, and will not retourne being warned and called
both the receauer and he that is receaued shall incurre the sentence
of excommunication. The sixte, that such bishops and
clerkes as are strangers, be content with such hospitalitie as is
giuen them, and that it be laufull for none of them to execute
any office of a priest, without the permission of the bishop in
whose diocese they are knowen to be. The seuenth, that whereas
by the auncient decrees a synode and conuocation ought
to be assembled twise a yere, yet bicause diuerse inconueniences
doo happen amonge vs, it hath semed good to vs all, that it
should be assembled onse a yere the first day of August at the
place called Clofeshooh. The eight, that no bishop should ambitiously
preferre him selfe before an other, but should all acknowledge
the time and order of their consecration. In the ix.
article it was generally entreated, that the nomber of bishops
should be encreased, the nomber of Christian folke waxing
daily greater, but hereof at this time we sayed no farther. The
x. for mariages, that noman cōmit aduoutrie, nor formication,
that noman forsake his owne wife, but for only fornication,
as the holy ghospell teacheth. And if any man put away his
wif being laufully maried vnto him, if he wil be a right Christian
man, let him be ioyned to none other: but let him so continewe
still sole, or els be reconciled againe to his owne wife.
And thus these articles being in common treated of, and agreed
vpon, that no offence of contention should ryse from any of
vs hereafter, or any other decrees should be published in stede

of these, it semed good, that eche of vs should confirme these
thinges that were decreed, subscribing thereto with his owne
hand. Which sentence and somme of our appointement I gaue
Titillus the notarie to write out. Yeuen the moneth and Indiction
aboue written. Who soeuer therefore go about any wise
to doo against this ordinaunce and sentence prescribed according
to the decrees of the canons, and confirmed also with our
consent and subscribinge of our handes, let him knowe himselfe
in so doinge to be excluded from all charge and office of
priesthood, and also from our felowship and companie. The
grace of God kepe vs safe, liuing in the vnitie of his holy churche.
This synode was kepte the yere from thincarnation of our
Lord 673.An. 673. in which yere Ecgbert king of kent died in Iulie, and
his brother Lother succeded him in the kingdome, the which
he enioyed xj. yeres and vij. moneths. Bisi also Bishop of the
East english, who was present at the foresaid Synode, did succede
Bonifacius, of whom we made mētion aboue. This Bisi was a
man of much holynes and deuotion, and when Boniface was
dead after he had bene bishop xvij. yeres this man was made
bishop in his place, being consecrated and appointed ther to by
Theodore. This Bisi yet liuing, but greuously vexed with sickenesse
in such sort that he could not execute the office of a
bishop, two other for him Aecci and Badwine wer chosen and
consecrated bishops: from which time vnto this day that prouince
hath bene wont to haue two bishoppse.
            
            
               
                  How VVinfride was deposed, and Sexulfe made bishop in his place, and Ercanwald made bishop of the East Saxons.
               
               The. 6. Chapter.
               NOt long after these thinges were done Theodore tharchebishop
being off ended with VVinfrid bishop of the
Marshes,Theodore the Archebishop of Caunterbury deposeth VVinfride bishop of Lichefilde &c. for a certaine crime of disobedience, deposed

him of his bishopprike, not many yeres after that he had receaued
the same, and in his place appointed Sexulphe for bishop,
who was the builder and Abbot of the monasterie, that is called
Medes hansted in the countre of the Giruians. Which
VVinfride being deposed, retourned to his monasterie, which is
named Artbearue, and there ended his life in holy conuersation.
At that time also, when Sebbe and Sighere of whome we
spake before ruled the east Saxons,Essex. tharchebishop appointed
ouer them Earconwald to be their bishop in the citie of London.
                  Saint Erkenwalde the 4. bishop of London.
The life and conuersation of which man both before he
was bishop, and after, was reported and taken for most holy, as
also euen yet the signes and tokens of heauenly vertues and
miracles do well declare. For vntill this day his horselitter,
being kept and reserued by his scholers, wherein he was wont
to be caried when he was sicke and weake, doth daily cure such
as haue agewes or are diseased any otherwise. And not only the
sicke parties that are put vnder or layed by the sayd horselitter
be so healed, but also the chippes and pieces that are cut of from
it and brought to the sicke folke, are wont to bring them spedie
remedie. This man before he was made bishop had builded
two goodly monasteries, one for him selfe, and an other for his
syster Edilburge, and had instructed and disposed thē both very
well with good rules and disciplines. That which was for himself
was in Surry by the riuer of Thems, at the place that is called
Crotesee, that is to say, the ile of Crote. And that other for
his syster in the prouince of the East Saxons,Berking in Essex at the place that
is called Berching where she should be a mother of Nonnes.
And so in dede after she had taken vpon her the rule of the
sayd monasterie, she behaued herselfe in all thinges as became
one that had a byshop to her brother, both for her owne vertuowse
lyuing, and also in the good and godly guyding of
them that were vnder her chardge. Which thing was also well
proued by miracles from heauen.
            
            
               
               
                  Howe in the monasterie of Berking it was shewed by a light from heauen in what place the bodyes of the nonnes should be buried.
               
               The. 7. Chapter.
               FOr in this monasterie many wonderfull signes of vertues
and miracles were shewed, which for the memorie and edifieng
of thaftercommers are yet kept of many men, being
written of them that knewe the same. Some of the which we
will also put in our ecclesiasticall historie. When the tempest
of the same plage so often mentioned, storming ouer all
the Ilond, came to this monasterye and had entred vpon that
part thereof where the men dyd lyue, and dayly one or other
was taken owt of the worlde to our Lorde, this good mother
being carefull of her companie, at such tyme as also the same
visitation of God towched that part of the monasterie, in whiche
the flocke of Goddes hand maydes dwelled by them selues,
from the mens companye, began ofte tymes in the couent to
aske the sisters in what place abowt the monasterie they wold
haue their bodies to be layed against suche tyme as it showlde
happen them to be taken out of this world with the same hand
of Gods visitation as other were. And when she could get no
certaine awnswere of the systers, although she often enquired
the same of them, she receaued both her selfe and all the reast
with all, a most certaine awnswere of Gods prouision from aboue.
For after matyns was done, on a certaine night, as these
handemaydes of Christe went forth of the chappel to the graues
of the bretherne that were gone out of this lyfe before thē,
and dyd sing their accustomed lawdes and praises to our Lord,
behold sodainly a light sent downe from heauen lyke a great
shete came vpon them, and strake them withe so great a traunce,
that for very feare they stopped and leafte of their songe
that they sange. And the brightnes of that shining lyghte, to
which in comparison the sonne at mydday might seme but
darke, being not long after lyfted vp from that place, went to

the sowth part of the monasterie, that is to saye, the East end
of the chappel, and there abyding a while, and couering those
places, withdr
                     •
                  we it selfe vpp to heauen so plaine to all their
sightes, that none of them all dowbted, but that the very light
which showld lead and receaue vp into heauen the sowles of
Christes handemaydes, dyd also shewe a place for their bodyes
to reast in, and abyde the day of resurrection. The brightnes
of this light was so great, that a certaine elderly man one
of the bretherne who at that tyme with an other yonger man
was in their chappell, reported, that the beames thereof entring
in at the morning through the chinkes of the doores and windowes,
dyd seme to passe all brightnes of the day lighte.
            
            
               
                  How a litle boy dieng in the same monasterie called a certaine virgin that should folowe him, and howe an other virgin at her departing dyd see a part of the light to come.
               
               The. 8. Chap.
               THere was in the same monasterie a child abowt three
yeres olde, or not past, named Esica, which bycawse of
his age being yet a very infant,Children browght vp in Nō
                     
                     
                        •
                     eries. was wont to be brought
vp in this howse of virgins that were dedicated to God, and to
be occupied in meditation among them. This childe being
striken with the foresayd plage, when he came to the last panges
of death cryed owt, and spake to one of these holy virgins
of Christe, naming her as if she were present by her owne name,
Eadgit, Eadgit, Eadgit, and therewithall ended this temporall
lyfe, and entred into lyfe eternall. But that virgin which
he called at his death, straight way in the place where she was,
being taken with the same sickenesse, the very same daye that
she was so called, was taken owt of this lyfe, and followed him,
that had called her, to the kingdome of heauen. Moreouer a
certaine one of the same handemaydes of God being taken
with the sayd disease and nowe browght to the last point, began
sodaynly abowt midnight to crye to them that dyd kepe
and watche her, desiring them to put owt the candle that stode

there burninge. And when she had ofte tymes so called vnto
them, and yet none of them would doo as she bad them: I
knowe, quoth she at the last, that ye thinke me thus to speake,
as if I were not in my right mynde. But doo ye well knowe
that I speake not so. For I tell yowe very truly, that I see
this howse fylled withe so great a light, that that candell of
yours semeth to me altogether dym and withowt light. And
when none of them dyd yet awnswere vnto these sayinges of
her, nor followe her bydding, well, quoth she againe, let that
candell stand burning as long as ye lyst. But yet knowe ye
well, that thesame is not my lighte. For my lighte shall come
vnto me when the morning beginneth to drawe nere. And
therewithall she began to tell, that a certaine man of God appered
vnto her, which dyed the same yere, and sayd to her, that
when the morning drewe nere she should departe hence to the
euerlasting lyghte. The truth of whiche vision was so tryed
and proued by the death of the mayden, abowt the appering
of the day light.
            
            
               
                  What signes were shewed from heauen, when the mother of that company departed this world.
               
               The 9. Chap.
               NOWE when the godly woman Edilburge mother of
these holy professed Nonnes should also be taken out of
this world, a wonderfull vision appered to one of the
sisters whose name was Thorithgid, the which had now many
yeres continewed in the same monasterie, and alwayes was diligently
occupied in seruing God with all humilitie and sinceritie,
and in helping the said mother to kepe good order and
discipline, with enstructing or correcting the yonger sort. The
vertue of which woman, that it might, as the Apostle saieth,2. C
                        •
                     . 1
                        •
                     . 
                  be
made perfect in infirmitie, she was sodainly taken with a very greuouse
sickenesse of body, and was therewith very sore tormē
                  ted
by the space of ix. yeares, through the mercyfull prouision

of our redemer,Sinne purged by paine in this lyfe. to this end, that what so euer spot of defilinge
sinne had through ignorance or negligence any thing long remained
in her among her vertues, it might al be perboyled out
by the fire of long tribulation. This same woman on a certaine
night, when the day light began a litle to appere, as she went
out of her chamber that she abode in, sawe plainly as it were a
corse, brighter than the sonne, wound vp in a shete and caried
vpward from the dortery where the sisters were wont to reaste.
And as she diligently marked what it shoulde be that drewe
vp this vision of the gloriouse body which she behelde, she sawe
as it were certaine cordes brighter than gold, which drewe
it vp so hye, till it was taken into the open heauens, and than
she could see it no longer. Which vision when she thought vpon
with her selfe, she douted no whit, but some person of that
company should dye shortly, whose soule should be lifted vp
to heauen by the good workes it had done,Good workes. euen as by golden
cordes. Which thing happened so in dede. For not many dayes
after, the mother of that couent, for the loue that God bare her
was deliuered out of the prison of this flesh. Whose life was
certainly such, that no man which knewe it, can dout, but that
the entring in to the heauenly mansion was open vnto her going
out of this life. There was also in the same monasterie a certaine
holy Nonne, both noble for the dignitie of this world,
and more noble for the loue that she had of the world to come.
The which many yeres was so bereafte of al vse of her limmes,
that she was not able so much as to moue one parte of her
bodye. This Nonne when she knewe that the body of the reuerend
Abbesse was brought and layed in the churche vntill it
should be buryed, desired that she might be caried thither, and
be layd by the same, bowing downe as folke doo at their prayers.
Which thing being done,The like maner of deuotion vsed Constantia a holy woman at the 
                        ••
                     mbe of Hilarion the monk, as S. Hierom recordeth, in the life of Hilarion writen by him. Tom. 1. she spake to the Abbesse as if
she had bene aliue and desired her to obtaine of the mercye of
the pitiful Creatour, that she might be loused and rid of so great

and so longe tormentes. And not long after her petition was
heard and graunted: for xij. dayes after she was taken out of
this life also, and receaued euerlasting rewarde in chaunge of
those temporall afflictions. Nowe when Torithgid the foresaid
handmayd of Christe had lyued three yeare more after the
death of the Abbesse, she was so far pyned away with the sickenesse
that we spake of before, that the skyn and bones did
scant cleaue together. And at last the time of her departing being
nowe at hand, she could not only styr none of all her limmes,
but was speachelesse and could not moue her tongue. In
which case as she lay three daies and as many nightes, sodainly
being relieued with a ghostly vision, she opened her mouthe
and eyes, and looking vp to heauen begā thus to speake to the
vision which she sawe. Thy comminge is to me mo
                     ••
                   ioyfull,
and thou arte hartely wellcome. And when she had so sayd,
she held her peace a litle, as it were abyding for an aunswere of
him whome she sawe and spake to. And then as it were a litle
angerly she sayed againe: I can not gladly suffer this. And
straightway holding her peace a litle, she spake the third tyme
and sayd: If it may not by any meanes be to day, I beseche the
that the meane time be not longe delayed: wherewith holding
her peace a litle as she had done before, she ended and concluded
her talke thus. And if it be fully so appointed, and that
this sentence and order can not be changed, I beseke thee that
there be no more but only this next night betwene. After
which wordes, being demaunded of them that sate about her,
to whom she spake, forsoth, quoth she, to my most dere mother
Edilburge. Whereby they vnderstode she came to bringe her
word that the time of her passing hence was nye. For euen as
she made request, after one day and one night passed, she was
deliuered both of the bond of the flesh, and of her sickenesse,
and entred into the ioyes of eternall blesse.
            
            
               
                  How a certaine blynd woman praying in the Churchyard of the same monasterie, receaued her sight.
               
               
               The. 10. Chap.
               IN the place and office of Abbesse Edelburg succeded a deuout
handmayd of God named Hildilhid, the which many yeares
euen till her very great and extreme age, gouerned the same
monasterie exceding diligently, bothe in keping of regular
discipline and order, and also in prouiding such thinges as apperteined
to daily vses. This woman, bicause of the straightnesse
of the place wherein the monasterie was built, thought good
to haue the bones of the holy monkes and handmaydes of
Christ which were there buried, taken vp and remoued all to
the churche of the blessed mother of God, and there to be buried
and laid in one place. In which place how often the brightenes
of the heauenly light appered, howe often and howe great
a flagrant odour of a meruailouse swete sauour, and what
other miracles were there shewed, who so will know and reade,
he shal fynd the same aboundantly in that booke, out of which
we haue taken these thinges. Yet my thinke I can in no case
let passe a miracle of one, that was healed, which miracle (as the
same booke declareth) was wrought in the Churcheyard of
the sayd religiouse house. There dwelled an Erle therby, whose
wyfe had a certaine darkenes sodainly comen ouer her eyes,
the griefe whereof daily encreasing she was so farre troubled
and molested therewith that she could not see any litle light
at all.Beholde how farre differēt the faith of our primitiue church is from the false faith of protestants. This lady remaining a space in this blindnesse, it came
sodainly to her mind on a time, that if she were brought to the
monasterie of the holy virgins, and there prayed at the reliques
of the Saintes, she might receaue her sight againe. And she made
no delay, till she had straight fulfilled that which she had
ones conceaued in her mind. For being lead by her maydes to
the monasterie (being hard by adioyning) where she had full
belefe to be holpē and healed, she was straight brought into the
churchyard. And as she praied ther for a space on her knees, her
petition was heard and obtained anon. For rising vp from her

prayer before she went out of the place, she receaued the benefit
of her sight that she sought. And where she was lead thither
by the handes of her wayting maydes,Note the iudgemēt of S. Bede she went ioyfully home
by herselfe without any guide: so that it might seme that she
had lost the light of this world only for this end, that she might
shewe by her healinge, what and howe great the light is that
Christes Saintes haue in heauen, and what grace of power and
vertue.
            
            
               
                  How Sebbi king of the same prouince ended his lyfe in monasticall conuersation.
               
               The. 11. Chapter.
               AT that time, as also the foresayd booke sheweth, there
raigned ouer the East Saxons a man very deuout and
godly named Sebbi, of whome we made mention aboue.
For he was very much geuen to exercises of religion, and
vertu, to much and often praier, and to charitable almesdedes,
esteming the solitarie and monastical life before all the rychesse
and honours of a kingdome. Which kinde of lyfe he had taken
long time before, and giuen vp his kingdome had not the
selfewilled mind of his wife refused to separate from him. And
therfore some men thought (as it had bene often sayed) that a
man of such a nature and well disposed mind, was more mete
to be made a bishop then a king. Nowe when this souldiour of
the ecclesiasticall kingdome had passed ouer xxx. yeres in his
temporall reigne, at lenght he died. But first he admonished
his wife, that then at least they should wholly geue themselues
both together to serue God, whereas they could no lenger now
enioye or rather serue the world together. Which thing when
he had with much a doo obtained of her, he came to the bisshop
of London named Waldher who had succeded Erconwald,
and at his hand and blessing receaued the habit of religion,
which he had long desyred. To which bishop he brought a
great somme of mony to be bestowed and giuē to the poore, reseruing

nothing at all for him selfe, but rather desyring to remaine
poore in spirite for the kingdome of heauen. And when
he perceaued the day of his death to be at hand, bicause the foresayd
sicknesse grewe on still vpon him, for the princely
haught courage that he had, he began to feare least at his death
throughe the bitter pange of the same, he might hap either to
vtter with his mouth, or with some other part of his body
doo any thing, that were not mete and comly for his person.
And therefore he sent for the bishop of London, where he also
then continewed, and desyred him that at his departing and
passing out of this world, there should be no mo present but
the bishop himselfe, and two of his chapplens. Which thing
when the bishop had promised moste gladly to doo, not long
after, the said man of God setting him selfe to slepe, sawe a
comfortable vision, which toke from him all care of the foresayd
feare and shewed him moreouer on what day he shoulde
ende this lyfe. For he sawe (as he after reported him selfe) three
men come to him araied in bright shining clothing, and one
of them, while his felowes, that came with him, stode by and
asked how the sicke man did whom they came to visite, sate
before his bed and sayed, that his soule should departe from the
bodie both without pain, and also with great light and brightnesse.
And he farther also declared vnto him that he should
die the third day after. Both which things (as he learned by the
vision) were so fulfilled in dede. For the third day ensuyng
when the ix. houre was come, sodainly as if he had fallen
in to a softe slepe he gaue vp the ghoste without feeling any
grief at all. And whereas for the buriall of his body, they had
prepared a tombe of stone when they began to lay his bodie
in it they found it to be longer then the tombe by the quantitie
of an handbreadth. They hewed therefore the stone as
much as they might, and made it longer than it was about two
fingers breadth, but yet it could not receaue the bodie not so

neyther. Whereupon bicause of this distresse of burying him
they were minded, eyther to seke an other tombe, or els, if they
might, to gather in the body by bowing of the knees, that so it
might be holden and receaued of the same tombe. But a wonderfull
case happened, and not withowt the working of God
from heauen, the whiche kept them from doing any of those
thinges. For sodainly, the byshopp standing by and the sayd
kinges sonne a monke also Sighard by name, which after him
raigned with his brother Frede, and also a great company of other
men, the very same tombestone was found to be of a fyt
length for the quantitie of the bodie. Yea and so much that
at the head there might also a pillowe be layde betwene: and
at the feete there remained in the tombe bysyde the body about
the quantitie of fowre fingers. And thus was he buried and Layed
in the Churche of the blessed doctour teacher of the gentiles
S. Pawle, by whose good lessons he being taught had learned
to labour and longe for the ioyes of heauen.
            
            
               
                  Howe after Eleutherius, Headd
                        •
                      was made bishop of the west Saxons, after Putta Quichelmus was made byshop of Rotchester, and after him Gebmund, and who were byshops in Northumberland at that tyme.
               
               The 12. Chap.
               THe fowrth byshop of the westsaxons was Eleutherius.
For the first was Birinus, the second Agilbert, the third
VVini. After the departure of kinge Cenwalch in
whose raigne the sayd Eleutherius was made byshop, certaine
Lordes vsurped the kingdome, and diuided it betwene them,
and so helde it about x. yeres. In their raigne dyed this byshop,
and Headdy was put in his place, and consecrated bishop
by Theodore in the citie of London. In the time of whom being
byshop, Ceadwalla dyd ouercome and put owt the sayd
vsurpours, and toke the kingdome to himselfe. And when he
had kept the same for the space of two yeres, at last pricked and
styrred with the loue of the kingdome of heauen, he leafte it,

while the same bishop dyd yet gouerne the diocese and went
vnto Rome and there ended his lyfe, as it shalbe tolde more at
large hereafter. In the yere of thincarnation of our Lorde
677.An. 677. 
                  Edilred kinge of the Marshes or middleland englishmen
came into kent with a terrible and fell hoste, not only spoyling
the countree, and profaning the churches and monasteries
withowt any respecte of pitie or feare of God, but also ransacking
with the same generall ruine the citie of Rotchester, wherof
Putta was byshop, howebeit at that tyme he was not there.
Who when he heard hereof, that his Churche was spoyled, and
all thinges taken away and ryffled, he went vnto Sexwolfe byshop
of the Marshes, and receaued of him the possession of a
certaine churche and a litle piece of grownd, and there ended
his lyfe in peace and reast not taking any care at all for the restoring
of his byshopricke, for (as we haue aboue sayd) he was
a man more giuen to ecclesiastical and spiritual, than to worldly
and temporall matters. And so he liued quietly and only
serued God in the same church, going somtimes abrode, where
he was desired, to teache verses and hymnes of the churche. In
his place dyd Theodore consecrate VVilliam bishop of Rotchester.
Who not long after for scarcitie and lacke of thinges necessarie
departed frō the bishopricke, and went his way thence,
in whose place Theodore ordeined Gebmund byshop. The yere
of thincarnation of our Lord 678.An. 678. which was the viij. yere of
the raigne of kinge Ecgfride, there appered in the moneth of
August a blasing star, the whiche continewed three moneths,
rysing in the morninges, and giuing forth as it were an highe
piller of a glistering flame. In which yere also throwgh a certaine
dissension that rose betwene king Ecgfride, and the moste
Reuerend byshop VVilfride, the sayd reuerend father was put
owt of his byshoprike, and two other appointed byshops in his
place ouer the prouince of Northumberlande,The dioce
                        •
                     es of Yorke, Carlele and Dyrham. Holy 
                        ••
                     nd. the one named
Bosa to gouerne the Deires, and the other named Eata for the

                  Bernices, which Eata had his see at yorke, and Bosa at the Cathedral
churche of Hagulstald or Lindisfarne which two men
were both taken owt of the cloyster of monkes and called to
this degree. And with them also was Eadhed made byshop ouer
the prouince of Lindesfar,
                  Lincolne shere. which king Ecgfride had very
lately conquered of VVulfhere whom he ouercame in battaile
and put to flight.The first bishops of Lincolne. In which prouince this man was the first bishop
that they had of their owne, the next was Ediluine, the
third Eadgar, the fourth Emberth, who is there at this present.
For before Eadhed came they were in the diocese of bysshopp
Sexwolfe, who was byshop both of the Marshes, and the myddle
english, but nowe being put from the gouuernement of Lindisse
he remayned only bishopp of the Marshes. These bysshops
Eadhed, Bosa and Eata were cōsecrated byshops at yorke
by Theodore tharchebishop, who also the third yere of VVilfrides
departing thence, ioyned vnto them two byshops mo, Trū
                     bert
at Hagustald, Eata remayning at Lindesfar, and Trumuin
ouer the prouince of the Pictes, which at that tyme was subiect
to the dominion of the english men. But bycause that Edilrede
kinge of the Marshes recouered the sayd countree of Lindisse
againe, Eadhed came away thence, and was by Theodore made
byshop of the diocese of Rhyppon.
               
            
            
               
                  Howe byshop Wilfride conuerted the prouince of the Sowth Saxons to Christ.
               
               The. 13. Chap.
               WHen VVilfride was put out of his byshoprike,The Cō
                     uersion of Sussex to the faith.
he went and wandred in many places a longe
tyme, and came to Rome, and from thence retourned
into England againe. And thoughe
bicause of the displeasure of the said kinge, he
could not gett into his owne diocese againe,
yet he could not be kept from doing the office of preaching
the ghospell. For he went his way to the prouince of the

                  South Saxons,
                  Sussex. which from kent reacheth southwarde and westward
as far as the West Saxons, contayning vij. M. tenementes,
and was yet at that time lyuing in the paynimes lawe. Vnto
them did he minister the worde of faith and baptisme of saluation.
The king of the same countree, whose name was Edilwach
was christened not long before in the prouince of the
Marshes, in the presence and at the exhortatiō of king Wulfhere.
Who also at the fonte was his godfather, and in signe of that
adoption gaue him two prouinces, that is to say, the Ile of
wight, and the prouince of Manures, in the West parte of England.
By the permission therefore and great reioysing of the
king, this bishopp christened the chiefe Lordes and knightes of
the countree. And the reast of the people at thesame time or
sone after were christened by the priestes Eappa, Padda, Bruchelin,
and Oidda. The Quene also named Ebba was christened
in her Ile, which was in the prouince of the Viccians: for she
was the doughter of Eanfride who was Eanberes brother, whiche
were both christen men, and all their people. But all the
prouince of the South Saxons had neuer before that time heard
of the name of God nor the faith. Yet there was in the countree
a certaine monke, a Scot borne named Dicul, which had
a very litle monasterie in a place called Bosanham,
                  In Bosam a monasterie before the faith openly receiued in Sussex. all compassed
about with woddes and the sea, and therein a v. or vj. bretherne
seruing God in humble and poore life. But none of the
people there did giue them selues either to followe their lyfe,
or heare their preaching. But when bishop Wilfride came and
preached the gospel vnto them, he not only deliuered thē from
the miserie and perill of eternall damnation, but also from an
horrible morraine of this temporall death. For in three yeares
before his comming to that prouince, it had not rayned one
drop in all those quarters. Whereby a very sore famine came vpon
the common people, and destroyed them by hole heapes
in most pitifull wyse, In so much that it is reported, that diuerse

and many times xl. or l.A miserable famine in Sussex before the faith receaued. men in a company being famished
for hunger, would go together to some rocke or sea banke and
there wringing their handes in most miserable sort, would cast
themselues all downe, either to be killed with the fall, or drowned
in the sea.The first christenīg in Sussex miraculous. But on that very day on which the people receaued
the baptisme and faith, there fell a goodly and plentifull
shoure of raine, wherewith the earth florished againe, and
brought a most ioyfull and frutefull yere, with goodly greene
fieldes euery where. Thus their old superstition being layed
away, and idolatrie blowen out and extincted, the hartes and
bodies of them all did reioyse in the liuing God: knowing that
he which is the true God, had by his heauenly grace enryched
them both with inwarde and outward giftes and goodes. For
this bishop also when he came into the countree, and sawe so
great a plage of famine there, taught them to get their sustenaunce
by fysshing. For the sea and riuers there about them,
had great abundance of fysh. But the people had no skill at all
to fish for any thing els but eeles. And therefore they of the
bishops company gat somewhere a sort of eelenettes together,
and cast them into the sea, and straight way by the helpe and
grace of God they tooke CCC. fishes of diuerse kindes. The
which they diuided into three partes, and gaue one hundred to
poore folke, and an other to them of whom they had the nettes,
and the third they kept for themselues. By the which benefit
the bishop tourned the hartes of them all much to loue him
and they began the more willingly to hope for heauēly things
at his preaching, by whose helpe and succour they receaued the
giftes and goodes of this worlde. At this time did Edilwach giue
vnto the most reuerend bishop VVilfrid, the land of lxxxvij.
tenementes where he might place his company that were exiles
with him. The name of the place was S
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     se
                        •
                     s.
                  Selsee. The whiche
place is compassed of the sea round about sauing on the west,
where it hath an entraunce into it as brode as a man may caste

a stone with a slinge. Which kinde of place is in Latin called
Paeninsula, and in Greke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .Selsee the first monasterie in Sussex now brought to the faith. When bishop VVilfride had
receaued this place, he founded a monasterie there which he
did binde to monastical life and rule, and did put therein monkes:
namely some of them that he had brought with him. Whiche
monasterie his successours are knowen to holde and kepe
vnto this day. For vntil the death of king Ecgbert, which was v.
yeares space, he continewed still in those quarters in great honour
and reuerence among all men for his good deseruing: for
he did the office of a bishop both in word and dede. And bicause
the king with the possession of the forsaid place had giuē
him also al the goodes and demaynes of the same with the groundes
and men to, he instructed them all in the Christian faithe
and baptised thē al. Amōg the which ther wer CCC. bond
men and bondwemen, whome he did all not only deliuer by
christening them from the bondage of the deuil, but also by giuing
them their freedom, did louse them from the yoke of the
bondage of man.
            
            
               
                  How by the prayer and intercession of Saint Oswald the pestilent mortalitie was taken away,
               
               The. 14. Chapter.
               IN this monasterie att the same time there were shewed
certaine giftes of heauenly grace by the holy Ghoste,
as in which place the tyrannye of the deuill being lately
expelled, Christ had newly begonne to raigne.Miracles in the monasterie of S
                        •••
                     ee in Sussex. One of which
thinges we thought good to put in writing to be remēbred hereafter,
the which in dede the most reuerend father Acca was
ofte times wont to tell me, and affirmed that be had it shewed
him of the bretherne of the same monasterie, a man most worthy
to be credited. About the same very time that this prouince
receaued the name of Christ, a sore plage and mortalitie
raigned in many prouinces of England, which plage by the
pleasure of Gods dispensation and ordinaunce when it touched
also the foresayed monasterie, which at that time the most

Reuerend and vertuouse priest of Christ Eappa did rule
and gouerne, and that many bothe of them that came thither
with the bishop, and also of such as had bene lately called to
the faith in the same prouince of the South Saxons were taken
daily out of this life,Fasting against the plage. it semed good to the bretherne to appoint
themselues to faste three daies and humbly to beseke the mercy
of God, that he wold voutsafe to shew grace and mercy towarde
them, and deliuer them from this perilouse plage and
present deathe, or at least when they were taken out of
this world, to saue their soules from eternall damnation. There
was at that time in the same monasterie a certaine litle boye,
that was lately come to the faith, a Saxon borne, which was
taken with the same sickenesse, and had kept his bed no small
time. And when the second day of the said fasting and praying
was nowe come, it happened that about vij. a clocke in the
morning, as the boy was leafte al alone in the place where he
lay sicke, sodainly by the appointement of God there vowtsafed
to appere vnto him the most blessed two chiefe Apostles
S. Peter, and S. Paul. For the boy was of a very innocent and
meke mind and nature, and with sincere deuocion kepte the
sacramente of faith which he had receaued. In this vision the
Apostles first saluted him with most gentle wordes, saying:
Feare not, Sonne, the death, for which thou art so pensife: for
we wil this day bring thee to the kingdom of heauen. But first
thou must tary til the Masses be said, and after thou hast receaued
thy viage prouisiō, the body and bloud of our Lord, being
so released both of sickenes and death thou shalt be lifted vp to
the euerlasting ioyes in heauen. Therefore doo thou call for
priest Eappa vnto thee, and tell him, that our Lorde hath heard
your prayers and deuocion, and hath mercifully looked vpon
your fastinge, neither shall there any one more dye of this plage,
either in this monasterie, or in any of the possessions that
adioyne to the same. But as many as belonge to you any where

and lye sicke, shall rise againe from their sickenes and be restored
to their former health, saue only thow, which this daye
shalt be deliuered from death, and be brought to heauen to the
vision of our Lord Christ, whome thow haste faithfully serued.
Which thing it hath pleased the mercy of God to doo for
you, through the intercession of the godly and dere seruant
of God king Oswald,Intercession of Saintes. which sometime gouerned the countre
of Northumberland most nobly both with the authoritie of
this temporall kingdome, and also in holynesse and deuotion
of Christen pietie which leadeth to the euerlasting kingdom.
For on this very day the same king being bodely slaine in battaile
of the infidels and miscreants was straight takē vp to heauē
to the eternal ioyes of the soule, and felowship of the chosen
and electe companies. Let them seke in their booke that haue
the notes of the departing of the dead, and they shall fynd that
he was takē out of the world on this selfe day, as we haue sayd.Masse in the memory of Saints.
And therfor let thē say Masses and geue thankes that their prayer
is heard, and also for the memory of the sayd king. Oswald,
which sometime gouerned their nation. For therefore did he
humbly pray our Lord for them, as being straūgers and exiles
of his people. And when all the bretherne are come together
to the churche, let them all be houselled and so fynish their faste,
and refresh their bodies with sustenaunce. All the which
wordes when the boy had declared to the priest being called
vnto him, the priest enquired of him, what maner of aray
and lykenes the men had, which appeared vnto him. He aunsweared,
they were very notable and goodly in their aray and
countenaunces, and exceding ioyfull and beautifull, such as he
neuer had sene before nor beleued that any men could be of
so great comlynesse and beautie. The one was shauen like a
priest, the other had a long beard. And they sayd, that the one
of them was called Peter and thother Paul, and that they were
the ministers and seruantes of our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus

Christ of whome they were sent from heauen for the sauing
and defense of our monasterie. Wherefore the priest belieued
the wordes of the boye, and went out by aud by and sought in
his booke of Cronicles, and found that king Oswald was
slaine on that very day. Then called he the bretherne together
and commaunded dyner to be prouided, and masses to be sayd,
and that they should all communicat after the accustomed maner.
And also willed a parte of the same sacrifice of our Lordes
oblation to be brought to the sicke boye: which thinge so done,
not lōg after the boy died the very same day, and proued by
his death, that the wordes were true which he had heard of
Christes Apostles. And this morouer gaue witnesse to his wordes,
that at that time no creature of the same monasterie was
taken out of the world, except him only. By which vision many
that might heare of the same, were meruaylowsly styrred
and enflamed, both to praye and call for Gods mercy in aduersitie,
and also to vse the holesome helpes and medicines of fastinge.
And from that time not in that monasterie only, but in
very many other places to, the birthe day of the sayd kinge and
champion of Christ began yearely to be kept holy with masses
and deuout seruice most reuerently.
            
            
               
                  Howe king Ceadwall 
                        •
                     lew Edilwach king of the Genisses, and wasted that prouince with cruell death and ruyn.
               
               The. 15. Chap.
               IN this meane time Ceadwall a valiant yong man of the
royall blood of the Genisses,
                  That is, of Hampshere. being bannyshed from his
countre, came with an hoste of men, and slewe king Edilwach,
(of Sussex) and wasted that prouince cruelly murdering
and spoyling euery where. But he was sone after driuen owt
by two Capitaines of the kinges, Berthun, and Authun, whiche
from that tyme dyd holde and kepe the dominion of the prouince.
The chief of whiche two, was afterward slaine of the
same Ceadwall, being then kinge in the west countre and the

prouince subdued and browght into more greuouse subiection
then it was before. Againe he that raigned after Ceadwall oppressed
it with lyke miserie and bondage a great many yeres.
Whereby it came to passe that the people (of Sussex) in all that
time could haue no bishop of their own: but were faine, (their
first byshop VVilfride being called home againe) to be vnder
the diocese of the byshop of the Genisses which belongeth to
the, VVest Saxons, as many as were in the territory of Selsee.
            
            
               
                  Howe the Ile of Wyght receaued christen inhabitantes, in which Ile two childerne of the kinges blood as sone as they were Christened, were slayne.
               
               The. 16. Chap.
               AFter that Ceadwall had thus obtayned the kingdome
of the Geuisses or west Saxons, he tooke the Ile of
Wight also, which was so all giuen to the worshipping
of idols, that he entended vtterly to bannysh and dryue owt
thence all the old natiue inhabitantes, and to put people of his
owne countre in their place. For thowghe he was not yet at
that time christened and regenerated in Christ him selfe at it is
sayd, yet he bownd him selfe with a vowe, that if he tooke the
Iland, he wold giue vnto God the fourth part therof and of all
the pray. Which thing he so perfourmed, that bishop VVilfride
happening to be there at that time a man of his own countree,
he gaue and offred the same vnto him to the vse and seruice of
our Lorde. The sayd Iland conteyned, as the English doo rate
it, M. CC. tenementes. Whereof was giuen to the byshop the
possession of the land of CCC. tenementes. Whiche portion
the Bishop gaue and committed to one of his clerkes named
Bernwini, his sisters sonne, and appointed there to a priest named
Hildila, to minister the worde and baptisme of lyfe to all
that would be saued. And here I thinke it not to be passed ouer
in silence, that for the first frutes of them that were saued
throwgh beleuing in the same ile, two children of the blood
royall being bretherne to Aruald king of the Iland, were crouned

with a speciall grace of God. For when the ennemies came
on the Iland,The Vites inhabited Hāpshere, as the Saxons Sussex. they 
                     •
                  led and scaped to the next prouince of the
Vites. And there they gat to a place called Stonestat, hoping to
hyde themselues from the face and sighte of the king that had
conquered their countree, but they were betrayed and fownd
owt, and commaunded to be put to death. Which thing when
a certaine abbat and priest named Cimberth had heard of, whose
monasterie was not far from thence at a place called Redford,
he came to the king which was than in the same parties, lying
secretly to be cured of his woundes that he had taken fighting
in the Ile of Wighte, and desired of him, that if he would nedes
haue the childerne put to death, yet they might first receaue
the sacramentes of the Christian fayth. The kinge graunted
his request, and than he tooke them and catechised them in the
right faith of Christe, and wasshing them withe the holesome
fonte of baptisme, made them sure and in perfyt hope to enter
into the kingdome euerlasting. Anon after came the hangeman
to put them to death, which death of this world they ioyfully
toke, by the which they douted not but they should passe
to the eternall life of the soule. When after this order all the
prouince of great Britaine had receaued the faythe of Christe,
the Ile of Wight receaued the same also: in whiche notwitstanding
bicause of the miserie and state of forayne subiection,
no man tooke the degree of the ministerie and place of
a bysshopp, before Daniel, who nowe is bysshopp of the west
Saxons and of the Geuisses. The situation of this Ile is
ouer against the middes of the South Saxons and Geuisses,
                  Sussex and Hāpsphere. the
sea comming betwene, of the breadth of three myles, which sea
is called Solent: in which, two armes of the Ocean sea, that breake
out from the maine north sea about Britanie, do dayly
mete and violently ronne together beyond the mouth of the
riuer Homelea, which ronneth along by the countree off the
Vites that belong to the prouince of the Genisses, and so entreth

into the foresaid sea. And after this meting and striuing together
of the two seas, they goe backe and flowe againe into the
Ocean from whence they came.
            
            
               
                  Of the Synode made at Hetdfield, Theodore the Archebishop being there president.
               
               The 17. Chap.
               AT this time Theodore hauing worde that the faith of the
church at Cōstantinople was sore troubled through the
heresie of Eutiches,
                  The secōd Synode of the church of Englā
                     de. and wishing that the churches of the
english nation ouer which he gouuerned might continew free
and clere from such a spot, gathered an assemble of Reuerend
priestes and many doctours, and enquired diligently of eche of
them, what faith they were of, where he found one consent and
agrement of them all in the catholique faith. Which consent
he procured to set forth and commende with letters sent from
the whole Synode for the instruction and remembrance of the
aftercommers, the beginning of which letters was this. In the
name of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and in the raignes
of our most good and vertuouse Lordes, Ecgfride king of the
Humbers, the x. yere of his raigne, the viij. yere of the Indiction,
and the xvij. day of September, and Edilrede king of the
Marshes in the vj. yeare of his raigne, and Aldulphe king of the
Estenglish, in the xvij. yere of his raigne, and Lothar king of
kent, in the vij. yeare of his raigne, being there president and
chief Theodore by the grace of God Archebishop of the Ile of
Britanie, and of the citie of Caunterbury, and with him sitting
in assemblee the other bishops of the same land, most Reuerend
men and prelates, hauing the holy ghospelles set before
them, at a place called in the Saxon tong, Hedtfield, after commoning
and conference together had thereuppon, we haue
expounded and set fourth the right and true catholique faith
in such sort as our Lorde Iesus being incarnate in this worlde
deliuered it to his disciples, which presently sawe and heard his

wordes and doctrine, and as the crede of the holy fathers hath
leaft by tradition, and generally as all holy men, all generall
Councells, and all the whole company of the authentique doctours
of the catholique churche haue taught and deliuered.
Whome we following in good, dewe, godly, and rightbeleuing
maner, according to their doctrine inspired into them
from God do professe and beleue, and stedfastly do confesse
with the holy fathers, the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy
ghoste most verily, and in true and formall proprietie, the Trinitie
in the vnitie of one substance and the vnitie in Trinitye,
that is to saye, one God in three persons, of one substance, and
of equall glorie and honour. And after many like thinges pertaining
to the confession of the right faith, the holy Synode
dyd also adde to their letters, these thinges folowing. We
haue receaued the fiue holy and generall Synodes of the blessed
and derebeloued fathers of God, that is to saye, of CCC.
xviij. which wer assēbled at Nice, against the most wicked and
blasphemous Arrius, and his opinions.The v. firste general councels receaued by a cōmō consent of the church of Englād about 800 yeares past. And of Cl. at Constantinople
against the madenesse and fond secte of Macedonius and
Eudoxius, and their opinions. And at Ephesus the first time, of
CC. against the most wicked Nestorius, and his opinions. And
at Chalcedō, of CCxxx. against Eutiches and Nestorius and their
opinions. And at Constantinople the second time where was assembled
the fifte Councell in the time of the emperour Iustinian
the yonger, against Theodore and Theodorete and Ibe,
and their epistles and their opinions. And a litle after against
Cyrill. Also we receaue and admit the Synode made at the citie
of Rome in the time of the most holy and blessed Pope Martin,
the viij. yere of the Indiction, and the ix. yere of the most
godly and good Emperour Constantine.The 5
                        •
                     . And we worship and
glorifie our Lorde Iesus Christ, in such sort, as these men haue
done, adding or diminishing nothing: and we accurse with hart
and mouth them whome these fathers haue accursed, and whome

they haue receaued, we receaue, glorifyeng God the father
without beginning, and his only begotten sonne, begotten of
the father before all ages and times, and the holy ghost proceding
of the father and the sonne in vnspeakeable wise, according
as these aboue mentioned, holy Apostles, and prohetes
and doctours haue preached and taught. And all we, that with
Theodore the Archebishop haue set forth and declared the catholique
faith, do hereunto subscribe with our owne handes.
            
            
               
                  How Iohn the Chantour of the sea Apostolique came into Englande to teache his conninge.
               
               The. 18. Chap.
               AT this Synode there was present, and also confirmed
the decrees of the catholique faith a most reuerēd man
named Ihon, the chief Chantour of S. Peters churche
and abbot of the monasterie of S. Martyns, whiche was come
of late from Rome by the commaundement of Pope Agatho,
hauing for his guyde the most reuerend Abbot Bishop
surnamed Benedict, of whome we spake before. For when
the sayed Benedict had buylt a monasterie in England,In this monasterie S. Bede was brought vp. in the
honour of the most bessed chief of thapostles S. Peter by the
mouth of the riuer Were, he came to Rome as he had ofte bene
wont to do before with his felowe and helper in the same
worke Ceolfride, (who after him was abbot of the same monasterie)
and was receaued most honourably of Pope Agatho of
worthy memorie,Priuilege from Rome for the libertie of monasteries. of whome he desyred and obtained for the
warrant and assurance of the libertie of the monasterie that he
had erected, a letter of priuilege confirmed by the authoritie
Apostolique in such forme as he knewe the will and graunt of
king Ecgfride to be, by whose leaue, and liberall gyfte of possession
and land he had made the sayd monasterie. He obtained
also to haue with him, the foresayd Abbot Ihon into England,
to the entente he might teache in his monasterie the
yearly course and order of singing, as it was in S. Peters at Rome.

And so the sayd Abbot Ihon did, as sone as he had commaundemente
by the Pope, both with his owne voyce and presence
teaching the chantours and singing men of the saied
monastery the order and forme of singing and reading:Order of singing and churche seruice from Rome. and also
putting in writing those thinges that appertained to the celebration
of highe feastes and holy dayes for the whole cōpasse
of the yere. Which things of his writing haue bene hitherto
kept in the same monastery, and are now euery wher copied
out by diuerse. And the same Ihon did not only teache the
brethren of that monasterie, but such as were skilled in songe
came together to here him almost from all the monasteries of
the same prouince. And many to did earnestly desyre and entreat
him in such places where he taught to come to them him
selfe. Beside this office and skill to teache synging and reading
he had also an other charge in commaundement from the Pope
Apostolike,The heresy of the Monotholite. which was that he should diligently learne of
what faith the churche of England was, and bring worde thereof
at his retourne to Rome. For not longe before there
had ben kepte at Rome a Synod by the holy Pope Martin,
of the consent of. Cv. bishops against them principally, that
preached one only working and will in Christe. Which Synode
he brought with him, and gaue it to be writen and copyed
out in the foresayd monasterie of the moste vertuouse Abbot
Benedict. For such men had at that time very sore troubled the
faith of the churche of Constantinople,
                  The Pope is informed of the state of the church. Lege Cipr. lib. 1. epist, 3. et Aug. ep. 92. & 93.
                   but by the goodnes and
gyfte of our Lorde they were anon espied out and conuicted
at the same time. Wherefore Agatho the Pope minding as in
other prouinces, so also in England to be enformed what the
Churche was, and howe clere it was from the pestilent contagions
of heretikes, committed this charge and busynes to the
most Reuerend Abbot Ihon being nowe appointed to go to
England. And therefore when the synode, which we spake of
before, was called together in England for this purpose, the

catholike faith was in them all found clere, sownd, and vncorrupted.
And a copie of the same was geuen him to carie to
Rome. But in his retourning homewarde, not long after he
passed the sea, he fell sicke by the way and died. His body for
the loue of S. Martin, whose monasterie he gouerned, was by
his frendes brought vnto Tours, and there buried honorably.
For as he went toward England he was gentelly receaued and
lodged in that churche, and desired earnestly of the bretherne
ther that whē he retourned to Rome, he wold come that way,
and lodge with them. Finally he toke with him from thence
certaine to helpe and succour him both in his iourney, and also
in his busynes that he was charged withall: who althoughe he
thus died by the way, yet neuerthelesse the copie of the Catholique
faith of England was brought to Rome, and receaued
most gladly and ioyfully of the Pope apostolike, and of al that
heard or read the same.
            
            
               
                  How quene Edildred continewed a perpetuall virgin, whose body could not be corrupted, nor rot in her tombe.
               
               The. 19. Chapter.
               KIng Egfride tooke to wife a woman named Edildride
the doughter of Anna king of the East english, of whom
we haue ofte made mention, a man meruailouse godly
and in al pointes notable for vertu both of thought and dede.
This sayd woman had bene wedded to an other man before
him, that is to saye, to the prince of the South Giruians named
Tonbert. But he died a litle after he had maried her, and then she
was geuen to wife to the foresayd kinge. With whome she liued
xij. yeres, and yet remained continually a pure and glorious
virgin, euen as bishop Wilfrid a man of blessed memorie
did shewe me enquiring of purpose of the matter, bicause many
did doubte thereof, and saied vnto me that he coulde
of all men be a very sure witnesse of her virginitie, for so much
as kinge Ecgfrid promised to geue him landes and much money,
if he coulde persuade the quene to vse his companie,

though yet he knewe well that she loued no man in the world
more then him. And it is not to be mystrusted,VVhy the miracles here reported ought not to be mistrusted Luc. 22. but that the
same thinge may be done in our time also which, hathe
ben sometime done in times paste as trewe histories do witnesse,
whereas one and the same lorde geueth the grace,
which promiseth to abyde with vs vnto the end of the world.
For besyde this, the signe and token of the diuine miracle, in
that the flesh of the same virgin buryed could not be corrupted
and putrefied, doth well shewe, that she lyued alway vncorrupted
and vntouched of any man. Againe it is well knowen, she
besowght the king very much and a long time, that she mighte
forsake the cares of the world, and haue leaue to go into a monasterie,
and ther
                     •
                   only to serue Christ the true king. Which
when she had at last obtayned, she entred into the monasterie
of Abbesse Ebbe, who bare a good affection to kinge Ecgfride.
                  Nonnes cōsecrated of bishops
The monasterie standeth in a towne called Coludi, and the aforesayd
byshop VVilfride gaue her the veale and habit of a
nonne. Within a yere after whiche, she was herselfe made an
Abbesse in the ile of Ely in which place there was built a monastery
of virgins dedicated to God, amonge whom she began
to be a very good mother and virgin bothe in examples and also
good lessons of heauenly lyfe. Of her it is sayd, that after
the time that she went to the monasterie, she wold neuer weare
any lynnen but only wollen clothes, and seldome wash herselfe
in warme bathes, saue against solemne highe feastes, as
Easter, whitsontyde, or twelfetyde, and than would she be the
last of all, and with her owne handes and helpe of her handemaydes
wold first wash the reast of Christes virgins that were
there. Very seldom also excepte on high feastes or for great necessitie
dyd she eate more than onse a day, and that continually,
on lesse a greater feblenesse dyd let her. From the time
of the first comming to prayer together vntill the rysing of
the day she abode in the Churche still continewing at her

prayers. And there are that say, that by the spirite of prophecie
she dyd foretell both the pestilence wherof she should dye herselfe,
and also did openly in all their presence declare the nomber
of them that showld be taken from this world owt of her
monasterie. She was takē away to our Lord in the mids of her
company seuen yeres after she was made Abbesse. And as she
her self had willed, she was buryed in a tombe of wood in none
other place than in the myds of them in such order and sort as
she departed. After whome succeded her sister Sexburg in the
office of Abbesse, which woman Earcombert king of Kent had
had to wyfe. And when Edildride had lyen buried xvj. yeres,
it semed good to her sayd syster nowe Abbesse, to haue
her bones taken vpp, and put in a newe tombe, and remoued
into the churche. Whereupon she wylled certaine of the bretherne
to seke a stone, whereof they mighte make a tombe for
this purpose.The ile of Eelye. And they taking ship (for the countree of Eelye
is round abowt compassed with waters and fennes, nor hathe
any great stones for such purposes) came to a certaine litle citie
leafte desolate and vnhabited, the which was not far from
thence, and in the englysh tonge is called Grandchester, and
straight way they found by the walles of the citie a tombe of
white marble ready made very fayre, and couered very trym
and fyt with a couer of the same stone: wherby vnderstanding
that our Lorde hadd prospered their iourney, they gaue him
thankes therefore, and browght it to the monasterie. And
when the graue was opened and the body of the holy virgin
and spouse of Christ taken owt into the light, it was found so
cleane from corruption, as if she had dyed or bene put in the
grownd the very same daye, euen as bothe the aforesayd byshop
Wilfride, and many other that knewe it, beare wytnesse.
But Cinfride a certaine phisition, whiche was present by her
bothe when she dyed and when she was taken owt of the tombe,
was wonte of more certaine knowledge to tell, that when

she lay sicke she had a very great swelling vnder her arme pit,
and they bad me, quoth he, to launce that swelling, that the yll
humour that was within might issue owt. Which when I had
done, for the space of two dayes after she semed to be somewhat
better at ease, so that some thowght that she might be cured
of her grief. But the third day her former paynes tooke
her againe, and straight way was she taken owt of the worlde,
and chaunged all paine and death with health and life euerlasting.
And when after so many yeres her bones showld be
taken owt of the graue, they spred a tent ouer the same, and all
the company of the bretherne on the one syde, and systers on
the other, stode round about synging and the Abbesse with a
fewe other went in, to take vp and bring forth the bones. But
sodainly we heard her within crye owt withe a lowde voyce,
Glorie be to the name of God. And anon after, they called
me in, opening the entraunce of the tente, where I sawe the body
of the holy virgin of God being taken out of the tombe,
and lyeng on the bead like one that were a slepe. Then dyd
they also open the couering of her face, and shewed me the
wound of the cut, that I had made, healed and cured, so that in
meruailous wyse in the place of the open and gaping wound
wherwith she was buried there appered than but litle smal signes
of the scar. Byside this, all the lynnen clothes, wherein the
body was winded appered hole and so newe, that they semed
to be put abowt those chast lymnes but that very daye. And
the report is, that when she was grieued with the forsayd swelling
and paine of her cheeke bone and necke,VVhat burdens are borne now a dayes of lesse then kinges children, and yet no grief felt at all? she tooke great
ioye in this kind of disease, and was wont to saye: I knowe
most certainly, that I worthely doo beare this bourden of paine
in my necke, in which I remember that when I was a gyrle,
I did beare the superfluouse and vaine bourdens of tablettes
and owches, and I beleue that the soueraine pitie of God
doth therefore send me this grief and paine in my necke, that

he may so absoyle and quit me from that gylte of vanitie and
lightenesse, whereas nowe in stede of gold and pretious stones
the read fire heate and burning swelling breaketh out off
my necke. It happened also that by the touching of the same
The napkins and partlets taken from S. Paules body healed the sicke and expelled diuels. Act. cap. 19. c. Clothes wherein the corse lay, both spirits were driuen oute
of certaine bodies possessed, and also other diseases healed sometimes.
And it is said, that the tumbe in which she was firste
layd and buried, did heale certaine that were pained in their
eyes, which as sone as they set their head to the same tombe
and prayed, straightway had the griefe of their sore or
dymme eyes taken away. The body of the virgin was taken
and washed, and layd in newe clothes, and so caried into the
churche, and put in the other tombe that was brought, where
it is kepte vnto this daye, and is had in great reuerence. The
said tumbe, founde ready made, was (not without a miracle)
so apte and fyt for the virgins bodie, as if it had bene of purpose
made and cut out for her, the place also of the head was made
by it selfe seuerally, and semed to haue bene fasshioned as
iuste as could be for the bygnesse of her head.In Cambridge shere. This countree
of Ely is in the prouince of the East english, and conteyneth
about CC. housholdes, and is compassed on eche syde, as we
haue said, lyke an Iland, round about with either fennes or
waters. And therefore of the eeles which are plentifully taken
in those waters, it hath his name. In this Ile this sayd handmayde
of Christ desired to haue a monasterie, bicause, as we sayd
before, she came of the nation and bloud of the East english.
            
            
               
                  An hymne of the sayd virgin.
               
               The 20. Chap.
               THe occasion semeth conuenient to put in this historie
an hymne of virginitie, which many yeares past we
made in meter, in the lawde and prayse of the sayde
Quene and virgin, which is in dede therfore verely a Queene,
for that she is the spouse of Christ. And herein we shall followe
the custome of the holy scripture in the historie whereof

                  many songes and psalmes are put in amonge, which were (as is
well knowen) made in meter and verse.
               
               
                  A song or sonnet in praise of virginitie and in the honour of S. Edildred.
                  O God, o gloriouse Trinitie, in whome all rule doth alway stande,
                  O gloriouse God, all one in three, ayde thou the thinges we take in hand.
                  Of wars let Virgils verse endite, sing we the plesant frutes of peace:
                  Aeneas fights let Virgil write, Christs gifts to sing let vs not cease.
                  My verse is chast, it is not made, to tell of 
                        •
                     ynfull Helens stelth,
                  My verse is chast, such wanton trade, write they that liue in wanton
welth.
                  Of heauēly giftes to speake I long, not of thassaults of ruinous Troy:
                  Of heauenly giftes shalbe my song, the which the earth dothe nowe
enioye.
                  Behold highe God commes from aboue, the virgīns pure wombe to
possesse
                  Behold high God commes for mens loue, them to redeme from death endlesse.
                  A maydē mother bringes sorth a childe, who is the father of al that is,
                  Borne is a son of a mayden myld, Marie the gate of God and blys.
                  The blessed flocke in her delight, mayd and mother of the Deitie,
                  The blessed flocke most pure and bright, in pure and chast virginitie.
                  Her worthinesse hath made mo spring, of this chast virgin stocke and bowe
                  Her worthinesse doth daily bring, mo virgin flowers to bud and
blowe.
                  The fyry flames the virgin pure, S. Agathe neuer shranke to byde,
                  The fyry flames dyd eke endure, Eulalya as gold in fornace tried.
                  The vgly beastes with gaping iawes, chast Te
                        •
                     la conquered gloriously,
                  The vgly beastes with ramping pawes, chast Eufeme lead victoriously
                  The bloddy sweard with laughing looke, Agnes more strong than stele nere drad,
                  The blooddy sweard S. Cicilie tooke, great ioy therein no harme

she had.
                  The world wyde hath flowed in such, triumphing actes of sober harts,
                  The world wyde hath flowed in much, loue of like chaste and sober
partes.
                  And eke our dayes with one are blest, a noble virgin verilie,
                  Our Edildride doth shine addrest, with like bright perfit puritie.
                  Of royall spirite and stocke she came, her father a famouse worthy
wighte,
                  Her royall spirite and noble name, was much more noble in God his sighte
                  She had also the soueraintie of Queene and raigne terrestriall
                  But she had an higher maiestie of raigne and blysse celestiall,
                  O virgin bright what sekst thee a man, which hast already thy spouse
aboue?
                  VVhat other husband sekst thee than, Christ is thyne only spouse and loue.
                  I thinke that thou 
                        •
                     erein mighst doo, as dyd the mother of the heauenly
king,
                  That thou both wyfe and virgin too, mighst be like her in that ilke thing.
                  For when this spowse of God had past, xij. yeres in secular life and
raigne,
                  This spouse of God herselfe did hast in life monasticall to remaine.
                  VVher she to heauen wholly bent, florisht in vertues many and hye
                  Frō thēce her soul to heauē went, to which she did her wholly apply.
                  This virgins body pure in ground had lyen the space of xvj. yere
                  Yet was the same as swete and sound, as when it first was layed on
bere.
                  O Christ this was thy worke most true, the very clothes about the corse
                  O Christ, were faire and hole and newe, long time on them had lost
his force.
                  The dropsy eke that foul disease, these holy shrouds did heale and cure
                  And diuerse had by thē their ease, of sundrie griefs they did endure.
                  The furiouse fend that erst beguyld, our mother Eue maliciously
                  This fend so fell a virgin myld, did put to flight victoriously.
                  Lo bride of God see and behold, what honour in earthe to thee done is
                  
                     O spouse of Christ a thousand folde is done thee more in heauēs blys
                  The ioyfull gifte thou doest possesse, a bride full bright for thy bridegrome,
                  The ioyfull gifte that neuer cesse, lo Christ him selfe to thee is come.
                  And thou to him melodiously, doest sing with swete and tuning voice
                  To him with hymnes and harmony, new and swete spouse thou doest
reioyce.
                  The lābes high throne and cōpany follow thou shalt for euer and euer.
                  His loue and bonde is such to thee, noman there fro shall thee disseuer.
               
            
            
               
                  How bishop Theodore made peace betwene the two kinges Ecgfrid and Edilfride.
               
               The. 21. Chapter.
               THe ix. yere of the raigne of Ecgfride a battaile was
fought betwene him, and Edilfride king of the Marshes,
by the riuer of Trent in which was slaine Elbuine
king Ecgfrides brother a yōg mā of about xviij. yeres of age, and
very well beloued of both the countries. For a syster of his named
Osthride was wife vnto king Edilred. And whereas hereupon
there semed to ryse an occasion and matter of sharper war
and longer enmitie betwene the two kings, and the fierse peoples,
Gods derebeloued bishop Theodore trusting in the helpe
of our lord did by his holesome exhortation, vtterly quenche
the fyre of so great a perill begonne, in such sorte that the kinges
and people beinge pacified on both sydes, the lyfe of
no man perished for the death of the kinges brother, but
only a dewe amercement of mony was geuen and payd to the
other kinge for amendes. The bondes of which peace did
a longe time after endure betwene the sayd kinges and their
dominions.
            
            
               
                  How the fetters of a certaine prisoner were lowsed, when masses were songe for him.
               
               The. 22. Chapter.
               
                  IN the foresayd battaile in which was slaine king Elbuine, a
certaine notable thing and wel knowen of many, happened,
which we in no wise may leaue vntolde, bothe
for the profit of the reader and for the glory of God.
In the battaill aboue mencioned among other of the souldiers
a certaine yonge man named Imma was left for dead:
which when he had all that day and night following lyen
among the bodies of the slayne men, lyke as he had bene dead
also, at laste receaued ayre and breath and reuiued againe, and
sate vp, and bound his woundes him selfe, as well as he could
resting himself a litle. After he arose vp and begā to go his way
seeking where he might fynd some fryndes to see to him and
helpe him. But as he so did, he was found and taken of his enemies
of the other campe, and brought vnto their Lord, who
was an Erle subiecte to king Edilred. Of whome being demaunded,
what he was, he feared to cōfesse that he was a souldier,
and thought better to answer that he was a poore husband
man of the countre, and one that had wyfe and children,
and that he came forth with such other as he was to bring vittailes
to the souldiers. But for all this the sayd Lorde suspected
him and willed his woūdes to be looked vnto: and when he began
to wex hole, he cōmaunded him at night season to be kept
in bondes, least he should scape away: but beholde no bondes
could holde him, but as sone as they were gone that had bound
him, his bondes and fetters wer straight way loosed.An example for the cōfirmatiō of purgatory. For he had
a brother, whose name was Tūna, a priest and Abbot of a monastery
in the citie, which of his name is called vnto this day
Tunnacester: who when he heard that his brother was slaine
in the battaile came to seeke, if he might happely fynd his bodie.
Where he finding one that was in all pointes like him, and
thinking it to be him in dede, brought him to his monasterie,
and buried him honorably, and did often times cause masse
to be saied for his soule: By the saying of which masses

that, which I sayd, came to passe, that noman could bynd him,
but that he was straight way loused againe.The sacrifice of the Masse propitiatory. Then the Erle that
kepte him began to wonder here at, and to enquire of him,
what the cause was that he coulde not be bound, and whether
perhaps he had about him any loosing letters, such as men talke
of that he could not be bound by the vertue of them. But
he aunsweared, that he knewe no such arte nor conning: but
I haue a brother, quod he, in my countre, one that is a priest
and I knowe that he thinkes I am slaine, and therefore doth oft
saye masse for me: and if I were nowe in an other world, my
sowle showld be there loused from paynes throughe his intercessions
and prayers as my body is here from bondes. And
while he was thus kept a certaine space in the Erles howse,
some that marked him more diligently, sawe by his countenaunce,
behauiour, and talke, that he was not (as he had sayd) of
the common poore sort of people, but of some good house and
degree. Therefore the Erle called him secretly, and examined
him more straightly of whence he was. Promising that
he wold doo him no harme in the world, if he wold playnly
vtter and shewe himselfe, what he was. Which thing when he
had done, and declared himselfe to be one of the kinges seruauntes,
wel, quoth the Erle, I knewe by thy wordes and awnsweres,
that thow were no husbandman of the countre. And thou
art well worthy to dye nowe, for that all my bretherne and
kynnesmen were slaine in that battaile, yet I will not put the
to death, for breaking of my faith and promyse. And therfore
as soone as he was full cured, the Erle sent him to London and
solde him to a marchant of Friseland. But neither he, nor any
man els as he was lead thither, could bynd him by any meanes.
And yet his enemies dyd lay on him many and sundry kindes
of fetters which yet allwaies were loosed. When he that hadd
bowght him, sawe, that he cowld be kept and holden in no
bondes, he gaue him leaue to ransome himselfe, if he were able.

For after abowt viij. a clocke in the morning when masses began
to be sayd, his bondes and fetters were euer lowsed. And
thus vpon his othe either to come againe, or els to send his ransome,
he was let go, and came to kent to kinge Lodhere, who
was sonne to the sister of Quene Edildrede of whom we haue
spoken before, and himselfe had bene sometime a seruaunt of
the sayd Queenes. There he sued to the kinge for so much as
wold pay his ransome, which he obtained, and sent it (as he had
promised) to him whose prisoner he was. Afterward he retourned
to his countree, and came to his brother, and declared
him in order all the aduersities that had happened vnto him,
and also what comfortes and succours he had had in the same.
And he knewe, by that his brother told him, that his bondes
were loosed at those times specially, in which masses were said
and songe for him. He vnderstoode also, that the other helpes
and succours that happened to him in his danger, came of
the heauenly gyfte and grace throwgh his brothers intercessions
and offring of the holy holsome hoste and sacrifice. Many
that heard these thinges of this man, were styrred vp and enflamed
in fayth and godly deuotion, vnto prayer, vnto almesse
and charitable dedes, and to offer to our Lorde hostes of the
holy oblation and sacrifice, for the deliuery and reliefe of their
frindes, that were departed this worlde. For they vnderstood
thereby and knewe, that the holesome blessed sacrifice was effectuous
to the euerlasting redemption and ransoming bothe
of sowle and bodie. This storie was told me of one of them
that heard it of the very man in whome it was done, and therfore
knowinge it to be true and certaine, I dowbted no whit,
to put it into this our ecclesiasticall historie.
            
            
               
                  Of the lyfe and death of Abbesse Hilda.
               
               The 23. Chap.
               THe yere following after this, which was, the yere of thincarnation
of our Lorde DClxxx.An. 680
                        •
                     
                   the most deuowt and

godly seruaunt of Christe Hilda Abbesse of the monasterie,
that is called Streanes halch (as we before mentioned) after many
heauenly dedes that she did in this world, passed owt of this
lyfe to receaue the rewardes of the lyfe of heauen, the xvij. day
of Nouember, when she was three score and six yeres of age.
The which nomber of yeres equally diuided into two partes,
she lyued, the first xxxiij. in secular lyfe withe most noble and
worthy conuersatiō, and as many after did she dedicate to our
Lord more nobly and worthely in monastical life. For she was
come of noble birth, and was the dawghter of kinge Edwins
nephewe named Hererike, with which kinge also at the preaching
of Paulinus of blessed memorie the first bysshopp of
Northumberland, she receaued the fayth and sacramentes of of
Christe, and dyd syncerely kepe the same, vntill she deserued
to come to his sight and vision, whome only to serue after
she had determined, and forsaken this secular lyfe and world,
she went to the prouince of the East english. For she was allied
to the king there, and from thence she desyred, if she might by
any meanes, to forsake her countre and al that euer she had, and
go into Fraunce, and there in the monasterie named Cate to
leade a pilgrimes and exuls lyfe for our Lordes sake, that she
might the more easyly deserue to enioye an euerlasting countre
in heauen. For in the same monasterie her syster Hereswide
mother to Adulphe king of the East english did at the same
very tyme lyue vnder rules and disciplines of religion abyding
and looking for the crowne euerlasting: whose example
she mynding to followe and liue a straunger out of her owne
countree, dyd abyde in the said prouince one hole yeare. After
which being called home againe into her countree by bisshopp
Aidan, she had deliuered her the landes of one Lordeship at the
north coast of the riuer Were, in which she liued also the space
of one yeare, and lead a monasticall lyfe with a fewe other of
her companie. After this she was made Abbesse in the monasterie

that is called Heortheu, which monasterie had bene builte
not long before of the godly and deuout handmayed off
Christ Heiu. Which is said to be the first woman in the prouince
of Northumberland, that tooke the vowe and habit of a
Nonne,Vow and habit monasticall. being blessed and consecrated by bisshop Aidan. But
not long time after the making of the monasterie she departed
thence to the citie of Calcaria,
                  Colchester. whiche is called of the english
men Calcacester, and there she appointed to abyde and continewe.
Now this other handmayd of Christ Hilda being placed
to rule this monasterie, dyd strayght procure to order and dispose
the same in all pointes with regular lyfe and discipline, in
such wise as she could be best enstructed of them that were
learned. For both bishop Aydan, and as many religious persons
as knewe her, for the great wysedome and loue to serue
God, that was in her, were wont ofte times to visit her, louingly
to helpe her, and diligently to instructe her. Thus when
she had certaine yeres gouuerned this monasterie in great obseruation
and straighnes of regular lyfe and order, it was her
chaunce to take in hand the buylding and disposing of a monasterie
in the place called Straneshalch, which busynes committed
vnto her she finished with all speede and diligence. For
she fournished and framed it with the same rules and orders of
regular lyfe, with which she had disposed the other monasterie
before. And truly she dyd there teache singularly the workes
of righteousnes, deuotion, chastitie, and other vertues, but specially
of peace and charitie, in such wise that after the example
of the primitiue church, there was none riche there, none poore,
but all thinges common to all, for nothing semed peculiar
and priuate to any one. She was of such wysedome, that not
only all meane persons in their necessities, but also kinges and
princes dyd seke and find counsel of her: Such religious men, as
liued vnder her gouernāce, she made to bestow their time in the
reading of the holy scriptures, and in the exercise of the workes

of vertue, that out of her monastery many might easely be founde,
mete and worthy mē to serue the church, and the aultar.
And in dede we haue sene in a short space fiue bishops oute of
the same monasterie, all, men of singular merite and holynesse,
whose names are these Bosa, Adda, Ostfor, Iohn, and VVilfride.
Of the first we haue spoken before, howe he was consecrated
bishop of Yorke. Of the second to speake shortly, he was made
bishop of Dorcister.
                  Dorchester in Barkeshere. Of the two last we shall speake afterwarde,
of which the one was consecrated bishop of Hagulstad, and
the other of Yorke. Of the middlemost let vs nowe say somewhat.In holy Ilond.
When he had in both the monasteries of Abbesse Hilda
diligently applied the reading and studieng of the scriptures, at
last desiring more perfecte exercises, he came to kēt to the Archebishop
Theodore of blessed memorie. Where hauing continewed
a certaine space and spent his time in holy studies and
reading, he found also the meanes to go to Rome,Going to Rome accompted a matter of deuotion in our primitiue church. which at that
time was counted a thing of great vertue and deuotion. From
thence retourning home againe to England, he went vnto the
prouince of the Victians ouer which king Osric raigned than,
and there he remained a long time, preaching the word of faithe,
and also giuing himselfe for an example of life to all that
knewe and heard him. At which time the bishop of that prouince
named Boselus being so sicke and weake, that he could
not himselfe fullfill the office a bishop, by all mens iudgement
and consent the foresaid man was elected and chosen bishop in
his place, and at the cōmaundment of king Edilred was consecrated
by bishop VVilfride of blessed memorie, who at that time
was byshop of the Middleenglish. For Theodore tharchebisshop
was than dead, and none other as yet made bishop for
him. In which prouince a litle befor, that is to wytt, before that
foresaid man of God Boselus, one Ta
                        •
                     frid a man most stout,
couragiouse and well learned and of an excellent wyt, was elected
bishoppe out of the monasterie of the said Abbesse: but he

was taken away and died before his time, ere that he might be
consecrated. This foresaid handmayde of Christ Abbesse Hilda,
whome, all that knewe her, were wont to call mother for her
notable grace and godlinesse, was not only in her owne monasterie
an example of lyfe to them that were with her, but also
to many other that were far of the ministred occasion of saluation
and amendement, to whom the happy report of her doing
and vertuous liuing came. And so was fulfilled the dreame,
that her mother Bregoswid had, when this was but an enfant.
For when her husband Heriric was out of his coūtre as an outlawe
vnder Cerdix kinge of the Britons, where also he was att
last poysonned, she sawe in a dreame, that he whom she sought
with al diligēce, was as it wer sodainly takē out of her sight that
no signe aud token of him any where did appere. But as she yet
busily sought for him, she foūd by and by a very pretious ouch
and iewel vnder his garmēt, which as she did wel marke and cō
                  sider
it semed to shine and glister with brightnesse of so great a
lighte, that it filled all the borders of Britannie, with the grace
thereof. The which dreame was proued true in her doughter,
whome we speake of. Whose lyfe not to her selfe only but to
many other that wold lyue well, did geue examples of the
workes of light. But nowe when she had many yeres ruled this
monasterie, it pleased the mercifull worker of our saluation,
that her holy soule should also be examined and tried with
long sicknesse of the body, that after thexample of the Apostle,
her vertue might be made perfect in infirmitie and weakenesse.
                  2. Cor. 22.
For she was striken with feuers, and begā to be greuously vexed
with the heate, and was in the same wise sicke and deseased
for the space of vj. yeres. In all which time she did neuer omit
and let passe, both, to giue thankes to her creatour, and also to
teache and enstructe openly and priuatly the flocke cōmitted
to her charge. For by her owne example she warned them all,
both to serue our Lorde dewly when he geueth them their bodely

health, and also thanke him continually and faithfully in
worldly aduersities, or bodely infirmities and sickenesse. And
thus the seuenth yere of her sicknesse, the grief and paine
tourning toward the hart and inward partes she came to her
ende and last day in this worlde, and about the crowing
of the cocke after she had receaued the viage prouision of holy
howsell she called vnto her he handmaides of Christ that
were in the same monasterie, whome as she admonished and
counselled to kepe the euangelicall vnite amonge them selues
and with other, at the very last worde and making of this her
exhortatiō she gladly and willingly saw the houre of her death
yea rather (to speke with Christs owne wordes) she passed from
death vnto lyfe. In which very night our almightie Lord vouchesafed
to reuele her death and departing by a manifest
and plaine vision in an other monasterie that was a good way
of, named Hacanes, the which she had buylt the same yere. For
there was in the same monasterie a certaine Nonne named
Begu which had serued our Lord in monasticall conuersation
and blessed virginitie xxx. yeres and more. This Nonne taking
her reast at that time in the dortour howse, heard sodainly in
the ayer the knowen sound of the bell, wherewith they were
wonte to be called vp to prayers, when as any of them was
called out of the worlde. And opening her eyes (as she
thought) she sawe the roofe and top of the house vncouered,
and all aboue full of light. Which light as she earnestly marked
and looked on, she sawe the soule of the foresayd handmaid
of God in that light caried vnto heauē, accompained and lead
by Angells. And as she then started out of her sleape, and sawe
other systers taking their reast about her, she knewe and perceaued,
that that which she sawe was shewen her either in a
dreame or in some vision of minde. And by and by she rose vp
for ouermuch feare that she had, and ranne to the virgin, which
was then gouernesse of the monasterie in the Abbesse stede,

whose name was Frigit, and with much weping and teares, and
drawing long sigthes told her that the mother of them al Abbesse
Hilda was nowe departed this worlde, and with a meruailouse
great light, which she sawe, and company of Angells
leading her, ascended vp to the gates of euerlasting lighte and
felowship of the heauenly citisens. Which when she had heard,
she raised vp all the sisters, and called them to churche, willing
them to be occupied in prayers and psalmes for the soule
of their mother. Which thing as they diligently did the rest of of
the nighte, at the breake of the day there came certaine bretherne
from the place where she died, to bring worde of her
departing. Which the other aunswered that they knewe of
before. And when they had declared in order howe and when
they had learned the same, it was found that her passing was
shewed them by the vision at the very same houre, that
they reported her to passe out of the world. And with a goodly consent
and agreement herein it was by the worke of God so disposed,
that when the one sawe presently her departing out of
this lyfe, at the same time the other did knowe her entring into
the perpetuall lyfe of soules. These two monasteries are
distant a sonder almost xiij. myles. It is also reported, that
in the same monasterie to, where the foresayd handmayde
of God died, one of those vowed virgins to God,
that loued her more then the rest had her departing shewed
vnto her the same night in a vision, and sawe her soule go to
heauen with angells, which thing the very same houre it was
done she opened and declared to those handmaydes of Christ
that were with her and called them vp to pray for her soule,
and that, before the reast of the company knewe of her departing:
which thing to be so, was anon after declared to the hole
company when morninge came. For at that houre this Nonne
was alone seuerally with certaine other handmaydes of Christe,
in the outmost places of the monasterie, wher such as were

such wemen as were newely come to religion, were wonte
to be tried and abide the time of probation, vntill they were
instructed in the rule and order, and then taken into the felowship
of the reast, and professed.
            
            
               
                  Howe the gyfte of synging was miraculowsly giuen to a certaine brother in the monasterie of this Abbesse.
               
               The. 24. Chap.
               IN the monasterie of this Abbesse there was a certaine brother
notably endewed with the speciall grace of God, whiche
was wont to make songes and meters fit for religiō and
godly meditation, in so much that what so euer he learned of
the holy scriptures by other mens expounding, he tourned and
made the same anon after with poeticall and musicall wordes
set together withe wonderfull swetenesse and melodie in his
owne mother tonge. With whose verses and songes the mindes
of many men were ofte enflamed to the contempt and despysing
of the world, and desire of the euerlasting lyfe of heauen.
After whome diuerse other among the english men assayed
to make godly and deuowt meters, but noman cowlde
matche his connyng therein. For he learned this arte of singing
and making, not towght of men, nor by any mans helpe,
but he receaued the gyfte therof freely by the only ayde and
grace of God. And therefore he cowld neuer make any fond or
vayne balade, but such things as belonged to religion and godly
meditation were only mete to come owt of his religiowse
and godly mowth. For as long as he was a secular man, which
was, tyll he was well striken in age, he neuer had learned any
such matter of singinge. In so much that sometimes at the
table, when the company was set to be mery, and agreed for the
nonse, that eche man showld syng in order at his cowrse, 
                     •
                  he,
when he sawe the harpe to come nere him, rose vp at myds of
supper, and gat him owt of doores home to his owne howse.
And as he so dyd on a certaine time, getting him owt of the

place where they were drinking and making mery together, to
the stable among the beastes which he had appoynted him to
kepe and looke to that nighte, and when the howre of slepe
came, was gone his way quietly to bed, as he laye, he dreamed
that acertaine man stoode by him, and bad him, God spede,
and calling him by his name, sayd to him, Cednom, I pray thee
singe me a songe. Whereto he made awnswere and sayd, I can
not synge. For that is the matter why I came owt from the
table to this place here, bicause I cowld not singe. But yet,
quoth he againe that spake with him, thow hast somewhat to
syng to me. What shall I syng? quoth he. Sing, quoth the other,
the begynning of al creatures. At which awnswere he began
by and by to singe in the lawde and prayse of God the
creatour, verses which he had neuer heard before, of which the
sense and meaning is thys. Nowe must we prayse the maker of
the beauenly kingdome, the power of the creatour, his cownsell
and deuyse, the workes and actes of the father of glorie. Howe he
being God eternall was the maker and author of all miracles, whiche
first vnto the children of men created heauen for the top of their dwelling
place, and after the omnipotent keper of mankinde created the
earthe for the flowre thereof. This is the meaning, but not the
order of the wordes which he sange in his sleape. For verses
be they neuer so wel made can not be tourned out of one tonge
into an other word for worde, without leasing a great pece of
their grace and worthynesse. Now when he awooke and rose
vp, he remembred stil by harte all the thinges that he had songe
in his slepe, and dyd straight way ioyne thereto mo wordes in
the same maner and forme of meter, and made vp a song fytte
to be songe and applyed to God. And on the morowe he came
to the farmar or baylie vnder whome he was, and tolde him of
the gifte that he had receaued, and being browght to the Abbesse
he was commaunded in the presence of many learned
men to tell his dreame, and rehearse the song, that it might by

the iudgement of them all be examyned and tryed, what or
whence the thing was which he reported. And it semed to
them all, that some heauenly grace and gifte was graunted
him of our Lorde. For more triall whereof they recited vnto
him the processe of some holy storie or example, willing him,
if he cowld to tourne the same into meter and verse. Which he
tooke vpon him to doo and went his way, and on the morowe
after came againe and browght the same made in very good
meter, which they had willed him to doo. Whereupon straight
way the Abbesse acknowledging and embracing this grace and
gifte of God in the man, enstructed and exhorted him to forsake
the world, and the lyfe thereof, and to take the monasticall
lyfe and profession vpon him. Which he did and was thereupon
by the commaundment of the Abbesse placed in the company
of the bretherne, and by her appointement tawght and
enstructed in the course of holy scripture. But he what soeuer
he cowld heare and learne, would afterwarde thinke vpon
the same againe by him selfe, and chewinge theron lyke a cleane
beast at his cudd, would turne it into very swete meter,
and melodiously singinge the same, made his teachers to become
his hearers againe. His songes were of the creation
of the world, and beginnyng of mankynd, and al the storie of
Genesis, of the going of Israel out of Aegipt, and their entring
into the land of promise, and of many other histories of the
holy scriptures. Of thin carnation of our Lord, of his passion,
resurrectiō, and ascensiō into heauē, of the cōming of the holy
ghost, of the doctrine and preaching of the Apostles. Also he
was wont to make many songes and meters of the dread of
domes day and iudgement to come, of the horrible paynes of
hell, and of the ioyes and swetenes of the kingdome of heauen.
And many other also of the benefits and iudgementes of God.
In al which, his endeuour was to pull away men from the loue
of wickednesse, and styrre them vp to the loue and readinesse

of vertue and good lyfe. For he was a man very deuout and religiouse,
and humbly obedient to his rules and disciplines. And
very zelouse and feruently bent against them that would doo
otherwise. And therefore he ended his lyfe with a good ende.
For when the houre of his departing was at hande, he was taken
before and diseased xiiij. dayes with bodyly sickenesse, and
yet so temperatly, that he might all that tyme both speake and
walke.The fer
                     
                        ••
                     ry. There was there by, a litle house into whiche they that
were sicke were wont to be brought, and such as were lykely
shortly to dye. This man desyred him that serued him, the same
eueninge before the night that he should depart out of the
world, to go and prouide him a place to reast and lye in that
house. The other maruailed why he desired the same, for he
was nothing likely to dye so sone. But yet he did as he was bid.
When they were there placed, and were meryly talking and
sporting amonge themselues and them that were there before,
being now about midnight he asked and enquired of them all,
whether they had the sacrament there within. What nede,
quoth they, is there of the sacrament, for your tyme is not come
to dye yet, that are so meryly talking with vs, as a man in
good health.Reseruation of the blessed Sacrament. But yet, quoth he againe, doo ye bring me hither
the sacrament. Which when he had taken in his hand he asked
them, whether they were all of a quiet minde and persit charitie
toward him, without any quarell, grudge, debate, and rancour.
They aunsweared all, that they were of very good mynd
and will toward him, and far from al wrath and displeasure: and
they asked him againe, whether he bare good will and affection
toward them.Howseling befoer death. He aunsweared by and by, I do beare, my
dere children, a quiet and good mynd to all Gods seruauntes.
And there withall arming him selfe with that heauenly foode
made him ready to enter into the other lyfe. Then he asked,
howe nyghe the houre was, that the bretherne should ryse to
saye their night laudes and seruice to our Lord
                     •
                   It is not far of,

quoth they. Wel than, quoth he, let vs abyde and tarie for that
houre. And blessinge himselfe with the signe of the holy crosseBlessing with the signe of the crosse.
he layd downe his head on the bolster, and so falling a litle
in a slomber ended his lyfe in quiet and silence. And thus God
wrought with him, that euē as he had serued our Lord with a
simple, plaine, pure mynde and quiet deuotion, so lykewise he
might come to the fight and vision of God, leauing this worlde
with a quiet and still death. And that also the tounge whiche
had made and inuented so many goodly meters and holesome
wordes in the prayse of the creatour of all, might conclude
and shut vp the last wordes in the praise and lawde of the
same, blessing himselfe, and commending his spirite into the
hands of our Lord. It appereth also by these thinges that we
haue tolde, that he knewe before and forsawe the time of his
departing.
            
            
               
                  Of a vision that appered to a certaine man of God before that the monasterie of the towne Colodon was burned.
               
               The 25. Chap.
               ABout this time the monasterie of virgins,A Nunnerie burned for the sinnes of the inhabitās. which standeth
in the towne of Coludon of which we haue made
mention aboue was through negligence by a great
misfortune consumed with fire. Which thing notwithstanding
happened also for the wyckednes of them that dwelled in the
same, and specially of the chief and elders thereof, as all men
might easyly see that knewe it. And the open scourge of God
dyd mercifully whippe them euen at the beginning, that being
thereby corrected they might lyke the Niniuites tourne awaye
the wrath of the iust iudge from them by fastings, weaping,
and prayers. In the same monasterie there was a certaine man
a Scotborne named Adaman, leading a very deuout lyfe vnto
God in chastitie, abstinence and prayer, in such sort, that he
neuer dyd eate nor drinke, saue only eche Sonday and thursday:
and oftētimes also he passed ouer whole nightes watching

in prayer: which straightnes of hard lyfe he began at the first
of dewtie and necessitie to amend his former syn and ylliuing,
but in processe of time he had tourned that necessitie into a
continuall custome. For whereas in his youth he had committed
a certain greuouse offense and sin, that coming ofte to
his mynd and remembrance, considering in his hart the greatnes
thereof, he abhorred it and trembled therat excedingly, and
feared the pounishement of the sharp iudge vppon him for the
same. Resorting therefore to a priest and hoping of him to
lerne some remedy of saluation, he confessed his syn to him,Cōfessiō to the priest.
and desyred him to giue him counsell, whereby he might flee
and escape the wrath of God and vengeaunce to come. The
priest when he had heard his offense and sin, said. A great woū
                  de
requireth a greater cure and medicine: and therefore geue
thy selfe to fastinges, and prayers,Psal. 94. as much as thou art able, to
the ende that coming before the face of our Lorde in confession
thou maiest deserue to fynde him mercifull vnto thee. But he
for the passing grief of the giltie conscience that held him, and
desyre that he had to be sone assoyled of the inwarde bondes
of synnes wherewith he was laden, sayd: I am yonge of age,
and strong of bodie. And therefore what soeuer ye put me vnto,
so that I may be saued in the day of our Lorde, I will easely
beare it all, and thoughe ye bid me to stand the whole night
and spend it in prayers, and passe ouer the whole weke
in abstinence. It is very much (quod the priest) to endure
the whole weke without sustenaunce of the bodie,Penaunce enioyned.
but it suffiseth to faste two or three daies at onse. And this doo
thowe vntill I come againe to the after a short time, and shewe
thee more fully what thou must doo, and howe long thou
must continewe in penaunce. After which wordes the priest
appointed him what penaunce he shoulde doo, and went his
way. And through a sodaine occasion that happened he passed
into Ireland, where he was borne, and came not to him againe,

as he had promised to doo. Yet the yong man remembring
both his commaundement, and also his owne promise, gaue
himselfe wholly to weping, penaunce, holy watchinge and
continence, in such wise that (as I sayd before) he neuer tooke
sustenaunce saue only thursdaies and sondayes, but continually
fasted all the other daies of the weke. And when he had
heard that his ghostly father was gone into Ireland, and there
departed, euer after from that time he kept this maner of fasting,
according as it was first appointed him. And the thing
which he had onse begon to doo for compunction of his syn
and dread of Gods vengeance, the same did he nowe, without
lothesomnesse or werynesse, yea with pleasure and delight for
the reward that followed, and for the feruent loue of God.
And as he nowe long time had continewed diligently the same,
it chaunced that on a certaine day he went out of the monasterie
to some place a good way of, hauing one of the bretherne
with him in his companye. And when they had done
their iourney and were comming home againe, drawing nere
the monasterie they beheld and vewed the goodly high building
of the same, wherat the man of God brast out all into teares,
and with his weping countenaunce bewrayed the heauynes
of his harte. Which thing when his fellowe sawe, he asked
him why he so did. O quod he, al these buildinges that you see,
both the common that belong to many, and the priuate houses
of particular persons shall shortly be tourned into ashes and
consumed by fyre. Which he hearing, as sone as they came
into the monasterie, found the meanes to tell that to the mother
of the couent, named Ebba. Who being troubled at such a
warning and fortelling, as good cause was, sent for the mā vnto
her, and enquired the whol matter of him diligētly, and how
he knewe the same. Of late, quod he, being occupied at night
time in watching and saying of psalmes, I sodainly sawe one
stand by me, of a straunge and vnknowen fauour. At whose

presence when I was sore afraide, he bad me not to feare, and
then in familiar wise he spake to me thus and sayd. Thou doest
well in that this night time of reast, thou hast had the strength,
not to geue thy selfe to ease and sleape, but to be occupied
in watching and praying. Whereto I aunswered and sayd,
that I knewe my selfe to haue great nede to continewe in holsome
watching, and to make diligent and dewe intercession
to our Lord for my synnes. Thou sayest true, quod he farther,
that thou and many other haue nede to redeme and satisfie for
their synnes with good workes, and at such time as they are at
leasure from worldly paines and busynesse, to labour the more
freely for the desyre of euerlasting wealth: but yet very fewe
doo so. For right nowe haue I walked through all this monasterie
in order, and looked in euery selle and bead, and of them
all, sauing thee, haue I found not one occupied aboute the sauing
of his owne soule: but they are all both men and wemen
either depely drowned in sleape, or watching vnto wickednes
and syn. For the litle houses that were made to pray or reade
in, are nowe tourned into chambers of eating and drinking,Abuses of religious persons punished by God from heauen.
and talking, and other enticemente of yll. And the virgins, vowed
vnto God, contemning the reuerence and regard of their
profession, as ofte as they haue any leasure thereto, do occupie
themselues in weauing and making fine clothes, wherewith
they may set forth themselues lyke brydes, to the daunger and
great perill of their estat and professiō: or els to get thē the loue
of strangers and men abrode. And therefore is there worthely
prepared from heauen for this house and them that dwel therin
a greuouse punishment and vengeance by fyre. Then quod
the Abbesse, And why wold ye not soner tell me herof when
ye knewe it? Forsooth, quod he, I feared so to doo for respecte
of you, least ye wold perhap be ouermuch troubled therewith.
And yet take ye this comfort herein, that this plage and punishment
shall not fall in your dayes. This vision being spread

abrode and knowen, they of the place began somewhat to
feare for a fewe daies, and to amend them selues, and leaue
their naughty lyfe. But after the death of the Abbesse they
retourned to their old naughtynesse, yea and to worse to. And
when they sayd and thought themselues in peace and saftie,
they were anon stricken with the punishment of the foresayd
vengeance. All which thinges to haue bene thus done in dede,
the most Reuerend Giles my felow priste reported vnto me,
who lyued than in the monastery: and afterward, (for that
many dwellers there went thence bycause of this ruyn) lyued a
long time in owr monasterie, and there dyed. This haue I
thowght good to put in our historie to this end, that we might
warne the reader and put him in mynd of the workes of owr
Lorde, howe dreadfull and terrible he is in his iudgementes
and counselles ouer the children of men. And that we serue
not at any time the allurementes and prouocations of the
flesh, lytle fearing the iudgement of God, least perhap his sodaine
wrath strike vs, and scowrge vs iustly and sharply either
with temporall losses and plages, or els deale more hardly with
vs and take vs quite away to perpetuall paine and perdition.
            
            
               
                  Of the death of king Ecgfride and king Lother.
               
               The 26. Chap.
               THe yere of thin carnation of our Lord DClxxxiiij.An. 684. 
                  Ecgfride
king of Northumberland sent Bertus his captaine
generall with an hoste of men into Scotland, and miserably
spoyled and destroyed the harmelesse seely people, which
had euer bene great frindes to the english nation, in so muche
that the hand and force of the enemie spared not the very
churches and monasteries. Yet the men of the Ile as far as they
were able dyd both resiste and withstand force with force, and
also calling on the ayd of Gods mercy, dyd long with continuall
cursinges make supplication to be reuēged from heauen.
And although such as curse cannot possesse the kingdome of

heauen, yet it is beleued, that they which for their vnmercyfulnes
were worthely accursed, dyd shortly suffer the punyshmentes
of their wickednes by the vengeance of God.
For the next yere after this, the same king against the aduise
and counsell of his frindes, and specially: of Cutbert a man of
blessed memorie, who of late had bene consecrated bysshopp,
dyd rashly and vndiscretly go forth with an armie to waste the
prouince of the Redshankes. Who making as thowghe they
sled, browght him vnto the straightes of the hilles where was
no passage, and there with the most parte of his hoste that he
had browght with him, he was slayne the xl. yere of his age, and
xv. yere of his raigne, and xx. day of maye. And in dede (as I
sayd) his frindes and counsell would not suffer him to begyn
this war, but euen as the yere before he wolde not giue eare to
the most Reuerend father Ecgbert, for settinge vpon Scotland
that dyd him no harme, so was this nowe giuen him for a punyshment
of that syn, that he wold not harken vnto them that
labowred to call and staye him from his owne destruction. After
which time the hope and prowesse of the dominion of the
English began much to decaye and go backeward. For the
Redshankes recouered againe their landes and possessions whiche
the English men did hold, and the Scottes that were in
Britaine,The wel
                     
                        •
                     hmen. and also a certaine part of the Britons got againe their
freedome and libertie, which they hitherto haue yet these xlvj.
yeres or thereabowt. Where among many of the englishmen
that were eyther slaine with the swearde or made bondmen,
or scaped frō the land of the Redshankes by fleeing, the most
reuerend man Trumwini, which had bene byshop ouer them
there, departed with his company that were in the monasterie
of Ebbercune, the which standeth in the Englysh region, but
nighe vnto the straight that diuideth the landes of the english
and the Redshankes. And commending his felowes to his
frendes abrode in diuerse monasteries where he best might,

himselfe went to the ofte mentioned monasterie of Gods seruantes
and handmaydes, named Streaneshalch, and there chose
him his abyding place: where with a fewe other of his company
he lead his lyfe a long time of yeres in monasticall straightnesse,
very profitably not to himselfe only, but to many other
also. At which time there gouerned the same monasterie a certaine
virgin of the kinges blood named Elflet, and their mother
Eanflede togither, of whome we haue before made mention.
But when this byshop came thither, the good and vertuouse
Abbesse found thereby not only great helpe in her chardge
and gouernaunce, but also comforte to her owne lyfe and
conuersation. After king Ecgfride succeded in the kingdome
Altfrit a man very well learned in the scriptures, who was said
to be Ecgfrides brother, and sonne to king Oswine. This man
dyd nobly and worthely recouer the decayed and destroyed
estate of the kingdome, thowghe the boundes and greatenes
thereof were nowe more narowe. This same yere, which was
from thincarnarion of owr Lorde DClxxxv.An. 635. dyed Lothere king
of kent the vj. daye of February, when he had raigned xij. yeres
after his brother Ecgbert, who raigned jx, yeres.
For this Lother was wounded in the battaile of the South Saxōs,
the which Edrich the sonne of Egbert fowght against him,
and while he was at surgerie in curing he dyed. After whome
the sayd, Edrich raigned one yere and an halfe. Who departing
without issue, that kingdome was for a space throwghe
vncertaine and foraine kinges sore decayed and destroyed, vntyll
the lawfull and legitimat king Victred, who was Egberts
sonne came and was quietly settled therin, who both by good
religion and princely prowesse deliuered his people from foraine
forse and inuasion.
            
            
               
                  Howe Cutbert the man of God was made bisshop, and howe he liued and tawght while he yet was in his monasterie and monasticall conuersation.
               
               The. 27. Chapter.
               
                  IN that same yere that king Egbert ended his lyfe,Holy Ilō
                     de. he caused
(as we haue sayd) Cutbert an holy and reuerend man to be
consecrated bishop of the church of Lindesfarre,
                  The Ile of Cochette. who had
lyued a solitarie lyfe many yeares in great continencie bothe
of body and mynde, in a very smal yle, called, Farne, whiche lyeth
distant from the said churche of Lindisfarme almost ix.
myles a good waye in the mayne Ocean sea. This man from
the first beginning of his childhode was alwaies feruently desyrouse
of religiouse lyfe, and when he was growen somewhat
toward mans state, he tooke both the name and habite
of a monke. For he entred first into the monasterie of Mail
                     
                        •
                     os,
which standeth on the banke of the riuer Tyne, and was
at that time gouuerned of Abbot Eata, the mekest and mildest
man of a thousand. Afterward he was taken from thence,
and made bishopp of the diocese of Hagulstald or Lindisfarne,
as we haue a foresaide. The which see was before gouuerned
by Boisill a man of great vertues, and graces and of a propheticall
spirite. Whose humble and diligent scholer Cutbert
had bene, and learned of him the knowledge of the holy scriptures,
and examples of good workes. Which man after he was
gone to God, Cutbert was made head of the same monasterie,
where both by the authoritie of his master, and example of his
owne dooing he instructed and brought many vnto regular
lyfe and discipline.The life of S. Cutbert being yet a monke. Neither did he only giue vnto the monasterie
both admonishementes and examples of vertuouse and
regular lyfe, but also laboured to tourne the common people
far and nere thereabout from the lyfe of their carelesse conuersation,
to the loue and longing of the ioyes of heauen. For many
folke at that time did profane and defyle the fayth that they
had with wicked workes and dooinges, some also in the time
of the great death and plage, setting at nought the sacramentes
of fayth (wherewith they were endewed) ranne to the erroneous
medicins and sorceries of idolatrie, as though they wer

able by enchantementes or withcrafte, or any other secrete arte
and coning of the deuill to staye and kepe of the plage sent
from God the creatour. Both which sortes of people to correcte,
and reproue their erroneouse and yll dooing this good
father would go out of the monasterie somtime on horsebacke,
but moo times on fote, and come to the villages lyeng thereabout,
and preache the way of truthe to them that were astraye.
Which thing also Boisill was wont to doo in his tyme.
For it was the maner of the people of England at that time,
that when any of the clergy or any priest came to a village,
they would all by and by at his calling come together to heare
the worde, and willingly harken to such thinges as were saied,
and more willingly followe in workes suche thinges as they
could heare and vnderstande. Nowe this man Cutbert had
such a grace and skill in vtteraunce, such a zele in persuading,
such an Angels face and countenaunce, that none that was
present durst presume to hyde the secrettes of his hart from
him: but dyd all openly declare in confession the thinges that
they had done: both for that they thoughte that the same could
in no wyse be hid from him, and also that they might be shryuen
and cleansed from their synnes throughe the dewe frutes
of penaunce as he should appoint them. This good man was
wont to resorte vnto those places and villages most commonly
that stoode a far of in stipye and craggie hylles, and whiche
other men were afraid to come at, or els being lerned lothed to
visit bicause of the vnsemely dwelling and vplandish rudenesse
of the inhabitants. And yet he dyd so ioyefully giue himselfe to
this godly and charitable labour, and so diligently instructed
them with good and holesome doctrine, that he would go out
of the monasterie oftetimes, and not come home againe in an
whole weke, sometimes not in two or three, yea not in a
whole moneth, but all that time tarie in the hylles among the
poore folke of the countree, exhorting them to the ioyes of

heauen both with the worde of preaching, and worke of vertuouse
example. When this reuerend seruante of our Lord had
lyued many yeares in the monasterie of Mailros, and excelled
in great signes of vertues, the most reuerend Abbot there Eata
remoued him to the yle of Lindesfarne, that he might there
also set forth to the bretherne the keping of regular discipline
both with the authoritie of an head and ruler, and also expresse
and shewe the same by his owne doing and example. For this
most reuerend father did at that time gouuerne the same place
as Abbot there of. Though of olde time in that place both the
bishop was wont to abyde together with his clergie and ministers
of his church, and the Abbot with the monks, who did also
notwithstanding belong to the houshould, and cure of the
bishop. For Aidā
                   which was the first bishop of that place, came
thither with monkes being also a monke himself, and did there
place and begyn monasticall lyfe and conuersation: e
                     •
                  en as before
also the blessed father Augustine did in kent, as is well
knowen, and as we haue declared before, at what tyme as the
moste reuerend Pope Gregorye wrote to him, on this wyse.
For asmuch as, dere brother,
                  In the first booke the. 27. chap. 
                  it is not mete for you that are enstructed
and brought vp in monasticall rules and orders to be and dwell seuerall
from your clergie and chapplins in the churche of England,
which is of late by the worke and grace of God brought vnto the
faith, you must therefor vse this lyf and cōuersation which our fathers
vsed in the beginning and rysing of the primitiue churche, amōg whom
noman did call any thing his, of all that they bad: but all thinges were
common among them.
               
            
            
               
                  Howe the same man lyuing an anchors solitarie life did by praying bring furth water out of a stone ground, and also receaued graine by the labour of his hande out of sowing time.
               
               The. 28. Chapter.
               AFter this, Cutberte encreasing in the merite of religiouse
and holy deuotion came also to the secret silence
of an Anchors lyfe and contemplation. And bicause

many yeres passed, we haue sufficiently written of his lifeThe life of S. Cutbert writen by S. Bede, is ex tant in the. 3. tome of his workes. and
vertues both in heroicall verse, and in prose, yt shall suffise at
this present only to rehearse this much, that at his going to the
iland he protested to the bretherne and sayd: If the grace and
goodnes of God doo graunt me in that place, that I may liue
by the worke of mine owne hande I will gladly abyde there:
if not I will God willing very shortly retourne to you againe.
Now this place was quite destitute both of water and graine
and wodde, and also not mete for any man to dwell in bicause
of the wicked spirits and fendes that haunted there. Yet at
the prayer and desyre of the man of God it became such in all
respecte, that it mighte well inough be enhabited. For at his
comming the euill spirits went their way. Which enemies being
so driuen out, and that he had made himselfe a narrowe
and small dwelling place, compassed about with a trenche, and
with the helping hand of the bretherne had bylded necessarie
howses in the same, that is to saye, a chappell and a common
dwelling place, he commaunded the brethern to make a pyt in
the pauement of the same dwelling place. Which they did, and
yet the earth was very hard and stonye, and semed not to haue
any moisture in the world, nor any vaine of water or spring in
it. But the next day at the faith and praiers of the seruaunt of
God, the pyt was found full of water, which vnto this day doth
geue sufficient vse and aboundance of that heauenly grace to
all that come thither. Beside this he desyred to haue ploughing
tooles brought him and wheate withall, and when he had laboured
and made ready ground before and sowen it in dewe
season, it so happened that at the very time of sommer ther grewe
therof not only no eares, but not so much as any blade or
grasse. Wherefore when the bretherne came to visit him as
their maner was, he willed barly to be brought him, to see if
happely the nature of that soile, or the will of the highe
geuer were, that the sede of that graine could growe any better

there. Which when it was brought him, and that he had sowen
it in the same field, out of all season of sowing, and out of all
hope of hauing any frute againe, yet there arose and
grewe vp anon corne plentifully, and gaue to the man of
God the ioyfull refresshing and sustenaunce of his owne labour.
And when he had there serued God solitarily many yeres
(for the banke wherewith his house was compassed and
trenched about was so highe,The third Synod of the english church. that he could see nothing
els out of it, but heauen, which he thyrsted and longed to enter
into) it happened at the same time, that there was a great
synode assembled in the presence of king Egfride by the riuer
of Alua, at a place called Atwiforde, which signifieth as much,
as, at the two fordes, in which Archebisshop Theodore of blessed
memorie was president, and there this foresayd man with one
mind and consent of them all was chosen to be bishop of the
churche of Lindisfarne. Who when he could in no wise be drawen
out of his monasterie for all the messengers and letters
that were sent him, at last the foresayd king himselfe hauing the
most holy bishop Trumwine with him and many other religiouse
parsons and men of power and authoritie, did passe ouer
vnto the Iland. Also many of the bretherne of the ile of Lindesfar
came thither for this purpose: all which on their knees
most earnestly desyred and required him for Gods sake and
with weping teares in our Lords name they besought him so
longe, that they made his eyes stand full of swete teares to, and
so they gat him out of his caue, and brought him to the Synode.
And when he came thither, though much againe his owne
will he was ouercomed by the one assent and will of all the
reast, and compelled to submit his necke to beare the yoke and
office of a bishop. And the wordes that forced him most, were,
that the seruaunt of God Boisil (who did with the propheticall
spirite he had, foreshew many things that should fall after him)
had also prophecied and fortelde that Cutberte should be bisshop.

Nowe his consecrating not appointed to be straight way
but after the winter passed which then was at hand, in the feast
and solemnisation of Easter it was finished at Yorke, in the
presence of the foresayd king Egfride, where there came to his
consecrating vij. bishops,Cōsecration of bishops with a number of bisshops. of whome Theodore of blessed memorie
was chief and primate. He was first elected and chosen
to be bishop of Hagulstad diocese in Trumberts place,
who was deposed from the same. But bycause he rather desired
to be of Lindisfarne churche, in which he had sometimes lyued,
it semed good, and was appointed that Eata showld retourne
to the see of Hagulstad, of whiche he had first bene
made byshop, and Cutberte showld haue the chardge and iurisdiction
of Lindisfarne Churche. And when he had thus taken
vpon him this degree and office of byshop, he dyd setforth and
adorne the same with the workes of vertues and holinesse, following
the example of the blessed Apostles. For he dyd bothe
with continuall prayers make intercession for the people committed
vnto him, and with most holesome exhortations styrred
them to thirst after the ioyes of heauen.S. Cutbert the example of a good Bisshoppe. And (the thing
which most of all is wont to helpe and farther teachers) suche
thinges as he towght other folke to doo, he first in his owne
dooing gaue example of the same. For he was aboue all thinges
feruent in the fyre of Gods loue and charitie, modest and sober
in the vertue of patience, excedingly giuen to deuotion of
praying, affable and familiar to all men that came to him for
comfort and counsell. For he tooke this for a kynde of prayer
too, if he dyd helpe and succour with his exhortation such as
were weake and vnperfecte, knowing that he that sayed, Thow
shalt loue thy lord God, sayed also, Thow shalt loue thy neighbour as
thy selfe. He was also notable for his abstinence and straight lyuing,S. Cutberts deuotion at masse time.
euer panting after the hope of heauenly thinges with
great contrition and compunction of harte. Finally when he
offred the hoste of the holesome sacrifice vnto God, he commended

his prayers to our Lord not with a voyce lyfted vp on
highe, but with teares powred owt from the botome of his
harte. Thus when he passed ouer two yeares in his bysshoppricke,
he went againe to his ile and monasterie, being warned by
the oracle and admonyshment of god, that the day of his death
was nowe at hand, or rather the entraunce and beginning of
that lyfe, which only in dede should be called lyfe. Which thing
he himselfe at the same tyme dyd after his playne and simple
maner open vnto certayne, but in darke and obscure wordes,
yet such as were afterwardes playnely vnderstanded. And to some
to he dyd vtter and reuele the same in very open and playne
wordes.
            
            
               
                  Howe the sayd byshop dyd foretell his death to be very nighe at hand vnto Herebert a vertuous priest.
               
               The. xxix. Chapter.
               FOr there was a certayne priest reuerend for his vprightnes
and perfection of lyfe and maners named Hereberte, which
had a longe time bene coupled to this man of God in the
bond of spirituall loue and fryndship. For lyuing a solitary lyfe
in the yle of that great wyde lake, owt of which ronneth the
head and beginning of the ryuer of Derwent, he was wont to
visite Cutbert euery yere, and to heare the good lessons of eternall
lyfe at his mouth. When this vertuous priest heard of his
comming to the citie of Lugubalia, he came after his accustomed
maner desyryng to be enflamed more and more to the
blysse and ioyes aboue by his holesome exhortations. Who as
they sate together, and dyd inebriat one an other with the cuppes
of the lyfe of heauen, among other thinges the byshop sayd:
Remember brother Hereberte, that what soeuer ye haue to say
and aske of me, yow doo it nowe: for after we departe the one
from the other, we shall not mete againe and see one an other
with the eyes of the body any more in this world. For I knowe
well, that the time of my departing is at hand, and the laying

away of my bodyly tabernacle shalbe very shortly. Which thinges
when he heard, he fel downe at his feete, and with heauy sighes
and powring teares I beseke yow (quoth he) for our Lordes
sake, forsake me not, but remember your most faythfull fellowe
and companion, and make intercession to the high and
tender pitie of God, that we may departe hence vnto heauen
together to behold his grace and glorie, whome we haue in the
earth serued and honoured together. For yow knowe that I haue
euer studied and laboured to liue after your good and vertuous
instructiōs, and what soeuer I offended and omitted throughe
ignoraunce and frailtie, I dyd straight way doo mine endeuour
to amēde the same after your ghostly coūsel, wil, and iudgement.
At this earnest and affectuouse request of his, the bysshop
gaue him selfe to his prayers, and anon being certified in
spirite that he had obtayned the thing that he besought of our
Lorde: Aryse (quoth he) my dere brother, and wepe not, but reioyce
with all gladnesse. For the highe mercy of God hath graunted
vs that we haue praied for. The truth of which promise
and prophecie was well proued in that which befell after. For
after they departed a sonder, they sawe not one an other bodyly
any more, but on one selfe same day, which was the xix, day of
Marche,Quomodo in v
                        ••
                     asua dilexerunt se, i
                        •
                     a in mer
                        •
                     e nō sunt separati. their soules went out of their bodyes, and wer straight
ioyned together againe in the blessed sight and vision, and caryed
hence both to the kingdome of heauen by the handes and
seruice of Angels. But Herebert was first tried and pourged
in the fyre of longe sickenesse,As they loued in their lyfe so in their death they were not seuered. by the dispensation of our Lordes
goodnes and pitie, as it is credible, that such want of merite
and perfection as he had, more than blessed Cutbert, the
same might be supplied in the purging pain of long chastening
sickenesse, so that being made equall in Gods grace and fauour
with his fellowe that was intercessour for him, euen as he
should depart out of the body at the selfe same time with him,
so he might also deserue to be receaued into the selfe same

and lyke seate of perpetuall blysse. This moste reuerend father
dyed in the Ile of Farne, and at his death he besought the
bretherne most earnesty, that he might be buried there in the
same place, where he had no small tyme serued and bene in
warfar for our Lorde. But yet at laste ouercomed with their
requeste, he was content, that he might be brought to Lindisfarne
Ile,
                  Holy Ilond and layed in the churche there. In the meane time,
these thinges done VVilfride the most reuerende bisshopp
kepte the bishoppricke of that churche one yeare vntill an
other was elected to be made bysshoppe for Cutberte. After
whiche tyme Eatbert was consecrated, a notable man in the
knowledge of the holy scriptures, and also in the dewe keping
of heauenly preceptes and lessons, and most of all in doing of
almes and dedes of charitie, in so much that according to the
old lawe he gaue euery yeare to poore folke the tenth not only
of his cattle, but of all graine, frute and apples, and some parte
of his clothes and apparaill to.
            
            
               
                  Howe the bodye of Cutbert after xj. yeares burieng, was founde free from corruption and rotting. And howe the successour of that bysshoppricke passed owt of the worlde not long after.
               
               The 30. Chap.
               THe ordinance and dispensation of God willing to shewe
more largely abrode in howe great glorie the man
of God Cutbert lyued after his deathe, whose highe
godly lyfe before his deathe excelled notably by many and often
signes and miracles, dyd put into the myndes of the bretherne
xj. yeares passed after his buriall, to take vpp and remoue
his bones: thinkinge to fynde them all drye, the bodye
being nowe consumed and brought to duste as dead bodies
commonly are, and so to put them in a newe toumbe, and laye
them againe in the same place, but somewhat aboue the floure
and pauement, for the more reuerence dewe thereunto. Which

mynde and entent of theirs they did declare to Eadbert their
bisshop, who agreed to the same, and bad them remember to
doo it on the daye of his departing. And so they did. And
when they opened the tumbe, they founde the body all
whole and sounde, as if it were alyue, and the lymmes, ioyntes,
and synowes softe and pliable, muche liker a sleping bodye
than a dead. Also all the clothes, that were about hym, semed
not onely without wem or any blemish, but also as fresh
faire, and bright, as when they were newe and first made.
Whiche when the bretherne sawe, they were striken straight
with a great feare, and with all hast went to shewe there bysshopp
what they had found, who as it happened was that tyme
solitarie abyding alone in the farthest place from the churche,
being closed rounde about with the flowing and ebbing
fluddes of the sea. For there was he wont alwayes to kepe
the tyme of Lent,The deuotion of bisshops in times past. and also xl. dayes before Christmas in greate
deuotion of abstinence, prayer, and teares. In which place
also his reuerend predecessour Cutberte before that he went
to the Ile of Farne, did at certaine tymes secretly serue our
Lorde in spirituall warfare. And they browght hym a part of
the clothes that were about the holy bodye. Which he both
receauing thankefully as acceptable presentes, and most gladly
reioysing to heare of such miracles (for he kissed the clothes
with a great affection as if they were yet about the fathers
bodye) put ye on (quoth he) newe clothes aboute the bodye
for these that ye have brought me, and so laye it againe in the
cheast that ye haue prouided therefore: I knowe moste certainly,
that that place shall not remaine longe emptie, which
is hallowed with such a speciall grace of this heauenly miracle.
And howe happie is he, vnto whome our Lord the author
and giuer of all blysse will vouchesafe to giue leaue and
lycence to reaste in that place? These and many lyke thinges
when the bysshoppe had sayed with many teares, and greate

compunction, and trembling tounge, the bretherne dyd
as he had bydden them, and wounde the bodye in a newe clothe,
and put it in a newe cophin, and so layed it aboue the pauement
of the chauncell. And shortely after the dere beloued
of God Eadbert the byshopp was taken with a bytter
and burning disease, the which dayly encreased and waxed
more feruent, so that not longafter which, was the sixte day
of Maye, he departed out of this world, and went vnto God.
And his body was also layed in the graue of the blessed father
Cutbert, with the cophim ouer him, in which they had put
the vncorrupted bodie of the sayd father. In which place signes
and miracles sometimes done in restoring the sicke to
their health, do beare witnes and confirme the merite and vertuouse
lyues of them bothe. Of which miracles we haue longe
synse put certaine in memorie in the booke of his lyfe. But
yet we haue thought it conuenient to adde thereto certaine
in this historie allso, which we happened to heare and learne
of late.
            
            
               
                  Howe a certaine man was cured of the palsey at his tombe.
               
               The 31. Chapter.
               THere was in the same monasterie a certaine monke
named Beadwegen, whose office of longe time was to
serue such geastes and straungers as came, and is alyue
yet to this daye, a man of whose much deuotion and religiouse
conuersation all the bretherne and strangers that resorte
thither to beare witnesse and testifie. And that obediently and
dewly he doth the office put vnto him, only for the rewarde
that he looketh for aboue. This man on a certaine day when
he had washed in the sea the mantels or clothes that he occupied
in the hospitall, comming home againe was in the myd
way sodainly taken with a paine in his bodie, in such wise that
he fell downe on the earth, and laye flat on the ground for a
space, and could scant at last get vp againe. And when he was

rysen vp he felte the halfe part of his body from the head to
the fete to be greuously taken and stryken with a palsey, and
so with much paine he came home to the howse leaning on a
staffe. The disease grew and encreased litle, and litle: and when
night came, was waxen so greuouse and painfull, that the next
day he was scant able to ryse vp or go by himselfe. Into which
paine and aduersitie he being thus brought, conceaued in his
mynd a profitable way and counsell, which was to get him to
the churche by some meanes or other as well as he could, and
enter into the tombe of the blessed father Cutberte, and there
vpon his knees humbly to beseche the highe soueraine goodnes
of God, that either he might be deliuered from the anguish
and paine, if it were so good and profitable for him, ot els if it
behoued him to be lōger chastened with that grief by the gratiouse
prouision of God, that he might then patiently and
with meke mynd beare and suffer this paine and afflicton put
vpon him. And as he had deuised and purposed in his mynd,
so he did in dede, and bearing vp and staying his feble lymmes
with a staffe he went into the churche, and there fell downe
prostrate at the corse of the man of God, praying with feruent
entent and deuotion that through his helpe and intercession
our Lorde wold be good and mercifull vnto him. And as he
was at his prayers falling as it were in a certaine softe slumber,
he felte (as he him selfe was afterward wont to tell) like as a
great brode hand touche his head in that place where the grief
was, and with the same touching passe along ouer all his body
to the very feete, on that syde where the paine laye, and there
with al by litle and litle the grief wēt away, and straight therō
followed perfecte health: which done he awoke forthwith,
and rose vp sound and hole and geuing thankes to our Lorde
for his health, came and shewed the brethern what had chaunced
vnto him. And at the great reioysing of all men he retourned
againe to the office and seruice that he was wonte diligently

to doo, being nowe as it were made better and more
seruisiable by this tryeng and examining scourge of God.
The clothes also wherewith the holy body of Cutberte was
clad either before in his lyfe time, or after when he was dead
did not want the grace and gyfte of healing the sicke:In the third tome of S. Bedes workes. as
who so will reade, shall fynd in the booke of his lyfe and vertues.
            
            
               
                  How a certaine man of late at S. Cutbertes reliques was cured of a g
                        •
                     eat sore in his eye.
               
               The. 32. Chapter.
               YET this one thing is not to be passed ouer or vnspoken
of, which three yeares passed was done by and at his
reliques, as was tolde me by the same man on whome
it was done. And it was in the monasterie, whiche
is buylt by the riuer of Dacore, and thereof hath his name,
in whiche that time Switbert a good religiouse man
was head and Abbot. In that monasterie there was a certaine
young man, that had a foule vnhansome swelling in the
lead of his eye, the which daily grewe bigger, and was lyke to
put him in danger of the losse of his eye. The physitians layed
salues and plaisters thereto to assuage the swelling, but they
could doo no good: some men wold haue it to be cut of, other
sayed no, for feare of a farther danger. And thus the foresayd
poore brother continewed in this case no small time, and could
get no helpe at mans hand against this perill of the losse of his
eye, but rather it daily encreased and waxed worse, till at last
it was his chaunce through the grace and goodnes of God to
be healed sodainly by the reliliques of the most holy father
S. Cutbert. For when the monkes had found his body
not rotten nor corrupted after it had many yeres lyen buried,
they tooke partes of the heare of his head, which in maner
of reliques they might giue or shewe for a signe of the miracle
to their fryndes when they came, and desyred the same. A litle

parte of these reliques were at that time in this monasterie, in
the keping of one of the priestes there named Thridred, who
now is Abbot of the house. Which mā on a certaine daye went
to the churche and opened the shrine of reliques, to geue a parte
therof to afrynd of his. At what time it chaunced, the yong
man which had the sore eye, was present in the churche. And
when the priest had geuen his frynd such parte therof, as he
wold, he gaue the rest to the yong man to lay vp againe in his
place. Who by a good motion and minde that came to him, as
sone as he had receaued the heares of the holy head, tooke thē
and put them to his sore eye, and helde them there a space to
kepe downe and assuage the greuouse swelling therewith. And
that done he layed the reliques vp againe in the shrine as he
was bidden,If they which now preach only faith, had such faith they should see such miracles now. beleuing that his eye should shortly be healed by
the heare of the man of God, wherewith he was touched. And
his faith and belief deceaued him not. For it was at that time
(as he was wont to tel) about vij. of the clocke in the
morning. And as he thought vpō his busynes and wēt
about other thinges as the daye required, towarde
none the same day, he hapned sodainly to touche
his eye, the which he felte and found
with the eyled and all, as whole and
sounde, as if ther had neuer bene
sene any blemyshe
or swellinge
therin.
               THVS ENDETH THE FOVRTH BOOK FO
THE HISTORIE OF THE CHVRCH
OF ENGLAND.
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFTE BOOKE OF THE HISTORY OF THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND.
            
               
                  How Aedilwalde Cutberts successour lyuing a solitary and heremytes lyffe alayd by prayer for certaine of his Bretherne a greate tempest in the sea.
               
               The. 1. Chapter
               THE famous and reuerende father Aedilwalde,
which by vertuous and worthy behauiour of
him selfe many yeres in the monastery called
Inripe, brought the office of priesthoode taken
vppon him in greate reuerence and estimation,
succeded Cutbert the man of God in practise of
that solytary and lonefull lyffe, which he passed in Farne island
before he was made bishoppe. Whose worthynesse and good
lyfe, that all men may more euidently perceaue, I will declare
one miracle wrought by him as one of the same company for
and in whome it was wrought, declared to me: to wit Gutfride
a faithfull seruante of Iesus Christe by vocation a priest,Holy Ilond. who
afterwarde was Abbot of the same church of Lyndisfarne where
he was brought vpp. I came (saide he) with ij. other off
my bretherne to Farne Island desyring to speake with the reuerend
father Aedilwald. And when we had talked with him a
whyle to our greate comforte, and afterwarde receiuing his
blessing haste nyd homewarde againe, beholde, sodainly as we
were in the mydest off the sea, the caulme in which we sayled
was taken awaye, and so greate a tempest and terrible storme
came vppon vs, that neither with sayle nor ower we coulde preuaile,
nor presently looke for any thinge but deathe. And when
we striuing longe with the wynde and the seas to no effecte,

looked backe at the lenght, if perchaunce by any possible meanes
we might returne backe to the Iland agayne from whence
we came, we manifestly perceaued that on euery syde with leeke
tempest our iourney was staied, and retourne intercepted:
and no hope of escape in our selfes: Afterwarde when we descried
the lande a farre of and looked stedely towardes the
same, we sawe in Farne islande that vertuous and holy father
Aedilwalde come out of his caue to loke howe we sayled awaye.
For as sone as he heard the blusteringe of the winde, and
rage of the Ocean sea, he came foorthe to see what might happen
and chaunce to vs. And when he sawe vs labouring harde
against the surges of the sea, and in cleane desperation of recouering
the lande, he fell downe vppon his knees: and prayed to
almighty God, father of our Lorde Iesus Christ to deliuer vs
from that present daunger of death: And when he had ended
his prayer, he appeased the rage of the sea in such sorte, that the
violence of the storme all together ceasing, we had winde and
wether at will without any surges of the sea or greate waues
of water, vntill we came to lande. When we were on grounde,
and had layde our shippe at ancre, streytwayes the same storme
and tempest which for our sakes was a litle whyle alayed, beganne
againe, and ceased not his rage all that daye, to thende
it might be geuen vs to vnderstand, that the litle caulme which
happened, was geuen of God from heauen at the contemplation
of that godly mans prayer, to deliuer vs oute of daunger.
This vertuous man, high in fauour with God continued in
Farne island xij. yeares, and there died: but he is buried in Lindisfarne
island: Nere to the place where the bodyes of the forementioned
bishops lye: in saincte Peter the Apostle his church.
These thinges were done in kinge Elfrides raigne, who was
kinge of Northumberlande xviij. yeares after his brother E
                        •
                     gfride.
               
            
            
               
                  Howe bysshoppe Iohn cured a dumme man, with blessinge of hym.
               
               
               The 2. Chap.
               IN the beginninge off this kinge his raigne when bisshoppe
Eata was dead,Of S. Iohn
of Beuerlake. 
                  Iohn famous for his integritie and pure
lyfe tooke the bishoppricke of Hagulstald vppon him: of
whome his neare and familiar acquaintaunce were wonte to
reporte many straunge miracles aud vertues wrought at diuerse
seuerall tymes: and specially amongest all other, Berethum
sometime his deacon, but nowe Abbot of the monastery caulled
Inderwodde: a man woorthy of all reuerence and credit for
his truethe: off the which I haue thought good to committ
one or two to your memories. There is a secrett and solytary
mansion place compassed aboute with a greate wood, and
closed rownde with a deeke distant from Hagulstalde not paste
a myle and a halffe, but diuided with the riuer Tine whiche
runneth betwixte them boothe, hauing a churche yard off
saincte Michael the archangell where this holy man was wounte
to seiourne and make his abode very often, as occasion,
and time serued, with a fewe of his companions, and geue
him selffe most earnestly to prayer and studie, but specially
in the Lent. And when att a certaine tyme (lent being at hand)
he came thither to abyde after his accustomed manner, he
commaundid those that were aboute him to seeke some poore
begger, and impotent Lazar, whome he might haue wyth
him all the time of his continuaunce there, to extende his charitie
and deale his almes vnto. There was in a towne not farre
off, a younge man, that was dumme well knowen of the bisshoppe
(for he vsed to come before him oftentimes to receiue
his almes:) the which was neuer able to speake so much as one
worde. Besides, he had such an vnsemely sore in his head, that
in the crowne and hyer partes there coulde not a heare take
roote, only a fewe euill fauored rough heares stoode staringe
rounde about his temples. This impotent Lazar the bishop

commaunded to be brought thither, and a harbour made for
him within the precinct of his house, where he might ordinarilye
euery day receiue his almes: And when one weke of Lent
was past, the next sounday he willed the poore man to come
into him: when he was come, he bydd him put oute his tounge,
and shewe it vnto him, and takinge him by the chinne, made
a signe of the holy crosse vppon his tounge: and when he
had so signed and blessyd it, he commaunded him to plucke it
in againe, and speake sayinge, speake me one worde, say gea, gea,
which in the english tounge is a worde off affirmation and
consent in such signification as yea, yea. Incontinent the stringes
of his tounge were loosed, and he sayd that whiche he was
commaunded to saye. The bishoppe added certaine letters by
name and bid him say A: he said A. say B. he said B. and when
he had said and recited after the bishop the wholle crosse rewe,
he put vnto him sillables and hole wordes to be pronounced.
Vnto which when he aunsered in all pointes orderly, he commaunded
him to speake longe sentences, and so he did: and ceased
not all that day and night folowing, so longe as he coulde
hold vpp his head from sleape, (as they make reporte that were
present) to speake and declare his secret thoughtes and purposes,
the which before that day he could neuer vtter to any man:
in leeke manner as that longe lamed Lazar, who restored by
the Apostles Peter and Iohn,Act. cap. 3. to the vse of his legges agayne
stode vpp and walked, and entred into the temple with other
walkinge and leppinge and praysing God with muche ioy and
myrthe, that he could nowe go vppon his legges, the whiche
benefit he had lacked longe time before: The bisshoppe also
reioysing that he had his speache againe, commaunded the
phisicion to take the sore of his head in cure. Which he did, and
by helpe of the bisshopps benediction and holy prayer, the skinne
came againe, and heares grewe as fightly to see as any other
mās. So he that was before euil fauoured, dumme, and a lothesome

creature to looke to, he was nowe made a hansome younge
man, his countinuance amyable and pleasaunt to beholde,
his tounge ready and expedit to speake, his heare curled and
faire to see. And so reioysing for the recouery of his healthe,
he returned home, notwithstanding the bisshop offred him
lodginge and gentyll entertaynement, amongest his owne familye.
            
            
               
                  Howe the sayd bysshoppe healed a sycke mayden by prayer.
               
               The 3. Chap.
               THe same good Abbot Berecht tolde me an other greate
miracle done by the sayd bisshop: and this it was. When
that lerned prelate and Reuerend father VVilfride after
longe exile and banishement was recouered againe to the bisshopricke
of Hagulstalde, and the same bishop Iohn translated
to Yorke after Bosa (a man full of all godlynesse and humilitie)
was departed oute of this transitory lyfe, he came on a certaine
time to a Nunnerie in a toune called Vetade, wher Herebuge
was abbesse. When we were there said he, and intertained
gently with good harte and chereful countinence of al, the abbesse
tolde vs that one of her couent and younge nonnes (whiche
was her owne daughter) beinge sicke, lay languishinge and
pininge awaye, because she was lett blood off late in her arme:
and while she was thinking off it in her fonde and foolyshe
fantasye, the sodayne payne made her very weake: whiche
growing vppon her more and and more, the arme where
the vaine was opened, waxed very sore, and so pitefully
swollen, that a man coulde scarse clippe it with bothe his
handes, and she lyinge in her bed for the greate intolerable
paine semed to be almost dead and at the pitts brimme. Wherefore
the Abbesse besought this good bishop to go in and blesse
her. Because she beleued stedfastly that if he did other blesse
her or touche her, the vehemency of her desease wolde cease,
and she shuld stratyways beginne to amende: He asked them

when she was lett blood, and vnderstanding it was donne at
the prime of the mone, sayed, that it was very vnskilfully and
and vndiscretly donne to lett her blud at the prime of the mone.
I remember well (quod he) Archebishop Theodore (renouned
among all his posteritie) tolde me that letting of blud and
opening the vaine was very daungerous about the first quarter
of the moone, and rysinge of the sea. And what can I do for
this maiden, nowe she is at deathes doore? Not withstandinge
she besought him very instantly for her daughter, which she
loued tenderly (for she purposed to make her abbesse after her)
and at the lenght with much a doo obtained, so much of him
as to go into the chamber, and see the sicke maiden: Wherefore
he tooke me with him, and went to the maiden which lay languishinge
(as I said) with greate and intolerable paine in her arme,
so swellinge that it coulde not once bowe at the elbowe.
And standinge there he sayd certaine prayers ouer her, and after
he had blest her, went out againe. When we had sate an
houre at the table, one came in and called for me, and leading
me a syde from the company, sayde, Coenburge (for that was
the maides name) desyreth you to come to her as sone as
you can. When I came in to the chamber I founde her very
cherefull and mery and as it were almost hole. And when I
had sate by her a whyle, shall we call for some drinke saide she?
mary with a good will quod I, and I am right glad you ar able
so to do. When we had bothe dronke, she beganne to declare
vnto me, that sense the bishoppe had prayed for her and blest
her, and went out of the chamber, she beganne to amend and
waxe better and better, and albeit I haue not recouered my former
strength againe, quod she, yet all the anguishe and paine,
is gone bothe out of my arme (where it was most feruent) and
also out of all other partes of my body, the bishop as it were
carying all out of doores with him, though yet the swelling semeth
scant all alayed in my arme. As we were taking our leaue,

and departinge thence, the swellinge also went away, as the
paines and anguishe of her body did before: So the maiden deliuered
from daunger of deathe and other wofull wooes, gaue
laude and praise to God with the rest that wer there attending
and waytinge vppon her.
            
            
               
                  How he healed an Earles wife with holy water.
               
               The. 4. Chapter
               OF this forsaid bishoppe, Berecht abbot of Inderwodde
told vs an other miracle not much vnleke this. An earle
called lord Puch had a manour, abbout two miles from
our monastery, whose lady had bene trobled with such a vehement
desease for xl. dayes, that in iij. weakes space she was not
able to be caried out of the chamber, where she lay. It fortuned
one day this deuoute and godly father to be sent for by the
earle to dedycate and hallowe a churche,Dedication of churches. and when the solemnity
of this dedication was past, and the churche halloed, the
earle inuited him home to his house, and (as ciuilite and courtesy
required) desired him to diner. The bishop refused his
gentilnesse, sayinge that of dewty he must returne and go to
the next abbaye: But the earle most instantly entreatinge him
promised that he wolde do great almes to the poore, if he
wolde vouchsaffe to go home to his house that daye and
breake his fast. I entreated him in leeke maner as the Earle
did, promisinge that I wold geue almes also to relieue the poore,
if he wolde go to dynner to the earles house, and blesse
him and his familie. And when we had obtained so much of
him with longe entreataunce, we went to the earles house to
take our repast. The bishop sent the sick lady by one of the
company that came with him, some of the holy water, which
he hallowed in dedicatiō of the church, commaunding him to
will her to drinke of it, and to washe that parte of her body
with the same wher the grief was most vehemēt. Al which being
done she rose out of her bed whole and sounde. And perceauing

that she was not only cured of her longe infirmitie
and desease, but made also as lyuely, lusty and stronge as euer
she was before, came to the table, shewed her selfe very officious
in caruinge and drynkinge to the bysshoppe and all the
hole table and ceasyd not to vse such courteous officiosytye,
all the dynner time. Folowing in this poynte saincte Peters
mother in lawe, who delyueryd from her hotte burnynge feuer
by the only touche of Christes hande, rose vpp as stronge and
hole as euer she was before, and seruyd them at the table.
            
            
               
                  Howe he curyd another earles sonne lyinge at the poynte of deathe.
               
               The. 5. Chapter.
               THis bysshoppe called another tyme in leeke manner to
dedicate and halloe a churche of the earle Addi was desired,
after all the solemnitie were donne, by the earle, to
go in to one of his children, which was very sicke and redy to
dye, as being benūmyd of al senses and natural operations of the
bodye. the cophyn also or chest where he shuld be layd after
his deathe was preparyd and made redy. Furder more the good
earle intreatyd hym with weapinge teares desirying for the
passion of god that he wolde go in and pray for his sonne because
his lyfe was both necessary and deare vnto him: for his
parte he stedfastly beleued that yff he wold lay his hande vppon
hym and blesse him once,The faith of our primitiue church. he shulde streytwaye recouer. At
his desire and longe entreataunce the bysshoppe went in, and
sawe him (to the greate dysconfort and heauynesse of all that
were present) redy to yelde vpp the ghoste, and the cophyn
hard by him in which he should be buryed. He made his prayer
to god and blest him, and goying owte spake those comfortable
wordes that men vse to syck folke, to wytt, I pray god send
yow helthe and quyck recouery from this desease And when
they had sate a whyle at the table the childe sent to the earle
his father, desyringe to haue a cuppe of wyne sent him: for he

was thrustye. The earle being glad with all his harte that his
sonne could drynk sent him a cuppe of wyne which the bishop
had blessed. As sone as he had dronke of yt, he rose owte of his
bed, put on his clothes, came downe from his chamber, went to
the greate hall, saluted the bysshop, welcomed the ghestes, and
sayde he had a good stomake and appetyte to eate. They commaūdyd hym
to the table and were glad that he was so well recoueryd.
He sate downe, he eate, he drank, he lawght and
made mery with them and in all pointes behaued hym selffe
as the other ghestes, and lyuinge many yeares after contynuyd
in the same state with owte any grudge of his olde desease. The
abbot sayde this miracle was not donne in his syght and presence
but he heard yt by relation of them which were present
when yt was done.
            
            
               
                  Howe by his prayer and blessinge he relieued one of his clerkes maruelously broosed with a fall from his horse and in greate danger of deathe.
               
               The. 6. Chapter.
               NEther do I thinke yt good to passe ouer in sylence that
greate myracle which a faythful seruaunt of our sauiour
Christe namyd Herebalde was wonte to reporte to haue
bene done and practised vppō hym selfe, who at that time was
one of his clergy, and is nowe abbot in a monastery that borderyth
harde vppon the ryuer VVyre. So farre forth said he, as yt
was lauful for a man to iudge I fownde all the whole state and
māners of his life correspondēt to that grauytye and holynesse
which is required in a byshoppe: and of that I am ryght well assuryd
because I was dayly conuersant with him. But touchyng
his w
                     •
                  nes in the sight of God, and fauour before the myghth
                     •
                  
which sercheth the secrets of all mens hartes, I
h
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   experience in many other, but specially in my felff,

                     •
                   whome be in a manner restoryd from deathe to lyfe

                     •
                   prayer and benediction. For when in my first florys
                  
                     ••
                  yng
and lusty yowthe I lyuyd amongest his clergy, and was

set to schole to lerne bothe to reade and singe, and had not yet
abandonyd all foolysh fantasies, and yowthfull panges, it fortuned
one day that as we rode with him we came into a
goodly playne waye and fayre grene which semed a very
trymme place to runne and coorse ower horses in. And the
yowng men that were in his company, especially of the lay
sorte, beganne to desire the Byshop to geue thē leaue to coorse
and gallop their horses. But at the first he vtterly denyed and
sayd them nay with this checke: It is but a foolysh fonde thinge
yowe desire. At the last not able to withstande nor gaynesay
the ernest and importune request of all the whole company,
he sayd, do if yowe wyl: mary so, that Herebald refrayne,
and abide with me. Than I entreating as suppliantly as I could
to haue licence to galloppe my horse and coorse vpp and downe
with the other younge men (for I trusted well my horse,
which the bishop him selfe had before geuen me) I could not
preuaile at all. But when I sawe them take their horses vppe
with the spurres and fetch nowe this way nowe that as couragiously
with stoppe and turne, as could be, the bisshoppe and
I beholding all their pastime, I strayt waies ouercomed with
wanton courage could not stay my selfe, but went amongest
the thickest of them, and ranne with the best. And as I tooke
my horse vppe with the spurres, I heard him behynde my
backe, with a deape sigth, to saye. O mercifull God what wofull
woo, woorkest thou to me in ryding after thus sorte. I
heard those wordes, notwithstanding with willful will I minded
to folow my pastime. And behold euen straightwaye as
my horse wilde, fearce, and couragious with greate violence
and force lept ouer a deeke by the waye, downe fell I to the
grounde, and as one ready to dye by and by, lost all my senses,
and was not able to moue any one ioyncte of my bodye. For
whereas in the same place lay a stone close to the grounde couered
with a litle greene turffe, and not one other could be foū
                  de

in all that plaine vally and leuell grounde, it fortuned by
chaunce, or rather by the diuine prouidence off God to punisshe
my disobedience it happened, that I pitched vppon the same
stone with my head, and hande which in the fal I putt vnder
to stay my self, and so broke my thumme, and sculle off my
head, that (as I said before) I lay there leeke a dead man ready
for his graue. And bicause I coulde not be remoued thence,
they stretched foorth a pauilion, and made me a lodging there.
This was aboute seuen of clocke in the morninge: from
that houre vntill night I taried there with out any noyse or
disquietnes euen as it had ben a dead man: than I beganne to
reliue and came to my selfe againe, and was caried home to the
bishops lodging, by certaine of my fellowes where I lay speachlesse
al that night, casting and vomiting blud, because my bulcke
and ynner partes, were sore broysed with the fal. But the bisshop
for the tender affectiō and singular good fansie he bare to
me, was meruailous sory for my misfortune and deadly wounde,
and woulde not all that night after his accustomed manner
tarry with his clergy, but continuing alone in watch all that
night, as I may well coniecture, besought the goodnesse of allmighty
God for my health and preseruation. And cominge to
my, chamber early in the morninge, said certaine prayers ouer
me, and called me by my name, and when I waked, as it were
oute of a greate slumber, he asked me, if I knewe, who it was
that spoke to me. And I casting vpp my eyes, saied yea right
well, you ar my dere bishop and master: than said he can you
recouer or liue? Yea quoth I, by yower good prayers if it please
God. So streytwaies laying his hand vppon my head, and repeting
the worde of benediction returned again to his praiers,
and coming to see me againe a litle while after, founde me fitting
vppe in my bed, and well able to speake. Then moued, as
it were with some inspiration from heauen, asked whether I
knewe without all scruple and dowte, whether I was baptized

or no: to that I aunswered, yea forsothe I knowe with oute all
doute I was wasshed in the holly fonte of baptisme in remission
of synnes, and knowe the priestes name very well that
baptized me: but he foorthwith replyed saying: if you were
christened of him doubtlesse you are not well christened: for I
knowe him well, and am right assured that when he was made
priest he coulde not for his dulheddid witt lerne, nor to instructe
nor to baptise. And for that cause I straightly chardged
him not to presume to that mynisterie which he could not do
accordingly: As sone as he had spoken those wordes he beganne
to instructe and informe me in the faith againe: and it came
to passe that as he breathed in my face, the payne vanished awaye,
and I felt my body much better than it was before. Than
he called for a surgion, and commaunded him to sett my skull
againe, and knitt it vpp together as it should be, and by and by
with his blessing I was so well recouered, that the next daye I
was able to mounte to my horse and ride with him to the next
place where he minded to lodge: And not longe after being
fully recouered I was baptized. This good bisshopp continued
in the see, three and thirty yeres, and so translated thence to the
ioyfull kingdome of heauen, lyeth buried in sancte Peters porche,
in a monastery called Inderwodde the yeare of our Lorde.
721. For when he was not able for olde age to preach, teache,
and gouuerne his bisshopprike, he consecrated and made Wilfride
one of his chaplins archebisshop of Yorke, and went to
the said monasterie, and there with good example and conuersation
ended his lyfe.
            
            
               
                  Howe Cedwall kinge of the Weast Saxons came to Rome to be baptized, and his successour of deuotion went to the sepulchres and monuments of the blessed Apostles.
               
               The. 7. Chapter.
               
                  
THe third yere of kinge Aldfrides raigne, Cedwall kinge
of the weast saxons, when he had kept the souerainty
in his country very stoutely for ij. yeres space, for
Gods sake and hope of an eternall kingdome in heauen
forsoke his owne vppon earthe, and went to Rome. He
thought it to be a singular glorye and renowne for him, to be
regenerated at the sea Apostolique, with the sacrament of baptisme,
by the which he lerned that all mankinde had entrye to
the kingdome of heauen. With all, this hope he conceaued,
that as sone as by baptisme he was clensed from synne, and made
a member of Christes mysticall body, he shoulde departe
from this worlde to the eternall ioye, the which bothe by the
prouidence of God, were fulfilled euen as he had secretly in
his minde determined before: For cominge to Rome when
Sergius was Pope, he was baptised on easter eue, the yere after
the incarnation of Christ 689.An. 689. and wearing yet the white apparel,
and robes of innocency which were put vppon him in
baptisme fell sicke, and died, the 20. day of Aprill. Whome the
Pope at his baptisme named Peter, that he might beare that
holy name of the Apstole whose sepulchre and tūbe he came
to see, with good zeale and deuotion many hundred myles,
and buried him honorably in his churche. And at the Popes
commaundement, an Epitahphe was engraued vppon his
toumbe
                     •
                   that bothe the remembraunce of his good zeale and
deuotion might continewe in admiration trough out all ages,
and the readers and hearers also might be stirred to the leeke
godlynesse and deuotion. The epitaphe was written after this
sorte.
               
                  An Epitaphe vpon kinge Cedwall.
                  All dignities and wordly wealthe, all princely ioye and mirth
                  All palaces and castells stronge, all ladies of greate birth,
                  All triumphe all princely attire, all precious pearle and pride
                  The feruent loue of heuenly blesse, made Cedwalle set a syde.
                  
                     And spedely to Peters seate and monuments at Rome
                  His fleshly lustes and filthy synnes with baptisme to ouercome.
                  Through daungerous seas and hougely hilles a pilgrimage to make
                  And happely the ioyfull starre to endlesse comforte take.
                  Incontinent when his repaire was knowen among the states,
                  Full courteously they met him all, and brought him to their gates.
                  Pope Sergius perceauinge eke his zeale and godly minde
                  Did ioyfully baptise him streyt, and from his synnes vnbinde.
                  He altered his propre name, and did him Peter calle
                  Delyueringe him from Sathans snare, from mysery and from mysery and from thral:
                  But innocent lyfe this worthy wight on earthe did not longe kepe
                  VVithin fewe days death did approche, and rocked him a slepe.
                  Vndoubtedly greate was his faith greate was the mercy of Christ,
                  VVhose iudgments who so seketh oute, shall creke when he is highst.
                  From Britanny that famousisle, to Rome he saffly past
                  The monuments and Apostles tumbes, he sawe al at his later cast.
                  Deathes fyery dart his hart did perce and brought him to the groūde
                  VVhere foysteringe mans carcas lyeth, vntill the trumpet sounde.
                  Here couered with marbel stone his body lyeth at ease,
                  In paradise his soule abideth, Gods wrath he did appease.
                  Then euident it is that he, who from his realme did range
                  For earthly things did heauen obtaine, and lost naught by exchange.
               
               
                  An other epitaphe.
                  Here Cedwall is buried, otherwise named Peter kinge of
the weast Saxons who died the xx. of Aprill in the seconde indiction
and lyued thyrty yeares, or ther aboute, when that
noble and mighty prince Iustinian was Emperour of Rome:
and had raigned iiij. yeres in the empire and Sergius a trewe
paterne of the Apostles had sate ij. yeres in Peters seate.
                  As this good kinge Cedwall was takinge his iourney to Rome,
Huu one of the kinges bloud suceeded into the croune
of that realme, who after he had raigned there 37. yeares gaue
ouer his kingdome and committed the gouernaunce of it, to

his children, and went him selfe to the tumbes and monuments
of the Apostles in Rome Gregory beinge the Pope,
hauinge an ernest desyre to wander leeke a pilgreme here in
earthe for a tyme, aboute such holy places, that at the lenght he
mighte be more willingly receaued of the blessed saintes in
heauen: the which practise in those dayes many englishmen
both of the nobility and commons,Pilgrimage to Rome a wōt matter in our primitiue church. spirituall and temporal,
men and women, wer wonte to vse with much emulation.
               
            
            
               
                  Of the death of Archebishop Theodore.
               
               The. 8. Chapter.
               THE yere after kinge Cedwall died at Rome, that is to
say, the yere of our Lorde 690.An. 690. archebishop Theodore
worthy of perpetuall remembraunce for his singular
vertues, beinge very olde and in those yeres, to which men
commonly by course of nature may come, to wit, foure score
and eight, departed out of this wordle. The which number of
yeres that he should lyue and see, was signified vnto him by reuelation
in a dreame: as to his familiare fryndes he was wont
to make reporte: He continued in his bishoprike xxij. yeres and
was buried in sainct Peters church, where al the other bishops
of Cāterbury ar buried. Of whom with the rest of his felowes
equal both in dignity and degree it may be truly verified that
their names shal liue in glory frō generati to generation time
out of minde: for that I may vse fewe woordes, the church of
Englande for the time he was archbisshoppe, receaued so much
comforte and encrease in spirituall matters, as they could neuer
before nor after. As touching his personage, his lyfe, his age and
manner of death the epytaphe written vppon his tumbe in
fowre and thirthy heroicall verses dothe manyfestly sett owte
to all that haue accesse thither, of the which these are the iiij. off
the first.
               A woorthy prelate lyeth here fast closed in this graue
               To whome the name of Theodore the greekes most iustly gaue.
               
                  
VVith tytle ryght the souerayntye hauynge of eche degree,
               Christes flocke he fed with trewe doctrine, as almen do welsee.
               iiij. of the last.
               His sowle was sett at liberty (that lumpyshe lumpe of claye
               Dyssolued) when September had put nynetene dayes away.
               And couetinge their feloship that lyueth a godly lyfe,
               Is companyd with angells hie, voyd off all care and stryfe.
            
            
               
                  Howe after the death of Theodore Berechtwalde toke the archbysshopricke vppon hym, and amongst many other bysshopps consecrated and orderyd by him, he made Tobye (a man very well lernyd) bysshopp of Rochestre.
               
               The. 9. Chap.
               BErechtwald succedyd Theodore, and was archbysshoppe
of Canterburye who before was abbot of a monastery
lyinge hard by the north entree of the ryuer Glade otherwise
callyd Rachwulf, a man dowtlesse well traueled in the
knowledge of holy scripture, and very skyllfull both in ecclesiasticall
and Monastical ordres, censures, and disciplynes, but
nothynge to be compared to his predecessour: He was chosen
to this bysshoprycke the yere after the incarnation of Christ
692.An. 692. the first of Iuly, when Wichthrede and Swebharde were
kynges of kent. He was cōsecrated the next yere after, vppon a
sunday (beinge then the xxix. of Iune) by Godwyn archbisshoppe
and metropolytane of fraunce and was installyd and put
in possession the next day before the calendes of September,
which was also vppon a sundaye. Who amongst many other
bysshopps of his creation, after Gebmund bysshopp of Rochester
was dead, dyd consecrate and substitute Tobye in his place,
a man well experte in the latyn, greke, and Saxon tounge, and
all other liberall sciences.
            
            
               
                  Howe Ecgbert a holy man, wolde gladly haue gone to Germany to preache, and coulde not, and howe Victberte went thither in deede, but because he could do no good, returnyd backe to Ireland, from whence he came.
               
               The. 10. Chap.
               
                  THe very self same tyme Ecgbert a most reuerend priest,
and faythfull seruaunt of our sauiour Christ of
me to be named with honour and reuerence, who (as
we sayd before) lyued leke a pilgrime in Ireland, to obtayne
aeternall lyf in heauen, purposing with him selfe to profitt manye,
tooke vppon him the office of an apostle to preache the
worde of God to certayne countries, which had not yet receuyd
the same nor heard of it. And many such countries he knewe
to be in Germany, of whome we Englishmen or Saxons,
which nowe inhabit Brytanny are wel knowen to haue our
beginninge and ofspringe. Al which of the brytons our neighbours
are corruptly callyd Germans, for of them there are FrisiansPeople of high Allemaigne about the cyte of Camin.
                  Rugyns, Danes, Hunnes, old Saxons,People of the higher part of 
                        ••
                     iseland. 
                  Bruchtuars, and
many other nations besides, obseruing yet the rytes and ceremonyes
of paynims, to whome this valiant and noble souldiar
of Christ purposed to go, after he had sayled rownde aboute
Britanny, yff happely he myght delyuer any of them, from the
bondage and thrauldome of Satan and trade them toward
Christ: or yf this could not come to passe according to his expectation,
then he fully determined to trauell to Rome bothe
to see and to worship the chappels, monumētes, and tumbes off
the holy Apostles and Martyrs: But the secrett working off
God, and answers by reuelations from heauen suffryd hym to
atcheue neither of these enterprises. For when he had chosen
certayn stoute men to accompany hym, and such as were
most meete to preche the worde of God, aswell for their good
gesture and comly action, as for their profounde knowledge
and wisdome, and had preparyd all thinges necessarye for their
voyage to the sea, there came to him one day early in the mornyng
a religious man, that had bene somtymes scholler and
seruaunt to that good priest Boysyll in Britanny, at what time
this said Boysyll was cheefe gouerner of the abbay of
Maylros vnder Eate their abbott (as we haue signified before)

and shewed hym a vision that he had the same nyght, and sayd.
When matyns was done I layd me downe vppon my bed, and
falling in a litle slūbringe sleape, Boysil that was somtymes my
good Master and bringer vpp, appeared to me and demaūding
many questiōs, askyd whether I knewe hym. Yea Syr very wel
quoth I: yow ar my especiall good Master and frynde Boysill.
Then sayd he, I am come nowe to shewe ower Lorde and sauidur
Iesus Christes commaundemēt to Ecgbert: the which notwithstanding
this, must be signified vnto him by the. Tell him
therfore that he is not able to go forwarde with the iourny,VVe reade in the Actes of the Apostles that S. Paul and Stlas were forbidden of the holy Ghost (which was by reuelatiō) to preache the worde in Asia and in Bithinia.
which he purposeth. It is gods will he go rather and instructe
Columbes monasteries. This Columba was the first preacher
of Christes fayth to the Pictes dwelling beyonde the greate
mountaynes northward, and the first founder of a monastery
in the ile Hu which was had in great reuerēce and estimation
a long time both of the Scottes and of the Pictes. This said Columbe
is now called of some Columcell: deryuing his name by
composition of the latin woordes Cella and Columba. Ecgbert
hearing thys vysion gaue the messenger chardge that he
should reuele it to no man, left peraduenture in the ende it
might appeare to be a vaine and fantasticall vision: but he considering
the matter secretly with him selff, feared it was in dede
trewe,Act. cap. 16. notwithstanding he neuer ceased to make prouision
for his iourney which he purposed to take for the instruction
of those countries in Germanye.The Redshankes. But within iij. or iij. dayes
after, the same man came to him againe, saying, that the very
same night after mattins was done, Boisill appeared againe vnto
him in a vision, and saied these words. Why diddest thou thy
message so negligently and so coldly to Ecgbert? Go nowe and
tell him that whether he will or no he shall go to Columbes monasteries.
For, because their plowes go not right he must, reduce
thē to good order againe. When he heard this, he chardged the
messenger, in leke manner as he did before, to reuele it to no

man. And albeit he was so certified of the vision, yet for at that
he called his company together, and went forward on his iourney.
And when they had fraighted their shippes and laied aborde
all that should be requisite in such a longe voyage, and taried
thre or iiij. daies for a good winde, there arose one night
such a vehement tempest, that great part of the marchandise
in the shipp being lost, she was left in the middest of the sea lying
vppon one syde. But notwithstanding this storme, all Ecbertes
goods were saued and his companions also. Then he
saying as it were, the sentence of the holy prophet, this greate
tempest happeneth for my sake, withdrew him selff from
that iourney, and was content to tarry at home. But one of his
fellowes named Victbert a man notable bothe for his minde
mortifyed with contempt of worldly things, and also for deepe
and profounde knowledge, toke shipp, and arriuing in Frislande
preached the ghospell of Christ ij. yeares to the inhabitans
there, and Readbert their soueraine and kinge. In the ende finding
all his labour spent in vaine amongest such barbarous people,
he returned to the solytary places where he lyued before
(to witt in to Ireland) where he passed many a yeare leke an
anchoret in much perfection, and serued God in silence and
contemplation, and because he culd do no good in conuertinge
those foryners to the christian faythe, he studyed howe
he might better profitt his owne countrey men, by vertuous
example of lyfe.
            
            
               
                  How Wilbrorde preaching in Friselande conuerted many to Christe, and howe also the ij. Henwaldes his companions were martyred.
               
               The 11. Chap.
               WHEN that godly mā 
                  Ecgbert perceaued that
neither he him selff could be suffred to go and
preache to the countries of Germany, but
was stayed for some other greate commoditie
of the churche whereof he had vnderstanding
by reuelation from God, neither Victbert
                  
coming into those parties did profit any thing, he assaied yet
the seconde time to send thither for the setting forth of Gods
worde certaine holy and vertuous men, able and willing to take
paines, amongest whome that notable and excellent lerned
man VVilbrorde priest, was chieff. Who after their arriuall thither
being in number xij.Friseland conuerted to the faithe. went streyt to Pypine chiefe gouuernour
then of Fraunce
                     •
                   where being very frendly intertained of
him,
because he had lately taken the lower part of Frisland, and
by force driuen oute their kinge Radbed, he sent them thither
to preache ayding and assisting them with his princely authoritie
that no man should by violence iniury them, or interrupte
their preachinge, and also bountifully rewarding all such
as would embrace and receiue the faithe. Whereby it came to
passe by the assistaunce of Gods grace that in shorte tyme they
conuerted very many from idolatrie to the faith of Christ.
               After the example of these holy men, ij. other englishe priestes
which had voluntarily liued in banishment a longe tyme
in Ireland for hope of aeternall lyfe, came to Saxonie, if happely
by their preaching they might winne any to Christ. As these
good men had leeke deuotion, so had they bothe one name,
being bothe called Henwalde. Yet for diuersitie to knowe one
from the other, one was called blacke Henwalde, and the other
white Henwalde, because of the diuerse colour of their heare:
Bothe of them had a greate zeale, and reuerend loue to Christes
religion. But blacke Henwalde was the better diuine. They
coming into the countrey, went to a farmers house, and desired
they might be conducted to the Lorde, which had the rule and
gouuernaunce there, saying they had an embassy, and other
matters of importaunce to declare vnto him.The gouuernemēt of the old Saxons. For the olde Saxons
had no kings but many Lordes to rule the countrie. Who
as often as there was surmise or feare of warres towarde, did
cast lotts equally amongest them selfs, and vppon whome the
lott fell, him they folloed as their generall capitaine, as longe as

the warres indured, and obediently exequuted what so euer he
commaunded. When the warres were done, all the Lordes wer
equal in powre and authority againe, as they were before. The
farmer intertained these good men, and promising to conduct
them to the Lorde of the soyle according to their request staied
them iij. or iiij. dayes in his house. When they were espied
of the rude barbarous people, and knowen to be of an other
religion, (for they soonge hymnes, psalmes, and other deuoute
prayers, and saied masse, hauing with them bookes, and holy
vessells, and a litle table hallowed, in stede of an aulter) they
had them in ieolosy, and suspicion that if they came to the
Lorde and talked with him, they would turne him quite from
worshipping of their gods, and bringe him to the new religion
of Christes faith. Wherby a litle and litle all the whole country
should be enforced to chaunge the old auncient manner of
worshipping their Gods into some newe religion neuer heard
of before.The martyr
                        •
                     ome o
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . english priests in Saxony. Wherfore they toke them away sodainly and killed
white Henwald with a sworde, and blacke Henwald with longe
torments and horrible di
                     •
                  membringe all partes of his body,
and after they had murdred thē cast thē into the riuer of Rhene.
This fact when the Lord of the coūtry (whom they desyred to
see) vnderstoode, he was very angry, that straungers repayring
to him, could not haue free passage. And streytwais sending
forth his men of armes slew all the inhabitaunts of the same
village, and burnt their houses downe to the grounde. Those
good priestes, and faithfull seruants of our Sauiour Christe
suffred the third day of Octobre: and to testifye their Martirdom
vnto the wordle, there lacked no miracles from heauen.
For when their bodies were cast of the paynims, (as we signified
before) into the ryuer Rhene, it so fortuned that they were
caried against the maine runninge streame, almost xl. miles,
where their companions were, and a greate bright beame of
light reaching vp to heauen shyned euery night ouer the place,

whersoeuer they came, they them selues that had cruelly
murdered them beholding and seing the same. Moreouer one
of them appered by vision in the night to one of their companions,
whose name was Tilmon, (a noble man of great renowne
in the worlde, who from the high degre of a knyght becacame
a monke) shewing that he might finde their bodies
in that place, where he should see a light shyne from heauen.
The which came so to passe. And their bodies being founde,
they were buried with all honour worthy for such holy
martires. And the day of their Martirdome, or rather of the findings
of their bodies, is kepte solemne and holy in those parties
with much deuotion and reuerence. Finally when that
worthy and renouned Captaine of the frenchmen named Pipine,
had vnderstanding of this, he caused their bodies to be
buried very honourably in the church of Coollen, a famous
citie situated harde by the riuer Rhene: Besides it is commonly
saied, that in the place where they were kylled there spronge vp
a fountaine, which at this present day floweth with a greate
streame to no litle commoditie of the country.
            
            
               
                  How ij. reuerend and holy men were made bishoppes to set forth and preache Christes religion in Frisland, Switbert in Britanny, and Wilbrorde in Rome
               
               The. 12. Chapter.
               AT the first arriuall of these holy men to Freslande,
Wilbrorde hauing lycence of the prince to preache,
went first to Rome, where Sergius at that present occupied
the sea Apostolique, that with his lycence and benediction
also he might set vpon that Apostolike office of preachinge
to the heathen, which he longe desyred
                     •
                   hoping with al
to receiue of him some reliques of Christes holy Apostles
and Martirs: to the end that while in the country where he
preached, he should erect churches, after the idolles were cast
out and destroyed, he might haue in a readinesse, some holy saintes
reliques, to bring in their place, and to dedicat churches in
their honour, whose reliques he had receuid, Diuers other thinges

also he lerned and receiued from thence, requisite for so
greate an enterprise. In al which requestes when his desyre was
accomplished, he returned backe againe to preache. At the very
same time his bretherne and companions left in Fresland, altogether
bēt to the setting forth of Gods word, choosed out of
their cōpany, a mā modest and sober in al outward behauiour
and humble of spirit, called Switbert to be their bishop. Whom
(sent for that purpose into Britanny) the most reuerend father
in God VVilfride did consecrate, lyuinge then, as a banished
man out of his country amongest the Marshes. For at that tyme
Canterbury had neuer a bishop. Theodore was dead, and
Berthwalde his successour which went ouer the sea to be
consecrated, was not yet returned to his bishoprike. The said
Switbert returning out of Britanny after he was consecrated
and made bishopp, went within a shorte tyme after to the
People of the higher Frisia. Bruchtuars. And cōuerted a greate nūber of them to the perfect
way of truth: but shortly after whē the Bruchtuars wer subdued
and conquered by the old Saxōs, al that receiued the gospell
were dispersed: some into this corner, some in to that: The
bishop him self with certaine other went to Pipine which at the
earnest sute of his ladye, Slichildride gaue him a dwelling
and māsion place in a isle of the Rhene, which in their toungue
is called In litore, that is to say, in the sea cost: where he buylding
a goodly monastery (which his successours possesse at this
present) liued a very austere and continent lyfe there, where al
so he died. After the foresaid holy men that came to Frisland
had preached there iiij. yeares or mo, Pipine with the common
assent of all the country sent that vertuous and worthy prelate
VVilbrodde, to Rome where Sergius was yet Pope, desyring
that he might be made Archebishop of that parte of Freslande:
the which was fulfilled, accordinge to his request the yeare
sence the incarnation of Christ. 696.An. 696. Vpon sainct Cicelies day
and in sainct Cicelies churche he was consecrated and named

Clement of the said Pope, and forthwith sent away to his bisshoprycke,
to witt xiiij dayes after his cominge to Rome. At
his returne Pipine assigned him a Cathedrall Churche in his
chief and principall cyte called by an olde auncient name of
those countries, VViltaburge as yow would say a toune inhabited
of the VViltes.
                  VVilbrord an english man, the first Archebishop of Vltraict in Frisselād. In the french tounge it is called Vltraict.
Where when this holy and reuerend father had buildid
a churche and preaching the faith of Christ farr and wyde
had reuokyd many from blindnes and errour, he erected also
many churches and monasteries through out al those coūtryes,
and within shorte tyme after made many bishopps chosen either
out of those that came presently with him, or of other
which came thither afterward to preache, of the which company
many are now departed to god. But Wilbrorde called
otherwise Clement lyueth yet a reuerent father euen for his age:
for he hath lyued in his bishoppricke xxxvj. yeres and after
many agonies and troubles of his heuenly warfare laboureth
and panteth yet after the rewarde of euerlastinge blysse in heauen.
            
            
               
                  Howe one in Northumberland rysing from deathe tolde many thinges that he had sene, some terrible to heare, and some worthy to be desired of all men.
               
               The. 13. Chap.
               THe very same time was wrought in Britanny a miracle
worthy of perpetuall remembraunce and not vnleke to
the olde auncient miracles of tymes past: for to stirre vp
and reuiue men lyuing here vppon earth from the death of
their soules, a certayne man starke dead for a tyme, rose from
death to lyfe, and tolde many notable thinges that he had seene,
of the which I thought it good to touche certayne briefly in
this historie: There was in the coast of Northumberlande (in a
place callyd Incunning) an honest householder of the countrie
which with all his family lyued a godly and vertous life: He
fell sicke, and by vehemency of his dysease growing more

and more vppon hym, was brought to extremyty: and in the
beginnyng of the nyght died. But in the dauninge of the day,
reuiuing agayne, and fittinge vpp sodaynly: made all that remained
aboute the corse, runne a way as men wonderfully amased
with feare. Only his wife which loued him tenderly (although
she tremblyd and quakyd) tarried still. And he comforting
her sayed, be not afraide. For I am nowe rysen in very dede
from death which had me as it were in prison, and am permitted
to liue in earth amongst men againe, but not after the
same maner and trade as I did before. From hence forth my
conuersation must be farr vnleeke to my former life. And rysing
by and by, he went to the paryshe churche and continuing
there in prayer vntill it was fayre day light forthwyth diuided
all his goods into thre partes: one parte he gaue to his wife, an
other to his children, the third he reserued to him selfe, and made
distribution of it straytways amongst the poore. Not longe
after dispatched of all worldly cares he went to the Monastery
of Mailros. The which is almost closed in with a creeke
of the ryuer Tuyde. Where being shoren in, he went into a secret
cell which the abbot had prouided for him and contynued
there vntill his dying day in such contrition of harte and
mortefying of the body, that if his tounge had not reported yet
his life had testified that he had sene many thinges bothe terrible,
and also comfortable which no other man had sene. Of
the vision which in his departure he sawe, he told after this sorte.
He that conducted and guided me in this vision had a goodly
bright shyning countenaunce, and was clothyd all in
white: and as it semed to me, we went altogether in silence towardes
the rysing of the sonne: and as we walkyd furder we came
to a great brode vally so brode, so lōge, and so deepe that no
man could measure it. That which lay on the left hande as we
went, semed to haue one side very terrible with flaming fier, the
other intolerable with hayle, and snowe: beating an percing

into euery corner.Let the Christian reader here aduise him self, whether he may scorne at this vision, bicause in heathen writers, as in the Menippus of Lucian and other such fonde tales are fained or rather to beleue it, bicause so lerned and holy a man r
                        •
                     
                     porteth it, the time also of our first coming to the faith considered. Truly I thinke, therefore the heathen and infidell faineth such thinges, in his false religion, bycause he knoweth tha
                        •
                      God reueleth the l
                        •
                     ke to such as serue him in true religion. Euen as S. Augustin noteth, that therefore the diuell is delighted with externall sacrifice of man, bicause he knoweth that kinde of worship to be due and proper to God him selfe. Lib. 10. de Ciuit. dei: Cap. 19. Bothe places were full of mens sowles, which
apperyd to me to be cast interchaungeably, nowe hither now
thither as it wer with a violent tempest: for when they could no
lenger suffre the intolerable heate and flames of fier, they leaped
to the mydst of that hatefull and deadly colde. And when they
pitefully in could finde no reast there, agayne they wer reuersed
into those vnquencheable flames of fier. As an infinite number
of miserable and wretched soules were tormented without cea
                  
                     •
                  inge
or intermission (as I might then see) with this alteration
and interchaunge of paynes, I beganne to thynck with my selfe,
peraduenture this may be hell of whose intolerable torments I
haue heard men oftentimes talke. But to this cogitation and
thought of myne, my guyde answeryd sayeng. Na thinke not
so for this is not hell as thowe doest suppose. But when he
brought me farder beinge altogether amased with that terrible
sight, I sawe the places rownde aboute vs sodaynly leese
their lyght and euery corner full of darknes. As we entred
in to them, within a litle space they were so thycke that
I could see nothing, but the bright shewe and cote of him
which did conducte me. When we went forward all alone in
this darknesse beholde sodaynly there appeared before vs, many
rounde flawes of fier ascending as it were oute of a greate
pitt and falling downe againe into the same: When I was
brought thither my conductour and guide vanished away, and
left me alone in the midest of that darknesse, and horrible
sight. But as those flawes of fyer flew vppe into the element
still without intermission, and fell downe into the deape doungell
againe, I sawe the topp of euery flawe that ascended
full of mens soules, which in maner of litle sparcles of fyer flying
vppe with the smoke were somtimes a hye, and when the
heate and vapors of the fier were gone, fell downe againe into
the pitte. Moreouer a foule and noysom sauour, breaking out
with the same vapours infected all the darke places rownde

about. And as I tarried there somewhat longe in greate horrour
and feare, not knowing what I should do nor whether I shuld
go, nor what should be come of me, in the ende, I heard sodainly
behinde my backe most lamentable and pitifull crying,
and withall a lowde skournefull lawghing, as it had bene of some
rude and barbarous people, insulting ouer their enemyes
brought in captiuitie and thrauldome. As sone as the noyse waxing
more brimmer and brimmer came fully to my eares, I descried
a multitude of wicked sprites, which did hale, teare, and
plucke, the myserable and wretched soules of men, in to the
midst of darknes, weaping, wayling, and lamenting their state:
the wicked sprits in the meane skornefully laughing and triū
                  phing
at their myserie: amongest whome, as well as I could discerne,
there was a moncke, a lay man, and a woman. The wicked
sprites drawing and haling them, went downe into that
deape fyery flaminge dongell. And it came to passe, that when
they were gone a greate way of, I could neither discerne the
lamentable crye of those soules: neither the skornefull laughter
off the deuills, but had alwaies in my care a confuse noyse. In
the meane season came vp from the fiery flaming dongell, certaine
euill fauoured blacke sprites and compassed me rounde
aboute, and with there fiery eyes, and foule stinking sauours
which they breathed out had almost strangled me: Besides they
threatned to take me with the fiery forkes in their handes: yet
they could in no wise touche me, although they aduentred to
fraye me. When I was compassed in euery side with such foule
finnes, and ougly darknesse I cast my eies now this way nowe
that way if happely there might come any assistaunce or help
to saue me: and behold there appered behinde me, (euen the
very same way I came) the glimsing of a starre, shining in the
midst of that darkenesse, which waxing brighter and brighter
and coming a pace to me, dispersed those wicked sprites away,
which with their fyery pronges were ready to rent me in peces.

He that came and put them to flight was the guide which
conducted me before: Who turning streytwayes vppon the
right hande, lead me as it were somewhat northward where
the sonne riseth in the winter, and with a trice brought me out
of darknesse into the faire brode light. And as he lead me in the
faire shining light, I sawe before vs a greate walle, which was so
longe and so hye, that on nether side I could see any ende. I beganne
to maruell and muse with my self, why we should go to
the walle, specially whē I saw nor gate, nor loope hole, nor any
other entrance vp to it: but when we were come thither I can
not tell by what meanes, we mounted quickly to the toppe, and
beholde there was a faire brode fielde, both comfortable and
pleasaunt so ful of swete fragrāt sauours, and of fresh florisshing
floures, that incontinent the swete smel droue away quite and
cleane all the stinking and lothsom sent of that darke firy fornace,
which had almost stifled me. So goodly and clere a light
shined there in euery place that it semed more fayrer, than the
brightnesse of the day and beames of the some, when it is at
the highest. There were in that field innumerable companies
of white couloured men, many seates, and infinite multitudes
of soules reioysing and triumphing. As he lead me through
the middest of those blessed soules, I beganne to thinke with
selfe, perchaunce this may be heauen, of the which I haue hearde
men oftentimes preache. To this my imagination and
thought, he answered saying, this is not the kingdom of heauen
as thou doest imagine. As we went forward and passed the resting
places of those blessed and happie soules, I sawe a more
brighter shining light before vs than the other was, and heard
a sweete melodious noyse of Musicians, besides that such a
swete perfume and fragrāt sauour brake out in euery place, that
the other which I smelled before, and thought excessiuely passing,
was in comparison vnpleasaunte and nothing worthe, in
leeke manner as the other bright shininge light of the pleasant

grene fielde in comparison of this semed somewhat darke and
obscure. In to the which paradise of pleasure as I hoped well
we should go, sodainly my conductour and guide stoode
still, and turning backe brought me agayne the same waye
we came. In our returne, when we came to the mansions
and resting places of those blessed soules, he asked me, this
question. Do you knowe what all this is that yowe haue seene?
I answered no: Then he saied vnto me. The vally which you
saw horrible with hotte flaming fyer, and sharp byting colde is
the place, where their soules remaineth to be examined and tried,
which differring the cōfession of their synnes, and amendment
of life had recourse to penaunce in the instant and
pointe of deathe, and so departed owte of this wolrde.
Yet bicause they made humble confession of their synnes and
repented euen at the houre of their deathe, they shall come to
the kingdome of heauen at the day of iudgement, and some
before. For the good prayers, charitable almes, and deuoute
fastinge of those that yett lyuethe, and especially
the holy sacrifice of the masse, helpe to delyuer many
out of those torments, before that terrible daye. Moreouer
the the fiery flaminge pitt, and stinkinge doungell, which
thowe didst see is hell mouthe, into the which whosoeuer falleth,
he shall neuer be delyuered thence. The goodly grene
field full of odoriferous flowers, where thowe sawest all ioyfull,
iocund, and mery, is the very same place where their soules
ar receiued which departe oute of this lyfe in the state of
grace, but yet not of such perfection, that they deserue to be
brought streytwaies in to the kingdome of heauen, but for all
that in the day of iudgement, shall haue the sight and fruition
of Christes deity and immortall ioye with his chosen and elected.
Only they which are perfecte in all their wordes,
thoughts, and dedes, ar caried strayt to heauen after they haue
passed their transitory life. The place where thow heardest the

sweete melodious singing, with the goodly flagrante sauours
and bright shyning light, is next adioyninge to this. Concerninge
thy owne state, because thou shall haue thy naturall body,
and lyue amongest men in the wordle ones again, if thowe
wilt diligently examin thy doinges vppon earthe, and directe
thy maner of lyuing in vprightnesse and simplicitie, and refraine
thy tounge from vaine and ydell talke, certainly assure
thy self to haue a resting place amongest these blessed soules
which thou seest here: for when I went awaye for a tyme and
left the alone, it was for no other cause but to lerne and enquire,
what should be come of the. When he had talked with
me in this sorte, I vtterly detested this present life and was sorye
to returne to my naturall body againe. I was so rauished
with the swete fragrant sauoures, and beutifull sights of that
place which I did see, and especiall their society which for the
time made their abode there. Notwithstandinge I durst not be
so bold, as to demaunde or aske any question of my conductour
or guide, but in the midest of these meditatiōs, I perceued
(by what meanes I can not tell) that I was in the world again,
and liued as other mē did. These sightes and many other thinges
ells, this vertuous and holy man wold not report to sleuthfull
sluggards and idell folkes, men that had no regard of their
owne life, but to such only, as either dismayed with feare of
torments or rauished with hope of eternall ioye, wolde gladly
receiue and sucke oute of his woordes, some heauenly comforte
and encrease of piety. Wel, to be shorte, in the same rewe
where is celle stoode, dwelled a monke called Hengils promoted
to the holy ordre of priesthod, which he honoured much
with his vertuous woorkes. This man remaineth yet a lyue,
and leeke a solitary heremitein Ireland, fedeth his old impotent
body with browne bred and cold runninge water. This
monke resorting to the saied holy man oftentimes, vnderstode
by certaine questions which he propounded, what sightes he

sawe, after his body and soule were departed, and by his relation
all which I haue brefly declared, came to our knowledge.
Moreouer he communicated his visions with kinge Alfride,
a man excellently lerned in all good literature, who hearde
him with such comfort and attention, that at his desyre, he
was placed at the length in the same monastery, and shoren in
religion. In the which monastery at that time, Edilwald priest
of most godly and modest life was Abbot but now he is made
bishop of Lindisfarn, which church he gouerneth in right good
ordre, both with holsome doctrine, and good example of lyfe,
semely for his vocation. This holy man toke after in the same
monastery a more secret celle vnto him,Holy
Ilond. where with more liberty
he might serue his maker, in continuall praier without
intermission. And because the place was situated vpon a riuers
side, he was wont to dippe and plung
                     •
                   him self in the flowinge
water oftentimes, for greate desyre he had to chastise his body,
and cōtinue ther singing of psalmes and other duout prayers,
as longe as he coulde abyde for cold the water now and then
comming vp to his hippes, and now and then to his chinn. And
when he came out of the water he neuer chaūged his clothes
being wet and cold, but taried vntil they wer warmed and dryed
by the natural heat of his body. In the winter season, whē peaces
of yce half brokē dropt down on euery syde of him, which
of purpose he had broken to plounge into the riuer, and diuerse
men seeing him, sayd, it is a maruelous matter and straunge
case brother Drithelme, (for so he was called) that you can
possibly suffer such bitter and sharpe colde, he answered simplye,
(for he was but a simple and sober spryted man) I haue
sene places colder then this is. And when they said vnto him,
we maruel that you wil liue so cōtinent and auster a lyf, he answered
I haue sene more austeryte and hardnesse then this is.
So vntill the day of his calling hence owte of this wretched
world, for the ernest desire he had of heauenly felycitie, he punyshed

his old impotent bodye with dayly fastinge, and was by
good fruteful instruction and godly conuersation a great comforte
to manye.
            
            
               
                  Howe an other contrary wise dyinge founde all the synnes that euer he had donne written in a booke brought vnto hym by the deuill.
               
               The. 14. Chapter.
               BVt contrary wyse there was a man in the countre and
prouince of the Marshes whose visions, talk, and manner
of life dyd profitt many, but not hym selfe. In the time
of Coenrede which raygned after king Edilrede, there was a certaine
lay man taken vpp for a souldiar and put in office in the
campe, who for his dyligence and actyuitie in feates of armes
was greate in fauour with the kinge: but for the negligence and
improuident care concerninge the state of his owne sowle, in
displeasure with the princ
                     ••
                   Wherefore the kynge charged him
eftesoones to make humbl
                     •
                   confession of his sinnes, and amend
his former lyfe, and vtterly to forsake al his detestable actes and
haynous offenses, lest by deathes sodayne preuention he loste
tyme of repentaunce and amendment of his life: but he, notwithstandinge
this gentyll admonition, and fryndly exhortation
of his souerayne contemned and set naught by those comfortable
wordes of saluation, and promised that he wolde do
penaunce afterwarde. In the meane season beinge vysited with
sycknesse he toke his bedd and beganne to be more and more
vexed with the vehement pangs of his dysease. The kinge
came to his chamber (for he louyd hym tenderly) and exhorted
and counseled him, that at the lest nowe he wolde falle to
penaunce for his naughty lyfe, and sinfull actes, before he died.
Na quoth he. I wyll not be confessed now, but when I am well
recoueryd and able to go abrode agayne, than I wyll, lest if I
should now do it, my felowes would saye that I dyd it now for
feare of deathe which in my prosperyty and health I wold neuer
vouchsafe to do. Wherein he spake to his owne leekinge

stowtly and leeke a man, but certes, as yt appeared after he was
myserably deceuyd with the crafty illusions of the deuyll.
Whē the kynge came to visite hym agayne, and geue him good
counsell because his desease grewe more vehemently vpon him
euery daye, he cryed oute incontynent with a pytyfull and lamentable
voyce saying. Alas what meane yow my liege, why
come you hither? Yowe are nether able to profitt, nor pleasure
me nor do me any good. The kynge answeryd streytways,
Ah, say not so: see ye play the wyse mans parte: Nay sayth he, I
am not madde, but I haue here vndoutedly before my eies a
wicked conscience all woundyd and mangled. And what is this
said the kinge? Yf yt please yower hyghnesse quoth he: a litle
before yower grace came, ij. bewtyfull and hansome yownge
men came into the howse, and sate downe by me. One at my
head, the other at my feete: and one of them toke a goodly faire
booke owte of his bosome but litle in quantytye, and gaue y
                     •
                  
me to reade. In the which when I looked a litle whyle, I founde
all the good dedes that euer I had done fayre written: and god
knoweth they were fewe in number and litle in effecte: when
I had done, they toke the booke of me againe and said nothing.
Then sodainly came there abowte me an whole legion of wicked
sprytes, and beseaged the howse rownde abowte in the
vtter side, and sittinge downe replenisshed euery corner within.
Than he which for his fowle euyll fauouryd blacke face, and
hyghest seate apperyd to be greatyst amongst them, takyng out
a booke terrible to all mens sight, vnmeasurable for greatnesse,
and for weyght importable, cōmaūdyd one of his blacke garde,
to bringe yt to me to reade. When I had read a litle, I founde all
the enormous detestable sinnes that euer I had committed not
only in worde and dede, but also in lyght thoughtes written
there in greate blacke letters: and he said to the ij. fayre younge
men that sate by me, Why sitte yow here knowing most certaynly
that this felow is owers? They made answer. Trewe it is.

Take him and leade him away to the botomelesse pit of damnation:
and with that they vanisht away. Incontinent ij. wycked
sprites hauyng fyer pronges in their handes rose vppe and
stroke me one in the hed, and the other in the sole of my feete,
the which nowe with greate torment and anguysh creepe vp
in to the bowells and other internall partes of my bodie, and
when they meete together I shall dye, and be drawen hence by
the dyuells watchinge and whyuering about me into hel without
redemption. Thus spoke that myserable manlying in extreme
desperation and died owte of hande, and now lyuinge in
thrauldome with the deuill in euerlastinge payne doth that
penaunce (but all in vayne) which in his lyfe time he myght
haue done if it had bene but one howre, with an assured hope
of gods mercy and pardone for all his synnes. Of this miserable
and wrechyd man, it is euident that (as S. Gregorye wryteth of
certaine) he had not those visions for his owne sake, whome
they auailed nothing at all, but for other men which knowing
his lamentable end might be afeared to differ and prolonge the
tyme of repentaunce, while they haue oportunytye and leasure,
lest by sodayne preuention of death they dye impenitent.
That he sawe diuerse bookes brought before him by diuerse
and sondry sprites,A true and necessary doctrine for this wicked time. some good, some bad, it was done by the diuine
prouidence and permission of god to putt vs in remembraunce
that our doinges and thoughts flee not away with the
winde, but ar reserued particularly to the straite examination
of the dreadfull iudge. And at the ende shall be shewed to vs other
by the good angells which frindfully wishe our saluation,
or by the wicked sprites, which spitefully woorke our damnatiō.
Concerning that first of all the good Angells brought forhe
a fayre white booke, and the deuills afterwarde their fowle
euill fauoured black lygger: the angels a litle one, they an vnmeasurable
greate one: it is to be noted that in his childehode he
did some good dedes, yet notwitstandinge he disgraced all that

euer was done with his lewde and loose demeanour in yowthe.
But if he wolde haue amended in youth the wanton toyes and
foolishe panges of childhode, and with wel doinge raunesomed
them owt of the sight of god,Psal. 13. he myght haue bene brought to
their societie, of whome the Psalme of Dauid saithe, Beati quorū
remissae sunt &c. Blessed ar they whose iniquities ar forgeuen,
and whose sinnes ar couered. This history I thought good to
set forth playnly and simplie, as it was declared vnto me of that
worthy prelate Pechthelme, to the comforte of all suche, as shall
reade it or heare it.
            
            
               
                  Howe an other in leeke manner sawe a place of paine appointed for him in hell.
               
               The. 15. Chapter.
               FVrthermore I my self knew a religious man (whom wold
God I had neuer knowen) placed in a good and famous
monasterie, notwithstanding he him selfe was infamous
for his lewde behauiour and loose lyfe. I could tell his name
also, if it were worth the telling. This man was earnestly rebuked
of his bretherne and other head officers of the monastery,
for his enormities, and exhorted to a better trade of lyfe, but
all was in vaine. Notwithstanding, albeit he would not geue
eare nor humbly obey their charitable exhortations, yet they
did tolerate him very longe for his externalll seruice, which
was very necessarie for them. For he was a singular good carpenter.
This man was much geuen to dronknesse and other
wanton pleasures of dissolutnesse, and accustomed rather to fit
in his shopp both day and night, than to come to the church to
singe or pray, or heare the trew worde of life with his bretherne,
by which occasion it happened to him, as men ar commonly
wounte to saye. He that will not come of his owne accorde
within the church dore,A old prouerbe. shall runne against his will to hell
gates. For he being now streeken with a very fainte desease, and
brought to extremitie, called all the couent about him, and

with much lamentation and deepe sitghes, leeke a man damned
already, beganne to declare vnto them, that he sawe hell
gates open, and the deuill drouned in a deape doungell thereof,
and Caiphas and al the whole rablemēt that put Christ to deathe,
cast in flaminge fier, hard by him: and next to them (oh,
miserable and wretched man that I am, saide he) I see a place
of eternall perdition prepared for me. His bretherne hearing
these wofull wordes exhorted him earnestly to repent and be
sorie for his sinnes, while he was yet alyue. Then he brought to
extreme desperation answered, No No. There is no time for me
to amend my former life, especially seing I perceiue my iudgement
is past and fully complete already. With those wordes he
died without receauing the sacrament. His bodie was interred
in the formost parte of all the Abbaie, not one of all the whole
couent durst say masse for his soule, nor singe psalmes, nor once
say one Pater noster for him. Oh howe farre a sunder hath
God separated light and darknesse? The first blessed Martyr
S. Steuen ready to suffer death for testimonie of the truthe, sawe
heauen gates open,Actor. 7. and Iesus standing on the right hande
of God. He to the ende he might more ioyfully die, fixed the
eyes of his mind there before his deathe, where he should be after:
but this forsaied felow, blacke in soule, blacke in body, and
blacke in all outwarde doinges, sawe hell open, at the houre off
his death, and perpetuall damnation prepared for the deuill and
all that follow him. Againe to thentent that though his death
were miserable in desperation, yet by his owne damnation he
might geue other example to repent and worke their owne saluation
in time, he sawe his owne place and doungell prepared
amongest such caytyffs, as Cayphas and his complices were.
This chaunced of late in the countrie of the Berniciens,In Northumberland. and
wa
                     •
                   by common talke blasted all the countrie ouer: so that it
stirred vp many to make quick confession of their sinfull actes
and not to take dayes with God. Which God graunte it may

worke allso in such as shall reade this present historie.
            
            
               
                  Howe many churches of Scotland by the instant preaching of Adamannus kept the feast of easter after the catholique maner and howe he wrote a booke of holly places.
               
               The 16. Chap.
               AT that time a greate multitude of Scottes in Ireland,
and many Britons in Britanny receaued by the singular
gifte of God, the trewe manner of celebrating the
feast of Easter, taught by the catholique church. For when as
Adamannus a vertuous priest and Abbott of all the mounkes
and religious men, that were in the isle Hu, being sent Embassadour
by the prince of his owne countrie to Alfride kinge of
the Englishmen, and tarying a certain time in the countrie sawe
the Canonicall rites and ceremonies of the church, and besides
was sharpely admonished by the lerned that he should not
presume to lyue contrary to the vniuersall church,Catholike 
                        •
                     os
                        •
                     ruations to be preferr
                        •
                     d. nor in keping
the feast of Easter, nor in any other decrees, what so euer
they were, with his countrie men fewe in number, and dwelling
also in one of the furmost corners of all the world, he so
chaunged his minde hereuppon, that what so euer he had heard
or sene in the english church, he most gladly preferred it
before the custome and manner of his owne. For he was vertuous,
wise, and very ready in the knowledge of holy scripture.
After his returne therefore into the countrie he-endeuoured
diligently to reduce all the isle Hu to the brode beaten pathe
of truethe, which he knew very wel, and had embraced with all
his harte: but he was not able to bringe it to passe. Whereuppon
he sayled into Ireland, and preaching there and shewing
them with gentill exhortations the trewe and laufull obseruation
of Easter, he wanne many that were not in the dominion
of the saied Iland of Hu from errous to vnitie, receiued vniuersally
of the catholike church, and taught thē to obserue the
trewe time of Easter. This Adamannus whē the feast of Easter
was now kept by his meanes in Ireland after the institution of

Christes catholique church, he returninge to his islande agayne
and preaching to his bretherne in the monasteryes this
generall obseruation, and kepinge of Easter as he had
don before and yet being not able to compasse his purpose
it fortuned he fell sicke, and departed out of this worlde,
before the yeare was complete and fully ended. And
that by the greate prouidence of almighty God so disposing
it swetely: to the ende such a vertuous man desirous of vnity
and peace, should be taken hence to aeternall life before easter
came againe, for obseruation of which feaste he should haue
bene forced to much variaunce and discorde by such as wold
not embrace the truthe. This same vertuous man wrote a
booke of holy places very profitable for the readers, which he
lerned at the lectures and expositions of Archwulf a bishop in
Fraunce: who to see holy places and monuments went to Hierusalem,
and when he had wandred ouer all the lande of promesse,
and had gone to Damascum, Constantinople, Alexandria,
and other many isles of the sea, was driuen in his returne
by tempest to the weast coastes of Britanny. Who within
fewe dayes after reforting to that worthy seruaunt of our
Sauiour Christes Adamannus aboue mentioned, he was receaued
with all kinde of humanitie and frendefull intertainement,
specially when he was knowen to be lerned in scripture,
and skilfull in description of holy places. For Adamannus so
estemed him that he put in writing, what soeuer notable thing
worthy of remembraunce the bishop testified that he had sene
in those holy places: and made a booke (as I said) thereof profitable
to many: but most of all to those, which lye farre from
the place where the Apostles and Patriarches liued, and knowe
nothing of them but what they may picke oute with longe
study and often reading. This boke Adamanus dedicated to
Alfride, and by his liberality and charges, it was geuen to other
inferiour persons to be read, the author him selfe being rewarded

with many goodly giftes, and sent to his country againe.
Out of whose writings to gather some certain thinges, and
place them in this our history I haue thought it good and
profitable to the readers herof.
            
            
               
                  What thinges he mentioned in the same booke touchinge the place of the natiuitie, passion and resurrection of Christe.
               
               The. 17. Chapter.
               OF the place of Christes natiuity he reporteth in this
sorte: Bethleem a city of Dauid, situated in a narrow
and streyt mounte, compassed with vallies of euery
side, is a myle in lenght, from the weast to the East, very base
and plaine without any toures or turrets.The place of Christes natiuite. The walles are builded
flatt without any battelments. In the east corner there is as
it were a denne not laboured of mā but framed of nature. The
vtter most parte of it, is saied to be the place of Christes natiuity,
the innermost the maunger, where he lay. This denne
couered somwhat farre inwarde with goodly precious marble,
hath ouer the place where our Lorde was borne, a great church
of the blessed virgin Mary builded vppon it. Of the place of his
passion and resurrection he wrote after this sorte. As ye enter
into the citie of Ierusalem on the North side, to come to the
holy places, ye must by ordre of streetes first go to the church
of Constantine which is called Martyrium, that is to saye, the
Martirdome, or place where the witnesse of our redemption
was founde. This church the Emperour Constantine builded
very gorgeously, because our sauiour Christes crosse was foū
                  de
in that place by his mother Helena: Going frō thence on the
weast side you shall seeOf this church erected by Helena mother of Constantin, Paulinus Nolensis maketh mention. Epist. 11. ad Seuerum.
                   a church builded in Golgotha where
that rocke is to be sene, which bore Christes crosse and his
blessed Body fast nailed to the same, and beareth now also a
mighty crosse of siluer with a greate brasen whele hanging
ouer it ful of lamps and torches. Within the cōpasse and place
where Christes crosse stode, was a vaute cut out of the rocke:
In the which vppon an aulter there made, masse is wonte to be

saide for honorable men that dieth,The deuotion of the Christians in Ierusalem aboue a thousand yeres past. the dead corps standing
with oute, in the strete. At the weast side of the same church,
was also a rownde chappel of Christes resurrection, enuironned
with thre walles, and borne vp with xij pillers, hauing betwixte
euery walle, a fayre brode waye: which hathe with in
his compasse and circuite thre aulters in three places of the
midle walle, south, northe, and weast. This chappell hath eight
doores, and places of entreaunce, directly ouer the three walles:
of the which iiij. stande northeest. and iiij. weast. In the midle
of this chappell 
                     •
                  as laied the rounde tumbe of our sauiour
Christ cut oute of the rocke,Et erit sepulchrum eius glorisum. to the toppe of which a man
standing within, may reach with his hande. It openeth on the
east side,And the place of his buriall shall be glorious sayth the prophet. and hathe that greate stone that was layed vppon,
which vntil this day sheweth the print, and signe of the
yron tooles with which it was hewed and cut. With in, euen
to the very toppe all is couered with marble. The toppe it
selfe al gilted with golde, beareth a greate golden crosse, vpon
it. In the northe parte of that monument,Esaie. Cap. 11. Christes sepulchre
was cut oute of the same rocke, and made seuen foote longe,
and thre handfull higher then the pauiment. The coming in
is on the south side: where continually day and night twelue
ampes burne, foure with in the sepulchre, and eight aboue in
the right side. The stone which was put vppon the brimme of
the sepulchre, is nowe clouen. The lesse parte notwithstanding
standeth at the doore of the same sepulchre as an aulter foure-square.
The greater parte standeth for an other aulter in the same
churche in the manner of a quadrangle, couered with faire
white clothe. The colour of the sayd sepulchre semeth to be
white and read decently mixed together.
            
            
               
                  VVhat he wrote of the place of Christes ascension, and the patriarches sepulchres.
               
               The. 18. Chapter.
               
                  THe Author aboue mentioned writeth also in this wyse
touching the place of Christes ascension. The mounte
Olyuete is as hye as the mounte Syon, but not so
brode, nor so longe. There growyth no trees, but vynes and
olyues: wheate and barlye, it bryngyth forth good stoore. The
vayne and soyle of that grounde is not shryueled nor fleaten,
but grene and full of grasse. In the very toppe where Christ
ascendyd to heauen, standyth a greate rounde church, with thre
porches rownde in a circuite vawtyd and coueryd ouer. The
ynner chapell hauing an aultar toward the east, with a goodly
frount in the top, could not be vauted nor coueryd ouer bicause
the very place of Christes ascension might be kept open. In
the mydle of which churche the lastVVho thinketh this incredible, lett him geue a reason of the pathe way by Salisbury, called S. Thomas pathe by Clarengdon parke. prynte of Christes feete
left vppon earth, ar to be sene, where he ascendyd into heauen
openinge aboue and ready to embrace hym. And although
the earthe be fett away dayly of the Christians, yet it remayneth
still and kepyth the very figure and prynte made with the steppes
of his holy feete when he ascended. Rounde aboute the
print of those blessed feete lyeth a brasen wheele, as hygh as a
mans neck hauynge an entraunce and way in, vppon the east
side and a greate lampe hanginge aboue it in a pullye, whiche
burneth day and night. In the weast side of the same church
be eyght windowes, and so many lampes hanging in cordes directly
ouer them. They shine thorough the glasse to Ierusalem
and their light is said to stirre the hartes of all that behold and
see it, with a certaine feruent zeale and compunction: At the
day of Christes ascension euery yere, when Masse is done; there
cometh downe from heauen a greate gale of wynde, and maketh
all that ar in the churche prostrate them selfes downe flatt
vppon the grownd. Of the situation also of Hebron and monumentes
of old auncient fathers there, he writeth in this sorte.
Hebron somtimes the chiefest cytie in al Kinge Dauids realme,
shewing now only by her ruines howe princely and puissaunt

she was in time paste, hathe towarde the east with in a furlonge
the double denne, where the Patriarches sepulchres ar enuironed
with a fowre square walle: their hedds turned toward the
northe. Euery tumbe hath his stone. Al the thre stones of the
patriarches being all whyte, squared as other stones are vsed in
building of great churches. Adam lieth aboute the north side,
and vttermost parte of the walle not farr from them, in an obscure
tumbe nor curiously wrought, nor workmanly sett.
There ar besides base memorialls of thre simple weemen. The
hill Mambre also is a mile from these monumentes, ful of grasse
and pleasaunt flowres towarde the north, and in the top it hath
a goodly champion and playne fielde. In the north parte wherof
Abrahams Oke (which is nowe but a stumpe as hygh as ij.
men can reache) is compassed rounde abowt with a churche.
I haue thought it good for the profitt of the readers to intermingle
in my historie, these thinges taken out of the Authors
bookes and comprised here in latin after the trewe meaning of
his woordes, but more brieflie, and in fewer woordes. If any
man be desirous to knowe more of this matter either lett him
reade the same booke, or that litleThis abridgement is extant in the 3. tome of S. Bedes workes. abridgment which I drew
owt of him but late.
            
            
               
                  How the South saxons receaued Eadbert and Collan for their bysshopps, the weast Saxons Daniel and Aldethelme for theirs: and of certaine writinges sett foorth by the same Aldethelme.
               
               The. 19. Chap.
               THe yere of the incarnation off Christe 705.An. 705. 
                  Alfride
kinge of Northumberlande dyed, the xx. yere of his raigne
not yet fully expired. After hym sucdeded Osrede
his sonne, a child but eyght yeres olde, and raigned xj. yeares.
In the beginning of his raygne Hedde bysshop of the weast Saxons
departed from this mortall life to immortal ioye: For vndoubtedly
he was a iuste man, one that lyued vpryghtlye
in all pointes leke a good bishoppe, and preached sincerely leke
a trewe pastour, and that more of the loue of vertue naturally

graffyd in him, then of any instructours by often readinge
taught him. Furthermore, the reuerend father and worthy
prelate Pechtehlme, (of whom we must speake hereafter in
place where he shall be mentioned) who being but yet a deacon
and younge monke, liued familiarly a longe time with his successour
Aldethelme, was wounte to tell vs that in the place where
the said Hedde died, for reward of his holy life many great
miracles and cures were don: and that men of the same prouince
vsed commonly to carry away dust from thence and mingle
it with water for such as were deseased and sicke: that also
the drinking and sprinckling of the same did cure many sicke
men and beastes also. By which occasion for often carying away
of the sacred dust a great deepe pitt was made there. After
his death, that bisshopprick was diuided into ij. dioceses. The
one was geuen to Daniell, which he keapeth at this present: the
other to Aldethelme, where he ruled the people very painefully
for iiij. yeares. They were borhe lerned men skilfull in holy
scripture and all ecclesiastical doctrine. Aldethelme, when he
was priest, and yet but Abbot of the monastery ofIn the borders of VVilshere. 
                  Mailsbury
wrote by the commaundement of the whole Synode of his
countrye a booke against the errour of the Britons, for not keping
the fest of Easter in his dewe time, and doing many thinges
besides, contrary to the trewe obseruation and vnite of the
church. By reading of the same book he reduced many Brytōs
subiect at that time to the Weastsaxons, to the catholike solemnisation
of the feast of Easter. He wrote also a notable booke
of virginitie, bothe in longe verse and prose, with doble paines,
folowing the example of Sedulius. He set forth also many other
workes. For he was notably well lerned, very fine and eloquent
in his talke, and for knowledge as well in liberall sciences,
as in diuinite to be had in admiration. After his death Forthere
was made bishop in his place a man also much conuersant
in holy scripture. These ij. hauing the gouuernaunce and whole

rule of that diocese,The dioceses of Sussex and Hāpshere diuided. it was determined by a decree in the Synode,
that the prouince of South Saxons, which to that present
day appertained to the diocesse of Winchester, where Daniel
was bisshoppe, should haue a see and bishopp of their owne
seuerally.Celse foū
                     ded by Eadbert the first bishop of Celse in Sussex by Chichester. Whereuppon Eadberte Abbot in the monasterie off
that blessed bishoppe VVilfride was made and consecrated first
bisshopp of that diocese. After his death, Ceolla toke the bisshoppricke
vppon him: Who not past iij. or iiij. yeares past departing
this life, the see to this day is vacant.
            
            
               
                  Howe Coenrede kinge of the Marsshes, and Offa king of the East Saxons ended their liues in the habitt of religion, and of the lyfe and death of bisshop VVilfride.
               
               The 20. Chap.
               THe iiij. yeare of Osredes raigne, king Coenrede which
kept the soueraintie in the countrie of Marshes honourably
for a tyme, did more honourably forsake it,
and all his dominions. For vnder Constantine the Pope he
went to Rome, and receiuing there the tonsure and habitt of a
religious man, at the Apostles toumbes continued in praying,
fasting, and dealing of almes vntill his dying daye. Vnto this
noble prince Coenrede, succeded kinge Edilredes son, which Edildred
had the gouuernement of the same realme before him.
There went with him also to Rome Sigheres sonn king of the
east Saxons called Offa, (whome we mentioned before) a princely,
and beautefull gentleman, and then in his first flowres
and much desired of his subiectes to remaine and rule among
them. But he moued with leke deuotion and zeale as the other
prince was, forsoke his ladye, his landes, his kinsfolke, and countrie
for Christes sake, and the ghospell: that in this world he
might receiue an hundred folde and in the world to come life
euerlasting with Christ. When he came to the holy places att
Rome, he also was shoren into religion, in the which he passed
the rest of his life, and came to the vision of the blessed Apostles

in heauen, as he had longe desired before. The very selfe
same yere that these ij. princes went out of Britannie, a
worthy prelate and notable bishopp, called VVilfride, died the
xlv. yeare after he had ben made bisshoppe, in the territory, called
Wundale. And his body well chested, was caried to the monastery
of Rhippon wher he had before liued, and with al honour,
and solemnitie worthy for so noble a bishopp was buried
in Saincte Peters church at Rhyppon:Lib. 3. cap. 52. Of whose life and behahauiour
let vs brieflly make mention what things were done
returning as it were backe againe to that we haue spokē before.
               This Wilfride being but a childe was of such towardnesse
and good nature,The lyfe of bishop VVilfrid the Apostle of Sussex. induced with so many goodly qualities, of
such modest and honest behauiour in all pointes, that all the
elders and auncients did with a speciall good loue reuerence
him. After he was xiiij. yere olde, he more estemed a monasticall,
and solitarie lyfe, than all secular and wordly wealth. The
which thing when he had communicated with his father (for
his mother was departed to the mercy of God) he gladly condescended
to his holly requestes and godly desires, and exhorted
him to persiste in that godly purpose,Holy Ilond. which he had entended.
Hereuppon he came to the isle Lindisfarne and there attē
                  ding
vpō the monks, he diligētly lerned, and gladly practised, al
pointes of chastity, and godlinesse required in a solitarie and
religious man. And because he had a goodly pregnant witt
he lerned spedely psalmes and certain other bookes of prayers,
being not yet shoren in or professed, but well garnished with
those vertues, which far surmounted the outward profession
to witt of humility and obedience. For the which he was wel
loued and estemed bothe of the elders, and also of his equals.
When he had serued God certaine yeares in that monastery
he perceaued by litle and litle being growen in iudgement (as
a wife younge man that could quickly fore see) the waye of
trewe religion and vertue taught by the Scotts not to be altogether

perfecte. Whereuppon he fully determined to make a
voyage to Rome, only to see what ri
                     •
                  es and ceremonies were
obserued there, as well of secular priestes as of religious personnes.
The which determination of his, after notice geuen to
his Bretherne by preuy conference, eche man did well commēd
it, and persuaded him to go forward in his good purpose.
Incontinent coming to Quene Eamflede (who knew him wel,
and by whose counsell and cōmendation he was receaued into
that monastery) declared to her hyghnesse that he had an earnest
and feruent desyre to visit the monuments of the holy
Apostles. The Quene much delited with the younge mans
good purpose and zele, sent him to Caunterbury to kinge
Ercombert which was her vncles sonne requiring that it might
please his highnesse to send him honorably to Rome: at what
time Honorius one of the blessed Pope Gregories schollers, a
man profoundly lerned in holy scripture, was Archebishop
there. When this younge man lackinge nor good courage, nor
lyuely sprite, had tarried there a space, and employed his diligence
to lerne and commit to memory, that which he ouerloked,
there repaired thither an other younge gentilman whose
name was Bishop, and Christen name Benet, one of the
nobles of Englande, desyrours to go to Rome, of whom I haue
mentioned before. The kinge committed VVilfride to this
younge gentilman and his company, with chardge that he
shuld conduct him safe to Rome. When they came to Lyons
in Fraunce, VVilfrid was stayd there by Dalphine, bishop of that
city. The gentleman went on his iourney to Rome. The delight
and pleasure, which the bishop had in VVilfrides wyse talke,
aminable continaunce, ioly actituity, and graue inuention,
was the occasion why he was staied there. For that cause also
he gaue him, and all his company frendfull intertainement as
long as they continued there: and furder offred him the gouernement
of a greate parte of Fraunce, the mariadge of his

brothers daughter, (whiche was yet in the flower of her
virginity,) brefely to adopte him for his heyr, if he wolde make
his abode there. But he rendring lowly and harty thankes for so
great courtesy and gentilnesse, that the bishop vouchsafed to
shew vnto him being but a straunger, answered, that he was
fully determined to an other conuersation and trade of lyffe:
and therfore had forsaken his country, and taken this iourney
to Rome. The which when the bishop heard, he sent him to
Rome, with a guide to conducte him in the waye, and gaue
him mony sufficient to beare his chardges, desyringe that at his
returne he wolde remember to take his house by the waye.
VVilfride with in fewe dayes after cominge to Rome, and occypuing
him selfe in daily contemplation of heauenly thinges,
according to his first determination fel acquainted with a notable
holy and lerned man called Boniface, who was Archedeacon,
and one of the Apostolike Popes counsellers. By whose
instruction he lerned orderly the foure bookes of the Gospell,
and the trewe counte of Easter, and many other godly lessons
commodious and profitable to vnderstande the orders and
disciplines of the churche, which he could not attaine vnto in
his owne country. And when he had passed certaine monethes
there, in godly exercise and study, he returned to Dalfine
againe in Fraunce, and after he had tarried with him iij. yeares,
he toke the inferiour orders of the bishop, and was so entierly
loued of him that the bishoppe fully determined to make
him his successour. But by cruel death he was preuented and
VVilfride reserued to a bishoprike in his owne natyue country,
England. For Brunechild Quene of Fraunce sent a power, and
commaunded the bishop to be put to death: whom VVilfride
his chappellain folowed to the place of execution, desyring to
die with him, albeit the bishop did vtterly forbid him. But
whē the executioners knew, he was a stranger and an English
man borne, they spared him, and wold not put him to death,

with the bishop. Wereuppon returning to England he was
brought to be in frendship and amity with kinge Aldfride.
Who leke a good Prince had lerned to folow and reuerence
the general ordinaunces and rules of the catholike church.
And for that he perceaued this VVilfride to be Catholique, he
gaue him streytwayes a Lordshippe, of x. tenements in Stanford:
and within a while after a monastery with xxx. tenements
in Rhippon: which he had geuē but late to build an Abbay
forsuch as folowed the Scottes: but because they being put
to liberty and choise, had rather departe thence then to receiue
the trewe and Catholique celebration of the feast of Easter,
and other canonicall rites and ceremonies after the custome
of the church of Rome, and see Apostolike, he gaue it to him,
whome he sawe better qualified both for lerninge and for vertue.
The same time in the very selfe same monastery he was
made priest by Agilbert bishop ofThe countre about Salisbury 
                  Geuisse (of whom we spake
before) at the instaunce of the Kinge, moste earnestly requiringe
that so lerned a man shuld cōtinually follow his Courte,
and especially be his teacher and preacher. Whome not longe
after when the Scottes secte was disclosed (as is a fore said) and
vtterly abandoned, he sent to Fraunce by the counsell and aduise
of his father Oswin, when he was but xxx. yeres of age to be
consecrated and made bishop by Agilbert then bishop of Paris.
With whom xj. other bishopps assemblinge them selfes to consecrate
hym, did their dewty in that behalfe very honorably
with all solemnities. But while he was yet beyonde the seas,
Ceadda,
                  Lib. 3. cap. 28. a godly and vertuous man (as it is aboue mentioned)
was consecrated byshop of yorke, at the commaundement of
King Oswin. Who hauing gouerned the churche iij. yeares departed
thence, and toke the cure and charge of Lesting Abbay.
After him VVilfrid toke vphōim the bishoprick of al Northū
                  berland.
Who afterwarde in the raigne of Kinge Ecgfride,
                  Lib. 4. cap. 12. was
depriued of his bisshopricke, and others consecrated and put in

his place, of whome we made mention before. But when he
had taken shipp to go to Rome, and pleade his cause before the
Apostolike pope he was dryuen by a Sowthweast winde into
Freslande, where he was honorably receaued as well of the rude
and barbarous people, as of the Kinge Aldgiste. Where he preached
also vnto them Christ and his ghospell, conuerting many
thousandes to the faith, and with baptisme wasshing away
their sinnes. Whereby he layed the fundation of Christes
ghospell in those countries, which the Reuerend father
and holy byshopp VVilbrord perfited and finyshed afterward.
But when he had passed ouer a winter with this people newly
conuerted to Christe, he went forwarde his iourny to Rome.
When his cause was debated to and fro, in the presence of Pope
Agatho, and many other bishopps, he was founde in processe by
all their iudgementes to haue bene most vniustly accused, and
best worthy of that bishopprick. At what time the same Agatho
gathering a Synode at Rome of a 125. byshopps against such
heretikes as held the opinion,The heresie of the monothelites condemned. that there was but one will and
one operation in our Sauiour Christe, commaunded VVilfride
also to repaire thither. And when he came he willed him to
declare his faith and the faith of the countrie from whence he
came, sittinge amongest the other bishops: Wherin when he
and his country was founde to be Catholique, it pleased them
amongest other things to haue this also put in the Actes of the
decrees,The See Apostolique. the tenour wherof foloweth. VVilfride the vertuous
bishop of yorke, and appealinge to the see Apostolique for his
cause, and by that full authoritie absolued as well from certaine
complaints laied to his chardge, as all other vncertaine quarels,
and sitting in iudgement in the felowship of a 125. bishopps in
this present Synod, hath confessed, for al the north partes of the
isles of Englande and Irelande, whiche ar inhabited with Englishe
men, Britons, Scottes, and Pictes, the trewe and catholike
faith, and confirmed the same with his subscription. After his

returne to Britanny againe,Bishopp VVilfride the Apostle of Sussex. he conuerted the South saxons frō
idolatrye and superstition to Christes trewe faith and religion.
In the isle of Wight also he apointed certain to preach the word
of God: and the seconde yere of kinge Aldfrides raigne, who
had the soueraintye next after Ecgfride, receaued his see and bishoprick
againe, at the instaunt request of the kinge. But fyue
yeres after he was accused of the same king, and many other bishopps,
and depriued againe of his bishopricke. Wherein vpon
repairing againe to Rome, and obtaining lycence to pleade in
his owne defence before his accusers, Pope Iohn and many other
byshopps sittinge in iudgment, it was by their diffynitiue
sentence concluded, that in some parte his accusers hadd falsly
forged these malycious surmises against him. The Pope also
wrote letters to the kinges of England Edilrede and Alfride requiringe
them to see him restored to his bishopricke againe, because
he was vniustly condemned. The reading of the decrees
concluded in the fore said Synod assembled by Pope Agatho of
blessed memory, kept but of late when he hym selfe was present
in the cytie and resident amongest other bishops, did much
furder his cause. For when the Actes of the Synode, as occasion
was moued, were openly read ij. or iij. dayes before the nobylitie
and greate assembles of people, by the popes commaundement,
the protonotarie coming to that place where it was written,
Wilfride the vertuous bishopp of yorke appealing to the
see Apostolique for his cause, and by that ful authoritie absolued
as well from certaine thinges layed to his chardges, as all other
vncertaine quarells &c. As we sayed before, these wordes
being read euery man was astonned and the protonotary ceasing,
eche man inquired off other, what manner of man thys
bysshopp VVilfride was. Then Bonyface a counseller to the
Pope, and many other whiche sawe hym there in Pope Agatho
his tyme, made answere and sayd. He is the bishop which
was accused of his owne cuntry men, and came to Rome to be

iudged by the see Apostolik, euen the very same which of late
coming hither for the false accusations of his aduersaries, was
iudged giltlesse and innocent by
                     •
                   Pope Agatho, after the cause
and controuersie was well examined of bothe parties, and
thought to haue ben depriued of his bishopricke against all lawe,
and more than that hadd in such honour and estimation
of Pope Agatho of blessed memory, that he cōmaunded him to
sitt in the Synode which he assembled at Rome, as a man off a
trew perfect faith and syncere minde. All these allegations being
heard, the Pope and all that were present sayed, that a man
of such authoritie which had bene bisshoppe xl. yeares, ought
not to be condemned, but once agayne dischardged and quitted
from the false accusations and malicious surmises of his
enemies, and sent home againe with honour to his countrie.
With this iudgement returning towardes England, he fell sodainly
sicke, when he came to Fraunce, and was so weakened,
the desease growing vppon him more and more, that he could
not ryde, nor kepe his horse, but was caried in a bed by strength
of his seruauntes. Being thus brought to Meldune a citye in
Fraunce, he lay iiij, dayes and iiij. nights as though he had byn
dead. Only declaring by a litle breath, which he drewe very fayntly
and short, that he was a lyue. Thus continuing iiij. dayes
without meate and drinke, as speachelesse, and past hearing, he
rose the fifte daye, and sate vppe in his bed, as a man awaked
out of a deape sleepe, and when his eyes were open, he sawe a
company of his brethern aboute him, some singing, some weaping,
and fetting a litle sigthe, asked for his chaplyn Acca. By
and by he was called. Who entring into the chambre, and seing
his bishoppe somewhat better amended, and able to speake, he
fell downe vpon his knees, and gaue thankes to God with all
the company that was present. And when they had sate together
a litle while, and entred talke fearefully, of the high iudgements
of God, the bishop commaunded al to auoide the chambre

for an houre, and beganne to talke after this manner to his
chaplin Acca. There appeared vnto me euen now a terrible
vision, the which I wil haue thee heare, and concele withal vntill
I know knowe furder the pleasure of almighty God, what
shal become of me. A certaine man clothed all in white, stode
by me, saying. I am Michael the Archangell sent hither for this
only purpose, to deliuer thee from daunger of death. For our
Lord hathe geuen the longer tyme to lyue for the earnest prayers,
and lamentations, which thy scholars and bretherne here
haue made, and also for the intercession of the blessed virgin
Marie his mother: Wherefore I say vnto the, that presently thou
shalt be healed of this infirmitie and sickenesse, but yet be in a
readynesse: for after iiij. yeares I will returne againe and visit
the. Agayne, as sone as thou art returned to thy countrye,
the greatest part of thy possessions, that haue ben taken away
from the, thou shalt receiue againe, and ende thy life in tranquillitie
and peace. Vppon which comfortable wordes the bisshoppe
recouered to the greate ioye of all men, reioysing and
praysing God for him. Thus going forward on his iourney he
came to England. When the letters brought from the see Apostolique
were reade, Berechtwald archebisshop and Edilrede sometimes
kinge (but then made an Abbot) receiued him gladly
in fauour againe. Edilred also entreating Coenrede whom he
had made kinge in his place, to come and speake with him, requested
him to be a good and gratious Lord to the saied bisshopp,
which also he obtained. But Aldfride king of Northumberland
which would not receiue him, died within a while after.
By which occasion it fel out in the raigne of kinge Osred
his sonne, that in a Synode assembled by the riuer Nid after
greate contention and reasoning in both partes, he was receiued
into his church and bisshopprike againe with all fauour
they coulde shewe him. So iiij. yeres space, to witt to his dying
daye, he liued in peace, and died the xij. daye of October in a

monasterie, which he had in the prouince of Wundale vnder
the gouuernement of Abbot Cudbalde. From whence by the
handes of the couent he was caried to his owne monasterie in
Rhyppon, and interred in the blessed Apostle S. Peter his churche
harde by the aultar, towarde the Sowth side, as we signified
before, and ouer him is written this epitaphe.
            
            
               An Epitaphe vppon Bisshop VVilfride.
               VVilfrid that worthy prelat, lyeth bodely in this graue:
               VVho moued with godly zeale, to Christ this temple gaue.
               And of the Apostle Peters name, S. Peters church did it call.
               To whom the kayes of heauen Christ gaue, cheaf gouernour of all.
               He guilted it with golde most fyne, and hanged it with scarlat roūd.
               And sett vp there a Crucifix, of golde euen from the ground.
               The foure bookes of Christes ghospell, in golden letters are wrote
               At his cōmaundmēt and charges eke, right worthy to read and note.
               A couer for the same also of beaten golde he did fitt.
               The price and valew was great, but his hart surmounted it.
               Touching the course of Easter, in dew time to be kept,
               Bicause by wronge tradition, many it ouerlept,
               He taught the catholike order, all England thourough out,
               Extirping the contrary errour, by authorite most stoute.
               A numbre of religious men, he assembled in this place,
               Instructing them vertuously in the holy Fathers race.
               VVith miseries and perills eke much vexed of longe time,
               And of his owne dere countremen charged with many a crime:
               But when fiue and fourty yeares, he had kept a bishops state
               To heauen be past his bretherns cause, with Christ for to debate.
               And that with all alacrite, with mirth and ioyfull hart,
               Now graunto Christ that after his trace, we folowe thee on our
part.
            
            
               
                  How Albine succeded the holy Abbot Adrian, and Acca the good bishop VVilfride.
               
               The 21. Chapter.
               
                  
THE next yere after the death of that forsaid holy father
which was the fifte of king O
                        •
                     rede his raigne, the
Reuerend and worthy father Adrian Abbot, and coadiutour
to Theodore (Bishop of most blessed memory) in preachinge
the worde of God, passed oute of this transitory lyff,
and was interred in his owne monastery, in our ladyes church,
the one and fourtith yeare, after he was directed from Pope
Vitalian and made coadiutor to Theodore, and the 39. after he
came to Englande: Of whose profounde knowledge and lerninge
amongest other thinges, this may be a sufficient testimony
that Albine his schollar, who had the gouernaunce of
the Abbay after his decesse, was so well practised in exercise of
holy scripture, that he had greate knowledge in the greeke tounge,
and did speake latin as eloquently withoute staggering
or staying, as he did english, which was his naturall language.
After the death of bishop VVilfride Acca his priest succeded in
the bishoprik of Hagulstad, a man of a ioly courage, and honorable
in the sight of God, and of men, who enlarged his Cathedrall
church, dedicated in the honour of saincte Andrewe,
and set forth the buildinges with diuers comely, and sightfull
workes, and moreouer imployed all his diligence and endeuour
to gather together oute of all places the holy Apostles
and Martirs reliques, to the ende he might in honour of them
builde certaine aultars a parte by them selues in litle chapels
made for the same purpose, within the precincte and walles
of the same churche. Besides he sought with al possible diligence
the histories of their martyrdome and other ecclesiastical
writers, and made vp a very large and worthy library. Moreouer
he zelously prepared holy vessels, lightes, and other necessaries
appertaining to the better furniture and adorninge of the
church of God. Againe he sent for a cunning Musician named
Mabam which was taught by the successours of Pope Gregory
his schollars in Canterbury, to teach him and his clergy to tune

and singe. For the which purpose he kept him xij. yeares, to the
ende he might partly teach them certaine verses and songes
of the church which they could not yet singe, partly by his
singular conninge bringe in vre againe, suche songes and
tunes as for lacke of vse had ben quite, and cleane forgotten.
For bishop Acca him selfe was a very cunninge Musician, wel
lerned in holy scripture, sounde and perfect in the Catholique
faith, expert and skilfull in all orders, rules, and disciplines of the
churche, and so continued vntil it pleased God to rewarde
him for his good zeale and deuotion. He was brought vp frō a
childe in the most holy and vertuous prelate Bosa his clergy,
then bishop of yorke, and afterward comminge to VVilfride
vppon hope of some better lerning, spent all his time in his
seruice, vntil deathe arrested him. He went with him also to
Rome, and lerned many holy and necessary ordinaunces of
the church, which he could not attaine vnto in his own countrye.
            
            
               
                  How Abbot Ceolfride, sent to the kinge of Pictes, or Redshankes, cunninge carpenters and workemen to builde him a churche, and an epistle with all touchinge the Catholique celebration of the feast of Easter and after what maner priests and religious men should be sha
                     
                        •
                     en.
               
               The. 22. Chapter.
               THE same time Naitane kinge of the Pictes, which inhabit
the Northe coaste of Britanny admonished by
often meditation of holy scripture, abandonned the errour,
which he and al his country had longe kept, touching the
keping of Easter, and brought him selfe and al his subiectes to
the catholike solemnising and dewe obseruation of the time
of Christes resurrection. Which that he might bring to passe
with lesse difficulty, and more authority, he required ayde of
the Englishmen, whome he knewe to haue framed their religion
after the counterpaine and example, of the holy church

of Rome and sea Apostolike. For he sent ambassadoures to
that Reuerend father Ceolfride (Abbot of the monastery dedicated
to the blessed Apostles Peter and Paule, situated at the
mouthe of the ryuer Were, and not farre from the riuer Tyne
in a place calledNow called weimouth in which Ab
                        •
                     by vnder this Ceolfrid S. Bede was brought vp, and liued al daies of his life. 
                  Ingiruum, where he ruled with great honour
and admiration next after Benedict, of whome we haue made
mention before) desyringe to receiue from him some earnest
and forceable exhortation both to persuade him self and also to
confute all other which wold presume to keape the fest of
easter after their owne fansye and custome, and not according
to the ordinaunce of Christes churche. He requested farder to
haue instructions by his letters what maner of tonsure the
clergy should vse. Notwithstandinge he was partly already
informed in many points requisite for that purpose. With all
he desired to haue some conninge and expert woork men, to
builde him a churche of great stone accordinge to the manner
of building in Rome, promising to dedicat the same in
the honour of sainct Peter head and cheif of the apostles, and to
folowe euermore with all his wholle realme the ordre and fasshion
of the churche of Rome and see Apostolique: so farre
forthe as men not knowing the Romayns tounge and farre distant
from them might attaine to the knowledg thereof. Vpon
sight of these letters Ceolfride muche tendring his godly purpose
and intent, sent him such cunnyng and expert artificers,
as he required, and withall letters indighted, as it foloweth. To
the right honourable, and moste renouned Prince Naitane,
Ceolfride
                  A lerned letter of the Abbat Ceolfrid
                        •
                      vnto Naitan kinge of the Peyghtes or Redshankes. Abbat sendeth greting in our Lorde. The Catholik
obseruation of holy Easter, wherein you desire to be instructed,
right godly and renowned Prince, we haue gladly and diligēly
endeuoured to set forth vnto you in these presents, according as
of the See Apostolique we haue our selues ben informed and
taught. Of whiche your zeale we thanke highly allmighty
God, knowing well that when princes and Lordes of the earth

do employ their study to lerne, to teache, and to obserue the
truth, it is a singular benefit and speciall gift of God geuen vnto
his Churche. And most truly spake a heathen philosopher
saying, that the worlde should then be happy, when either kinges
embraced philosoply, or els philosophers might beare the
Soueraynte. Now if by the philosophy of this world, knowleadg
of the worlde might be hadd, where by the worlde might
be beloued, how much the more ought such as are cityzens of
the heauenly countre aboue, and but straungers in this worlde,
desire, labour, and with all meanes possible be suppliantes to
God, that the higher power and charge they beare in this world,
the more they applie them selues to harken after and vnderstande
the will and pleasure of that highe Iudge, which iudgeth
all, and bothe them selues obey gladly the same, and moue also
all other committed vnto their charge, by their example and
authoryte to fulfill and perfourme the same? To come therefore
to the matter, wherein you require to be instructed, you
shall vnderstande, we haue in holy scripture iij rules sett forthe
vnto vs, by the which the true and iust time of solemnising the
feast of Easter is appointed,A proufe out of holy Scripture, of the Catholique obseruation off Easter. which by no authorite of man can
be chaunged. Of the which rules, two were taught by God in
the lawe of Moyses, the third is ioyned in the ghospell by the
effecte off Christes passion, and resurrection. For the lawe off
Moyses commaunded that in the first moneth of the yeare,Exodi. 12. a. 2 c. 18. and
in the third weke of that moneth, that is from the fiftenth daye
vntell the one and twentith,This first moneth beginneth in the first moone after the Aequiu
                           •
                        ctium.
                   Easter should be kept. And it
was added by the institution of the Apostles out of the ghospell,
that in the same third weke, we should tary for the Sonday,
and in it celebrat our Easter. This triple rule if a man diligently
note and obserue, he shall neuer misse in the cownte
of Easter. But if it be yower pleasure, to haue euery particular
poynte more pitthely and largely declared, it is written in
Exodus, where the people of Israel ar commaunded to kepe the

feast of Easter when they shulde be deliuered owte of Aegipte,
that God said to Moyses and Aaron.
                  Exodi. 12. a. 2. 
                  This moneth shalbe vnto
yowe the begynninge of all monethes, and cheafest in the hole yere.
Speake to all the children of Israel and tell them. The x. day of this
moneth lett euerye man take a lambe, accordinge to their familiee and
howseholde. And a litle after he saith. And you shall kepe him vntill 
the xiiij. day of the same moneth. And all the whole multitude of Israel
shall offer the same vp in sacrifice at the euening. By the which
wordes it is euidēt, that in the obseruation of Easter, though the
fourtenth day of the first moneth be mentioned, yet it is not so
mentioned that on that day Easter should be kept, but in the euening
of that daye. That is, that the lambe should be offred,
when the moone is fiften dayes olde, whiche fyftenth daye off
the moone, is the begynning of the third weke of the monthe.
And that it is the selfe same night of the xv. daie of the moone
in which God stroke the Aegiptians, and deliuered the children
of Israel, it appeareth by that he saithe.Exod. 12. c. 15. 
                  Seuen dayes ye shall eate
sweete bred: With which wordes also all the third weke of the
first moneth is commaunded to be kept solemne and holye
not only the first daye of the weke. And that we shoulde not
thinke those seuen dayes to be counted from the xiiij. to the
xx. he added by and by. The firste day, there shall be no leauen bred
in your houses: VVhosoeuer shall eate in any of your houses any leauen
bred, his soule shall perishe out of the companye of Israel, from
the first day vntyll the vij. &c. Vntill, he saith: For in the same daye
(he saith after) I will bring and conducte your hoste oute of the lande
of Aegypte: First of all then. He called that the first day of 
sweete bred, in the which he would conducte and bringe their
hoste out of Aegipte. But it is manifest that they were not delyuered
oute of Aegipte the xiiij. daye, when the lambe was offred
in the euening which night was properly called the passeouer
but the xv. daye, as it is euidently written in the booke of
numbers where we reade thus.Nume. 33. a. 3. 
                  VVherefore when the children off

Israel were gone from Ramesse the xv. day of the firste monethe, the
nexte daye after they kepte the Passeouer with a myghty power. Ergo
the seuen dayes of swete bred, in the first of the which seuen
the children of God were deliuered oute of Aegipte, must
be counted (as I said before,) from the beginning of the thirde
weeke, that is from the xv. of the firste moneth to the xxj. fully
complete and ended. Now that the xiiij. daye is not numbred
amongest these seuen, wher Easter beginneth, that which foloweth
in Exodus doth euident declare.Exod. 12. c. 17. Where after it was saied,
For in the vij. daye I will delyuer thy hoste oute of the lande of Aegipte,
it was added streytwayes. And you shall keape holy this daye,
 from generation to generation after one perpetuall rite and ceremonye.
The xiiij. daye off the first moneth at the euening you shall
 eate sweete bredd vntill the euening of the xxj. in the same moneth
                        •
                      Seuen
dayes shall no leauen bred be founde in your houses. Now who
doth not plainly see, that from the xiiij. day to the xxj. be nott
only seuen dayes, but also eight, yf the xiiij. day be reakoned for
one. But if we will counte from the euening of the xiiij. daye
to the euening of the xxi. (as the veritie of holy scripture diligently
searched oute doth declare) we shall well perceiue, that
the xiiij. daye so beginneth the feast of Easter in the euening,
that all the whole weeke hath no more but vii. dayes and vij.
nightes. Wherefore our proposition is proued trew, wherin we
saied that Easter must be kepte in the first moneth of the yere,
and the thirde weeke of that moneth. And that is in dede truly
solemnised in the third weeke, the solennite where of beginneth
in the euening of the xiiij. daye, and is complete and ended in
the euening of the xxj. daye. Now after that Christ our trewe
paschall lambe was offred vpp in sacrifice, and had made the
Sondaie (called amongest the auncient writers,It is so called Act. 20. and Ioan. 20. 
                  
                     
                        •
                     na vel prima
sabbati, one of the sabothe, or firste of the sabothe) solemne and
holy to vs for ioye of his resurrection, the tradition of the Apostles
hath so put this Sounday in the feaste of Easter, that they

fully decreed, nether to preuent the time of Easter in the olde
lawe nor to diminishe any on daye, but commaunded according
to the precepte geuen in the lawe, that the same first monethe
of the yeare, the same xiiij. daye, and the same eueninge
should be expected and taried for. In which euening when it
fell vppon the saboth daye, euery man should take a lambe according
to their families and householdes, and offer him vpp in
sacrifice at the euening. That is to saye, all christian churches
through out the whole world (which all ioyned together maketh
but one catholike church) should prepare bred and wyne,
for the mysterie of the fleshe and precious bloud of that immaculate
lambe, which tooke awaye the synnes of the world, and
when all lessons, prayers,The B. Sacrament is offred vp to god the father. rites and ceremonies vsed in the solemne
feast of Easter were done, shoulde offer the same to god
the father in hope of their redemption to come. For this is
the selffe same night that the people of Israell were deliuered
oute of Aegypte by the bloude of the lambe. This is the same
night in whiche the people of God were delyuered from aeternall
death, by Christes glorious resurrection. In the morning
folowing, being Sondaye, the solemne feast of Easter should
be celebrated. For that is the day, wherein our Sauiour, opened
the glory of his resurrection, appearing diuers times in that one
day to his disciples, to their vnspeakeable comfort and ioye.
This is the first daye of the swete bread of the which clere
mention is made in the Leuiticus, wher we reade thus.Leuit. 23. a. 5. 
                  The xiiij.
daye of the first moneth at euening is our Lordes passeouer and the
xv. day of the same his solēne feast of swete bred. vij. dayes shal ye eate
sweete bred: the firste daye shall be most solemne and holye. Wherefore
if it were possible that the soundaye might alwaies falle vppon
the xv. daye of the firste moneth, that is to saye vpon the
fifteneth day of the age of the moone, we might celebrate and
keepe the feaste of Easter alwaies at one time with the olde
auncient people of god as we do in one faith, albeit they differ

from vs in the kinde of externall sacramentes. But because
the weeke dayes do not runne equally with the course off
the moone, the tradition of the Apostles preached at Rome by
S. Peter, and confirmed at Alexandria by the Euangelist Saint
Marke his interpreter, hath decreed that when the first moneth
is come, and the eueninge of the xiiij. daye of the same,
the next sounday also should be expected and looked for from
the xv. day to the one and twentyth off the same monethe. For
in which so euer off those it shall be founde, Easter shal be kept
in the same. And that because it appertaineth to the number of
these vij. daies in which the feast of sweete bred is commaunded
to be kept. Wherefore it cometh to passe that our Easter
neuer passeth the thirde weeke of the thirde moneth, nor ouer,
nor vnder: but ether it hath the whole weke, (that is to say. vij.
daies of sweet bred according to the old lawe,) or at the lest some
of them. If of all them it compryseth but one, to witt, the
vij. daie which the holy scripture so highlye commendeth, sayinge.Leuit. 23.
                  The vij. daye shalbe more solemne and hollye, and no seruil
woo
                        •
                     ke shalbe done from morninge to eueninge, no man can iustly
reproue vs, and say we kepe not the Ester soundaye (which we
toke of the gospel) in the third weke of the first moneth apointed
by the lawe as we shuld do. Now thē seing the general cause
which the Catholiques alleage for the obseruing of this feast
of Easter,The contrary opinion is refuted. is plainly set before your eyes, the vnreasonable errour
of those which rashly presume to passe or preuēt with out
any force of necessitie the time apointed in the lawe, is manifest
for al men to espye. For they anticipate and preuent the
time appointed in the lawe without any force of necessity,
which thinke that Easter day must be kepte, from the xiiij.
moone of the firste moneth to the xx. of the same. For whereas
they begynne the eue of that holy feast, from the eueninge
of the xiij. it appereth that they appointe that day in the beginninge
of their Easter wherof they finde no mētion in the law.

And whereas they refuse to kepe the Easter soundaye the xxj.
daye, in it appereth truly that they exclude vtterly from their
solemnity that day which the law cōmaundeth to be obserued
and had in memory with ioy and mirth aboue al other. And so
they end their Easter after a peruerse ordre keping it somtimes
altogether in the seconde weeke, but neuer in the vij. day of the
third weeke. Againe they which thinke they shuld kepe Easter
from the xvj. day of the saide moneth to the xxij. day roue farre
wide from the truth, and runne though an other waie, yet as
farre out of the waie, as the other did, falling (as the common
prouerbe sayth) in to the greate gulff, and swalloing sandes of
Charibdis, while they seeke to escape the dangerous straites of
Scilla. For wheras they teach, that we shulde beginne frgm the
rising of the xvj. moone of the first moneth (that is from the
eueninge of the xv day) it is manifest, that they vtterly seclude
from their solemnity, the xiiij. day of the same moneth, which
the law doth principally and before the rest commend: so that
they scarse come to the eueninge at all of the xv. day in the
which the people of God were deliuered out of the bondage
of Aegipt, in the which our sauiour Christ delyuered the
worlde from synne by sheding his precious blud, in the which
he being buried, put vs in comfort and hope of resurrection
and aeternall rest after deathe. And these men by occasion of
their former errour, falling in to an other in punishment of
the first, whereas sometimes they kepe their Easter in the xxii.
day of the saied moneth, they do expressely passe the bondes
of Easter commaunded in the lawe. For in the euening of that
day they beginne their Easter, in which euening they ought
by the lawe cleane to haue ended and finished their Easter.
Againe by this meanes they make that day the first daye of
Easter, which in the lawe is not mentioned at all: to wit, the
first day of the fourth weeke. And both these sortes of men are
deceaued not only in counting the age of the moone, but also

in finding out of the first moneth. The debating of which matter
is more tedious and lōg, then that either it can or may be cō
                  prised
in an epistle. Only this I say, that the time being ones certainly
knowē whē the day is as long, as the night, and the night
as the day, at the spring time of the yere, it may infallibly be foū
                  de,
which ought to be the first moneth of the yere after the accōpt
                     •
                  
of the moon, and which ought to be the last. In the spring
the day is as longe as the night, and so the night as long as the
day after the opinion of all lerned men in the East, and specially
of the Aegiptians which beare the price for calculation before
all other AstronomersThe xxj. daie of marche. the xii. calendes of Aprill, as we
also haue had experience by triall of the dyall. Whatsoeuer
moone therfor is at ful befor the day and night be of one lēght
being xiiii. or xv. dayes olde, that mone pertaineth to the last
moneth the yere befor, and therfor is not meet or conuenient
for the feast of Easter. But that mone which is at full either after
the day and night be of one and equal lenght, or in the very
pointe of that equalitie, in that doubtlesse (because it is the full
moone of the first moneth) we must vnderstand that the olde
aūcients wer wount to kepe Easter, and that we ought to kepe
ours in leeke manner, when the Sondaie cometh.Gene. 1. That it
shuld be so, this reason semeth somwhat to enforce: In Genesis
it is written that God made ii. great lights the greater to rule
the day, and the lesser ouer the night: or as some other translation
hath, the greater light was made to begynne the day and
the lesser to beginne the night. Therfore as at the first begin|
ning, the son rising from the full middest of the East made
by that his rising, the equalite of day and night in the beginning
of the yere: and as the moone in the very first day of the
worlde the son going downe, folowed also at the full, rising
in the midst of the East: so euery yere in leeke manner the
first moneth of the moone must be obserued after the same
rate: so that she be not at the full, before the day and night

be of one length but either on the very same day (as it was at
the first creating of the worlde) or when it is paste. For if the ful
mone go but one day, befor the day and night be of one length,
the former reason proueth manifestly that the same mone must
not be ascribed to the firste moneth of the yere, but rather to
the laste of the yere that is past: and for that consideration not
meete nor conuenient for the solemnisinge of Easter daye. Els
in one yere we should haue ij. Easters. Now if it like yow to
heare also the mysticall reason hereof, this it is. In the firste
moneth of the yere, (which is called mensis nouorum, that is,
theThe moneth of Aprill. moneth of new springe) we are commaunded to kepe the
feaste of Ester, because our hartes and mindes being renewed
toward the loue of heauenly thinges, we ought to celebrate and
honour the mysteries of Christes resurrection and our redemption.
We are cōmaunded to keepe the third weeke of the same
moneth, first because Christ him self promised vnto vs before
the lawe, and in the time of the lawe, came in the thirde age off
the worlde in the time of grace, and was made our Easter, and
passeouer. Secondarely becawse he risinge from deathe the
third daye after his bitter passion vpon the crosse, woulde haue
that daye to be called the daye of our Lorde,Dies Dominic
                        •
                     . and all Christen
men to kepe the feast of Easter yearly the very same day in
honour of his glorious resurrection. The thirde cawse is, because
we do then truely keepe this solemne feast, if we endeuour
to the vttermost of our power to make our passeouer
(that is to saye ower passage owte of this wordle to God the father)
with the triple knot of faith, hope, and charytie. After
theequalite of the daye and night we are commaunded yet to
tary for the full moone of the moneth in which Easter falleth,
to thend that first the sonne may make the day longer then the
night, and afterward the moone also may appeare to the world
in her full light, to signifie vnto vs, that the son of righteousnesse,
in whose beames is our saluation, that is to sayour Lorde

Iesus Christe by the victory and triumphe which he had in his
resurrection, hath ouercomed the darknesse of deathe, and so ascendinge
to heauen hath replenished his churche: (whiche is
ofte signified by the moone) with the inwarde light of his
grace, by sendinge downe the goly ghoste. The which ordre
of ower saluation the prophete beholdinge, said, Eleuatus est
sol & luna stetit in ordine sno. The sonne is lyfted vppe, and the
moone stode in her ordre. They therefore which contendeth
that the full moone of the moneth in which Easter should fall
may come before the Son maketh the daye and night of equall
length, as they disagree in the celebration of most high and greate
misteries from the doctrine of holy scripture, so they seme
well to agree with them, which trust to be saued with owt the
preuenting grace of Christe.He meaneth the Pelagians Which in dede presume to teache
that man myght haue had perfecte iustification, though Christ
the trewe lyght had neuer ouercomed the blyndnesse off the
world with his painefull death and glorious resurrection. To
conclude therefore, we about the equinoctiall springe, when
the day and night be of one length, and when the full moone
of the firste moneth orderly folowing the same (that is to saye)
after the xiiij daye of the said moneth is fully expired (the obseruation
of all which tymes is commaunded in the lawe) do
expecte yet in that thirde weeke (accordinge as in the ghospel
we lerne) the next Sonday folowing, and then we keepe the solemne
feaste of Ester: And that to thende we may testyfie by
ower doings, that we cellebrat not this solemnytie with the old
fathers, in remembraunce that the children off Israel had the
harde yoke of bondage shaken from their neckes in Aegipte, but
that we woorshipp with deuoute faith, and perfecte charitie the
redemption of all the world, prefigured in that deliuerance off
gods old people owte of thrauldome, and fully ended in Christes
resurrection: to thende we may signifie that we reioyse in
the assured hope of ower resurrection, which we beleue shalbe

on the same Sonday also. This accompte of Easter, which we
haue here declared vnto you to be folowed,The inuention of the golden number. is comprised in the
compasse of xix. yeres, which of late, that is to saye in the Apostles
time, beganne to be obserued in the churche, especially at
Rome and Aegipte, as I haue specified before. But by the industry
of Eusebius, who of the blessed Martyr P
                        •
                     amphilus hathe
his surname, it is more playnly and distinctly set in ordre: So
that, where as before the bishop of Alexandria was wonte euery
yeare to send abrod to euery particular church the true time
of the Easter that yeare to be obserued, now from hence forth
the course of the full moone being brought in to this order, and
certainly tried out, euery church by itselfe can finde it without
failing. This counte of Easter (so distincted by Eusebius)
Theophilus bishop of Alexandria made to serue for one hundred
yeres, at the request of Theodosius the Emperour. Cyril his successour
made it for 95. yeres more, comprising it in v. circles of
the saied compasse of 19. yeares. After whome Dionisius the
yownger added as many circles in leeke ordre and style whiche
reached euen to ouer tyme. The which now approching nigh
to the date and terme prefixed, there is nowe adayes, such store
of calculatours, that in our churches through owte all England
there be many, which can by the olde preceptes of
the Aegiptians, (which they haue lerned and committed
to memory) extende and drawe forthe the circle and
course of Easter, in to as many yeares, as them listeth, euen
to the numbre of 532. yeares. Which number of yeares
being expired, all that appertaineth to the course of the son,
moone, moneth and weke returneth into the same ordre it
did before. The calculation or directory of which time, we haue
not at this present sent vnto you, because demaunding only
to be instructed of the reason and cause of this time of Easter,
it semeth you are allready informed of the time it selfe.
Hauing now hetherto brefly and compendiously spoken concerning

the dew obseruation of Easter, accordinge to yower
highnesse requeste, we exhorte you most humbly to prouide
that your clergy haue the same tonsure which the church doth
receiue and vse as most agreable to the Christian faith: wherof
you required also our letters. We know right wel that the Apostles
were not shauen all after one sorte. Neither now the whole
catholique church as it agreeth in one faith, one hope, and
one charite towardes God, so vseth also one and the self same
order of tonsure. Againe that we may consider the time befor
vs, to wit, the time of the holy patriarches, Iob a perfect patterne
of patience, when his tribulation and aduersite beganne,
shore his head. Wherby we learne that in time of prosperity
he was accustomed to lett his heare growe. Yet Ioseph
a trewe teacher and practiser of chastity, humility, piety and al
other vertues, is written to haue bene shauen, when he came
out of preson. Wherby it appeareth that in prison for the tyme
of his induraunce he was wounte to remaine with longe heare
nor clipte nor shorne. Lo here two vertuous and godly men
who inwardly in hart and mind wer one, shewed yet in outward
behauiour some diuersite and contrariete. But though we may
boldly saye that the diuersite of ecclesiasticall tonsure hurteth
nothing at all such as haue a pure faith in God, and perfecte
charitie towarde their neighbour, especially seing we reade no
controuersie betwene the catholike writers, touching the differēce
and diuersitie of shauing, as ther hathe bene for the celebration
of Easter, yet notwithstanding amongest all kynde off
tonsures which we finde to haue ben vsed or in the church, or
vniuersally amongest all other men, I may well saye, that none
is rather to be folowed and receaued of vs, than the very same,
which he ware on his head, to whom Christ saied after he had
confessed him to be the sonne of God.Matt. 16. 
                  Thou arte Peter, and vppon
this rocke I will builde my churche, and hell gates shall not preuaile
against it. To the will I geue the kayes of the kingdome of heauen.
                  
And contrarywise we may well beleue, that none is more
to be abhorred and detested of all faithfull men, than that whiche
he had to whom desiring to bye the grace and gifte of the
holye ghoste with monie, saincte Peter saied.Act. 8. 
                  Thy mony perishe
with the, because thou thinkest the gifte of God may be obtained with
monye. There is no part, nor felowship for thee in the ministerye of this
worde. And truly we are not shauen or clipte rounde for that
consideration onely, that saincte Peter was so shauen. But because
he was so shauen in the remembraunce of Christes passion,
therefore we also desiring to be saued by the merites off
the same passion, do beare vppon the toppe of our crowne,
(beinge the highest parte of our bodye) the signe of Christes
passion as Peter dyd. For as euery congregation of faithfull
men which by the death of him that quickeneth and relyueth
them, is made in very dede a holy congregation, commonly
accustometh to beare the signe of the crosse in their forhead,
that by the diuine power of the same they may be defēded from
all assaultes of the deuill,They did beare the signe of the cross
                        •
                      in their so rehead which vsed to ble
                        •
                     
                     se them selues therewith. and may by often remembraunce and
admonition of it, be instructed howe they ought to crucifie the
fleshe with all her sinne and concupiscence, so in leeke manner
it beho
                     •
                  eth them, which either being made by vowe monks, or
by profession of the clergy, do binde them selfes more streytly
with the bridle of continency for Chistes sake, to beare in their
head by clipping, the fourme of a crowne, as our mercifull Sauiour
caried vppon his precious head, at the tyme of his passion
a crowne of thorne, to the entent he might thereby carie
yea and carie awaye the thornes and briers of our sinnes. To
the end also they may protest vnto the worlde, e
                     •
                  en by their
open head, that they are ready and gladde to suffer all mockery,
irrision, and obloquy for his sake. Last of all to testifie,
that they looke for the crowne of aeternall glorie, which God
hath promised to all that loue him, and that for the purchasing
of this, they contemne all wordly shame and wanton wealthe.

But touching that fassion of shauinge which Symon Magus
ennemye of Christes faith vsed, who dothe not euen streyte
at the beginning detest and abhorre it with all his magyke?
Which to outwarde sight semeth to haue the leeknesse of a
crowne in the ouermost parte off the head, but when a man
cometh nere and beholdeth the hinder parte, he shall finde that
which semed to be a crowne, to come very short thereof. And
truly such manner as it is voide of Christian considerations,
so for Symons secte it is very conuenient. Who in dede by their
simoniacall hypocrisie seme in this life to certain deceiued persons
worthy the glorye of euerlasting ioye, but in the lyfe whiche
foloweth the dissolution of this bodye, ar not only depryued
of all hope of the crowne of glorie, but (which is more) are
condemned to euerlasting tormentes and payne. And here
tuly I would not your highnes shoulde thinke that I prosequute
and debate this matter so largely, as though I iudged
them worthy to be condemned which vse this manner of shauinge,
yff they tender in hart and dede the vnytie of Christes
catholique churche. Nay I boldly protest, and affirme that many
of them haue bene vertuous and holy men. Of the which
Adamannus, priest and Abbot of the Columbines is one. To
whom amongest all other thinges, when he was sent in embasie,
for his owne countrie to kinge Alfride, and as he passed was
desyrous to see our monasterie, and shewed in his behauiour
and talke, much wisdome, humilitye, and godlynesse, I saied
these wordes vnto him. I beseke you good brother. Why do
you, beleuing that you shall passe hence to a crowne of lyfe
that hath no ende, weare in your head the proportiō and fourme
of a crowne, which hath an ende, seming in behauiour to
be contrary to your faith? And if you seke the felowshipp off S.
Peter, why do you follow that manner of shauing, which he vsed
whom S. Peter did ex communicate and deliuer to the deuil,
and do not rather shewe that you loue entierly with al your

harte his habite, with whom you desire to lyue in eternall blysse?
Knowe you for a suerty my derely beloued brother (quoth
he) that albeit I vse the same fasshion of shauing which Symon
Magus did after the custome and manner of my country, yet I
vtterly detest and abandone the vnfaithfulnesse and infidelyty
of Symō Magus and desire with al my hart to follow the steppes
of the most blessed head of the Apostles S. Peter so farre forthe
as my poore habilitie wil serue. To that I replyed and saied.
I beleue it is so in very dede. Yet it may be a more manifest declaratiō,
that you embrace euen frō the bottom of your hart al
that the holy Apostle Peter taught, if you kepe that outwardly
which you knew was vsed of him generally. For I thinke your
wisdō do easely iudge it most conuenient vtterly to seclude frō
your presence and face (dedicated to God) the habit, proportiō,
and figure of his coūtinaunce, whō you abhorte with all harte,
and minde. And contrariwise as you desyre to folow his steps
and counsell, whome you looke to haue as a patrone before
God the father, so it besemeth you to follow his outward behauiour.
This for that time I spoke to Adamanus. Who after well
declared how much he had profited by seinge the ordinaunces
and rules of our churche. For after his returne to Scotland he
reduced by his preaching many of the same cuntry, to the catholique
obseruation of Easter. Albeit he coulde not reduce
the monkes that liued in the Iland Hij (where he was Abbat)
thereto as yet. He thought also to redresse the māner of ecclesiasticall
tonsure amongst them, if his authority could haue
preuailed. And I nowe also (most puissant prince) do exhorte
you to endeuour with all the country, where the kinge of kinges,
and lorde of lordes, hathe geuen you the souerainte, to
obserue and kepe all that agreeth with the vnity of Christes
catholike and Apostolike church. So it will come to passe, that
after you haue had dominion and rule here vpon earth, the primat
and head of the blessed Apostles will gladly open to you

and yowers the gates of heauen to rest with the holy angells,
and other dere frēdes of God. The grace of God, of our Euerlasting
kinge and lord preserue you (most derely beloued sonne
in Christe) and graunte you longe prosperous raigne to
our quietnesse and peace. When this epistle was reade in the
presence of kinge Naitane, with many other lerned men besides,
being truly translated into the kinges natiue tounge, by
them which did well vnderstande it, he much reioysed at that
exhortation as some make reporte: euen so much that rising
from the place where he and many of the nobility were sate,
he fell downe vppon his knees, and gaue God thankes, that he
had deserued to receiue such a benefit out of Englande. And
treuly, saied he, I knewe before that this was the trewe celebration
and kepinge of Easter: but nowe I do so well knowe the
cause and reason, why it shuld be so obserued, that me thinketh
I had no knowledg of it at all before: wherfore I professe and
openly protest before you all, that ar here present, that from
henceforth I and all my people, wil kepe the feast of Easter at
the time which is here described. I thinke it good also that all
priests and religious men in my realme ought to receaue this
kinde and manner of shauing, which we haue heard to be very
reasonable. And without any furder delaye by his princely authority
he performed that which he spoke. For forthwith the
accompte of xix. yeres,This accompt is now called the golden numbre. were sent abrode by a publique edicte,
to be copied oute, lerned, and obserued through out al the prouinces
of the Pictes: the erroneous accomptes of 84. yeres altogether
blotted oute. All priestes and religious men had their
heads shauen rounde after the trew shape a
                     •
                  d figure of a
crowne. And all the whole country being well reformed, was
glad that they were reduced now to the discipline and ordre
of saincte Peter, (primate and head of the Apostles) and committed
as though it were to his patronage and protection.
            
            
               
                  How the monkes of Hij with other monasteries vnder their iurisdiction beganne at the preaching of Egbert to kepe Easter after the canonical ordonaunce of Christes church.
               
               
               The 23. Chapter.
               NOt longe after the monkes of Scotland which inhabitt
the island Hij with al other monasteries vnder their iurisdiction
were brought by gods great prouidence to
the canonicall obseruation of Easter, and ryght manner of ecclesiasticall
tonsure. For the yere after Christes incarnation,
716.An. 716. when Coenrede toke the gouuernaunce and souerayntye off
Northumberlande after Osrede was slayne, the derely beloued of
God and honourably of me to be named, the Father and priest
Ecgbert cominge vnto them owt of Irelande was honourably
receiued and ioyfully intertayned of them. This Ecgbert beinge
diligently heard of thē as one that had a singular good grace in
preachinge and that practised in lyfe with much deuotiō, which
he taught openly in their congregation, dyd chaunge by godly
exhortations and aduertisements the olde tradition of their forefathers.
Of whom we may verifie that saying of the Apostle,Rom. 10.
                  Aemulationem dei habebant sed non secundum scientiam. They had
an earnest desyre to folow God, but not accordinge to knowleadge.
And he taught thē by one appointed compasse (which
shoulde be perpetuall) to kepe the chefe and princypall feast after
the Catholique churches institution, and manner of the
Apostles. The which appeareth to be done to by the great goodnesse
and infinit mercy of God: that because the countre which
had the knowleadge of God, and his holy worde dyd freely and
gladly communicate the same to englishmen, shoulde them selues
afterward come to a more perfect trade of life, then they
had before by the helpe and instruction of Englishmen also,
now associated and allied vnto them. As contrary wise the Britons which woulde not ones open their mouthe to teache the
Englishmen the knowleadge of Christ, which they had before
receiued, are nowe hardned in blindnesse, and halte allwaies
from the right waie of truthe, neither vsing the ecclesiasticall

tonsure after dew maner, neither celebrating the solemne feste
of Easter in the societe of the Catholike church. Whereas now
all Englishmen are established in the faith, and perfectly instructed
in all pointes of Catholike religion. The monkes of the
Iland Hij in Scotland receiued at the preaching of the lerned
father Ecgbert, the Catholike rites and customes, vnder their
Abbat Dumchad, about 80. yeares after they sent Bishopp Aidan
to preache the faith to Englishmen. This man of God Ecgbert
remained in that Ilande xiij. yeres, which he had now as though
it were newly and first consecrated vnto Christ by reducing it
to the Catholike vnite and societe. The same good father in
the yere of our Lorde.An. 728. 728. vpon Easter daye, which then fell vpon
the xxiiij. of Aprill, after he had that day saied Masse in remembraunce
of our Lordes resurrection, departed this worlde,
and finished that day that ioyfull festiuite, with our Lorde and
all the blessed company in heauen, which he had begonne with
his brethern euen that day by him reduced to the Catholique
vnite. And truly the prouidence of God herein was wonderfull,
that that Reuerent father should passe out of this worlde to
the Father, not only vpō an Easter day, but also vpō that Easter
day which was the first Easter after the Catholike order celebrated
in that place. The brethern therefore reioysed, bothe for
the certaine and Catholike obseruation of Easter then lerned,
and also to see their teacher and master that time also to passe
to God, to be there their patrone and intercessour. The good
father also reioysed that he liued here so longe, vntell he might
see presently his scholers to celebrat with him that Easter, whiche
euer before they shunned and abhorred. So this most reuerend
Father being nowe certainly assured of their vndoubted
amendment, reioysed to see that day of our Lorde: He sawe it,
I saie, and reioysed.
            
            
               
                  What is the state of Englishmē, or of all Brytānie at this present with a brief recapitulation of the whole wor
                        •
                     , and with a note of the tyme.
               
               The. 24. Chap.
               
                  
THE yeare of Christes incarnation 725. which was the
vij, off Osric kinge of Northumberlandes raygne,An. 725. 
                  Vicbert
Ecgbertes sonne kinge of kent passed oute of this
transitorie lyfe the xxiij. of Aprill leauing iij. sonnes, Edilbert,
Eadbert, and Aldric, heires of his kingdome, whiche he hadd
gouuerned. 34. yeares and a halffe. After his death the next
yeare folowing Tobias bishoppe of Rochester died, a man
certainly well lerned (as I mentioned before), for he was
scholler to ij. Masters of most blessed memory: Archebishoppe
Theodore, and Abbat Adrian. By which occasion beside his
knowledge in diuinitie, and all other sciences, he so perfectly
lerned the greeke tounge, and the Latyn, that he had them as
perfecte and familiar, as his owne propre language. He is buried
in a litle chappel of saincte Paule whiche he builded in S.
Andrewes churche, for a toumbe and place of buriall after his
deathe. After him Aldwulff succeded in the bishoppricke,
and was consecrated by Berthwalde the Archebishoppe. The
yeare of our LordeAn. 729. 729. appeared ij. greate blasinge starres aboute
the sonne makinge all that behelde them maruelously afraied.
For one went before the sonne euery morninge, the other
appeared in the eueninge, streyt after the sonne was downe,
presaging as it were, to the east and weast some greate destruction.
Or, if you wil saie, one appeared before daye, the other
before night, that by bothe the saied tymes they myght signifie
diuerse miseries to hange ouer mens heads. They helde vp
a fyer brande, towarde the Northe, ready as it were to set all a
fyer. They appeared in Ianuarye, and continued almoste ij.
weekes. At what time the Saracenes wasted and spoiled Fraunce
with much murder, and bloudshed. Who not longe after
were iustly punished in the same countree for their spoyling.
The same yeare that the holy and good father Ecgbert died as
we saied before on Easter, streyt after Easter king Osric hauinge
the Souerainte in Northumberlande departed out
                     •
                   of this

lyfe the 9. off Maye, after that he had appointed Ceolwulff brother
to kinge Coenrede his predecessour, to be his successour in
the kingedome, hauing raigned xj. yeares. The beginning and
processe of whose raigne is so full of troubles
                     •
                   hath had such diuerse
successe of thinges contrary one to the other, that we can
not yet well tell what may be written of them, nor what ende
euery thinge will haue. The yeare of our Lorde 731.An. 731. Archebisshoppe
Berthwalde worne oute with olde age died the 8. of Ianuary
37. yeares, 6. moneths and xiiij. daies after he had ben bisshoppe.
In his place the same yeare Tacwine of the prouince off
the Marshes, was made archebisshop a longe time after he had
bene prieste in the monastery of Bruiden: He was consecrated
in Caunterbury by the reuerend fathers, Daniel bishop of Winchester,
Ingualde bishoppe of London, Alduine bishoppe of
Lichfelde, and Aldwulff bishoppe of Rochester, the x. of Iune,
beinge the soundaye a man certes notable for his godlynesse
and wisedome, and well conuersaunt in holy scriptures. Wherefore
at this present Tacwine and Aldwulff are bishoppes of
kent, Ingualde of the east Saxons, Eadbert and Hadulac of the
east english. Daniel and Forthere of the Weast Saxons, Aldwine
of the Marshes and VValstode of them which dwell beyonde
the ryuer Seuerne towarde the Weast. VVilfrid of theOf Yorke. Viccij.
Cymbert ofOf holy Iland and al Northū
                     berland. Lindisfarne. The isle of Wight is vnder the iurisdiction
of Daniel bishop of Winchester. The prouince off the
Sowthsaxons continuinge certaine yeares without a bishoppe
is gouuerned of the bishoppe of the Westsaxons in suche cases
as the bishoppes helpe is necessarye. Al these prouinces, and others
of the south euē to Humber with their kinges are in subiection
and owe homage to Edilbalde kinge of the Marshes.
But of Northumberlande where Ceolwulff is kinge, there ar but
iiij. bishops, Wilfride of Yorke, Edilwalde of Lindisfarne, Acca
of Hagulstalde, Pethchelme of Whitchurch which being made a
bishopps see of late, when the faithfull people beganne to multiplie,

hath now this Pechthelme for their first bishop. The Pictes
also at this time are in leage with the Englishemen and in vnite
with the catholike church. The Scottes which inhabitt Brytannye
content to keape their owne lymittes and bordres, worke
no treason towardes England. The Britons, albeit for the
most parte, euen of pryuie malice and grudge they maligne the
Englishmen, and impugne with their lewde manner the tyme
of Easter ordained by the catholique churche, yet the
allmightye power off God, and man resistinge their malyce,
they can haue their purpose in neither off them. For
thoughe they are in some parte free, yet for the more parte
they are insubiection to englishmen. And now all warre and
tumult ceasing, all thinges being brought to an vnity and concorde,
many in Northumberlande as well noble men, as
poore, layinge away al armour and practise of chiualry become
both they and their children religious men. Which what successe
it is leeke to haue, al the posterity shal see. Thus for this
present standeth the whole state of Britanny. The yere sence
the English men came into Britanny 285. and 733. sence the
incarnation of Christe: In whose raigne let the earth alwaies
reioyse. And seing Britanny taketh ioye and comfort now in
his faith, let many ilandes be glad, and sing praise to the remembraunce
of his holy name.
               THVS ENDETH THE FIFTE
AND LAST BOOKE OF THE
Historie of the Church
of England.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
         
            
            The wordes of Venerable Bede folowing after the abridgement of this whole history, in the 3. Tome of his workes, which we haue thought good to place here at the ende of the History it selfe.
            THIS much touching the ecclesiasticall history of the
Britons, and especially of the english nation, as I could
lerne by the writinges of my aunceters, by the tradition
of my elders, or by my owne knowleadg, I haue by the helpe
of God, brought vnto this order and issue, I Bede the seruaunt
of God, and priest of the monasterie of the blessed Apostles
Peter and Paul at Weimouth. Which being borne in the territorie
of the same monastery, when I was seuen yeares of age,
I was deliuered by the handes of my frendes and kinsfolkes to
be brought vp of the most Reuerend Abbat Benet, and afterward
to Ceolfrid. From the which time, spending all the daies
of my life, in the mansion of the same monastery, I applied all
my study to the meditation of holy scripture: and obseruing
withal the regular discipline, and keping the daily singing of
Gods seruice in the church, the rest of my time, I was delighted
alwaies, to lerne of other, to teache my selfe, or els to write. In
the xix. yere of my age I was made deacon, and in the xxx.
yeare Priest, Bothe which orders I receaued by the handes
of the most Reuerend bishop Iohn of Beuerlake
at the commaundement of Ceolfrid my Abbat.
From which time of my priesthood vntell the
yere of my age lix. I haue vpon holy scripture
for my owne instruction and others
partly brestly noted and gathered what
other holy fathers haue writen,
partly I haue at large expounded
after the maner of their
interpration and
meaning.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE SPECIAL MATTERS. The figure signifieth the leafe. A. B. the first and second side.
            
               A
               
                  A Buses of religious persons punished by God from heauen.
               144. b
               An army of infidels put to flight by singing Alleluia.
               27. b.
               The martyrdom of S. Alban and miracles thereat befalling.
               17. b. 18.
               Apostafie from the faith punished.
               76. a. 82. b.
               The life of our Apostles and first preachers.
               32. a.
               Arrian heresies in Britanny.
               19
                     •
                   a.
               S. Augustin sent by S. Gregory to preach the faith to englishmen
               29. b.
               S. Augustin preacheth the faith to Ethelbert or Elbert kinge of kent
31. a. b. he was a monke. 33. a. made bishop in Fraunce. 32. b. he prophecieth
the destruction of the Britons.
               50. b.
               S. Augustin the first bishop of Cāterbury created of the bishops of Fraunce
by the commaundement of Pope Gregory.
               32. b.
               The death of S. Augustin our Apostle.
               51. b.
               An Epitaphe vpon him
               52. a.
               The life and vertu of S. Edilrede, now called S. Audery.
               133. a.
               Miracles and cures do
                     •
                  e at her tombe.
               134. b.
               A songin the praise of virginite and in the honour of S. Audery
               135. a
               Aultar of stone.
               68. b.
            
            
               B
               Of the Author of this History, Venerable Bede, reade the preface to
the Reader.
               
               Berkinge abbay in Essex.
               120. b
               King Elbert the first Christen kinge, of englishmen endued the Bisshoprikes
of Caunterbury, of London and Rochester with landes
and poss
                     •
                  ssions
               51. b
               Consecration of bishops with a number of bishops
               910. a. 149. a.
               The deuotiō of bishops in the primitiue church of englād.
               151. a. 109. 113. b
               
                  The example of a trewe preacher and a vortuouse Byshop.
               fol. 80. b.
               Vowe and habit monastical by the cons
                     ••
                  ration of bishops.
               138. b.
               S. Augustin ordeineth bishops by the appoyn
                     •
                  ment of Pope Gregory.
folio.
               35. a.
               No bishop ordained without a number of other bishops.
               35. a.
               Bl
                     •
                  ssing with the signe of the Crosse.
               143. a.
               A dumme man brought to speache by blessing.
               155. a.
                     •
                  58. b.
               Riot and euill lyfe, the Brittains destruction.
               23. a.
               VVhy the olde Brittons became weake and open to forrain inuasions.
folio
               20. b.
               The situation and description of Britanny.
               13. a.
               How Cesar conquered Britanny.
               15. a.
               The second conquest of Britanny.
               15. b.
               The faith receaued in britanny from Rome.
               16. a.
               Ciuill warres amonge the olde Brittons.
               29. a.
            
            
               C,
               Christes church in Caunterbury builded by S. Augustin our Apostle,
and a monastery thereby.
               44. a.
               The byshopp of Canterbury created Archebishop of other bishops in
britanny by Pope Gregory.
               35. b.
               The first Christening of Englishmen in Caunterbury.
               32. b.
               Catholike obseruations to be preferred.
               171. b.
               Heretikes confu
                     •
                  ed by Catholikes in open disputation.
               25. a. 26. b.
               Canonicall howers.
               108. b.
               T
                     •
                  e vertuous first bishops of England labour to bringe the Britons
and Scottes liuing in schisme to the vnite of the catholike church.
folio.
               53. a.
               Kinge Cedwall baptised and buried at Rome.
               159. b.
               Elbert the first christen kinge made lawes for the indemnite and quiet
possession of churche goods and of the clergy.
               54. a.
               The places off Christes natiuitie, passion, Resurrection and
Ascension described as they were a thousande yeares past.
               172. b.
173. a. and b.
               
                  Cedda the second bishoppe of London and Essex.
               98. b.
               Dedication of Churches.
               15
                     •
                  . b. 100. a.
               Holy vessels, altarclothes, crnaments for the church, priestly apparell,
certain reliques and church bookes sent by S. Gregory the Pope in
to England at the first Christening of the same.
               40. b.
               Churchemusike first practised in the northe.
               75. a.
               The temples of idolls conuerted in to Christen churches, being halowed
with holy water, and altered after the vse of Christen religion, hauing
altars sett vp and relikes placed in them.
               4
                     •
                  . b.
               Byshopp Chadda a man of greate humblenesse.
               114.
               The great feare of God in him
               116. b.
               Myracles at his tombe.
               117. b.
               Cloysters of Nonnes in order, fourme, and proportion, as to this daye.
folio.
               140. 141. a. 142. b.
               Such of the clergy as were out of holy Orders toke wiues.
               33. a.
               The maner of the clergy of the primitiue church of England.
               147. a.
               The people do communicat at Masse.
               54. b.
               The v. first general Councells receaued by a common consent of the
church of England.
               131. a.
               Consecration of the B. Sacrament.
               19. a.
               Confession to the priest and penaunce enioyned.
               143. b.
               Our faith began with Crosse and procession.
               31. b.
               Crosse and chalice of golde.
               75. a.
               A crosse erectyd by kinge Oswald.
               76 b.
               Many restored vnto healthe by the chippes of the same crosse.
               ibid. b.
               A broken arme made sownde and hole againe by the mosse of the crosse.
               78. a.
               VVhy the clergy weare shauen crownes.
               187. a.
               The life of S. Cutbert being yet a Monke.
               146. a.
               The life of S. Cutbert when he liued like an Anchoret.
               148. a. and. b.
               S. Cutberts body after xi. yeres buriall founde whole and sound.
               151. a.
               Miracles and cures done thereat.
               151. and. 152.
            
            
               
               D.
               Prayer for the deade.
               90. b.
               The deuotion of owr primitiue churche.
               91. b.
               The deuotion of Christians in Hierusalem aboue a thousand yeares
past, in Constantins time.
               173. a.
               Memories of soules departed.
               52. a.
               Dyriges ouer night and Masse in the morninge for the dead.
               77. b.
               A necessary doctrine for this time.
               170. a.
               Dorchester in Barkeshere a bishoprick.
               82. b. 139. a.
            
            
               E.
               The Catholike obseruation of Easter. 102. b. Item the same proued out
of holy scripture.
               181. b. 182. 183. 184. 185. 186.
               The east parte of England conuerted to the faith.
               69. b.
               The english men (at the first inuading of Britany by the forrain nations
of the Saxons generally so called) occupied all England except
Sussex, Essex, Kent, and part of the westcountre.
               24. a.
               The first spoyling of Britanny by the english men.
               24. a.
               Saint Erkenwald the. 4. bysshopp of London
               120. b.
               Excommunication.
               99. a.
            
            
               F.
               The faith of our primitiue church.
               156. b. 157. a. 123. b.
               The faith and deuotion of the first 400. yeares after Christ.
               26. b.
               Fastinge against the plage.
               128. a.
               The determinations off the holy fathers to be folowed.
               119. a.
               Friseland conuerted to be faith.
               163. a.
               VVensday and frydayes fast.
               80. b.
            
            
               G.
               Off the noble parentage and vertuous life off S. Gregory.
               45. a.
               S. Gregory brought vpp in a monastery, after sent to Constantinople
from Rome as legat, quenched there by his lerning an heresie off
Eutichius touching our resurrection. 45. b. 46. a. b. A recitall off
the lerned workes off S. Gregory. 46. b. S. Gregory the pope off

Rome our Apo
                     ••
                  le. 45. a. S. Gregory a great aulmes man. 47. a.
Letters off S. Gregory for the furderance of the faith in England,
to S. Augustin. 29. b. to the Archebishopp off Arles. 30. a. to S.
Augustin againe. 3
                     •
                  . a. to the B. off Ar
                     ••
                  s againe. 40. a. to S.
Augustin againe. 40 b. to. Mellitus the first B. off Londō. 41. b. to
S. Augustin againe. 42. a. to kinge E
                     •
                  h
                     ••
                  bert.
               43. a.
               A ioyfull reioysing off S. Gregory for the conuerting off our countre
to the faith. 47. a. An 
                     •
                  pitap
                     •
                  e vpon S. Gregory in meter.
               48. a.
               The occasion why he sent preachers to our countre.
               48. b.
            
            
               H.
               A trewe saying off an heathen.
               97. b.
               The heresie off the monothelites condemned.
               177. b.
               Heretikes banished the countre sett it in rest and quiet.
               28. b.
               Extirpation off heresy by counsell off forrain bisshops.
               25. a.
               The vertuous liffe off Hilda a lerned and famous Abbesse.
               138. 139.
               Howseling b
                     •
                  fore death.
               116. b. 142. b.
            
            
               I.
               Idols first throwen downe in Englande.
               83. b.
               Intercession off Saints.
               152. a. 
                     •
                  00. b. 128. b.
               Holly men worke miracles by intercession.
               88. b.
               The lyfe of S. Iohn off B
                     ••
                  uerlake.
               164. b. 165. 166. 167.
               The situation off Ireland.
               14. b.
            
            
               K.
               A rare and strange humilite off a kinge.
               91. a.
               Kinge Sigebert becommeth a monke.
               94. a.
               Reuolting from the faith in kent reuenged from God.
               54. a.
               Kent returneth to the faith.
               56. a.
            
            
               L.
               The first bishoppe off Lincolne.
               126. a.
               Lincolne conuerted to the faith.
               69. b.
               In the yere 60
                     •
                  . London receaued the faith, and S. Paules church at
that tyme builded. Rochester also receaued the faith, and S. Andrewes
church at that tyme builded.
               51. b.
               
                  Reuolting from the faithe in London plaged from God.
               55. a.
               Thr byshop off London consecrated off his owne Synod by the appointment
off S. Gregory the pope.
               41. a.
               Fasting in lent vntill euening.
               100. a.
            
            
               M.
               VVhether in acte 
                     •
                  ff Mariage be any sinne.
               38. a.
               Mariage vnlaufull aboue the third degre.
               34. a.
               Our first Aposile sayed Masse.
               32. b.
               The martyrdom off ij. english priestes in Saxony.
               163. b.
               Masse in the memory off saintes.
               128. a.
               The sacrifice off the Masse propitiatory.
               137. a.
               S. Cutberts deuotion at Masse tyme.
               149. a.
               The first chrysteninge off the Marshes, or middleland englishemen anno
Domini. 650.
               97. a.
               S. Augustin conuinceth the schismaticall traditions off the Brito
                     •
                  s
by miracle.
               49. b.
               Why miracles reported in the history ought not to be mistrusted.
               133. a.
               Miracles at the place, where kinge Oswald was slaine.
               85. b.
               Off miracles mentioned in the historye, reade the preface to the Reader.
               
               The foundation off monasterys.
               99. b. 101. b.
            
            
               N.
               Nonnes consecrated off bishops.
               133. a.
               A Nunnerie burned for the sinne off the inhabitans.
               143. a.
               The first christeninge in the Northe countre.
               59. b.
               The first christendome off the english Prince in the Northe.
               68. a.
               Children brought vp in Nonneries.
               121. b.
               Off nightly pollutions how and when they restraine from the blissed
sacrament.
               39. a.
               The inuention off the golden Numbre.
               186. a.
            
            
               O.
               The commendation of king Osuuius.
               90. b.
               Oblations of the people distributed by Bishops.
               33. a.
               
                  
S. Of waldes day kept holy with Masses and seruice.
               129. a.
               The persuasion off kinge Oswine withe the heathen kinge Sigberte
               93. a.
               Kinge Oswald a great prayer.
               88. b.
            
            
               P.
               Pelagians heresies in Britanny.
               20. a.
               The pope is informed of the state of the church.
               132. a.
               Letters from the popes off Rome for the increasing of the Faith in England.
               57. a. 60. a. 62. a. 70. b. 71. b.
               The letters off S. Gregory, see in the letter G.
               
               Fire quenched by praiers.
               27. a.
               Mellitus quenched a great fire by prayer.
               56. b.
               S. Gregory pope off Rome the chiefest bishoppe off the whole worlde.
               45. a.
               A tempest on the sea alayed by the praier.
               154. a.
               A great desease sodainly healed by prayer.
               165. a. 1
                     •
                  7. a.
               The behauiour of priestes in our primitiue church.
               107. b.
               The primitiue churche att the first dyd not abrogate all Iuysshe ceremonies.
               104. a.
               A rare zele to the preaching of Gods worde in a worldly prince. folio.
               78. b. 88. a.
               An olde prouerbe.
               88. b. 17. b.
               An example for the confirmation off purgatory.
               136. b.
               The paynes off Purgatory
               95. b.
            
            
               R.
               Religouse men our primitiue church reuerenced.
               107. b.
               Reseruation of the blessed sacrament.
               142. b.
               The goodnes of God and our faithe worketh miracles by holy relikes.
               89. b.
               Enormouse crimes in the rightuouse sooner punished.
               99. a.
               Relikes of holy ma
                     •
                  tyrs.
               26. a.
               The Pantheon, or temple of all idolls in Rome, conuerted by pope Boniface
into the church of our Lady and all Saincts.
               53. b.
               
                  
Mellitus the first bishop of London goeth to Rome, and counselleth
pope Boniface aboute matters touching the english church.
               53. a.
               The see Apostolike off Rome.
               177. b. 109. b.
               Priuilege from Rome for the liberty off monasteries.
               131. b.
               Authorite from Rome to make bishops.
               57. a.
               Constitutions from Rome touching the clergy.
               71. a.
               The See of Rome.
               33. a. 35. a.
               Going to Rome accompted a matter of great deuotion in our primitiue
church.
               139. a. 160. b.
               The first destruction of Rome, and decaie of that empire.
               20. b.
            
            
               S.
               The arriual of the Saxons in to Britanny.
               23. b.
               Discipline of the church vpon such as committed sacrilege.
               33. b.
               The gouernement off the olde Saxons.
               163. a.
               The sacrifice off the Masse.
               183. a.
               The blessed sacrament bread off life.
               55
                     •
                   a
               The praier and fasting of schismatikes auaile not.
               5
                     •
                  . a.
               Commendation off the scottishe monks, which gouerned first the english
church in the northe country.
               10
                     •
                  . a.
               Palladius the first bishop off Scotlād sent frō Caelestinus the Pope
               22. a.
               The order of english seruice chose of the b
                     •
                  st orders of other coūtres
               33. b.
               The deuill fighteth with synne against man.
               95. b.
               Synne purged by paine in this life.
               122. b.
               How sinne bredeth in the hart of man.
               39. a.
               Singing in churches thorought out all Englande.
               114. a.
               Order off singing and church seruice from Rome.
               132. a.
               The gifte off singing (off holy thinges only) geuen miraculously to a
simple laie man.
               141. and. 142.
               A lesson for vngodly studentes.
               89. a.
               Example off a trusty subiect.
               59. a.
               The conuersion off Sussex to the faith.
               126.
               Miracles in the monastery of 
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  ee in Sussex
               127. b.
               Selsee the first monastery in Sussex now brought to the faith.
               ibidem.
               
                  
In Bosam a monastery before the faith openly receiued in Sussex.
               126. b
               A miserable famine in Sussex before the faith receiued
               127. a.
               The first Christeninge in Sussex miraculouse.
               ibdem.
               The dioceses off Sussex and Hampshere diuided.
               175. a.
               The first Synod off the English Church. 118. b. The second. 130. b.
               The
third. 148. b.
            
            
               T.
               Difference betwene the new Testament and the old.
               37. b.
               Temples in the honour of Martirs.
               19. a.
               Theodore a greke borne the first Primat of all England. 113. b. He deposeth
VVinfride bishop of Litchfield. 120. a. The felicite of the english
church vnder him.
               113. b.
               Sickenesse and tribulation sent of God for triall of vertu.
               139. b.
            
            
               V.
               Vertu persecuted of the euill euen to death.
               99. a.
               Virgins in monasteries.
               84. a.
               Edwine the first Christen king of the North brought to the faith by
a vision.
               63. b.
               Vniuersalite prescribeth.
               104. a.
               Vowe of obedience in religion.
               119. b
               Vowes in sykenesse.
               108. b.
               Vowes to godde.
               101. a.
               The first Christeninge in the west contry
               82. b.
               A tempest ceased by holy water.
               25. a.
               Sicknesse healed by holy water.
               156. b.
               Vniust warres reuenged from God.
               145.
               The life of bishop VVilfrid the Apostle of Sussex.
               175. b.
               The faith first preached and receiued in the ile of wight. 139. b. The situation
of the Ile off wight.
               130. a.
               VVilbrorde an englishman the Apostle off Friseland.
               164. a.
               Good workes.
               122. b.
            
            
               Y
                     •
                  
               
               The bishop of Yorke made archebishop by the Pope.
               41.
            
         
         
            
            Faultes escaped in Printing.
            
               
                  
                     Leafe.
                     Side.
                     Line.
                     Faulte
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     27.
                     b.
                     Margen.
                     Hósius.
                     Hoste.
                  
                  
                     25.
                      
                      
                     Insidels.
                     Infidels.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     lleluya.
                     Alleluya.
                  
                  
                     29.
                     a
                     25
                     aut.
                     and.
                  
                  
                     30.
                     a.
                     
                        
                           •
                        .
                     vvōh.
                     vvhō.
                  
                  
                     41.
                     a.
                     
                        
                           •
                        8.
                     consuship.
                     consulship.
                  
                  
                     74.
                     b.
                     3.
                     Oure.
                     Ouer.
                  
                  
                     75.
                     a.
                     Mar.
                     good.
                     golde.
                  
                  
                     88.
                     b.
                     16.
                     recei.
                     receined.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     6.
                     isis.
                     
                        
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Mar.
                     verbe.
                     prouerbe.
                  
                  
                     90.
                     a.
                     30.
                     by by.
                     by.
                  
                  
                     95.
                     a.
                     Mar.
                     vvde.
                     vvorlde.
                  
                  
                     99.
                     a.
                     10.
                     elemency.
                     elemency.
                  
                  
                     104.
                     b.
                     15.
                     out.
                     on.
                  
                  
                     106.
                     a.
                     20.
                     can he.
                     can he not
                  
                  
                     112.
                     b.
                     27.
                     tis.
                     this
                  
                  
                     129.
                     a.
                     1.
                     sor.
                     for.
                  
                  
                     134.
                     a.
                     24.
                     lymnes.
                     lymmes.
                  
                  
                     151.
                     b.
                     23.
                     to.
                     do.
                  
                  
                     160.
                     b.
                     23.
                     generati.
                     generation.
                  
                  
                     177.
                     a.
                     9.
                     for such.
                     for such.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   