
      
         
            
            
            
               THE
Arte of Nauigation
wherein is contained all the rules,
declarations, secretes, & aduises, which for good
Nauigation are necessarie & ought to be knowen
and practised: and are very profitable
for all kind of Mariners, made by (master
Peter de Medina) directed to
the right excellent and renowned
Lord, don Philippe,
prince of Spaine,
and of both
Siciles.
            
               And nowe newely translated out of
Spanish into English by
John Frampton.
            
            1581.
            
               ❧
               Imprinted at London, by Tho
               mas
Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes
in the Vinetree, and are there
to be solde.
         
         
            
            
            
               ¶To the right woorshipfull, master Edwarde Dier Esquier,
Iohn Frampton wisheth health, and perfit felicitie with
increase of honour.
            
            
               COnsidering with my selfe (right worshippefull,) that friendshippe and
bounden duetie, doth force many times men to doe thinges, which if they
were in the free choyse of him that doth thē, to leaue thē vndone without
any conceaued discurtesie, not only hee woulde not doe them, but also,
not asmuch as thinke of them. This I say that forced by friendshippe, and
also mooued by persuasion of certaine pylottes, and Masters of shippes, I determined to
translate this booke of the arte of Nauigation, compiled by Master Peter de Medina a spaniarde,
in the yeere of our Lorde Iesus Christ. 1545. And because the worke is so principalle
that in our time, the like in all respectes hath not beene sette forth in our tongue,
considering it instructeth, and teacheth all the whole arte of Nauigation in all pointes, and
is in as like sorte necessary for the Mariner, as the accidens is for the Gramarian, the
weapon for the soldier, the Toole for the workeman, the Guide for the blinde, the instructor
for the learner: and finally, comparable to a glasse, wherein all the course of the
worlde, the Seas, the Windes, the Altitudes of the sunne, Moone, and Starres, are to
bee seene, and knowne, as farre as naturalle reason may extende to. And beesides, the
pleasure that I minded to doe, to the aforesaide persons, who mooued mee thereunto, as
also to satisfie my good and continual desire, which I haue, to helpe, and bringe to light
this good and profitable arte of Nauigation, whereby all men that are desirous to knowe,
the secreete of this noble arte, may profite themselues threewith by reading it in our Englishe
tongue, especially the Pylottes, Masters, and Mariners, considering their liues and
lyuinges doe stand there vpon. And seeing as I belieue and trust, they shall gather much
fruite theer by, and that by little and little, these sciences shall remaine aswell in our countries
as in any other whatsoeuer. And seing this worke so necessary for the cōmon wealth,
setting all other priuate busines aside I tooke in hande to translate this booke, being perused
and alowed by the chiefe Pilot, & learned Cosmographers of the famous contractacion
house of Seuil for the increase & knowledge of matters of Nauigation, for the subiects
of Spaine, which worke so excellent tried & approued by the learned: And for this our
Englād so fit, & by me now thus translated out of Spanish into English, I dedicate to your
worship before al others, for that I know you to haue the arte of Nauigation inhigh account,
& as highly to esteeme al men that indeuour the knowledge of the same, beseeching
you to accept of my good wil and to be a protector of the same worke. And so beseeching
the almightie, to giue your worshippe long life, and the aduancement in this common
weale, that the good people wish vnto you, that aucthoritie may enable you to doe, that
good, that your good inclination doth naturally moue you vnto. 
            
               From London this
fourth of August. 1581.
               
               Your worshippes to commande.
Iohn Frampton.
            
         
         
            
            THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE TO THE
right excellent and renowmed Lorde, Don Phillip Prince of
Spaine, and of both Siciles, &c. Set foorth by Maister Peter de Medina,
the Authour of the Arte of Nauigation.
            
               THE subiectes are accustomed to serue their Lorde right excellent and renowmed
Prince and Lord, with that which seemeth 
                  〈◊〉
                them to be most conformable
to their will, and so some there bee that serue with thinges that
are delightfull to the eye, and others to the taste. Others there are whiche
doe imploye their persons in labours, and also others in diuers other matters:
And seeing I am desirous to bee of the number of those, I sought by what
meanes I might put it in effect, and for that my abilitie is not sufficient to do
                  •
               
greater seruice: I determined to make a booke of the Arte of Nauigation,
and to offer it in the seruice of your highnesse. Two thinges haue mooued
mee to this most mightie Lorde. The first is, to see howe great seruice your
highnesse 
                  〈◊〉
                receiue by the Nauigation, at also howe great profite commeth thereby to all the common

                  •••
               alth of Christendome. And this beeing so, it appeareth that by the Nauigation, your Royall Senorie
is amplified and extented into so great parte of the worlde. And that whiche is newlye discouered is
more then fiue thousande leagues of the Sea coaste, where doeth containe so many regions, kingdomes, and
prouinces, where are founde so many nations and diuersitie of people, and many other thinges in suche sorte
by good reason it is called the newe worlde. So that by meanes of the Nauigation, there hath been brought
and is brought into your highnesse Countrye of Spaine, so many shippes laden with Golde and Siluer, that
the same thereof cannot bee accounted. As also such great quantitie of sweete Drugges, and other things
of great value and price: And this is litle in respect, right excellent Lorde, of the great number of people
whiche doe saile, not only to places knowne, but also to suche as are farre of, and vnknowne, and of such
at is no knowledge of, they procure by sailing to seeke and knowe, And seeing how long and dangerous wayes
they make by Sea, and f
                  •
               we of them that saile doe knowe what doeth appertaine to the Arte of Nauigation▪
The cause is, there are no instructors thereof, nor bookes whereby they may attaine to it, so that your
highnesse may vnderstande, although the Nauigation bee of such antiquitie, and more then three thousande
yeares 
                  〈◊〉
                it began, and a thing of such importance, that the life of man goeth therevpon. And who
can manifest the number of shippes and people, which only doe saile out of Spaine to all partes of the world,
or who can recken the multitude of people which doe consist only vpon the Nauigation, with their goodes,
riches, trades, merchandize, and other thinges: And for all this, there are no maisters whiche doe teache
this Arte, nor knowledge of an
                  •
                that vnto this daye haue written the manner of sailing: Euen so, the
most sorte of Pilottes haue the vse of Nauigation, no otherwise but euerie one following his owne opinion
and iudgement, where
                  •
               f it happeneth many times in one shippe two or three Pilottes, the one saith according
to his reckoning, the shippe goeth sailing vpon the lande, the other sa
                  •
               eth, according to his reckoning,
the lande is farre of from him, and the cause thereof is, that there wanteth true knowledge of Nauigation,
and hereby it happeneth many times both shippes and people are loste, and others sustaine great dangers
and losses. All whiche beeing by mee considered, and chiefly seeing the Maiestie of the Emperour, father
vnto your highnesse, and our Lorde many tymes putteth his imperiall person vnto the danger of the
Sea. Wherefore I beeing desirous to serue your highnesse in this, and to doe good to suche as are Sailers,
by giuing them rules and aduises howe they may make their Nauigation certaine without hazarde of ignorance,
I haue framed and deuised an Arte of Nauigation so orderly, that the Pilottes and other persons
whiche doe saile, shall finde them selues so able therewith, that of it selfe, or with verie litle helpe,
they shall knowe and verie plainly vnderstande that whiche they treate of, seeing it is so necessarie, and so
much standeth them vpon to knowe, as a thing whiche doeth importe to many their honours, liues, and

goods: Truth it is, most mightie Lorde, that weying my strength with the waight of my iudgemēt, and
finding my selfe of small sufficiencie, I greatly disputed with my selfe, if for my small knowledge I should
holde my peace, seeing that I knewe it to bee ouermuche boldnesse to make a woorke and to directe it to
your highnesse, but animating my selfe, and trusting in your accustomed clemencie and magnanimitie, I
put my selfe vnder the shadowe of your fauour, and so most humbly beseeching you to receiue this my litle
seruice with that Royall curtesie that vnto others you are accustomed to doe. And beeing perused by
your highnesse, it maye winne so muche fauour whereby it maye passe safely through all
places, yelding great benefite and seruice vnto your highnesse, as also profite to
suche as vse the Nauigation, that thereby they may vnderstande
the perfect knowledge thereof.
         
         
            
            
               ❧A preamble of the authour vpon the Arte of Nauigation, wherein is declared the great excellencie of the
said arte.
            
               AMonge all other vertues some are so much the greater, by howe much it is comunicated of
amongst others, wherby the vertue of Iustice is most perfit among other vertues, for it doth
most communicate and participat withall, so that amonge all artes the arte of Nauigation is
more excellent then others, for it doth not oenly communicate with them, but doth shut vp
into it, the most principall of them, that is to say, Arithmeticke, Geometrie, and Astrologie.
These haue excellencie among the Mathematicals, by the most true shewe that is made
of their conclusions. And that this arte hath his beginning and greatnes among other artes,
it appeareth by three reasons following.
            The first, by reason of his subtillitie.
            The second, by reason of his certaintie▪
            
            The third, by reason of his profit.
            For the first, who is sufficient to speake of so great a misterie that a man with a compasse, and certaine strekes
marked in a carde, doth knowe howe to goe rounde about the world, and knoweth both by day and night whether
he shall come, and from whence he shall depart, and howe much he shall go from one place to another, and
that he goe certainly in his right way, by so long and so large a thing as the sea is, where is no way no signe therof,
it is a misterie very difficult. And so it was considered by Salomon: who saith, that one of the hardest things
to be found, is the way of a ship in the sea, for she followeth not any way, nor leaueth any signe where she went,
And who is able to speake of so great a secret, that with a rounde instrument no greater then the palme of a mans
hande called Astrolabio, the roundnesse of the heauen is measured, being so great th
                  •
               t the vnderstanding of
man cannot atteine thereunto. And therewith is taken the heigth of the sunne, passing it by a very litle and subtill
place, being much greater then all the earth and the sea. And it is knowen howe nere and howe farre off it is
from vs: And in like manner the heigth of the starres are taken, and by this we are so certainely guided, that so
much as one point fayleth not. Likwise who can speak of the secrete & 
                  •
               inenes of the compasse, that being made
with as much paper as a mans hande, and with certaine streekes marked thereon, doth note the windes. And
with a litle iron put into it, is made an instrument that doth moue of it selfe, with onely the naturall vertue that
a stone hath giuen vnto it, and mouing without the helpe of any thing, sheweth where is the East, the West, the
North, and the South. And likwise the thirtie two windes which the Nauigation hath, and this is sheweth not
onely in one place but in all places, and it sheweth it so certainly that thereby they do it, and are certaine of their
purpose and pretence as many as are saylers in the sea. For the second, the certainetie of this art is so great, that
it seemeth the knowledge of one man not to bee sufficient to ordaine it, nor yet of many men, more then God
prouided a speciall grace and vnderstanding for that purpose, it is proued wherein it happeneth that a pilot commeth
sayling, and a storme taketh him three hundreth leages in the sea, and the day very cloudie, and the night so
darke that standing in the poope of the shippe, which is the hinder part, he seeth not the fore part of her, and
scantly the maste, and making many turnes in the seas, running from one part to another, rising and descending,
with a vehemencie of the windes and strength of the sea, and yet for all this, by the certainetie of the
arte, he knoweth the way that she hath gone, and the place where she is, and being come to the lande, shee
goeth to the port although it be in the night, not seeing the lande, likewise it happeneth many times, as the pilor
goeth sayling, he findeth a rocke or shoolde CC. leagues in the sea from any lande, and marketh the place where
he is, although he seeth not wherewith to marke it, for he seeth but the heauen and the water, and in it is not any
thing wherewithal to marke or make any signe, because al doth moue, but marketh it in his carde by the land,
he seeth in it and according to the art, which the carde hath, it is so certaine, that he and others both by day &
night do knowe howe to preserue and keep them selues from that place going aside from it, because they would
receiue no hurt, although it be vnder the water, that nothing of it is seene, whereby is concluded that although
the other artes haue trueth, this hath more by reason of the demonstration so certaine, which sheweth to keepe
a man from hurt and danger that he seeth not. For the third, I say there is no art of any that man vseth, so profitable
nor so good as this art of Nauigation is, and this to be true it seemeth well, because by it we haue knowledge
of diuerse and sundrie thinges in the worlde, and also of the trade with all partes of the worlde. And if
nauigation shoulde cease, men shoulde be driuen to liue straightly, for that they should lacke many things which
are necessarie for the life of man.
            Also here is to be noted, that amonge al artes which men doe vse and practise, none is of so great peril and labour
as the art of Nauigation, and chiefely in these dayes, seeing it is so greatly encreased and well neere the hol
                  •
               
               
roundnes of the worlde is sayled about: it is strange to consider that the auncient writers, neyther sawe it, no
                  •
               
thought of it, but rather helde it for vnpossible: it is worthie to be noted, that I haue seene many times a Pilote
come from the East India, who hath bene one yeere vpon the way, and from our Indias foure or fiue monethes,
passing such great daungers and troubles that many times they haue beene at the point of death, and being come
home to their naturall countrey, all hath beene so forgotten of them, as if it had past in adream, and so they procure
to returne with so geart good will, as though they went to a thing of pleasure. I thinke that couetousnesse
of goods is not the cause thereof, nor any other worldly gaine, but I take it to come of the will of God, that although
it be a thing so naturall to feare death, and great labour, yet all these labours and feares which they passe
in the same Nauigation, are by them forgotten, for if they shoulde remember and feare them, there is none that
woulde sayle on the sea: And seeing the wise pilot that so often times putteth his life in hassarde; and not onely
his owne, but in his knowledge is put in trust the liues and goodes of many: wherefore if any person will vnderstand
the arte of Nauigation, let him peruse this booke and arte, and studie therein, and he shall finde plainly
all things set forth necessarie for the same, whereby pleasing God he will graunt, to his way the ende which hee
desireth.
            The ende of the preamble.
         
         
            Errours escaped.
            
               Fol. 1. page 2, line 14. he in. for he is in.
               Fol. 2. page 2, line 36. and in planetes. for and in
plantes.
               Fol. 3. page 1. line 31. prospectiue. for perspectiue.
               Fol. 3. page 2. line 2. the tenne heauens. for the
tenth heauen.
               Fol. 11. page 1. line. 23. the king Iuba. the king I
                     •
                  b
                     •
                  .
               Fol. 14. page. 1. line 47. one high. for no high.
               Fol. 15. page 1. line 20. the 1. for the first.
               Fol. 30. pag 1. line 22. is taken for one sphera Esphera,
for is taken one spera, Esphera.
               Fol. 30. page. 2. line 1. is in auxe for is in his auxe.
               Fol. 34. page 2. line 23. your are distant. for you are
so much distant.
               Fol. 45. page 1. line 3. howe soeuer it be. for howe
great soeuer it be.
               Fol. 58. page 2 line 9. and of the guardes of his mouing,
for of the guardes and of his mouing.
               Fol. 58. page 2. line 22. the month of bozina. for
the mouth of bozina.
               Fol. 64. page 2. line 3. he be in the head at three.
for he be in the head, at three.
               Fol. 69. page 2. line 27. goe one any viage. for goe
on any viage.
            
         
         
            
            ¶The table of the bookes and Chapters that are conteyned in
the Arte of Nauigation.
            
               The first booke treating of the worlde, of his order
and composition.

                     
                        CAp. 1. What thing the world
is, and how it is compounded
of the heauens and elements,
it declareth the number of the
heauens and their monings.
                     Cap. 2. Wherein is declared
the three mouings which
the eyght heauen hath, & how they are knowne.
                     Cap 3. Howe the heauen hath a rounde figure
or shape, and by 5. reasons how it was conuenient
it should be so.
                     Cap. 4. Of the noblenes of the heauen and
of his col
                           •
                        or.
                     Cap. 5. Of the tenth heauen called the first
moueable and of his mouing.
                     Cap 6. Of the nienth heauen called Christa
                              •
                           ino
or heauen of water, it declareth how there
is a heauen of water and of his qualitie.
                     Cap. 7. Of the eight heauen which is the
firmament or the starrie heauen, and of the light
of the starres and their greatnesse.
                     Chap. 8. How it is vnderstood that the sun
doth enter into the signes, and the cause wherefore
they haue the name of beastes.
                     Cap. 9. What thing a signe is, and what likenesse
it hath with that which it is compared vnto,
and what day of the yeere the sunne entreth
into euery signe.
                     Cap. 10. Of the seuens heauens, of planets,
and of their mouings, and howe they make impression,
and cause generation and corruption
in the lower bodies.
                     Cap. 11. Of the elementall region, and how
it is deuided into 4. elements.
                     Cap. 12. Howe those elementes do shut vp
one another, and why the water doth not couer
all the earth.
                     Cap. 13. How the earth & the water, both elementes
do make one round body.
                     Cap. 14. Howe the earth is scituated in the
middest of the worlde.
                     Cap. 15. How the earth is quiet & moueth not.
                     Cap. 16. Of the foundation of the earth, and
howe it may be saide that the earth is the foundation
of the worlde.
                  
               
               The second booke of the sea and his mouings, and how
the Nauigation was inuented.

                     CAp. 1. What thing the sea is, and wherefore
it was called Occean.
                     Cap. 2. Howe the sea doth apperteine to the
perfection of the world, and without it the world
woulde perish, and howe the water is ingendered
in it.
                     Cap. 3. By what meanes the water of the sea
is salt, and howe it is more conuenient it shoulde
be so, and better for the Nauigation.
                     Cap. 4. Of the difference of mouings which
the Occean sea hath.
                     Cap. 5. What the cause is that the sea neuer
ouerfloweth aboue her bounds, nor is augmēted.
                     Cap. 6. Of the excellencie of the nauigation,
and the antiquitie thereof.
                     Cap. 7. Howe that by some tokens of the sun
and mone shalbe knowen when will come anye
tempest.
                     Cap. 8. Of the fires and lightes that appeareth
in ships which do saile when there is any storme.
                     Cap. 9. Of other certaine signes, whereby
may be knowne when stormes will happen in the
sea.
                  
               
               The third booke of the winds, their qualities & names,
and howe we ought to saile with them.

                     CAp. 1. What thing the winde is, and of
what quallitie, and how it is ingendered.
                     Cap. 2. How the winde doth not mooue right
vp nor downe, nor contrariwise, but his mouing
is in circle manner of water and earth.
                     Cap. 3. wherefore the winde is not alwayes equall
alike, but at sometimes more vehemente,
and at other times calme, and wherefore it moueth
to contrary place.
                     Cap. 4. Of the wherling of the winde and what
is the cause thereof.
                     Cap. 5. Of the windes which are named in the
cardes of Nauigation, and of the number of
them and their names.
                     Cap. 6. How the windes, conteined in the cardes
of Nauigation doe compasse aboute the roundnesse
of the worlde for to sayle by them.
                     A carde to sayle by, wherein is conteined the
Nauigation of the moste parte of Europe, Affrica,
and Indias or new world, with the distance
of leagues & height of degrees that euerything
hath.
                     Cap. 7. Of the order that the cardes of nauigation
hath.
                     Cap. 8. Of the accounte which the Pilote
ought to haue of his way when he sayleth with a
winde that differeth from his course.
                     
                        
Cap. 9. Howe the Pilot shoulde knowe sayling
by any maner of course, where the Meridian
is.
                     Cap. 10. Wherein is largely discoursed this
rule aboue written.
                     Cap. 11. Howe the Pilotte ought to choose
his course for the place whether hee mindeth to
saile.
                     Cap. 12. Howe he ought to pricke his carde
to knowe the place that the shippe is in.
                     Cap. 13. Howe the Pilotte ought to knowe
that his carde is iust and certaine, that there bee
no errour in his Nauigation.
                     Cap. 14. Of the number of leagues that is
counted for a degree in euerie course of the Nauigation.
                     Cap. 15. Of the number and measure, and
of howe many partes euerie degree is compounded.
                  
               
               The fourth booke of the heigth of the Sunne, & howe
the Nauigation ought to bee ruled thereby.

                     CHapter. 1. Wherein is declared. 17. chiefe
principles which ought to be knowne in the
height of the Sunne.
                     Cap. 2. Of the excellencie of the Sunne,
and of his mouinges.
                     Cap. 3. Of the yeare when the Sunne goeth
in his circle, and of other maner of yeares, and
howe the leape yeare is counted.
                     Cap. 4. What thing a shadowe is, and howe
the shadowes ought to be looked on whiche the
Sunne maketh for to take his heigth.
                     Cap. 5. Wherein is declared what thing is
the height of the Sunne, and howe it ought to be
taken to knowe the place wherein a man is.

                           Here followeth the rules of the height
of the Sunne.
                           THe first rule when the Sunne and the shadow
goeth towarde the North.
                           The 2. When the Sunne is at the North, and the
shadow at South, and the declination and height
is more then 90. degrees.
                           The 3. When the Sunne is at North, & the
shadowes at the South, and the declination and
height is iust. 90. degrees.
                           The 4. The Sunne at the North, and the shadowes
at South, and the height and declination
come not to 90. degrees.
                           The. 5. The Sunne in the Equinoctiall, and
the height to be lesse then 90. degrees.
                           The 6. When the height is taken in 90. degrees,
and whether there bee any declination in
the Sunne or no.
                           The 7. When the Sunne and the shadowes
goeth to the South.
                           The 8. The Sunne at South, and the shadowes
at North, and the declination and height
are more then 90. degrees.
                           The 9. The Sunne at South, & the shadowes
at North, and the height and declination are 90.
degrees iust.
                           The 10. The Sunne at South, and the shadowes
at North, and the height and declination
come not to 90. degrees.
                        
                     
                     Cap. 6. By the rules of the height of the Sun
the degrees are to be learned, a man is of one side
or parte of the Equinoctiall line, more then of any
of the other partes.
                     Cap. 7. Wherfore all the rules of the height
of the Sunne are reduced into 90. degrees, more
then any other number.
                     Cap. 8. Wherefore doe we say that a man is
from the Sunne the degrees that are taken in the
Astrolabio, lesse then 90.
                     Cap. 9. Howe it is vnderstoode that a man
hath the Sunne vpon his head.
                     Cap. 10. Howe to knowe the height of the
sunne it must be seene whether it be a leape yeare,
or what yeare it is.

                           A rule to knowe the leape yeare.
                           Tables of the declination or a departing that
the Sunne maketh from the Equinoctiall line, in
euerie day of the 4. yeares, as well to the North
part as to the South.
                           A Kalender of the Saintes dayes through the
whole yeare, with a declaration of the principall
feastes.
                           A rule to knowe the Dominicall letter euerie
yeare.
                        
                     
                     Cap. 11. Howe that by the Kalender aboue
written, a man shall knowe the moneth and the
day wherein he is.
                  
               
               The fift booke of the height of
the Pooles.

                     CHapter 1. What thing a pole is, and how
among the Poles, the roundnes of the world
is deuided.
                     Cap. 2. Howe the height of the Pole Articke
is to be taken, and the cause wherefore hee is taken.
                     Cap. 3. Howe the account is to bee vnderstood
which is taken of the pole Artick, or North.
                     Cap. 4. Of the North starre, & of the gwards,
and of his mouing.
                     Cap. 5. That according vnto the course the
gwardes are in, shalbee knowne howe many degrees
the North starre is vnder or aboue the Pole.
                     Cap. 6. How the rules of the height of the
North starre ought to bee applied, and how they
ought to bee added vnto, or taken away, according
to the place where the gwardes are.
                     Cap. 7. Wherin is declared certaine doubtes
that in this mouing of the North starre may bee
had.
                     
                        
Cap. 8. Howe the height of the North starre
may be taken, although the gwards be not seene.
                     Cap. 9. How the altitude of the North starre
may bee taken, although the Horizon bee not
seene.
                     Cap. 10. A Clock by the North starre, wherby
is knowne what houre of the night it is in any
time, or place a man is in.
                     Cap. 11. Howe the height of the Pole Antarticke
should be taken.
                  
               
               The sixt booke of the compasses
to saile by.

                     CHapter 1. Of the compasses of Nauigation,
and of the de
                           •
                        ects they may haue, and
howe they may bee amended.
                     Cap. 2. Howe the windes of the compasse
may be vnderstood, and howe the Sunne passeth
by them euerie day.
                     Cap. 3. Wherin is declared the opinion had
of the Northesting, & Northwesting of the compasses.
                     Cap. 4. Of the inconueniences that may followe
by the Northeasting and Northwesting of
the compasses.
                     Cap. 5. Of the regard or allowance which the
compasses of Nauigation haue, & howe it ought
not to be giuen them.
                     Cap. 6. Of an instrument wherby the compasses
may bee marked and knowne if they bee
true.
                  
               
               The seuenth booke of the Moone, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   her increasing
and diminishing doth serue in the Nauigation.

                     CHapter 1. What thing the Moone is, and
wherefore her light is not alwayes equall but
continually it increaseth, or diminisheth.
                     Cap. 2. Of the golden number, and howe
it amounteth from one to nineteene, and wherefore
no more not lesse.
                     A rule to knowe the golden number of euerie
yeare.
                     Cap. 3. Wherein is declared the day & houre
that the Moone maketh coniunction in euerie
moneth of the yeare for euer.
                     Cap. 4. Of the short account or reckoning
without any booke to knowe in short time howe
many dayes olde the Moone is in any moneth of
the yeare.
                     Cap. 5. How by the dayes of the Moone and
the course where the Sunne ought to stand, may
be knowne in what houre the tide will come.
                     Cap. 6. Wherein is declared more at large
the Chapiter aboue, with a shewe thereof.
                     Cap. 7. How that by the houre wherein the
coniunction was, shalbe taken out the 
                           •
                        ide, & the
regard or allowance that shalbe giuen to the Riuers.
                  
               
               The eight booke of the dayes of
the yeare.

                     CHapter 1. What thing a day is, and howe
it is reckoned, and in howe many partes it is
deuided.
                     Cap. 2. Howe that in all the artificiall daye
the Sunne riseth and setteth different vnto suche
as dwell in the world.
                     Cap. 3. How that vnder the Equinoctiall the
dayes and nightes are alwayes equall.
                     Cap. 4. Howe the dayes and nightes goe alwayes
increasing or diminishing vnto suche as
dwell out of the Equinoctiall line.
                     Cap. 5. Howe that the increasing and diminishing
of the day is not equall in all places.
                     A Table of the houres and minutes that such
as dwell in anye distance from the Equinoctiall
line, haue in the greatest day of the yeare.
                     Cap. 6. Of the houres and minutes whiche
they haue euerie day of the yeare in the height
of 40. degrees.
                     Cap. 7. Of the houres and minutes that the
Sunne doth rise and set euerie day in the yeare.
                     The last Chapter, how the Sunne doth giue his
light in equall time of the yeare, to all suche as
dwell in the worlde.
                  
               
            
            The ende of the Table.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The first booke of the world, his order and Composition.
            
               THe first chapter, what thing the world is, how it is compounded of heauens and elements,
the number of the heauens are declared and there moouings.
               
                  THe world according
to the Philosophers,
is vniuersall,
for all
things, it confesneth
therin, the
heuens, ye stars,
the earth, and
the sea, with all
the other elementes, and alltogether
is called the worlde. For as Ptholomie
sayth it is alwayes moouing and
hath no time of rest: Seeing this vniuersallitie
whiche wee call worlde, is
compounded and ordeined into twoo
distinct regions (that is to say) the region
Celestiall, and the Region elementall
               
               The first which is the region celestial,
is altogether shining, void, and free
from al variation, alteration and corruption.
This according to the opinion
of some auncient authors is diuided into
niene heauens (that is to say) seauen
of the planets, the eight is the firmament
where the fixed starres are, the
nienth the first moueable: of that opinion
was Ptholomie the great, and after
him Thebit, Alfragano, Albategni, and others
which in astronomy did floorishe,
more the late Astronomers (that is to
say) the wise king Don Alonso, Iohn de
Liueris, George Purbachio, Iohn de Monte
Rey, and others do bring it very probable.
               
                  
That vppon the nienth sphere
there is another tenth, whiche is the
first moueable, it is alone, and they
prooue that there are tenne heauens
moueable by the moouinges of the
eyght heauen. Hereof is written vppon
the first chapter of the sphere, that ye late
Astronomers saw fixed stars in ye heauen
to haue three moouings, whiche
were found in the eyght sphere, whiche
are these folowing one is the first moueable,
that is to say of the tenth sphere
which is the moouing of euery day, the
which in foure and twentie houres maketh
a reuolutiō from ye east to the west
and this is made vpon the two poles of
the worlde Articke and Antarticke.
               It hath another moouing of the
nienth sphere, and is called the
second moueable, for it is alwayes
according too the succession of the
signes from the Weste into the Easte, agaynst
the moouing of the first moueable,
which moouing is made vppon
the poles of the Zodiacke, and this according
as King Don Alonso sayeth,
is called Auge of the fixed starres, the
third moouing is of him selfe, and is
called the moouing of tripidacion, or
according to the saying of the sayde
King the moouing of accesse and recesse
of the eyghte Sphere, and is made
vpon twoo little circles in the concauety
of the nienth sphere, in the beginning
of Aries and Libra equally discribed
in such sorte that as to euery
one of the heauens shoulde not bee
geuen more then one moouing of it
selfe, and the eyght heauen should haue
three moouings.
               Heereof it commeth that twoo of
them are vnproper to him but are
caused of other twoo superiour heauens,
that is to say of the nienth and
tenth, vpon these tenne heauens or mouable
spheres wee put the eleuenth,
which according to the learned is called
the imperiall heauen, that is by reason
of his great brightnes, which alwayes
continueth firme in one manner
of order, without any moouing,
and of this there are some reasons,
whereby wee are perswaded, whereof
there are two thinges noted.
               The first is, that any manner of
thing that mooueth from a place
modueth his place eyther in all, or in
parte, so that whiche doeth mooue
mooueth into some place, forotherwise
it were immoueable, therefore any of
the moueable heauens mooueth place
eyther altogether in him selfe or his
partes, therefore he is in some place but
not in any inferiour sphere, for the
place must compasse about that which
is put into the place, therefore hee in a
superiour sphere. And it is conuenient
that there bee some heauen stedfast
and greater, wherein it maye
mooue.
               The second reason, is that there
is put a difference in the heauen, that
is to saye, before and after, on the
ryght side and on the lefe, not in respect
of as muche as toucheth vs, but
for the nature of the thinges, So the
Philosopher sayeth in the seconde of
the heauen and the worlde, this cannot
bee preserued by the moueable
spheres, the cause is that in the moueable
Spheres, the parte that nowe
is at the ryght side, shall bee at the left.
And the parte that is nowe aboue
shall bee vnderneath, as experience
sheweth, wherevppon it followeth,
that it is conuenient there bee a fixed
heauen, whiche in the behalfe
of the thing, is founde the difference
that is alleadged. This is the
imperiall heauen, as it is sayde,
whiche is higher then all other heauens.
It hath greate dignitie,
by reason of his brightnesse, cleannesse,
establitie, and purenesse, heere
is the Celestiall Courte, where
they dwell that are of good fortune,
enioying of GOD, whereas the
Apostle sayeth, nor eye hath seene,
nor eare hath hearde, nor canne
enter into the hearte of man, that
whiche GOD hath made ready for
such as loue him.
            
            
               
               The second chapter wherein is declared, the
three moouings which the eyght heauen
hath and howe they are knowne.
               
                  I Haue sayd in the chapter
before that in the
eyght heauen are found
three moouinges different,
and that some Astronomers
were of opinion,
that there were onely niene sphers
moueable and others had opinion of
tenne, and because that in this the auncient
authors, and the writers doe not
agree, I will shewe you the reasons,
that were of these opinions of ye which
is to be vnderstood, the first, Astronomers
mainteined that there were only
eyght heauens. This they obteyned by
the moouing of the stars. For the stars
mooue not of themselues, but in theyr
circles, so sayth the Philosopher in the
second of the heauen and the worlde,
that the starres are fixed in the circle,
as the knot in ye table: so yt by their moouings
the difference that is betweene
the planets which mooue, and the fixed
starres are knowne, these in their moouinges
are knowne to be different 
                     〈◊〉
                  
one from the other, in swiftnes and
in 
                     •
                  lownesse and by their place, but
the fixed 
                     •
                  ar
                     •
                  es are so many in number
that they cannot be toth prehended.
               The long experience and obseruation
of the Astronomers, attemed to the
knowledge that 
                     •
                  n doe mooue together
in equall distance and neerenesse
and continually the one doth keep with
the other, so that their moouing is one
so the Philosopher vnderstandeth in
the first of the heauen and the worlde,
therefore I say that these Astronomers
vnderstood that in the eyght heauen
was onely the continual moouing, that
is from the East to the Wea
                     ••
                  , and that
th
                     •
                   was the 
                     〈◊〉
                   moueable, it seemeth
that the sayd Phylosopher did so vnderstand
it in the place before aleadged,
where he sayth that all the fixed stares
are 
                     〈◊〉
                   the first indueable, & for this reason,
there are so man
                     •
                  e there, and in 
                     〈◊〉
                  
one of the inferiours 
                     •
                  d more but
one.
               There was other Astronomers,
that were not content to put only eight
sphers but they atteined to the nienth.
And the reason was because they sawe
the eyght heauen to haue two moouinges
different, the one is as aforesayd
from the East to the Weast, and
the other contrary to it: (that is to say)
from the West into the East, and
this motion is so slowe, that in A
hundred yeeres it is scarsely to be perceiued.
               This moouing Ptholomie declareth
in the seauenth of the Almagesto,
with most strong and certaine reasons,
so that these twoo different
moouinges beeing considered, they
came to the knoweledge, that the
eyght heauen was not the first moueable,
for the first mouable hath one only
moouing of himself most simple, the late
Astronomers by their large speculatiō,
founde fyxed Starres whiche mooued
sometimes from the Weast too
the North, And to the South, and
more swiftely to the Easte then too
the Weast, and at other times more
swiftely towardes the North then
too the South, The whiche Demonstration,
because with onely
twoo 
                     〈◊〉
                   aforesayde it could
not bee determined, they put another
thirde: moouing, and this is
one of him selfe whiche is made in
twoo small cyrcles in the heade of
Aries and Libra, So that as the
tyght Sphere hath three moouings, it
is not onely necessary to put the nienth,
but also the tenth: the reason is because
one simple body, ought to haue
but one only simple moouing, and
that is vntoo him proper and naturall,
so sayeth the Philosopher in the
first of the heauen and the worlde,
if they haue any more moouinges,
they are improper to him.
               And seeing that the eyght heauen
is a simple bodie, as the Phylosopher
vnderstandeth it in the same
place, it is conuenient that of these
three moouinges, one of them be proper
and naturall to him and the other
two improper. Likewise the moouing

that is not proper to him, vnto
another is proper and naturall. And
seeing that it is not an inferiour sphere,
it is conuenient to graunt, that vppon
the eyght heauen are other twoo moouinges
of whome is caused these twoo
moouinges aforesayde, so that as the
Philosopher saith, the eight heauē was
the fyrst moueable. It is to bee vnderstoode,
that hee and the Astronomers
of his time, beleeued that the
eyght heauen had onely the moouing
of euery day. And they came not too
the knowledge of the others, because
they were not determined vppon, but
in a very long continuance of time.
            
            
               The thyrde Chapter howe the heauen
hath a rounde figure and of fiue reasons
whereby it was conuenient 
                     〈◊〉
                  
should be so.
               
                  THE wisdome of the euerlasting
father which
treated and di
                     •••
                  sed all
thinges, ordeined that
the heauen shoulde bee
rounde vp these reason
                     •
                  
following.
               The first by reason of the similietude.
               The seconde, vp reason of the
commoditie.
               The thirde for necessitie, Unto
the firste, touching similitude or likenesse,
because the sensible worlde, is
made vntoo the 
                     •••
                  nesse of the
worlde imaginat
                     •••
                  , wherein is
no beginning nor ending, and for this
cause the sensible worlde hath a fourme
or figure, after the manne
                     •
                   of a sphere▪
in the whiche cannot bee. assigned or
marked, beginning nor ending, For
the second, of the commoditie or profit
this is because in all bodies and Super,
fimetros, the whiche are foure principally
Oual Piramidal, Colu
                        •
                     al, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
the Sphere is of gra
                        •
                     ter body
and of all figures the rounde fygure or
fourme doeth co
                        •
                     teiue most, and seeing
that the rounde bodye is the greater,
it followeth that all thinges which
haue that fourme or shape are profitable
in the world.
               
               The thirde whiche is of necessitie,
for if the world were of another fourme
or shape then rounde, as like vnto
a Tryangle or Quadrangle or of
another fourme it woulde followe
that some place shoulde be 
                     •••
                  ptie, or
some body without a place, therefore
an empty place cannot be put according
to nature, for nature it selfe doeth abhorre
it so muche, that more easily it
consenteth that whiche is heauie too
rise vp, or that which is light too descende,
then too permitte an emptye
place. So saith the maker of ye commē
                  taries▪
rather the heauen will descende
find the earth ascende, then nature to
permitte any thing emptie,
               
                  A ristotle bringeth in other twoo reasons,
to prooue that the heauen is
round.
               The first reason is, that vnto the
firste and noble body is 
                     〈◊〉
                   the firste
and moste noble Fygure or shape.
The heauen is the moste noble and
fyrstbodye and the rounde fygure is

                     〈◊〉
                   perfect, therefore vnto the
heauen is due the rounde houre 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                     •
                  ording too reason, for vnto euery
one bodie nature gaue a fourme propercionably
vntoo his woorke, euen
as it appeareth in Beastes and in planets.
               Therefore the proper woorke of
heauen is to
                     •
                   mooue it selfe continually
like to a circle. It was conuenient
that it shoulde haue a fygure
or fourme 
                     〈◊〉
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   for suche
a moouing, and that is rounde,
wherefore this lacketh the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
which doeth let the moouing.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   sayeth, if the worlde
were plaine some parte of it woulde
be more neere to be the
                     •
                   other 
                     〈◊〉
                  
euen as that parte whiche is ouer our

                     ••
                  ades, wherevppon the 
                     〈◊〉
                   that is
there, shoulde bee more 
                     〈◊〉
                   too be
then that whiche is in the Easte or in
the Weste, then those thinges whiche
are neerer too vs doe seeme greater

to vs, so the Starre whiche is in
the middest of heauen shall seeme
greater to vs then that whiche is in
the Easte or in the West, which we see
contrary, For the Sunne or another
Starre seemeth greater in the easte
or in the Weste, then in the middest
of heauen, the cause of this is,
not because the Sunne or the Starre
is greater or lesser, nor that hee is
father or neerer, But for some vapoures
that riseth vppe and putteth
them selues betweene our sight and
the Sunne or the Starre, and as
these Uapoures are thicke bodies
they take awaye the Beames of the
Sunne▪ or Starre from our sighte, in
suche sorte, that the thing in his
owne quantity
                     •
                   cannot bee comprehended.
               As it may bee likened to a peece of
money cast into 
                     〈◊〉
                   water, that because
of the glystering of the Beames
or strickes it seemeth to bee of greater
quantitie then it is.
               Euen so doeth the Sunne or starre,
when the Uapoures are put betweene
them and our sight.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, of the noblenesse
of the Heauen, and of his coulour.
               
                  
                     ARISTOTLE sayeth
that the noblenesse of
the heauen, is vnderstoode
and considered
in the clearenesse of his
shyning, in the roundnesse
of his fourme, in the vnitie of
his equallitie, in the vertue of his
moouing, in the heyght of his scituation,
whiche is verye farre from the
center of the earth, in the deminishing
of his quantitye, whiche doeth ouerreach
the imagination and measure
of reason.
               In nature nothing is like too it,
neither comparable to it in vertue,
The heauen is none of the elementes
nor hath their qualities, nor is compounded
of them, if it were it shoulde
be corruptible, for all thing compounded
of the elementes, shall bee desolued
and corrupted.
               The heauen is ingenerable inaugmentable,
it cannot receiue straunge
impressions, it is neyther light nor
heauie, hote nor colde, drye nor
moyst, formall or royall, but vertuous,
for his vertue and influence
doeth heate, so sayeth the Phylosopher
in the fyrste of the Heauen and the
Worlde, and so improperly it may
bee sayde, it is not to bee broken nor
penetrable, and likewise improper,
thicke, or congealed, improperly it
hath his coulor bright.
               And for as muche as the coulour:
which seemeth to vs it hath, is
to bee vnderstoode, that our sen
                  
                     •
                  es
many times deceiueth vs, and
the sight maye sooner deceiue vs their
any other of our sences, for our eyes
bee of so tender a composition, that
any manner of fourme, sente of
any visible thing, we feele griefe therof.
               So sayeth Alacen in the prospectine;
the thirtie niene rule.
               And Aristotle in the booke of Qualitate
Visus, whereby I say that nothing
aboue the Moone can bee seene,
But the Sunne, or the Starres,
whiche Starres wee see by meanes
of the light that they receiue of the
Sunne.
               But as touching the coulour of
Heauen, It is to be noted, that it
taketh coulour in one of twoo sortes,
one is of it selfe. And so is the seconde
qualitie, caused of the fyrste,
Euen as the whyte, the blacke, and
other coulours, In this sorte the
Celestiall bodies haue no coulours,
But in another sorte it is taken, that
is to saye, commonly by all that which
ye sight doth shew, & extendeth it selfe
to that which is bright and percing,
and in that manner the heauen hath

his colour, that is to say, shining.
            
            
               The fifth chapter of the tenne 
                     〈◊〉
                   called
the first moueable and of his moouing.
               
                  SEeing there hath beene
declared the number of
the heauēs there shapes
and qualities, I will
speak perticularly of thē,
and especially of that
which serueth for our purpose, of the
which I say it is manifest to our sight
that the heauens mooue, and it is to be
vnderstood, that a moouing is a passing
from one place to another, so that
all thinges which mooue passeth from
one place to another, or from one limet
to another, this moouing may be in one
of these three sortes, by meanes of a
circle or straight waye or from aboue
downward, and so contrary. The first
of those three, which is the moouing in
circle manner, mooueth not place according
to all his quantitie, but according
to his parts, as it appeareth in a whele
vnles it be al mooued from one place to
another yt they make it go roūd, so they
mooue all his partes, such is the moouing
of the heauen, so that, whiche is
now in the east afterward shalbe in the
west, and although the heauen moueth
not place according to all the proportion
which it hath, yet it is well mooued
which in it is mooued. And this hath
commonly been doubted, if the first moueable
of the heauens, were mooued by
one only moouer or by many: And if by
many howe manye there are, and in
what sort they mooue it. Of the which
it is to be noted that the heauens in the
first moueable are moued of one mouer,
and that they are not mooued of many,
for one only is sufficient, & many would
be superfluous, so saith the Philosopher
or the first of his naturall phylosophie,
that it is better to put one beginning
then many, and a fewe rather then an
infinite number, therfore it is better to
put one onely moouer then manye
who maketh this first moueable: there
are diuerse opinions, one saieth
God alone, bringing therefore that
which Aristotle saith that the first moouer
ought to be of an infinite strengthand
seeing that God is of an infinite
strength and hath created al thinges of
a reasonable strength, it seemeth that
God onely is he that mooueth the first
moueable. Others there are that proueth
that the firste moouer is a certaine
intellectiue whiche mooueth,
the whiche they prooue in this manner.
If the first moouer were God
it would folow either that ye mouing of
heauen were done at one instance, or the
doings of God be measured with time.
               Therefore it cannot be sayde that the
heauen is mooued at one instant, seeing
that all Astronomers holdeth and the
sight sheweth it, that in foure and
twentie houers there is one reuolution
a
                     •
                  complished. N
                     ••
                   the seconde can be.
For the saide Philosopher in the fourth
of the naturall philosophie sayth, the euerlasting
is not in time nor his dooings
are measured with time, but this
is it which most commonly is vnder
stoode, that an angell maketh the first
moouing, and likewise al the other heauens
haue intellectiue motion whiche
mooueth them in their owne moouings
and here by it appeareth howe orderly
they mooue since the time that GOD
made them, vntil the like moouing doe
cease when his will shalbee.
               Therefore I say that the first moueable,
of the first moouing which is of
the tenth heauen according to that as
hath been spoken of, geueth a turne
once in foure and twenty houres round
about the world, from the east into the
west, & with this his mouing he catcheth
& carrieth with him al the other inferiour
heauens and maketh them giue
a turne to the world in the time that hee
geueth it. Although that their owne
moouinges be contrary to this, this is
shewed because we see that the starrs,
the sunne, the moone▪ and the other planets
haue their first originall, and are
created in the east. And by little & little
they rise vp and assend vntill they come
to the meridian and so with one accord
they descende and come to the west, and

alwayes they make this moouing in
the same foure and twentie houres
as the tenth heauen doeth, so that
continuallye they obeye the moouinges
of the first moueable.
               And it is to be noted, that for as
muche as it is saide of this forceable
moouing or catching which the firste
moueable doeth, vntoo the other
inferiour heauens, it is to bee vnderstoode
that in the Celestiall bodies
is no forceable moouing or violence,
nor any resistance or contradiction,
but all with one conformitie or accorde
doe follows the fyrste moouing.
               And so when it is sayde that
the first moueable doeth catch the other
inferiour heauens it ought to be
vnderstoode soundly as if he should say
the inferiour or lower heauens are
mooued of the higher by an accedent, euen
so as the marriner mooueth the
shippe moouing her selfe, wherin he saileth
or as the water in a vessell, the vessel
being mooued the water also mooueth
so it is to be vnderstoode, that the
inferiour heauens doe mooue themselues
by the moouing of the firste
moueable, so by that aforesayde it seemeth
that alwaies there may be a dout
saying.
               (A doubt:) how can it be that the
tenth heauen moouing it selfe continually
without ceasing from the easte to
the west, that the other inferiour heauens
moouing them selues with him
doe make their owne moouinges contrary,
so that in one selfe time there is
made by one selfe body different moouinges.
               
                  A Declaration for the declaration of
this, the present exāple is to be noted, if
in ye wheele of a mil there were set a flee
or an Aunt, although that the wheele
doeth make his moouing very quicke
and hastie yet the Aunt or Flee may be
going at their leisure, and make their
moouing contrary to that whiche the
wheele doeth. As also if the wheele
carrieth them rounde about and in a
short space geueth a turne yet they
may make an ende of their moouing at
their leysure, so that in this sorte the
moouing which the tenth heauen doth
make which is in euery foure & twenty
houres, the inferiour heauens although
they are mooued of him they
make their owne moouinges contrary,
the whiche euerye one of them by himselfe
doeth make an ende in different
times.
            
            
               The sixthe chapter of the nienth heauen,
called Christaline or heauen
of water, it is declared howe there
is a heauen of water, and of what qualitie
it is of.
               
                  THe nienth heauen called
the seconde moueable,
which first of all challengeth
the mouing from ye
Weste into the Easte for
his owne, because of the
tenne moueable heauens. This is
the first, and that most by leysure maketh
his moouing from the West into
Easte, this is called the Christaline
Heauen or Heauen of water, of the
whiche is written in Genesis the first
Chapter. Where GOD sayde, let
the Firmament bee made in the middest
of the waters, So that the waters
remayne diuided, some aboue
the Firmament and others beneath,
the whiche Firmamente is the eyght
heauen. In suche sorte that of waters
which remayne aboue the Firmament
is this nienth Heauen, Of
this it seemeth there may bee a doubt,
saying.
               
                  A Doubt, Howe canne there bee
waters aboue the Heauen, seeing
that naturally water is heauie, and
all bodies whiche are heauie doe naturallye
descende, neither canne it bee
saide that GOD hath them there, for
any myracle, but by a naturall
meanes.
               
                  A Declaration, to this Nicholas

De Lyra, answereth in the glosse vppon
ye sayd article the first of Genesis, where
hee sayeth that these waters are taken
here in a double sence, for those waters
which are aboue the firmament
be of a celestiall nature, that is to say, of
the like qualitie that the heauens are
of, and of their owne nature: And those
which are vnder the firmament are of
ellymentall nature. This heauen is called
the heauen of waters or christaline
heauen, because it hath a pearcing light
like to water, and cleere shining like to
christal, of this nienth heauen, or of the
tenth we haue no signe, nor there is any
in them: nor our sight doeth passe
the eyght heauen where the fixed stars
are.
            
            
               The seauenth Chapter of the eyght heauen,
which is the firmament or starry heauen,
and of the light of the starres, and of their
greatnes.
               
                  THe eyght heauen, which
is the starrie heauen, is
called the firmament by
reason that in it are the
fixed starres, in such sort
as none by him selfe moueth
but altogether, of these it is to bee
vnderstode, that although we see them
bright, yet there is none of them that
haue any light of them selues, but the
Sunne giueth light vnto them all, for
he onely hath light and no other bodie.
This light God made the first day, as
it is written in Genesis the first chapter.
And the texte sayth that God saw
the light and it was good. Saint Austine
speaketh of the light that it is a
corporall substance, souereigne and simple,
multiplied in vertue, and shyning
with brightnes without resistance
it is communicable and delightfull and
therefore among all other bodies theris
nothing so profitable, so quiet, so vertuous
as the light: The light is sprinkled
abrod from the heauen to the earth
it is the beautie of all visible creatures,
and is the cause wherewithal the other
bodies or the world be praysed, seeing
that I say that the stars haue no light
of themselues, more then that which
they receiue of the sunne. So Albertus
Magnus writeth in the second of the heauen
and the worlde, The sixt chapter,
where he saith, al the stars of heauē are
lightned of the sūne, as also the moone,
but there is a difference in receiuing of
their light, & so they differ in receiuing
their vertu, as they differ in ye noblenes
of nature in such sort as, some are most
pure and most noble, & these, receiuing
their light at one instant it doeth penetrate
them, from the superficie which is
opposite to the sunne euen to the other
superficie, so that all the starres remain
cleane and full of light, others also are
penetrated with the sunne, although
that by their nature they decline to som
colour, but howsoeuer it bee, the sunne
doeth penetrate them at one instant, &
filleth them full of light euen as a candle
is lighted with fire, and heere it is
to be noted that in this eyght heauen is
the Zodiacke where the twelue signes
are, or ye houses of the sun. These signes
are cōpounded euery one of a certaine
number of starres, & besids the signes,
there are other 36. images, which are
also compounded of starres, so that ther
are in all. 48, and these starres, which
doe compounde these signes and images
are in number. 1021. of these speaketh
Alfragano in the third booke of the
assembling of the stars, that the least of
the fixed Starres to a notable sight is
greater then all the earth. And if al the
bodie of the earth were put into the
place where the fixed Starres are,
although it had light by reason of
the great distance, it would bee so little
that we should not see it, but this authoritie
is not to be vnderstoode of the
planets, for all of them bee not greater
then the earth, nor it is to be vnderstod
of all the fixed starres, therefore it is to
be sayd of them that are most notable
to the sight. For there are some fixed
starres so little, that wee see them not,
there be others also that although wee
see them by reason they are little, they
are not accounted of the Astronomers,
but onely such as are great and these be
not all of one greatnes or quantitie, but

of diuerse quantities, and therfore they
be diuided into sixe differences. So
Ptholomy hath it in his Almagesto, and
the king Don Alonso in his tables.
            
            
               The eyght Chapter, howe it is vnderstoode,
that the Sunne doth enter into the signes,
and wherefore the signes haue the names
of beastes.
               
                  IN the Chapter whiche
goeth before, was sayde
that in the eyght heauen
is the Zodiack wher the
twelue signes haue their
place or houses of the
Sunne, and of this it seemeth that two
things may be douted. (The first doubt)
To the fyrst, seeing that these signes or
starres are in the eight heauen and the
Sunne in fourth, how can the sunne enter
into the signes, seeing there is so
great distance betweene the sunne and
them, (The second doubt) To the second,
if euery one of the signes be compounded
of starrs wherfore doe we say that
one signe is called Aries, whiche is as
much to say a Ram, and another Taurus,
which is asmuch to say a Bull. And
likewise of others: seeing that in the
heauen there is not any beastes. (The
first declaration) To the first, although
it be true yt the signes be in the 8. heauē,
& the Sunn in the fourth, it is to be vnderstoode
that the moouing which the
Sunne maketh in all the yeere is, that
he mooueth himselfe vnder the starres
of the signes, and so when we say that
the Sunne is in such a signe, it is vnderstood
that then he mooueth himself
vnder the starres of that signe, as also
any of vs may stande vnder any signe
or vnder the Sunne, And the distance
that is from the one to the other doeth
not let it. (2. Declaration) To the second,
it is so, that in the heauen are no
beastes, but these are so named by reason
of the effectes whiche the Sunne
worketh, being in euery one of ye signes
which doe followe and answere by propertie
or likenesse to one of these beasts,
and by demonstration of suche an
effect, it cōpareth it self to the likenes of
such a beaste, or to another thing that it
is likened vnto, as in ye chapter folowing
is declared, that the Sunn entring
into euery one of these signes, doeth
cause diuers effectes. Therefore it is
to be noted, that of these twelue signes
foure of them are moueable, foure fixed,
foure common. The moueable are Aries,
Cancer, Libra and Capricorne, these
signes are called moueable, for the sun
entring into euery one of thē, it is said,
that the disposition of the ayre doeth
vary and not continue in one estate, and
likewise the Sunne entring into Aries,
it mooueth from winter into sommer,
and entring into Cancer, it mooueth
from Sommer into Estio, and entring
into Libra it mooueth from Estio to Otonno
which is haruest time. And entring
into Capricorne it mooueth frō Otonno
or haruest time into winter. The
fixed signes are Gemini, Virgo, Sagitarius
and Pisces, they are called fired, for the
Sunne entring into any of them, it is
sayde, that the time and the disposition
of the ayre doeth continue in his owne
estate, They which are common, are
Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, & Aquarius, they
are called common signes, for there
appertaineth to them some thing of the
moueable and of the fixed, and so the
common in parte is moueable, and in
parte is fixed.
            
            
               The nienth Chapter what a signe is, and
what likenes it hath with that whervnto
it is compared, and what day of the yeere
the Sunne entreth into euery signe.
               
                  I Haue sayde, that the
signes of the Zodiacke
haue names of beastes,
by reason that ye effects
which the Sunne doth
woorke by entring into
euery one signe, they haue likenesse or
property, with that beast or with that
thing wherof the signe beareth name;
And because I thought good to declare
this at large. I will shewe what thing
a signe is, and how many manner
of wayes it is taken, and the likenesse
that euery signe hath with that wherewith

it is compared, and in what daye
of the yeere according to the common opinion,
the Sunne entreth into-euery
signe, For the first is to be noted, that a
signe according to the saying of Sacro busto,
is a piramide of foure sides, whose
seate is that superficie, whiche wee call
signe, the sharpenesse therof is towards
the center, the signes are those starres,
yt the Astronomers were accustomed to
contemplate on, loking on their light
or brightnes, wherby they knewe what
wether would come, and many were accustomed
to behold them, and thereby
they foresaw the qualities of the summer,
winter, and other times of the
yeere. For the principal starres in their
risinges and in their setting, doe shewe
the qualities of the times, A signe is also
taken by one parte of the Zodiacke,
the which the sunne doeth passe, after
he hath gone thirtie degrees from his
moouing. And because the sunne in one
yeere doeth passe the zodiacke, whiche
hath three hundreth and threescore degrees,
therefore the signes or houses of
the sunne are twelue, so sayth Ptholomy
in ye second Quadri Partiti, that the signs
are twelue, answering to the twelue
partes of the earth, therefore of these
signes. The first is Aries, and the reason
why this signe is first named before
ye others, is because that some holdeth,
that in the first degree of this signe, the
sunne made his moouing the first day
yt he began, & that day he was in the equinoctiall:
and also for because the sun
entring into this signe making heate,
bringeth foorth moisture, by the which
it is a liuely moouing of generation,
This signe is called Aries, by similitude
euen as a sheepe is weake in one parte
of the bodie, and is strong in the other,
so entring the sunne into this signe ye. 11.
of Marche, in the first parte is a little
hote, and in the last with greater
strength his heate is felt.
               The 2. signe is called Taurus, to vnder
stande, that as the Bull is a strong
beaste, so entring the Sunne into this
signe the eleuenth of Aprill, it heateth
with more strength then before.
               The third signe is Gemini of this is
vnderstood▪ that the sunne entring into
him ye eleuenth of May, with his vertue
of heating ingendreth.
               The Iour
                     •
                  h signe is Cancer, into the
which the sunne is entred the eleuenth
of Iune, it is marked like a Crabbe.
               The fifth signe is the figure or shape
of a Lion, which is a strong beast, collericke
and full of anger, so that the
Sunne entring into this signe the
fourteenth of Iuly, it bringeth a strong
heat.
               The sixth signe is Virgo, by the whiche
is noted, euen as the virgine is barren
and doeth not engender, so the Sunne
entring into this signe the fourteenth
of August, the earth is barren and
bringeth not foorth any thing by reason
of the great heate.
               The seauenth signe is Libra, marked
by a payre of Ballance of like equalitie,
to vnderstand, that the Sunne beeing
entred into this signe the thirteenth of
September, the day is equall with the
night.
               The eyght signe is marked with a
Scorpion, which is a Beaste, that with
the tongue he flattereth, and with the
tayle he poysoneth, so when the Sunne
is entred into this signe the fourteenth
of October, the first part thereof is temperate,
but the last is colde.
               The nienth signe is Sagitarius which is
a beast offenciue, so that the Sunne entring
into this signe the thirteenth of
Nouember, offendeth with colde and
snowe.
               The tenth is Capricorne, wherein is
vnderstoode that euen as the Gote
from the lower parte goeth vp to that
which is high, so the Sunne entring into
this signe the fourteenth of December,
from the lowest parte of our hemisperio
beginneth to goe to that which
is high.
               The. 11. signe is Aquarius, marked by
a man yt sheddeth water for to shewe,
that entring the Sunne into this signe
ye 11. of Ianuary, he sendeth to the earth
water & moisture. The. 12. signe is Pisces,
marked by 2. fishes in the water,
which is cold & moist, to shew yt entring
ye sun into this signe ye. 12. of feburary ye
                  
weather is colde and moist. Of the aforesayde
it may be knowne, the diuersitie
of the effectes, that the sunne maketh
in euery signe. But it is to bee
noted that this doeth happen to such
as doe dwell from the equinoctiall towardes
the north or pole articke, for
such as inhabite towardes the pole
antartike, the sunne beeing gone foorth
of the equinoctial, doeth make contrary
effectes to them, so that when wee
haue summer they haue winter, in such
sorte that the order of the signes in the
Zodiacke is not conformable or agreeable
to all for if vnto vs commeth forth
first Aries before Taurus, to them commeth
foorth first Taurus before Aries, &
in like sort of the other signes as in the
materiall sphere is plainely shewed.
            
            
               The tenth Chapter, of the seauen heauens, of
the planets, and their moouings, and how
they haue impression, and cause generation
and corruption in the inferiour bodies.
               
                  SEeing that ye eyght heauen
hath bin treated of,
and of the stars & signes
that are in it. It is conuenient
to speake of thē
seauen inferiour heauēs
which are named by the planets, of the
which it is to be vnderstoode that of the
seauen heauens. The first is Saturn▪
                   the
second is Iupiter, the third is Mars, the

                     •
                  ourth is Sol, the fifth is Venus, the sixth
is Mercurie, & the seauenth Luna, more
neere vnto vs, then any of the rest, these
seauē planets are called stars, which are
moueable not because they erre, but because
their mouings be not vniform nor
agreable, these do moue ye elemēts & do
corrupt the things that are corruptible
they bring cloudie weather, and raiseth
vp the waues of the sea, they mooue
tempests, and causeth flowers to grow,
and the heauēs & planets haue natural
vertue to cause these effectes, the works
of these planets are diuers according to
ye variatiō of the countries & regions, &
therby their impressions are printed in
beastes, birds, and plantes, and in men
they incline more to one then to other.
But although they do to incline & moue,
they doe not constraine nor binde by
force, But rather as Ptholomie sayth, ye
wise man is lord ouer the starres He is
wise that followeth not sensualitie, but
reason, euery of these planets haue a
sphere of his owne, wherin he moueth
in circle wise, And the superiour circle
mooueth round about so nere to ye inferiour,
that betweene the one and the othere
is no space nor any thing emptie.
so that these heauens do shut one with
another, & they are nere together in such
sort, that any thing how litle or smal soeuer
it be, cannot put it self between the
one and theother, as it appeareth in the
elementes, that betweene the one and
the other their is no place emptie: so yt
we see betweene the water & the earth,
or between the ayr and the water, or betweene
the fire and the ayre, remain no
place, yt any thing may be put between:
more it is to be noted, that although
the heauens are so ioyned together, &
neer one to the other, that this ioyning
together doe not let them of their moouing,
so that they mooue very distinctly
in differente times the one from the
other, without any let of their moouing
or standing still one onely pointe in such
sorte, that the tenth heauen maketh his
moouing in twentie and four houres, &
the nienth heauen that is neere vnto
him, in fortie niene thousand yeres, and
likewise the eyght heauen doeth make
his moouing in thirtie & sixe thousand
yeeres, and another in seauen thousand,
and the seauenth heauen which is next
to him maketh an ende of his moouing
in thirty yeres. These are things which
doe teach vs the greatnes and power
of the maister & maker of such workes,
vnto whom the sayde woorkes giueth
praise, so did the royal Prophet consider
in the eyghteene Psalme where hee
sayth, The heauens doe shewe and manifest
the glorie of the Lorde, and in another
place, Lorde the heauens shall confesse thy
great maruelles, frō the beginning thou madest
the earth, & the heauens are the workes
of thy handes. And it is to be noted
that euery one of these heauens haue

twoo moouinges one is the first moueable,
which is made from the east into
the west, turning againe into the cast
as it is declared: The other moouing
which is proper to euery one, is made by
a circle oblique, contrary to the first, that
is to saye, from the west into the east:
Of this is to bee noted, that according
to the opinion of Frauncis Capuano, it
was necessary that in the heauēs were
twoo contrary moouinges, one in the
first moueable, and another in the lower
spheres, and this for twoo reasons,
The first is, because the first moueable
doeth mooue so swift, and with so great
hast, that scarsely his moouing can bee
considered, seeing that in twentie and
foure houres hee passeth all the space
that he doeth occupie, whiche causeth,
that he caryeth with him, all the lower
heauens, and the fire, and the measured
region of the ayre, as it is written,
in the first of the Metheoros, so that if
the eyght & nienth sphere and the heauens
of the planets did not mooue vnto
the opposite parte, with a contrarie
moouing, the sayd first moouing would
not onely mooue vnto the Celestiall
Spheres, and to the fire, but woulde
mooue all the ayre, water, and earth
rounde about, with his daily moouing,
and there woulde remaine nothing
quiet nor firme. The second reason is
because the starres with their moouing
doe cause influence in the inferiour, and
so they make impressiō as they mooue,
but if euery one did mooue, according
to their onely moouing, that is to saye,
from the Caste into the Weste, so that if
they mooued altogether with one vniformitie,
they would bring foorth one equall
and vniforme effecte, the which
shoulde bee an inconuenience. For that
onely generation is not sufficient, but
it is conuenient, that there bee corruption,
and so it was conuenient, that
all the Spheres, shoulde modue in
their daylye moouing, rounde about
the earth once in a naturall daye, because
all of them may communicate
with vs their impressions: and likewise
that they mooue in the seconde
moouing in the Zodiack, comming together,
and deuiding them selues one
from another to make that the effectes
shoulde be different. Aristotle sayeth,
in the second of generation, that the
moouing of the Starres in the circle,
oblique, that is to say, in the Zodiacke
is cause of the diuersitie of effectes,
And so the Sunne in the summer comming
nere vnto vs, causeth generatiō, &
likewise in Otonno, or Haruest time,
and in the winter going 
                     •
                  rō vs causeth
corruption.
            
            
               The eleuenth Chapter, of the Region elementall,
and howe it is diuided into four
elementes, and why it is not diuided into
any more or lesse.
               
                  IN the Chapters before
writtē hath bin declared
the order of the heauēs,
their nūber & mouings,
therefore I will nowe
speake of the elementes,
howe they are ordained and deuided,
of the which it is to be vnderstood, that
the elementes are foure and no more,
by reason, that first of all they haue
foure qualities, and it maye bee sayde,
that they Ioyne in sixe kinde of waies.
Let vs see if all sixe be possible. One
ioyning is hote and cold, another moist
and drie, the thirde hote and drye, the
fourth hote and moyst, the fifth moyste
and colde, the sixth colde and dry. The
twoo first be not possible, because there
cannot bee twoo contraries in one
subiect. The foure which remayne are
possible, in the whiche the actiue one
with the other ioyneth with ye passiue.
These foure do constitute the four first
essentias which are called elementes,
And this is by reason of their fyrste
simple bodies, euen as it seemeth in
their quallities. That is to saye, in the
fire, in the ayre, in the water, and in the
earth, because we see that the fire is hot
and drie, the ayre hote and moiste,
the water colde and moyste, the earth
colde and drye, by the which difference
of qualities of the first bodies, they are
parted in the same maner. All these elements
doe moone, by the higher moouing

except the earth which is immoueable.
So sayth Albertus the great in
the first of his Metheoros, the fourth
Chapter, it is necessarie that wee saye
the moouing, which wee see from
the inferiour, that is to say, the moouing
of the elementes proceede of the
superiour, euen as of his owne cause,
but it must be vnderstoode of the superiour
elements the which in their continuall
moouing, they mooue in circle
manner, onely the earth which is most
Iowe, remayneth without moouing,
not onely circuler neither yet straight.
            
            
               The twelfth chapter howe the elementes,
doe compasse about one another, and
wherefore the water doeth not couer all
the earth.
               
                  THese foure elementes,
that before are spokē of
ought to be vnderstoode
that the one doeth compasse
about the other in
this manner, the earth
is in the middest of al, like to a poynte
or Center of the worlde, neere vnto the
which is the water, and vppon the water
and the earth is the ayre, and vpon
the ayre, the fire, and the element of the
fire is vpon the ayre Albenruys proueth
it in the fourth of the heauen and the
worlde in his thirty two commentary:
where he sayth, we see that all fire moueth
vpwarde and is eleuated vppon
the ayre, therfore as his mouing is not
infinite it is conue
                     •
                  ient that it come to
one place where it is na
                     ••
                  ral, and there
it is conserued, whereupon it is concluded
that the fire is aboue the ayre, it is
prooued by an example in this sort. If
there be any that haue not seene the sea
but seeth how all riuers goe to demain
in one pla
                     ••
                   as their moouinges the not
infinite, it is necessarie to conclude and
appoint some place, where the waters
may ioyne, And this plate is the sea, so
it is conuenient to graunt that vpon
the ayre is a place in the hollowe parte
of the roūdnes of the moone, where the

                     〈◊〉
                   is gathered together. Therefore
I say that these Elementes eyther of
them doe compasse in roundnesse equally
from euery parte of the earth, sauing
the water in that parte of the earth,
which is discouered, for the breathing
and life of all liuing creatures, of this it
is to be noted according to the saying of
Albertus the great, that the water did
couer all the earth, and also he sayth in
the second of the Metheoros the thirde
treatie the seconde chapter, wee see
the order of the elementes are in suche
sorte, that alwayes the ioyning of the
one is in the hollownes of the other, &
this is by reason his roundnes doeth
girde him therevnto, and because this
is naturall, and sometimes it was so, yt
at somtime the earth was couered with
water, and all bodies naturally haue
one proper place, whereby it is conuenient,
that all be filled, for otherwise there
woulde be some thing superfluous in
nature, so it is euident, that the proper
place of the waters is the superficie of
the earth, for alwayes they mooue by
that place.
               Also when at any time two elements
doe not agree in any quallitie, commonly
it is called simbol, wherewithall the
one doeth ioyne with the other.
               Therefore it is necessarie, that there
bee some meane that they communicate
and ioyn together, and seeing the earth
and the ayre haue no simboll, it is conuenient,
that they ioyne together by
meanes which is the water that hath
a simboll with both, and so it is shewed
that according to nature all the earth
was couered with water: Of this may
be asked what is the cause, why the
roundnes of the elementes, fayled more
in the water then in the others: it is answeared
that GOD did make nothing
in vayne but alwaies woorketh
for the best.
               Therefore as God by his only grace
and wil made man, and al other things,
I leaue this part of the discouery of the
earth, that man and Beastes might be
conserued in their owne likenes.
               Of this haue past many questions,
this is certaine that GOD of his omnipotencie
made it. And so it is written
in Genesis the first chapter, that

God sayd lette the waters come together,
that are aboue the heauen, and let
the earth be seene drye.
            
            
               The thirteenth Chapter, how the earth and
the Water, both Elementes, make one
round bodie.
               
                  IT is to bee noted, that
these twoo Elementes,
Earth and Water, both
together doe make one
rounde body, Of this
speaketh Iohn de Sacro

                        •
                     usto in the first chapter of the Sphere,
The earth is rounde, which is shewed
by the signes and the other Starres,
which rise not, nor goe downe equally
to all men wheresoeuer they bee. But
first of all they rise to them that bee in
the east part, rather then to them that
are in the west, and why they appeare
to one rather then to the other, ye roundnesse
of the earth is the cause thereof, &
that to bee true, that the stars are seene
to some rather then to others, it appeareth
by the eclipse, for one selfe eclipse of
ye moone, which we see at the first houre
of the night, they which are in the easte
partes doe see them in the thirde houre
of the night, whereby it seemeth, that it
was first night, and the sunne was first
set to them, before it was set to vs, the

                     •
                  ause is, the roundnes of the earth, &
that the earth is rounde from the north
vnto the south, and so contrarywise
it sheweth it selfe, for vnto those
which are towardes the north, appeareth
alwayes some starres, which are
neere to the pole artick, & ye other stars
which are neere to the pole antartik are
neuer seene. But if any went from the
north towardes the south or midday he
might goe so farr, that the stars which
he saw first might be layde vnder the
horizon that he should not see them, and
howe much more he came towards the
south, so much lesse hee should see the
starres of the north, and then he should
see the starres of the south, that first
he coulde not see, as contrariwise, it
would happen to such as went from the
south to the north, and the cause of this
is the roundnes of the earth, likewise if
the earth were plaine from the easte to
the west, so sonne or equally, the stars
would rise vnto those in the east partes
as to those in the west, whereby it
seemeth false, by the fyrst reason.
               Item if the earth were plaine from
the north to the south, or by the contrary,
the stars that one should see should
neuer be set from him wheresoeuer hee
should goe, the which is false, by the second
reason, for if in any manner of wise
the earth doe seem plain, vnto the sight
of men, it is for the great quantitie that
it containeth, in respect of our sight. And
if any should say that the mountaines
and valleis doe let the roundnes of the
earth. To this is vnderstoode, that
the mountaines haue not any proportion
that should let the earth to be round
And if there be any thing in that sorte
they be as the nayles of a wheele, that
very little or nothing doe let his roundnes,
but note that in one of twoo manner
of wayes a round thing may be spoken
of, the one is by rule, that is to saye,
when the lines which are straightly caried
from ye center to the circumference,
be equall, in this sorte the earth is not
perfectly round. In another sorte it is
sayd to be round irreguler, that is, whē
all partes are not of equall distance frō
the middest, so is the roundnes of the
earth. And seeing it hath beene declared
how that the earth is rounde. I saye
that the water is likewise round which
is prooued by the reasons aforesayde.
               Also it is prooued, that suche as
sayle by the Sea, for to discouer the
Lande, they alwayes goe vppe to
the toppe of the Shippe, whiche is
the highest parte, and happeneth to
see the Lande from thence, and from
no other place, And this is by reason
of the roundenesse whiche the water
hath.
            
            
               The fourteenth chapter, Howe the earth
is scituated in the middest of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
worlde.
               
                  
                  
                     ALFRAGANO saith,
in the fourth difference,
if the earth were not in
the middest of the world
it would not be of equal
distance from euery part
of the heauen. But Euclides bringeth
in the firste of the Elementes, that it
standeth in the middest, and is equall
in distance from all partes, and prooueth
so, for if the earth were not in the
middest, it woulde reache more to the
Easte parte, or too the West. And for
a similitude, when the Sunne or other
Starre, were in that parte, it woulde
reach more neere to the earth, then it
it were in ye other part, & so they would
seeme greater: Which is false, for
wee see that all people whiche are vp
                     •
                  
on the face of ye earth the stars seemeth
to them of one selfe quantitie in what
parte of the heauen soeuer they be, be
it in the middle heauen, in the easte or
in the west. And the cause of this is,
by reason the earth is of equall distance
from the Sarres, it followeth
therefore that it is in the middest of
the Firmament.
               Item if the earth by any of his
partes, were more neare to the heauen
in one place then in another, he
that were in that part vpon the face
of the earth, which were neerer to
the heauen, shoulde not see the halfe
heauen.
               This is against Ptholomie, and all
the Philosophers, that doe saye, that
wheresoeuer a man standeth there riseth
alwayes with him sixe signes,
and other sixe setteth with him, and
the halfe heauen is seene of him, and
the other halfe is hid from him, so
that equally they are distant from the
heauen.
               
                  Sacro busto sayeth, that by the selfe
same signe or shewe is prooued, that
the earth is but a poynte in respect of
the Fyrmament, for if the earth were
of any quantitie in respecte of the heauen,
it woulde not happen that the half
heauen shoulde bee seene.
               And for the better vnderstanding
thereof, Imagine this, if any plain
superficie were put vppon the Center
of the earth, the whiche shoulde diuide
the earth into twoo equall partes. And
also the firmament it selfe.
               Then the eye of him that were in the
Center of the earth, should see the middest
of the Fyrmament, And the selfe
same eye standing vpon the face of the
earth, shoulde also see the middest of
the firmament, of this is gathered, that
the quantitie of the earth is insencible
in respect of the firmament.
            
            
               The fiftenth Chapter, how the earth is
quiet and mooueth not.
               
                  THAT the earth is vnmoueable
and quiet, to
is prooued by two reasons,
the firste is, that
beeing a hole naturall
body and altogether heauie,
it goeth to the place most lowe,
whiche is the Center and middest of
the Firmamēt, and there it remaineth.
So sayth the Philosopher in the fourth
of the naturall Philosophie and in the
fyrst and fourth of the Heauen and the
worlde.
               The seconde reason is to consider,
howe that the earth standeth in the
middest, and if it shoulde mooue and
departe from the middest, it woulde
rise vppe, the which woulde happen to
it naturally or violentlye, not naturallye,
because his naturall moouing
is to the middest, and so his moouing
contrary to the middest is not naturall
to it, then it shoulde be with
violence. But it cannot bee with violence,
because there is no body to
be found that shoulde doe violence to
so greate a body, in greatnesse and
waight, where it is to bee concluded,
that it is alwaies queit and mooueth
not.
               The same prooueth Albertus the
great, in the seconde of the heauen and
the Worlde, in the thyrde Treatie
and the. 8, chapter where he saith, ye order
of the starrs doe learn ye earth to be

quiet, and placed in the middest, for as
the moone is ordeined to be vnder the
Sunne, if the earth were not in the middest
and fixed, it would not happen 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the parte of the circle of the signes, the
Sunne and the moone to be opposite to
the heade and tayle of the Dragon, and
likewise the Astrolabios, and other instrumentes
of the Astronomers should
be false, and by them woulde neuer bee
found the courses and computations of
the starres, as by the sayd iustruments
our sences doe attaine vnto, for alwaies
they woulde happen to bee diuerse and
different, for from the earth the circles
of the heauen should not be equally seen.
All the which we haue prooued be Geomitrie
and Astronomie. It is to bee
considered that God made heauen and
earth, and all that therein is, he put the
earth fixed in the middest, because the
heauen and the starres should compasse
it about with their moouing, where the
diuine power doeth sustaine it in the
nuddest, euē as a point. Of this is written,
The Lorde sayth, I haue hanged,
the earth in one knot founded vpon his
stabillitie.
            
            
               The sixteenth Chapter of the center of the
earth, and howe it may be sayd that the
earth is the center of the world.
               
                  THE Center of the earth
may bee vnderstoode in
three manner of wayes,
The first as touching the
greatnes of the Center,
The secōd of the waight
of the center. And the third of the mase
or assemblie of the center, the which assembly
or mase is in the middest of the
firmament, This beeing had, foure
thinges are to bee noted. The first is,
that in the land is not one selfe center of
greatnes and of waight, for the earth
is deformedly waighty, for that the one
parte is couered with water, & the other
part is discouered. The seconde, that
the center of the waight of the earth is
not in the middest of the firmament, for
if you imagine to diuide the earth into
2. equal parts, thē the part that is couered
with water woulde surmount the
other. The third is that the Center of
the greatnesse of the earth, and the Center
of the firmament, are not one. For
that the earth is not equally couered
with water. Of the which there foloweth,
that in the earth we may imagine,
three centers really distinct, The firste,
is the cēter of the greatnes of the earth,
The second the center of the waight,
The third the midest of the firmament,
The fourth reason that the, center or
poynt of the mase or assembly of the water
and earth is in the middest of the
firmament. This is because the like assemblie
is a waightie body, and without
lette, and so the center touching his
wayght is in the middest of the worlde,
for that he is weightie by nature, wherby
it may be sayde that the earth is in
the middest of the firmament, for that it
is a parte of the mase, which mase is in
the middest of the world.
            
            ¶The ende of the first booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The seconde Booke of the Sea, and of his moouinges, and
howe the Nauigation was inuented.
            
               The first Chapter what thing the Sea is, and wherefore it is called Occean.
               
                  THe Sea is the
proper place of
the waters by
reason of the similitude
of his
forme. There
the waters doe
ingender & are
sutained. And
according as Albertus the great vnderstandeth
it, the riuers come foorth of
her and returne to her againe. So hee
sayth in the third of his Metheoros the
twelfth chapter, we see that all riuers
runne into the Sea, and from the Sea
they returne and come foorth, that they
may runne agayne, wherby it seuieth,
that the Sea is the end and beginning
of the waters. It is called the Occean
Sea, for the swift and continuall moouing
where with it mooueth: for that,
Oikis in Greeke is as much to say hasty
or swift. The Greekes and Latinists
doe name it by this name, and therefore
this name hath continued common: or
else it is called Occean Casi Cianeus, because
it girdeth or imbraceth the endes
of ye earth, & by reason of ye diuersitie of
the countries, it taketh diuers names,
as the Indian sea or Percian sea. &c.
               The Sea hath no colour, being looked
vpon, when one is neere it: for our sight
remaineth not vpon the superficies of ye
water, but desendeth downe and being
looked vpon a farre of it hath the colour
of heauen, & being moued of the windes
it hath the forme of diuers colours.
And it is to be noted, that the Sea for
seuen dayes riseth encreasing, and is
that which we cal springtides, & other
seuen she decreaseth. Of these flowings
and ebbinges. Aristotle bringeth the
causes to hee naturall, in the seconde
of his Metheoro
                     •
                  : and besides that,
Hipocrates, in his booke of ayre and water
sayth that there is a proper cause in
Astronomie, that is by the natural vertue
of the moone, vpon the waters, so
likewise we see that al shel fish with the
encreasing of the moone doe encrease, &
with ye decreasing do decrease: for as ye
moone riseth aboue the Horizon and
with his beames toucheth the sea, moueth
a stitring vp, whereby it causeth
her flowing and ebbing and to cast out
into her riuer or coast all dead bodies or
vncleane thinges that are in her.
            
            
               The 2. Chapter how the sea apperteineth to
the perfection of the world, and without
her the world woulde perish, and howe
the water is ingendered in her.
               
                  THe sea apperteineth too
the making of the world
and to her perfection, &
the world, should not be
perfect without her: for
if there were no beginning
of the waters there shoulde be no
simple waters. And if there were no
simple waters there would be no mixt
waters, and so there would be nothing
of that which is ingendered of the water,
and if there were no water there
would be no bodies, as there are continually,
and thinges which cleeueth together,
whereof it followeth, that if the
waters had not a beginning the generation
would be destroyed, And so consequently
all the world. Also if there
were no beginning of the waters there
would not be a ioyning together of the
contraries which are possible, and so
nature woulde dye in that which were
necessarie, and the woorke would cease
in the act. Then it would happen, not
hauing a beginning of the waters the
woorke of nature would cease, and so
the worlde woulde perish, where it concludeth,
that the sea is necessary for the
sustentation of the worlde. And Aristotle
in the seconde of his Metheoros,
sayth, that the waters in the sea doe ingender

in the North, which is as much
to say, as the greatest parte of the water
of the sea doth ingender in ye north.
This Albertus the greate declareth in
the second of his Metheoros, chapter
sixe, saying that the sea runneth from ye
North into the South, and the cause is
that the north is higher then the south
and the reason wherefore it is higher,
is, because that with the colde of the
north there is more water ingendred,
then that which can containe in the distance
and height of the riuers, and in
the south the water consumeth and is
wasted with the heate of the sunne, and
for this cause in the north, one water
pusheth out another, to the place which
is lower then it selfe: And so accidently
it mooueth, from the place of his generation.
For as it is moist, it runneth vntill
it come to be deteined in some drye
place. The reason why the water is so
consumed in the south parts is, because
the sunne alwayes mooueth in his circle,
Excentrik so yt his center is not in one
place of the earth, in such sort that if the
Diameter of the circle of the Sunne
were paste by both centers, that is to
say, his owne, and that of the earth, the
greater parte of the diameter shoulde
be towardes the one parte, and the lesser
towardes the other, in respect of the
center of the earth: And so it is shewed
by reason of Geometrie, that the greater
length of the diameter is neere vnto the
twentie degrees of Gemini in this our
time, and the lesser length is in the twē
                  tie
degrees of Sagitarius whiche is a
signe opposite to Gemini, whereof it appeareth
that the sunne commeth much
neerer to the earth in the south partes
then in the north partes. And so by reason
of his neere comming, he heateth in
such sorte, that he consumeth the water
and burneth the earth, the which he
doeth not in the north partes.
            
            
               The third Chapter, wherfore the water of
the Sea is salt, and wherefore it is most
conuenient and better for the Nauigation.
               
                  EXperience sheweth that
the water of the Sea is
salte, and so sayth Albertus
the great, that it is
called sea, by reason it is
bitter or salte, And the
Sea to be salts it seemeth to be against
his naturall kinde, wherefore, seeing
that the sea is the begin
                     •
                  ing of the waters,
and his owne place, and the waters
which ingender in her, and those
which enter into her foorth of the riuers
are fresh, it seemeth that with more reason
the sea should be fresh, and not salt.
Also as it is certaine that God made all
things to ye best, it seemeth to be better,
that the sea were freshe then salte. To
this answereth Albertus the great in the
second of his Metheoros, in the thirde
treatie and fifteenth Chapter, where he
sayth yt matter that causeth ye sea to bee
salt is. According to the truth, there are
twoo kindes of vapours, that is to say,
hote and moyst, and hote and drie, and
in the sea one of these doth rise from
the superficies, & the other riseth from
the bottome, This is by reason of the
heate of the sunne, and of the starres,
which are an efficient cause of these vapours,
and for the vapour of the water
it is very subtile, betweene these two,
and therefore being risen into the ayre is
consumed of the sunne, and the vapour
of the earth remaineth, or more properly
his exhalation dispersed, extended, &
mingled in the water. As it appeareth
by an example in the meate digested,
that the thin substance thereof, is raised
vppe and extended, into the members
and is that which nourisheth, and
the grosse substance remaineth, and also
that which is vndigested: euen so doth
the vapour of the earth remaine grosse,
and extendeth into the substance of the
water of the sea, and the coldnes of the
water compassing it round about, casting
into it coldnes, and with the coldnes
it burneth, by reason they bee two
contraries together, they are made
stronger then before, for the heate of the
salte exhalation, being come forth of the
depth of the sea, by vertue of the Sunne
fortifieth it selfe, with his contrary,

which is the cold, and so ouercommeth
the like heat which is yt as is required
in the generation of a salt fast, as the
Philosopher hath it in the second of his
metheoros the first chapter speaking in
this matter, of this there is a similitude,
that if a freshwater were passed
through ashes it would make it salte,
the like is of the water of the sea, in the
time it was made salt, and because that
some say, there is a pure element insubstance,
and the element of the water
is in the sea, and that in the middest
of the sea, the water is simple and without
tast, wherefore hath it not there an
obiection of contrarietie. This seemeth
to me not to be so, for the heate of the
Sunne, and the starres, are sufficient
to make exhalations come forth of the
bottome of the sea, which being mingled
with the coldnes and moisture of
the water caused a salt tast in the highest
parte of the water: As well & with
more reason they will make it in the
middest or in the bottome of the sea, and
so I hold with Aristotle, and with Constantine
a great Astronomer, that there
is now no element pure, & for as muche
as ye water is salt, it is more conueniēt
& better for ye nauigation, thē the fresh,
that is because the salte water is more
heauie and grosse then the freshe. And
that it is so, Albertus the great saith in
this manner, that ye salt water is more
heauie and thick then the freshe, it is gathered
by many experiences, of the
which one is. If the freshe water be
mingled, with salt and made a strong
mixture in such sorte that all the salt be
melted in the water, and in to it is cast
an egge fresh layde, it will swimme aboue
the water, by reason of the thicknes
that the water hath which is done
with the mixture of the salte, and if the
sayd egge be put in freshe water it will
sinke, it is sayd that it must bee a newe
laid egge, for if it be old or crackt, it
will sink. And by the same reason is
shewed, that the shippes doe rather
sinke in freshe water, then in that
which is salt for the fresh rather deuideth
it selfe and riseth vp rather then
that which is salt.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter of the different moouinges
which the Occean sea hath.
               
                  IT hath beene declared,
in the. 2. chapter of this
2. booke, yt a great part
of the water of the sea
doeth ingender in the
north, and from thence
it runneth to the south, and this is one
of the moouinges which the water of
the sea hath: wee doe likewise see that
the sea when it floweth mooueth towardes
one parte and when it ebbeth it
moueth to the cōtrary, hauing such order,
that where it began first to flowe▪
there it beginneth first to ebbe, whereby
it seemeth that the water of the sea
hath contrary moouings one from another,
and besides this wee see that
the riuers runne to the sea, and also
the sea commeth vp by them, and this
seemeth meruellous in nature: for the
water naturally goeth downwarde,
as a body which is heauie, as it is, and
if the riuers be higher then the sea, the
sea should not goe vp into them, and if
the Sea be higher then the riuers they
woulde not runne into the sea, wherby
with reason it may be doubted, saying.
(A Doubt,) what is the cause seeing
that all the waters of the sea, being one
bodie haue so many different and contrary
moouinges, so that some waters
are moouing towardes one place, and
some towards another, whereby it may
be sayde eyther that the sea mooueth it
selfe in these moouinges by chance, and
without any order, or that shee is mooued
by different moouinges or mouers
(A declaration,) To these doubtes Albertus
magnus answereth, in the second of
the Metheoros the sixth chapter of the
third treatie where he sayth, absoluing
all the difficulties, which are put, touching
these moouinges of the sea, wee
say with Seneca that there is no other
cause of the course of the waters, to one
place or other, but the places which are
high or low, (except that only mouing,
whereby the sea ebbeth or floweth,) for
in this it followeth the circle of the

moone, as wee teach in another place:
And that the saying of Seneca is true, it
is prooued because the waters of the
sea doe come flowing to all partes of the
worlde, that is to say, to the east, and
to the west, to the north & to the south.
And▪ likewise they goe ebbing from all
the sayde partes. And therefore the
Sea hath no parte proper where his
flowing and ebbing doeth beginne, so
that by accedent the water mooueth it
selfe from one place to another, vnlesse
it be downe right, for because this moouing
commeth not to it by any accedent
but by proper essence, consequentlie to
his forme.
            
            
               The fyfth Chapter wherefore the Sea neuer
ouerfloweth, nor is augmented nor
made greater.
               
                  IT may be asked what is
the cause, seeing that in
the sea there is so muche
water ingendred, and
continually entreth into
her so many riuers and
fountaines, wherefore shee neuer ouerfloweth
nor is augmented. To this is
some cause the whiche Albertus th
                     •
                  
great bringeth in the second of his metheoros
where hee saith, the sea receyueth
no augmentation nor yet maketh
it self greater, for because she is a naturall
receiuer of all the waters, and is
their quiet place. And the place cannot
ouerflowe, with the comming in of the
thing which by nature ought to bee in
this place: for the place ought to be conformable
with that whiche it shutteth
into it according to nature, so that the
sea is able to receaue into it al ye riuers.
And for the entrance of them neither to
ouerflowe nor to augment it self. Likewise
it ouerfloweth not by reason that
the Sea is so great that the riuers in
the respect of her are nothing, for there
is not any thing in them able to augmē it▪
The third reason is because the
heate of the sunne and the blowing of
the windes doe consume so great parte
of the water, that although it ingender
continually in the sea and continually
the riuers enter into her: yet in such order
God disposed it that it: neyther decreaseth
nor encreaseth. And so it may
be sayde that which is written in Iob,
Lorde thou diddest appoint her a precinct,
that she should not breake it. And
it is to be noted, that in the floode of
Noah. The holy scripture saith in Gene
                     ••
                  s
the seauenth chapter, that the water
did 
                     •
                  ise vp fifteene cubites vpon ye
most high mountaine that is vnder the
heauen, so that all the earth was coueted
with water. But although that
this encreasing of the waters were so
great, the sea did not ouerflowe nor did
couer the earth, by going foorth of her
limmet and precinct. But the great encrease
of waters came for two causes,
one was that the windowes & cloudes
of heauen were opened, and it raigned
fortie dayes and fortie nights very leisurly.
The seconde was that the fountaynes
and riuers of freshe water did
runne so much that all the earth was
couered as it is sayde, so that all liuing
things which were vpon the earth did
perishe (except Noah and all that were
in the arke) But the rayne being ceased,
the sayde text saith, that God sent such
great windes, that they consumed the
water, & returned the earth to his own
perfectnes.
            
            
               The sixth Chapter of the excellencie of the
Nau
                     •
                  gatiō, and of the antiquitie therof.
               
                  WIth reason it may bee
sayde that the nauigation
hath great excellency
seeing that God was ye
first that commanded to
make a shippe or instrument
to goe vppon the water: so it is
written in Genesis the sixte chapter
where is sayde that God commanded
Noah to make a ship or arke of timber.
This Arke had. 300. cubites in length.
and 50. in bredth, and 30. in hight, of
these cubites, there are diuerse opinions
what length they were of, some say
after the manner of Geometry, others
say common, with more reason it seemeth
they were in manner of Geometrie,
because they should be greater, for
it was conuenient that in the arke there
shoulde be 
                     〈◊〉
                   for that which shoulde
be put there in.
               S. Isidore writeth of the nauigation

in the Ethimologias that the Lidians
were those that first found out the making
of shippes, but these did not attain
to more knowledge then to ioyne one
timber with another, and were wel calked
and nayled, they sayled in them not
departing farre from the lande, after
that Epaminundas, the Greeke made an
end to put shippes to sayl in perfection,
and so in the warres of Peloponeso ther
was founde that notable captaine, Bias
with shippes, carrackes, and Gallies.
               In the third of the kinges in the; 10.
chapter is reade that Salomon king of
Hierusalem sent two shippes to Tharsis.
and euery three yeere they went and
came from whence they brought golde
siluer, woorkes of Iuorie, and apes.
               
                  Iulio Solino sayth that al the sea towardes
the south, which doeth compasse
Affrica about behinde and from the India
to Spaine was sayled, and of this hee
bringeth testimonie of the king of Inba
for the confirmation & argument thereof
he maketh mo
                     •
                  tion of Ilandes, and
of a certaine people the manne
                     •
                  s and
confines of ye places & the spaces of thē
                  Plato in ye .32. booke, in the dialogue of
Tim
                        •
                     o, sayth that from an Iland called
ye colūnes or pillers of Hercules, which
is at the mouth of a straight there was
failing to a firme land, which contained
greater then all Affrica & Asia; wherby
it appeareth that before the time of Plato
was sayling from the Iland of Cadiz,
which is at the mouth of the straite
of Iebralter vnto the land of the Indias
which we now haue.
               
                  Pliny writeth, that gouerning the
thinges of the empire of Tiberius Caesar
there did appeare in the coast of the sea
of Arabia signes of ships that the Spaniardes
had lost. Cornelius Nepote geueth
knowledge that in his time one
that was called E
                        •
                     do
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   from the
latine king sayling by the sea of Arabia,
and likewise sayth that he saw one Ce
                     
                        ••
                     
Antipatro that called with merchandise
frō 
                  Spain Ehiopia. In the time of
Augustus 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   most pa
                     ••
                   ye north
Occeā seas were sailed round about. Al

                        〈◊〉
                     
                   vnto the cape of the land of the

                     
                        〈…〉
                     . Reyhold Seleuco
and Anthioco saye that the riuers of
the Caspian sea were sayled and known
with the armies of those of Macedonia:
As also they sailed all the north parts
frō one place to another. Plinie himselfe
vseth the testimony of Cornelius Nepote
who affirmeth that the king of the Sweuiās
or Esquicaros gaue to Metello Celeri
chiefe consull of Fraunce certain Indians
ye which sailing frō ye 
                  India wt merchandise
were driuē 
                  into Almain with tēpest
of weather. Likewise it is read in Othō
                  
that in ye time of ye 
                  Iermain emperours
certaine ambassadours of ye 
                  India were
foūd in ye riuers of Almaine which were
driuen thither with great windes, & if
was not doubted yt they came from the
regiō towards the cast, which could not
be if it be as some doe think yt the north
seas be frosen Pope Pio the 3. saith that
in the booke he wrote of Geographie and
reasō doth manifest, & shew ye the sea in
old time was sailed seeing yt the men of
old time did put names vnto the riuers
of the O
                     •
                  cean sea, which doth cōpasse about
the farthest parts of the earth, of ye
great nūber & multitude of ships yt was
molde time some authors haue writtē.
Homer. saith yt in the host of ye Greekes
which came vnto Troy were 1180. ships,
likewise Diodorus saith yt 
                  Xerxes king
of ye 
                  Persians brought in his against Gretia,
700000. men of his owne, & 300000.
of his friendes, and when became to
the Sea called Pontico, hee made
in the sea a bridge of ships whereby he
past with his people so yt the ships being
together, reached from the land of Asia
vnto that of Europa, which is at ye least
a league of sea.
            
            
               The 7. chapter how by some signes of the
sun & of the moone may be known whē
stormes wil come.
               MAny times there happeneth to be
in the Sea tempests of winds &
waters which doe cause greate
stormes whereof followeth to such as
are saylers death or losses of ships and
goods or other great troubles: therfore
here I mind to declare the signes as I
find thē writtē by ye which the sayd tē
                  pests
or stormes may be known & being
foreseen or known they may do les hurt.

This pleased V
                        •
                     rgil greatly, who sayth,
that many hurtfull battels of windes
doe come vpon the ignorant: it is trade
of Democrito the Philosopher, that a
brother of his being reaping in time of
great heat, who was called Damaso,
the sayde Philosopher sayde vnto him,
yt he should reape no more, but shoulde
gather together that he had reaped, &
keepe it, for shortly would come a great
tempest of wind, that would carry it away
from him, And so a fewe houres
being past. It followed as ye Philosopher
had said, after declaratiō made of
signes or prognosticatiō of the tempests
or stormes, there shall bee first noted,
those which are shewed in the Sunne.
               
                  The signes of the Sunne.
                  
                     Plinie in his natural history the eighteenth
booke Chapter forty fiue sheweth
that if the Sunne when it riseth be
cleere and not cloudie, foresheweth a
fayre day, if it seeme yellow, it foresheweth
rayne with hayle. It when the sun
doth rise it seemeth hollow, it foresheweth
rain and winde, if when the sunne
doth rise there be cloudes before it, and
shewe redde, and parte of the sayde
cloudes are dispersed abrode towardes
the north and part towardes the south
it signifieth windes with great rayne:
Jf when ye Sunne riseth & setteth doe
appeare any streekes gathered together
neere it, if foresheweth rayne:
                  If before the Sunne rise do appeare
vpon it round cloudes it foresheweth
great colde, this is if after Sunne rising
they goe towardes the south, but
if they goe towardes the west it signifieth
fayre weather.
                  Jf cloudes doe compasse the
Sunne rounde aboute the lesse light
and cleerenes they geue signifieth, the
greater tempest, and it will be the greater
if her roundnes doe seeme dubled.
                  If in the rising of the Sunne do appeare
redde, cloudes lying ouer the sun
being brought thither by any manner
of winde it signifieth that the selfe same
winde will blowe, but if it be a southerly
winde it betokeneth rayne.
                  If when the Sunne riseth if be compassed
aboute with cloudes, from
that part where the roundnes doth discouer,
it is to be loked for that the wind
will come, but if it discouer all, it signifieth
equally faire weather.
                  If when the Sunne riseth shee extend
her beames farre of, by the clouds
and in the middest it seemeth emptie,
foresheweth rayne.
                  If beefore the sunne come foorth shee
shew her becames it foresheweth water
and winde.
                  If when the sunne shall let, her circle
be white, it foresheweth some tempest
that night, and if it be very hote,
there will be winde.
                  If whē the sunne doth set, her round
bodie doth seeme blacke or thicke of the
parte which is moste discouered, it will
blowe much winde.
               
               
                  The signes of the Moone.
                  Seeing there hath beene declared ye
signes of the sunne, for to know the tempestes
or stormes that are to come I
will speake of the thinges which are to
come, that the moone sheweth.
                  In A
                           •
                        gypt they keepe holy day, the
fourth daye of the moone the whiche if
shee seeme shining with a cleane brightnes
it foresheweth a very fayre day, and
if she shewe redde it betokeneth much
winde, if blacke it signifieth raine, if in
the fifth day her hornes be not sharp &
small, but great and brode, it foresheweth
rayne.
                  If the moone be straight and shewe
her selfe vpwarde it signifieth winds &
chiefelie when this is in the fourth
day.
                  If the moone being foure dayes old,
& her roundnes be of an Alborne 
                        •
                     ulle
                        •
                     
it signifieth great windes, the authour
hereof is Var
                           •
                        o.
                  
                  
                     Pl
                           •
                        nie sayth that if in the fourth day
of the moone she be vpright it betokeneth
tempest in the sea: vnlesse that all
rounde about her she hath a circle very
cleere.
                  If at the full moone in the middest of
her shee be cleere if sheweth a token of

fair weather, or if she be of an alborne colour
or like to a rose colour it foresheweth
windes, if she be blacke it foresheweth
rayne.
                  When at her rising shee rise with the
vpper parte of her horne blacke about,
at the decreasing of ye moone, it wil rain,
and if likewise her horne be blacke beneath
rounde aboute beefore the full
moone it also foresheweth rayne.
                  If the moone being at the 
                        •
                     ull haue
a circle round about her of that parte
which doeth shewe most bright, will the
winde come.
                  If at the first appearing of the moon
that is to say when shee is newe, the
bornes of her doe shewe great it signifieth
tempest. And it shall be the greater
if before the fourth day the wind do
not blows at the west.
                  If at the sixteenth day of the moone
the seeme to be of a great colour of flame
it foresheweth tempest.
               
            
            
               The eyght Chapter of the fires and lightes,
which doe appeare in shippes that doe
sayle when there is torment or tempest
in the Sea.
               
                  IT happeneth to such as
doe sayle when there is
stormes in the sea when
it seemeth that they
should be lost yt al night
they see vpon the maste
or yarde or in some other parte of
the shippe a certaine fire or clearenes,
the which some saylers call, S. Edmund,
which ought not to be so taken,
seeing that it is not as they thinke,
therfore I say that these fires or lightes
are a certain impressiō in the ayr which
the Greekes call Pili Deuces, & is so called
by meanes of the grosenes of ye humor
which goeth from the earth & fighteth
with the coldnes of the might, & so it
gathereth it selfe together and congealeth
in the first region of the ayre, and
when his exhalation findeth any body
wherunto to cleaue, it kindleth and
holdeth it selfe fast to it vntill it be consumed
and wasted. This fire burneth
not.
               And Plinie in his second booke of
the naturall historie, the thirtie seauen
chapter, saith that when these fires be
two they be called Pollux & Castor and
it is a good signe, and when it is but
one it is called Hellena, and it is an euil
signe.
               These fires are also seene in the
lande. And they haue beene seene in
the campes vpon the pikes which the
souldiers carry, and vpon the deade bodies.
               And Plinie sayth also that they
haue beene seene vppon the heades of
men, and of beastes, And so did Virgil
affirme that it appeared vpon the
head of lulio Escanio: In the campes of
the wars these fires doe appeare as wel
because of the continuall fumes, as also
because of the heate of many people:
Jn the ships they ingender of ye fume of
the said ship and of the heate of the people
gathered together into little rome,
and of the Marriners and people in
the shippe, which in the stormes with
the greate moouing they haue, doe ingender
heate: this is when there is
disposition that the rising vp of the vapour,
shoulde make impression in the
ayre, as before is sayde: And Plini
                        •
                     
                   saide
that one only fire is no good signe.
               This is because when there are two it
seemeth that in the ayre is abundance
of grosse smoke and signifieth that it is
sufficient to consume the matter of the
tempest.
               
                  Peter de Castroboll, vpon the seconde of
the Metheoros sayth, that whensoeuer
these fires are seene in a tempest, it is a
good signe, for it noteth faire weather.
Likewise it happeneth, that there are
great stormes, & none of these fires are
seene, and in small stormes they see
sometime one or twoo, so that the sayle
                     •
                  s
shoulde haue no deuotion vnto
these fires to beleeue that Sainte Edmunde
is there, for it is a naturall
thing.
               And therefore euery one with his
deuotion ought to commende himselfe
too GOD, that hee keepe
them, and bryng them foorth of
that Storme, and putte them

in the porte of saluation.
            
            
               The nienth chapter of other certaine signes,
wherein shall be knowne when stormes
will come in the sea.
               
                  IN the seuenth chapter of
this secōd booke I haue
declared some signes of
the sunne & the moone
wherby may be knowne
when stormes of winde
and raine will come, as it is declared:
and because these stormes are thinges,
that vnto such as saile is very conuensent
they shoulde knowe, and preuent: it
seemed well to mee to adde this present
chapter in the which, I will also declare
other fiue signes or prognostications,
which I finde written, that ought to be
looked on and knowne of the saylers,
which are these following.
               The first is when in the high places
or in the woodes there is heard a noyse
of winde, and abrode it is not heard it
signifieth stormes of winde.
               The second when the waues of the
scaswel and giue great falles or strokes
in the bayes of the sea being with great
noyse or ratling, signifieth stormes in
the sea: of these 2. Plinie is the author in
the eigteenth booke of the naturall historie.
               The thirde, if the sea being calme
doeth make a nosse within it selfe signifieth
great windes: of this speaketh
Virgil in the tenth of Ac
                        •
                     eados and Lucano.
               
               The fourth whē the Porpisses of the
sea goe leaping vpon the sea, and shew
them selues vppon the Waues is
a signe of stormes, And that the wind
will come frō that place that they come,
This S. Isidore bringeth in the twelfth
of the Etimologias.
               Of the fifth, Virgil, saith, in the Georgians
that when the Sea Meowes or
Gulles doe leaue the sea and goe to the
drye lande it signifieth stormes in the
Sea.
            
            ¶The ende of the second booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The third booke of the VVindes, and their quallities, and
names, and how one should sayle with them.
            
               The first chapter what thing the winde is, and what quallitie it is of, and howe it ingendreth.
               
                  FOR the declaration
of the nature
of the winde, for
the diuersitie of
the doubtes that
are of it, some say
it is the ayre and
it moueth: others
say that it is water: others that it
is a vapour of the earth: and others,
that it is some great celestiall body, or other,
that with great force and violence
doth pushe forwarde the ayre.
               And this cannot bee determined, if
his nature bee not considered in that
which principally it is. The which I
say that the winde is a vapour of the
earth that riseth vppe and stretcheth euen
to the highest parte of the ayre and
strongly thrusteth foorth the ayre.
               
               This vapour is hote and dry, and by
his subtiltie doth pearce the ayre: for as
the winde is of a subtile vapour in his
kinde, and being subtile and light, it is
natural to rise vp & so it riseth vp, & of ye
subtilt
                     •
                  e of ye vapour of ye earth, he is
made, and frō thence he descendeth, & in
his descending he sheweth that the vapour
mooueth it selfe vnto a high place
& as he is come to that place is made
winde, and so hee descendeth blowing.
And it is to be vnderstoode, that the vapour
riseth not so high as the superiour
parte of the ayre, which is called Estus,
                  
but riseth vp to the colde part, & there
as Algazel saith with the colde, he waxeth
thicke and descendeth of the which
it seemeth, that the vapour wherof the
winde is made, is not congregated
with the inwarde colde as some say,
but with the outwarde cold of the place,
by ye which as Algazel saith, he is letted
that he come not to the superiour parte
of the ayre. Likewise it is proued, that
the vapour is raised vp with heate, and
for this, if the heat of ayre round about
doe helpe him, it heateth the more: for
the 
                     ••
                  ner heat is holpen by ye outward
heat, & so if it were not for the cold of the
place, he would neither waxe thicke nor
blowe.
            
            
               The 2. Chapter, how the wind moueth not
right from aboue downward: nor contrarywise,
but his mouing is in circle of
water and earth.
               
                  FUrther for the mouing
of the winde, it is to bee
noted that it moueth not
from aboue downward,
nor frō beneath vpward
but it moneth in circuler
or round manner, of the water and the
earth: so saith Albertus the great in the
treatie of windes, chap. 12. all windes
commonly moue their blast & mouing
in circle manner, in such sort, that they
moue not vp vnto that which is high
nor descendeth to that which is lowe:
but moueth by the round superficiall of
the earth, and water in the ayre in circuler
manner, as appeareth by the
cloudes: that with the windes goe vp
& descend down from the East, into the
West: euen like to the moouing of the
starres. Where it is to bee vnderstood,
by the doctrine of the Astronomers,
that there are some starres, which moue
the winds, as lupiter, that moueth northerly
winds: & the sunne moueth Easterly
winds: and Mars moueth ye blast
of Southerly winds: & the Moone moueth,
Westerly windes. This is as it
were a beginning, as euery manner of
cause, by his owne meanes induceth to
one effect, & therfore it is cōueniēt that
the effect doe immitate the moouing of
the cause. And seeing that the star
                     •
                  es
doe moue in circuler māner, it is conuenient
that the wynd should moue like a
bowe vpon his Horison. In like māner
it is saide, when the signes doe cause
winds to blowe, because there are three
signes, which haue hotte and drie qualities,
which are these, Aries, Leo and Sagitarius:
and this is called the triplicitie
of the fire. And these are called Easterly
signes, because they moue the winds
of the East part. There are other three
signes, which haue cold and drie qualities.
These are Taurus, Virgo, and
Capricorne: and this is called triplicity
of the earth, these signes are called Meridionales,
because they moue the Southerly
winds continually. There are other
3. signes, which haue their qualities
hot and moyst: these are Gemini, Libra,
& Aquarius: & this is called the triplicitie
of the ayre. These are called occidē
                  tall
or Westerly signes, because they
moue ye winds of the West part. There
is another fourth triplicitie of the other
3. signes, which are Cancer, Scorpio, &
Pisces, And this is called triplicity of ye
water: for because his property is colde
and moyst, and these signes doe moue ye
Northerly winds, & that humor which
they haue in his propertie, they cause to
abounde in the times so attributed in
those bodies, where they are ingendred.
Of the aforesaide, it is concluded: that
the winds do moue thēselues in r
                     •
                  ūdnesse
of the water and earth like to the
mouing of the starres, and not right going
vpward nor descēding. For the vapour
is eleuated with the heate, and is
expelled with the colde, which congealeth
him, and so it is conuenient, that
the wynde descende not right downe,
for the heate that riseth vp, but that
it bee by one side in the circuite of water
and earth. And this reason Aristo
                        •
                     le
giueth.
            
            
               The 3. Chapter, wherefore the wynde is
not alwayes alike: but at sometime bloweth
harde, and at other times calme: and
wherefore it moueth to his opposite.
               
                  
                  WIth reason might be asked
two doubtes concerning
the wind, which
are these: (the first doubt.)
What ye cause is wherfore
when the winde beginneth
his blast, it is not equall, but
sometimes harde, and other times
more calme. And sometimes it ceaseth,
and other times it turneth to blowe, so
that it bloweth not cōtinuallye after one
sort. (the second doubt.) The second is,
wherfore the winde mooueth to his opposite,
for so we cal it whē from the east
he goeth to the west: And from the north
to the south, and likewise contrary, of
this it seemeth that there is no reason,
because the Uapour whiche is the
roote of the winde either followeth his
moouing which is to bee eleuated because
he is hote, and according as it is
straight so it ought to goe vpwarde, or
follow his matter which is earthly, &
at it is straight, ought to descēd. Likewise
what doth make the winde to
mooue more to one side then to the other,
rather then to moue it self straight
so that the east likewise should mooue it
selfe towardes the north, or towardes
the south, as towardes the west, and
likewise of the other windes. Item all
thinges whiche are ingendred in one
place naturally mooue not vnto the
place opposite: so that if the easterly
winde be ingendered in the east, and the
northerly wind in the north, they ought
to mooue to their owne place, and
not to the place opposite. By the
which it is to be said that the windes
mouing of them selues to their opposite
is violent, and against nature, or the
matter of the windes is maruellous &
vnknowne to vs. (The first declaration.)
The first is to be vnderstoode that as ye
matter of the winde, which is the vapour
of the earth, riseth vp by little &
little, maketh a weake & little moouing:
But as he is encreased in great quantitie:
so with a great force hee descendeth
and maketh a strong winde. Also
the winde bloweth not continually alike
because the matter which riseth vp
is not alwayes equal nor is equally put
forward, for the colde is more or lesse, &
the vapour not equally congealed. And
therfore the winde at one time bloweth
hard, and at another time soft, (The. 2
declaratiō.) The 2. is to be vnderstoode,
that the wind to mooue to his opposite
is for two causes. The 1. is as Alpetragio
sayth, the stars doe mooue in circle
manner; & so the wind doth immitate ye
circle mouing, The 2. as Albertus saith,
that it is more naturall, because the vapour
is ingendred of heate, & is expelled
& thrust out of the cold, & the cold
is behinde the heat, & therefore is thrust
out to his opposite, so that he cannot go
vpright for the cold yt is in the ayre nor
can descend, for the heat that riseth vp,
nor can returne backward for the colde
which is behind him: and therfore it is
necessary, that he moue in circle manner
to his opposite, & as much as yt which
is said that nothing moueth forth from
the place of his generation it is to be noted,
that which is of the nature of ayre,
mooueth it selfe to the place of ayre, and
the ayre hath place in all partes, and the
vapour hath the nature of aire as much
as apperteineth to his seldom mouing
so that he moueth not forth of his place.
            
            
               The 4. chapter, of the whirling of the winde,
and how it is caused.
               
                  IT hath been spoken before
yt the mouing which
ye winde maketh is mouing
himself to his opposite
by ye roundnes of the
water & earth, & not going
vpright nor descending, as it hath
been proued, & experience in the nauigation
doth shew it: and seeing that it is so
it may be asked what is the cause that
many times the winde maketh his mouing
right from beneath vpward. This
we see that the winde raiseth vp from
the ground the dust and the straw, and
carrieth them vpright one heigh which
is commonly a whirlwind, and this is
as well caused or done in the sea as in
the Lande. And in the Sea it is
made wel neere like a right sleeue, & by
it the water riseth upwarde, as many

times it is seen▪ Wherby it s
                     •
                  emeth yt ye
wind hath likewise a straight mouing,
yt is to say frō beneath vpward, as the
mouing in roundnes before is declared.
To this is to bee noted that this
moouing, which the winde maketh is
not naturall to it, but accidentall and
violent: for because it is done by force,
by meeting together in this manner:
when one winde commeth from one
part, and another frō another part contrary,
& ye strēgth of the one, doth meete
with yt of the other as euery one of thē
hath no free running, by the let of the
winde he findeth contrary: then he that
is strongest thrusteth forwarde the other,
and so they put themselues into
roundnes, and make a whirlewinde
vntill they be deuided. This appeareth
by an example in the water
when it runneth, that if it finde another
body that doth make any resistāce,
it maketh a whirling, moouing it in
roundnes: euen so the winde as it findeth
resistance of another winde or of
some mountaine, or of any like thing,
that doth resist his course, it cannot goe
forward. Therefore hee maketh that
round whirling. and this causeth in the
Sea many times that shippes be sunke
downe vnder the water, when they find
thēselues vnder such a whirlwinde or
spout: for the water which ye winde raiseth,
doth ouerwhelme & drown them.
Likewise when there are moouinges
of contrary windes, they cause to rise vp
stormes in the Sea, which the saylers
many times may know before hand considering
and beholding the moouing of
the cloudes if they be contrary and different
to the winde that is beneath. For
when it is so, it is a token that contrary
windes doe runne abrode, of the which
continually the superiour doth ouercome:
because he is of more strength &
swiftnes then the inferiour.
            
            
               The fifth chapter, of the windes, of the
cardes of nauigation, of their number, &
names.
               
                  AND seeing there hath
byn treated of ye winds,
what things they are, &
how they are ingendred
and mooue, In this I
wil speake of the winds
that are marked in the cardes of nauigation,
their number, & how they haue
their names according to the 
                     •
                  se of the
saylers. Of the which it is to be vnderstood
yt the windes of the cardes which
we cal courses, do shew forth 32. names
of windes, which are practised in ye nauigation,
& no more nor lesse: & the reason
wherefore this number is geuen, is
because the roundnes of the worlde, is
imagened to be deuided into 32. partes,
& in euery one of these is assigned one
wind, & is geuē to him a whole name, or
halfe, or a quarter, according to the part
where it seemeth to vs that he cōmeth;
as hereafter shall be declared. And to
vnderstād, this is to be noted, that this
roundnes of the world hath 4. principal
regions. These 4. partes are named and
knowne by 4. windes, which are east,
west, north, south. The east is also called
solan
                        •
                     , it groweth vnder ye equinoctiall
line, it is also called lecuāte, because
the sunn
                     •
                   riseth there, and beginneth
to appeare in the morning. This winde
is called in the nauigation east. The second
principall winde riseth of the Occident,
vnder the equinoctiall line, it is
called poniente, because the sun setteth
there, or hideth himselfe in the evening.
It is also called, fauonio, and in the nauigation
it is called west. The 3. principall
wind is called, Cierco and groweth
vnder the pole artick, he is also called,
Aquilonall, and Septemtrionall, Aquilonal
because he groweth in the part of Aquilon
Semptentrional by the 7. starres of ye
                  Vrsa minor. This winde in the nauigation
is called north. The fourth winde
is called Meridionall he commeth forth
vnder ye pole antartike, he is called Meridional:
for when he is come to the sun,
there he maketh vnto vs the middest of
the daye. And in the Nauigation
this winde is called South. These
Windes are marked in this manner.
               
                  
                  
               
               These foure windes haue other four
Colaterales, and are compounded of the
taking a name of halfe the name of euery
one in this manner.
               The 1. is marked betweene ye north
and the east, and taketh name of both,
and therfore is called northeast.
               The second is between the east and
the south, and is called southeast.
               The third is between the south and
the west, and is called southwest.
               The fourth is betweene the west &
the north, and is called northwest, and
is marked in this manner.
               
               These 8. windes are called in the nauigation,
whole winds or principalles,
amōg the which there is to bee marked
other 8. which are called halfe windes
not because they haue lesse force thē the
1. but because they are described among
those 8. winds afoesaid, the which also
do take their names of ye 2. windes Colaterales
and are called in this manner.
               The first is described between the
north and the northeast, and taking

                     〈◊〉
                   of both of them is called North
Northeast.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   called east, northeast, because
he standeth between the east and
the northeast.
               The third is east southeast, because
he is between the east & she southeast.
               The 
                     〈◊〉
                   is south Southeast, because
he 
                     〈◊〉
                   betweene the south and the
southeast.
               The fifth is south southwest, because
he is betweene the south and the southwest.
               The sixt is west southwest, because
he is between the west & the southwest.
               The seuenth is west northwest, because
it is betweene the west and the
northwest.
               The eight north northwest, because
it is betweene the north and the north
west.
               And they are ordained in this manner.
               
               Among these xvi. courses of winds &
half windes, are marked other sixteene
which are named quarters, and they
are put in this manner, euery one of the
eyght principal windes hath two quarters,
gathered foorth of them, and euery
one of them doth take the name of ye
windes nearest to him, in this manner.
               The north hath two quarters, which
is by the part of the northeast, and is
called North and by east, & that which
is by the part of the northwest is called
north and by west.
               The northeast hath other 2. & yt which
standeth towardes the north, is called

northeast and by north, and that which
standeth towardes the 
                     〈◊〉
                   is called
northeast and by east.
               The east hath other two that which
is towardes the parte of the northeast
is called east & by north, & th
                     ••
                   whiche
is towardes the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the so
                     •
                  th is
called east and by south▪
               
               The southeast hath two quarters, that
which is towardes the east part, is pacled
southeast and by east, & that whiche
is towardes the south part, southeast &
by south.
               The south hath two quarters, that
which is towardes the east, is called
south and by east, and that whiche is
towardes the West is called south and
by west.
               The southwest hath other 2. ye which
is towardes the part of the south is called
southwest and by south, and ye which
is towardes the west, is called southwest
and by west.
               The west hath two quarters, that
which is towardes the southwest is
called west and by south, & that whiche
is towardes the part of northwest is
called west and by north.
               The northwest hath two quarters,
that which is towardes the part of the
west is called northwest and by west, &
that which is towardes the parte of
the north is called northwest and by
north,
               They are ordayned in the manner following.
               
                  
                     The .32. 
                           •
                        indes 
                           •
                        n the com
                        
                           •
                        asse.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The sixt chapter, how the windes of the
cardes whereby the saylers doe sayle doe
girde or compasse about the roundnesse
of the worlde for to sayle by them.
               
                  SEeing there hath beene
declared, the windes of
the cards of nauigation,
their names, & differences:
I wil speak in what
manner and order these
windes doe compasse about the roundnesse
of the world, to know how to saile
by thē. Of this is to be noted, that this
round body of water and earth, hath in
roundnesse three hundreth and threescore
degrees. Therefore hee that is in
any part or place, and woulde sayle towardes
the North. All inconuenience
being taken away, shall sayle with the
winde at South, & with no other. It
is to bee vnderstood, sayling before the
winde. Although that hee not hauing
the wind at South: But some other
wind sayling by the bowling: may goe
rising vp by other courses, making
boords, one boord vnto one wind, & another
boord vnto another: vntill he come
to the place where he pretendeth to go.
Likewise, he that wil sayle frō ye north
to the south, must be with a Northerly
winde, or in the manner aforesaide.
               The nauigation of the east or west, is
in this maner: a shippe departeth from
the Islande of Saynt Thomas, or as
they cal it Saynt Thome, which is vnder
the equinoctiall, and woulde goe
roūd about ye world, if in case, yt it might
be sailed: this ship if she shoulde saile toward
the east, her way should be in this
maner, frō ye said Island or place where
she departed, she shall saile wt west, 180.
degrees, & if frō thēce she wil returne to
ye place frō whence she departed, by the
same course yt she wēt, she shal returne wt
east ye same way: but if she goe forward
on her way, you shal vnderstād, then all
ye roūdnes wil serue you, ye west wherwith
you departed, vntil you come to ye
point where you came forth, in such sort
yt in a place where a man is, a circle beyng
imagined, which gyrdeth the
worlde, all this circle is sayled with one
winde, but if from the halfe circle, or before
or after he will returne by the way
that he went, he shall returne with the
winde contrary. For it is to bee vnderstoode,
that from the place that a man
departeth vntill the halfe circle bee ended,
he goeth departing from the place,
from whence hee came, and the other
half he returneth towards it againe, as
the figure following sheweth it.
               
               I say that one departeth from A. to
goe towarde C. and goeth by B. in A.
which is the place from whence hee departeth:
the wynde beginneth, & being
come to C. which is his opposite, if hee
returne from thence to goe to the same
B. the wind which is contrary, wil serue
him. But if he goe sayling from C. to D.
and from D. to A. you shal vnderstande
that with the winde hee began to saile
by, he shall goe al the roundnesse, vntill
he returne, where he came foorth. The
same accompt, shall be made, if you beginne
to sayle towardes the West, and
that which hath beene saide of the nauigation
by the equinoctial, the same
must bee kept by any manner of circle,
whatsoeuer.
               And it is to bee noted, that onlie
from the East and West, there are circles
or courses greater and lesser: the
greater circle passeth by the Center,
and the lesser passeth not by the Center.
But all circles greater or lesser,
haue three hundreth and sixtie degrees
of length, but in the leagues
that euery degree hath, there is difference
of more & lesse, euen as the circle
stādeth neere to the equinoctial, or to the

poles. But the windes which must
serue the turne ought to be of the greater
circles and none of them of the lesser
circles. The nauigation by the other
windes is in this sorte. If one
sayling towardes the northeast, gaue a
turne about the worlde, going alwaies
by the same course, he shall returne by
ye southwest, from ye place where he departed:
and the same will bee done by
the contrary. And in the rest let the account
be kept as before hath beene declared.
The same doe I say by the nauigation
towardes the southeast, that
he shall returne by the northwest. And
for an example of this, let it be asked: if
two shippes bee in one port, and one
departeth towardes the north and the
other towardes the south, these shippes
if they shall meete, and if they doe meet
for to goe equall way how much shall euery
one of them sayle? I say that these
may meete, and that sayling by these
courses, when euery one of them haue
gone .180. degrees they shall be together.
And in like manner, this acount
is to be kept departing by other courses.
And so it is to be vnderstoode, that
whensoeuer two shippes or more doe
goe forth of one port, and do sayle by different
courses, when euery one of them
haue gone 180. degrees, they shall returne
and ioyne in the place opposite,
from whence they departed: this is because
as it is sayde, yt all the windes of
the nauigation bee of ye greater circles,
for all of them doe passe by the center, &
so euery one going the half circle which
is the sayde. 180. degrees shal finde him
selfe in the point opposite from whence
he came forth.
            
            
               The seuenth chapter, of the order of the
Cardes of Nauigation.
               
                  AMong the instrumentes
which are necessary for
the nauigation, one is
the carde: for without it
good nauigation cannot
be made, seeing that in
it the Pilot or sayler doeth see the place
where he is, and the place whether hee
pretendeth to goe, & seeth ye height of degrees
that euery place hath, so that hee
knoweth if he shall goe foorth right, or
if he shall goe rising or descending: hee
seeth also what winde or windes will
serue him in his course, and where hee
shall leaue one and take another: he also
seeth the distance of the way which
he shal goe, how many leagues it hath,
and so he ordaineth in all thinges that
which is best and conuenient for him.
But it seemeth that with reason there
may be had a doubt in the cardes wherwith
the nauigation is made▪ And say
that they be not certain nor true for this
cause following. (A doubt,) This being
prooued that the worlde is a round body,
and not onely the heauens, but also
euery one of the elementes, so that the
water whereby we sayle is round, and
the winde wherewith it is sayled mooueth
it selfe in roundnes & this being so
we see that the cardes of nauigation
be not made round but plaine: Therefore
frō the round to the plaine is great
difference, as appeareth by this present
figure,
               
               If two shippes should departe from
A. vnto C. and the one of them went by
B. and the other by D. so great differēce
will be of the way that the one maketh
to the other by how much the distance
is from the B. vnto the D. & seeing that
the way which by the sea is sayled is
from the A. vnto C. by D. because the
water is round, & the cardes doeth not
shewe it to bee so, but it sheweth it in
plaine manner which is from A. vnto C.
                  
by B. whereby it seemeth that the way
which the ship maketh, is halfe more
thē that which the card sheweth. Seeyng
the ship goeth it in circle manner,
and the card sheweth it by diameter,
& the diameter hath but only the thirde
part and one seuenth part of the circumference.
Likewise the aforesaid seemeth
to be so: because the roūd bodie is greater
then all other bodies, and as the
world is a round body, there is no other
figure so great, that may be compared
to it: and so the card which is made
in plaine, cannot bee equall with the
round. Also the courses of the nauigation,
as they are put in the cardes in euery
hundreth leagues: they departe
one from the other twentie leagues, in
such sort that from the place where the
ship doth depart vnto the xc. degrees
whiche doth amount to 1575. leagues.
An these leagues they depart one ship
from another, or one course from another
315. leagues. And seeing there are
32. courses, the world, that is to say, ye
earth & ye water should haue in roundnesse,
ten thousād & fourescore leagues:
this is false, because this roundnesse
hath 360. degrees of 17. leagues, and a
halfe, euery degree, which doth amount
to 6300. leagues and no more.
Of all the aforesaid, it seemeth that the
cardes of nauigation because they are
made in plaine: should be false and vnperfect.
(A declaration.) To this is to be
noted▪ that the cardes of nauigation
are true and altogether perfect: and the
art wherwith they are made and ordained,
doth conteine all certeintie▪ And
aunswearing to the first is: that the
nauigation which the ship doth make
in roundnesse, and the card doth shewe
in playne: is to be vnderstood, that the
same quantity or distaunce of way, that
euery part hath in roundnesse, the selfe
same is reckoned and giuen in playne:
aswell in ye land, as in ye water, by marking
in the leagues and degrees the
distance that euery thing hath in roūdnesse,
without taking from it any thing.
And this may wel be done, for although
that one body be round, there may bee
giuen to it the self same proportion and
greatnesse in playne, as Ptholome setteth
it foorth in the playne sphere. And
Iordan in the treatie which he made of
the same matter. This seemeth to be by
an example in an apple, that although
it be rounde, the length & breadth that
his roundnesse hath, may bee put in
playne forme: euen so in the cardes of
nauigation, although in their figure or
shape they be not rounde, yet in the accounting
of the way, they giue and hold
in equalitie with the round: And the
round body to be greater then another
body. It is to be vnderstood, that those
bodies being equall in circumference,
for not beyng equal, another figure may
wel be greater then the round. And for
as much as I say, of the courses of the
cardes. It is likewise to be vnderstood,
that these be ordayned in Geometry, &
because it is so singuler among ye Mathimaticals,
they cānot be false as those
Authours whiche I haue spoken of
doe shewe. And if by a point of the card
there are founde more Leagues in the
courses then the world hath: This is
not hurtfull to the carde, for this arte
and shew of the courses, is not only for
this number of sixe thousand and three
hundreth Leagues which the worlde
hath: but for any manner of number, so
that although the world had a hundred
thousand leagues, or had a thousande,
the selfe same woulde serue those courses
in one number as in another: as it
appeareth, that such as saile one hundreth
leagues doe goe in their waye
as well as those which goe vnto the
East India, which sayle fiue thousande.
And as Magalanes sailed, and suche as
went with him in the yeere 1521. when
the straight was discouered, which of
Magalanes is named, that then sayling
from Spayne, they gaue a turne about
the world: of that as is said, it appeareth
plainely, that the cardes of nauigation
are so well ordayned, that theyr
agreement and perfection is a thing
maruellous: seeing a thing so great as
the earth and the Sea is, beeing
marked in so little roome as a Carde
is, and doe so muche agree, that it
doth not misse one 
                     •
                  otte to sayle the

whole world thereby.
            
            
               The eight Chapter, of the account which
the pilot ought to haue in his waye
when hee sayleth with a winde different
to his course.
               
                  SEeing there hath beene
declared ye order which
ought to bee vsed, if the
roundnesse of the world
were sayled: In this I
will speake of shorter
voiages or wa
                     •
                  es, and such as are more
commonly sailed by sea frō one place to
another. And howe ye pilots & saylers
should know to keepe a good account, &
giue reason of their nauigations, whether
soeuer they goe: for the which I
saye, whensoeuer the pilot will saile, he
ought principally to look vpō 3. things.
               First of al, the place where he is, and
the place whither he mindeth to goe, &
to know the distance, that is frō the one
place to the other.
               The second, in what height of degrees
he findeth himselfe, and in what
height the place is which hee mindeth
to goe vnto.
               The third is, to know the winde or
winds that shall serue him in his nauigation,
al the which he may see & know
in his carde.
               And this beeyng knowne, let him
looke if he haue a winde that is conuenient
for his nauigation, and hauing it
let him proceede vppon his voyage as
weather, & time will permitte him. And
it is to bee noted, yt many times it happeneth
that for the nauigation which
should bee made, the wind serueth not
according to the course, which the ship
should goe: And therefore it is sayled
with another wynde whiche is different.
               Likewise it happeneth, that as a ship
goeth sayling, there commeth such weather,
that causeth her to goe foorth of
her right way: and take her course by
another, by the which how much more
she goeth, so much the land ye they goe
to seeke changeth it selfe into different
courses of the cōpasse. This is because
the shippe goeth not her right course to
the place, whither she pretēdeth to goe:
so that the selfe same place, varieth or
changeth it selfe from one cour
                     •
                  e into
another. And likewise sometimes it
waxeth neere, and other times farre
of.
               And when it is so, that the pilot sayleth
with a winde, different to that
which is conuenient for his course, and
sayling would knowe in what poynt or
course, the land whither he mindeth to
goe, lieth from him: and howe manye
leagues hee hath from him to it, in the
figures & accounts following, hee shall
finde it: the which shall profite him to
knowe the certayne place where hee is,
and thereby hee shall knowe howe to
choose the true course, (when weather
serueth him) for to returne to the certaine
place whither he mindeth to goe,
which is to be vnderstood in this manner.
I say that you will sayle to a land,
which beeing seene in your carde, and
the place marked where you are: You
shall find ye it is from you towards the
North or South, or any other course,
and so sayling towardes one place, you
runne towardes another: and put the
case that the land whether you pretend
to goe, be from you towards the North,
so that you should sayle with the winde
at South, & because this winde bloweth
not, you sayle with another winde:
Therefore if the nauigation bee by the
first course more neere to the winde it
selfe, in the first figure you shall finde
marked this first course, and neere to it
the leagues which you shall goe for to
get the land, whither you pretende to
goe towards all the courses of the compasse:
as also how many Leagues the
land is of from you, and in the manner
that the nauigation is declared by this
course, so all others are declared.
               And when in sayling you haue not
the proper winde which shoulde serue,
marke by the winde which you haue,
how many poynts it is of frō the proper
wind, wherewith you should saile, and
seeke it in one of the figures, that is
here put, which shalbe one of thē marked
with the crosse, & nere to the figure
where the like winde is, you shall finde
three accountes, these accountes serue

in this manner.
               In the first account, you shall finde
how many leagues you shall goe by the
course where you sayle.
               In the second account is the course
where you haue the lande whether you
pretend to goe, (I will say) that hauing
gone those leagues which there are declared
you shall come vnto the lande,
which you seeke after by the course that
is there marked: the which you shall
knowe what course it is, by the
number that he hath, seeking the same
number in the figure that is nexte to
it.
               In the third account, you shall finde
how many leagues you are distant of
the same lande whether you goe, so that
hauing gone the leagues of the first account
you shall haue the land whether
you goe at the course which standeth in
the second: And you shall be from the
same land the leagues that are marked
in the third account.
               This being knowne, three thinges
are to be noted.
               The first, because heere cannot be put
any rule for the number of the leagues
that are from the place where you are
vnto the place where you pretende to
goe: because at one time there will be
more distance then at another time.
               Therefore this account is taken out
for the number of a hundreth leagues, I
will say that the place where you are
vnto the place whether you wil goe, is
a hundreth leagues of way. And it is to
be noted, that although this accoūt, doe
serue for this number of a hundreth
leagues, it serueth likewise for any other
number of leagues, that the way
hath, in this manner, if the waye
be of 200 leagues you shall goe it twise
as much as the numbers of the first
account doe shewe: And then you shall
haue the lande whether you goe in the
course which is marked in the seconde
account, and you shall be from the sayd
land, twise as many leagues of them
which are accounted in the thirde account:
and if the way be of 300 leagues
you must goe thrise as much as the nū
                  bers
of the first account shewe so that
of euery hūdreth leagues, which is encreased
of the way you shall geue as
much more number of that which is in
first and third account, & then you shall
haue the lande at the same courses or
pointes, which are marked in the secōd
account, and if in the way bee fifties, or
more or lesse you shall geue a halfe, a
thirde, a fourth, or a fifth, or according as
the number is.
               The second is, that in the figures
which are put here, the nauigation goeth
marked by the windes of the one
parte of the compasse: and by the other
parte of the course where you shall finde
the lande.
               This is to be noted that the same account
is when you shall faile by the
parte where the courses goe, and so it
serueth for all partes.
               The thirde is, that towardes the wind
that these figures doe shew forth right,
shalbe geuen the name of the proper
winde wherewith you shoulde sayle
                     •
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
first course. I.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leigues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        l.
                        1
                        l.
                     
                     
                        lx vii.
                        2
                        xl
                     
                     
                        lxx. vi.
                        3
                        xx viii
                     
                     
                        l
                              •
                           xx.
                        4
                        xx v
                     
                     
                        xx.
                        5
                        xx ii.
                     
                     
                        xx. iiii.
                        6
                        xx.
                     
                     
                        xx. viii.
                        7
                        xx.
                     
                     
                        c.
                        8
                        xc. ii
                     
                     
                        c.
                        9
                        xx. v.
                     
                     
                        c. x
                        10
                        xx. v.
                     
                     
                        c xv.
                        11
                        xx. vi
                     
                     
                        c. xx.
                        12
                        xl
                     
                     
                        c. xl.
                        13
                        l
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                            
                           
                              ••••
                           . v
                        14
                        c
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
second course.II
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xxx.
                        1
                        lxxii.
                     
                     
                        l iii.
                        2
                        l i.
                     
                     
                        lxx.
                        3
                        xl ii.
                     
                     
                        lxx ii.
                        4
                        lx ii.
                     
                     
                        lxx
                        5
                        xl.
                     
                     
                        xcv.
                        6
                        xxx.
                     
                     
                        c
                        7
                        xl.
                     
                     
                        c iii.
                        8
                        xl
                     
                     
                        c x v.
                        9
                        xl ii.
                     
                     
                        c xxx.
                        10
                        lx.
                     
                     
                        c xl iii.
                        11
                        lxx.
                     
                     
                        c lxxx.
                        12
                        c.
                     
                     
                        cc lxxx ii.
                        13
                        cc.
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
third course.
III
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the waie.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx v
                        1
                        lxxx.
                     
                     
                        xl v
                        2
                        lxx.
                     
                     
                        lx
                        3
                        lx
                     
                     
                        lxx
                        4
                        l viii
                     
                     
                        lxxx i
                        5
                        l viii.
                     
                     
                        xc
                        6
                        lx.
                     
                     
                        c
                        7
                        lx.
                     
                     
                        c x viii
                        8
                        lx v
                     
                     
                        c xxx v
                        9
                        lxxx.
                     
                     
                        c lx v.
                        10
                        c
                     
                     
                        cc x v
                        11
                        c xl v
                     
                     
                        ccc lx.
                        12
                        cc xc
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     VVhen you shall saile by the
fourth course
IIII
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leages of the waie.
                        Courses.
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx
                        1
                        lxxx v
                     
                     
                        xl
                        2
                        lxx v
                     
                     
                        l viii
                        3
                        lxx
                     
                     
                        lxx
                        4
                        lxx
                     
                     
                        xc.
                        5
                        lxx
                     
                     
                        c
                        6
                        lxx v
                     
                     
                        c x
                        7
                        lxxx
                     
                     
                        c xl
                        8
                        c
                     
                     
                        c lxx v
                        9
                        c v
                     
                     
                        cc xxx v
                        10
                        c lxxx
                     
                     
                        ccc lxxx
                        11
                        ccc x
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
fifth course.
V
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the waie.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xc
                        1
                        xc
                     
                     
                        xl
                        2
                        lxxx
                     
                     
                        l v
                        3
                        lxxx
                     
                     
                        lxx
                        4
                        lxxx
                     
                     
                        xc
                        5
                        xc.
                     
                     
                        c x
                        6
                        c
                     
                     
                        c xxx v
                        7
                        c x v
                     
                     
                        c lxxx
                        8
                        c xl v
                     
                     
                        cc x
                        9
                        cc xx v
                     
                     
                        ccc lx
                        10
                        cccc xx v
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     VVhen you shall saile by the
sixth course
VI
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the waie.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx
                        1
                        xc.
                     
                     
                        xl
                        2
                        xc.
                     
                     
                        l v
                        3
                        xc
                     
                     
                        lxx v
                        4
                        c
                     
                     
                        c
                        5
                        c x
                     
                     
                        c xx v
                        6
                        c xx v
                     
                     
                        c lxx
                        7
                        c lx
                     
                     
                        cc l
                        8
                        cc xx
                     
                     
                        d x
                        9
                        cccc lxxx v
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        ❧VVhen you shall sayle by the
seuenth Course.
VII.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx.
                        1
                        xc v.
                     
                     
                        xl i.
                        2
                        xc v.
                     
                     
                        lx.
                        3
                        c v.
                     
                     
                        lxxx.
                        4
                        c x.
                     
                     
                        c x.
                        5
                        c xxx v.
                     
                     
                        c l v.
                        6
                        c lx v.
                     
                     
                        cc xl.
                        7
                        cc xl.
                     
                     
                        cccc xc.
                        8
                        cccc lxxx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        ❧When you shall sayle by the
eight Course.
VIII.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx.
                        1
                        c.
                     
                     
                        xl.
                        2
                        c x.
                     
                     
                        lx v.
                        3
                        c xx.
                     
                     
                        xc v.
                        4
                        c xxx. v.
                     
                     
                        c xl.
                        5
                        c lxx v.
                     
                     
                        cc xxx v.
                        6
                        cc l viii.
                     
                     
                        cccc lxx.
                        7
                        cccc lxxx.
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        ❧VVhen you shall sayle by the
nienth Course.
IX.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx.
                        1
                        c iii.
                     
                     
                        xl v.
                        2
                        c x v.
                     
                     
                        lxxx.
                        3
                        c xl.
                     
                     
                        c xx v.
                        4
                        c lxx.
                     
                     
                        cc v.
                        5
                        cc l.
                     
                     
                        ccccxl v.
                        6
                        cccclxx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        ❧When you shall sayle by the
tenth Course.
X.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xx.
                        1
                        c x.
                     
                     
                        l v.
                        2
                        c xxx.
                     
                     
                        c
                        3
                        c ix ii.
                     
                     
                        c lxxx.
                        4
                        cc xl.
                     
                     
                        cccc xl.
                        5
                        cccclxx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
eleuenth course.
XI.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of 
                              •
                           he way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xxx.
                        1
                        c xx.
                     
                     
                        lxx.
                        2
                        c l.
                     
                     
                        c xl.
                        3
                        cc x.
                     
                     
                        ccc xxx.
                        4
                        ccc cx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ¶VVhen you shall sayle by the
twelfth course.
XII.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of 
                              •
                           he way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        xxx.
                        1
                        c xx.
                     
                     
                        c
                        2
                        c lxxx.
                     
                     
                        cc xc.
                        3
                        ccc lxx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        ❧VVhen you shall sayle by the
thirteenth Course.
XIII.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        l.
                        1
                        c xl.
                     
                     
                        c xc.
                        2
                        cc ixxx.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        ❧When you shall sayle by the
fourteenth Course.
XIIII.
                     
                        
                     
                     
                        Leagues of the way.
                        Courses.
                        Leagues of distance.
                     
                     
                        c.
                        1
                        c xc.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
               
               AND for the better declaration of
the rules aboue written, this present
figure is to be noted in the whiche
I say, that you finde your selfe, in the
poynt, A. And the lande whither you
will goe, you haue it, I put the case at
the North, in the poynt B. and there is
from you to it an hundreth leagues, so
that your way should be from A. vnto
B. that is to say, sayling from the south
towardes the North, and because you
haue not this winde, you sayle by the
first course, and the account beeyng
put in the first rule, doth teache you,
that if you goe fiftie leagues by this
first course: that the Lande, which you
had first towardes the North, you shal
haue it at North and by East (you sailing
by the course of North, & bywest)
and there shalbee from you to it fiftie
Leagues, and if you goe by the same
course sixtie seuen Leagues, then you
shall finde it towards ye North North-East,
and then it will be from you to it
fortie leagues. And if you sayle seuentie
sixe leagues, you shall haue it towardes
the Northeast and by north, and
there will be frō you to it twentie eight
Leagues. And so in the rest, this rule
teacheth you how many leagues shuld
be sailed for to get to the lande whether
you goe to all these courses. The second
figure and rule is, when you shall sayle
by the seconde course distant from the
proper winde: in the whiche you shall
find the account that shalbe kept in that
way. And the third for the third course,
and so for all the rest: and it is to be noted,
that to this winde at North, which
was put for an example, shalbee giuen
the proper name of the winde, whereby
you should saile, and to the others the

names of the windes, that are next to
him.
               Also it is to be noted, that alwayes
it must be considered what distance is
from the place where your are, vnto
ye place whither you mind to goe, wherby
you may make the account, euen as
before is declared.
            
            
               The nienth Chapter, how the pilot shal certeinly
knowe sayling by any manner of
course where the Meridian is.
               
                  AND seeyng that in the
rules before writtē hath
beene declared howe the
Pilot shall knowe whersoeuer
he shall sayle, and
to what point or course of
the compasse he hath the land whither
he goeth, and how many Leagues the
lande is from him. Here I will speake,
that departing from one place for to
sayle to another by anye manner of
course, you shall knowe howe muche
you depart frō that Meridian wherin
you were, and knowe the Meridian,
wherein you finde your selfe: for this is
a thing most necessary in the nauigation,
the height or altitude only excepted.
And because this rule of the
Meridian, may bee the better vnderstood,
you shall note this example. I
saye that eight shippes beeyng in one
porte, and they goe foorth sayling, the
one from the North to the South, the
seconde by the first quarter, the third by
the seconde: and so all the other by
different windes, when euery one
of these shippes haue gone one degree,
or two, or more, being equal in degrees:
they shalbe East and Weast all of them
one with the other, although not equal
in way, for the one hath gone muche
more then the other, in such sorte, that
that which hath sayled by the seconde
course hath gone more waye, then
that which sayled the first, & the thirde
more then the second, and so of the rest:
by how much they goe from the first, so
much ye more way is to be gone to raise
vp, or to descend a degree. This is caused
by reason of the obliquitie of ye courses
as more largely shalbee declared in
the 14. Chapter of this third booke, and
this being knowne (I say for to know)
howe farre a man is from ye Meridian,
from whence hee departed, imagine
that his nauigation shoulde bee by the
same Meridian: that is to say, from
the North, to the South, or from
the South to the North: and that hee
saileth by the first, the seconde the third,
or fourth course, or by any of the other:
according as the course lieth whither
you minde to sayle, to one place, or to an
other. And this is to bee vnderstood in
the fourteene courses colaterales, from
ye North to ye South, or frō the South,
to the North, according as in the first
figures which are put heere doth appeare:
for because for ye other 14. courses
Colaterals, frō the East to the West, in
the secōd figure or fable they are declared:
therfore I say, when you shall sayle
by any of the 14. courses heeretofore declared,
two thinges must be considered.
The first in what height of degrees you
were, when you were in them, and in
what height you doe presētly find your
self in: and looke how many degrees of
differēce are frō the one to ye other. The
seconde is to looke by what course you
haue come vnto ye place where you are,
and this being knowne, looke into the
account hereafter written in ye first table,
and in it you shall finde how many
Leagues you haue departed from the
Meridian, which you had in place from
whence you departed.
               An example. I say, that you departed
from the point of these first marked figures
following, & so you were in 20.
degrees of height, & after that, taking
your altitude, you found your self in 15.
degrees, or in 25. in such sorte, that you
found to haue raysed or destended fiue
degrees, and this was sayling by the
fourth course, whose name you shall
know looking on ye fourth where he is
marked in the figures which are heere
put, & the course being knowne & agreeed
with y^ which you haue sailed, looke
in ye table which is next in the 4. course
at the fiue degrees, and you shall finde

that you haue gone from the Meridian
from whēce you departed 87. leagues.
And for ye better vnderstanding of this
rule, immagine that from this point of
the twentie degrees, where you were,
or from any other place from whence
you departed, that when from thence
you departed, there departed, likewise
another shippe from the same point sailing
by the same Meridian, and that
when you had gone the fiue degrees
she likewise had gone other fiue, in such
sort that you haue her East and West
with you, and so it is to be vnderstoode
that these 87. leagues are of distance frō
you to this shippe, because you are so
farre distant of that Meridian, And so
knowing the distance which you haue
from the Meridian, where you departed,
foorthwith you shal know the Meridian
wherin you are, and in this sorte
immagine that any manner of course
that you shall saile, by any of these that
are marked heere vnder in the two first
figures, you haue this shippe East and
West with you, and this shall be your
guide for to know how farr distant you
be from the Meridian where you were,
this is by seeing how many leagues
you haue raised or descended, and the
course wherby you haue sailed, and being
sought in the figures and table following,
by it you shall know the Meridian
certaine wherin you are.
               
                  
                  
                     The Nauigation by those courses Colaterales from the
North to the South.
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Nauigation by those courses Colaterales from the South
to the North.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  A Table of the nauigation from the north to the south, or
from the south to the north.
                  When you shall sayle by the first course
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees,
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           3
                           7
                           10
                           14
                           17
                           21
                           24
                           28
                           31
                           35
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the second course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           7
                           15
                           22
                           30
                           37
                           45
                           52
                           60
                           67
                           75.
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the third course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           11
                           23
                           34
                           46
                           57
                           69
                           80
                           92
                           103
                           115
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the fourth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii
                           ix.
                           x
                        
                        
                           Leagues,
                           17
                           35
                           52
                           70
                           87
                           105
                           122
                           140
                           157
                           175
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the fifth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x,
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           26
                           53
                           79
                           106
                           132
                           159
                           185
                           212
                           238
                           265
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the sixth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           42
                           85
                           127
                           170
                           212
                           255
                           297
                           340
                           382
                           425
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the seuenth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           85
                           171
                           256
                           342
                           427
                           513
                           598
                           680
                           769
                           855
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     ¶The Nauigation by the courses Colaterales from the east
to the west.
                     
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Nauigation by the courses Colaterales from the west to
the east.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  A Table of the nauigation from the East to the West, or
to the contrary
                  When you shall sayle by the first course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           85
                           171
                           256
                           342
                           427
                           513
                           598
                           680
                           769
                           855
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the second course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           42
                           85
                           127
                           170
                           212
                           255
                           297
                           340
                           382
                           425
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the third course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           26
                           53
                           79
                           160
                           132
                           159
                           185
                           212
                           238
                           265
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the fourth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           17
                           35
                           52
                           70
                           87
                           105
                           122
                           140
                           157
                           175
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the fifth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           11
                           23
                           34
                           46
                           57
                           69
                           80
                           92
                           103
                           115
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall saile by the sixth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           7
                           15
                           22
                           30
                           37
                           45
                           52
                           60
                           67
                           75
                        
                     
                  
                  When you shall sayle by the seuenth course.
                  
                     
                        
                           Degrees.
                           i.
                           ii.
                           iii.
                           iiii.
                           v.
                           vi.
                           vii.
                           viii.
                           ix.
                           x.
                        
                        
                           Leagues.
                           3
                           7
                           10
                           14
                           17
                           21
                           24
                           28
                           31
                           35
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The tenth Chapter, wherein is declared,
more of this rule before written.
               
                  FOR it is not onely necessary
to knowe the nauigation
which is made
from the north to the
south, and so contrary:
but also that which is
made from the East to the West, or from
the West to the East (that is to say) by
these courses their Colaterales. Therefore
I haue put the demonstrations &
table before written, of the whiche is to
bee noted the same order that is in
the Nauigation from the North to
the south, or from the south to the north
as it hath been declared. (The whiche
is) when you goe sailing you shall mark
in howe many degrees of height you
finde your selfe in, and after that when
you turne to take the sayde altitude, you
shall marke howe manye degrees you
haue risen or descended from the place
from whence you departed. And this
being knowne looke vpon the figures
before written, the course whereby you
haue sailed, and if it be the first the second
or third, or any of the others, and
ye course being knowne seeke it in ye table,
& in ye same course looke ye number
of yt degrees which you haue gone, and
nere to the degrees, you shal finde the
leagues which you haue sailed. I speak
of an exāple, that taking your altitude
you found your selfe in 30. degrees, and
after that you found your selfe in thirtie
two, or in thirtie eyght in such sorte
you rose v p or descended two degrees,
and you sailed by the third course.
               Therfore looke in the table in ye third
course at the second degree, and you shal
finde that you haue gone fiftie two
leagues, and in this order you shall
know the rest.
               And note that in these tables, there
are not put more numbers thē vnto ten
degrees. (The reason is) that whilest
these be a sayling by any manner of
course, there will be place to take the altitude,
and being taken, to marke the
place, and from thence to begin the account
as well rising as descending, and
in this sort you shal goe making a point
in your carde, and knowe the certaine
place where you are.
            
            
               The eleuenth chapter, how the Pilot ought
to choose the course which is conuenient
according to the place hee mindeth to
saile vnto.
               
                  THE Pilot or any other
person that mindeth to
sayle, before all thinges
he ought to consider of
the waye that hee mindeth
to goe, and so to
choose the course or courses which are
necessary, according to the way whiche
he mindeth to make, and for this put
before you a certaine rule, and this in
any manner of place where a man standeth,
is a point or beginning where the
courses or winds of the nauigation doe
proceede and come foorth. Therefore
the Pilot ought to looke in his card the
place where he is, & the place whether
he mindeth to goe vnto, and this being
knowne, he ought to seeke for the course
that maye goe moste right to it from
whence he doth depart vnto the place
whether he mindeth to goe, and if there
be a course that will carry him straight
from one place to the other, let him put
the foreparte of his shippe into it as his
compasse will shewe him, and by that
course let him follow his way, as long
as weather will serue him.
               And when there is no course that goeth
the right way, let him seeke with the
compasse the course that is most agreeable
vnto him, which is it yt wil bring
him least out of his way to the place
whether he mindeth to goe, and by the
saide course let him follow the degrees
or leagues which are of distance, vntill
he finde another that goeth more right
to the place, and in this let the Pilot
haue great care, to see how much waye
euery course serueth him, and where he
shall leaue that way and take another,
and that he keepe a good reckoning &
knowledge of the way that hee maketh
as much as is possible, and at all times
when neede requireth to make a point
in his carde and mooue his course, let
him doe it keeping alwaies a good
reckoning of his waye, and this to

continue vntill hee finde a course that
may cary him directly to the place that
he desireth. And the Pilot in the beginning
ought not to keep himself towards
the courses that are nearest adioyning
to him where he is, but vnto those that
are nearest to the place whether he goeth.
And it woulde doe well to pricke
his carde often, and prouide diligently
vpō his course: & let the Pilot note, that
for to chose ye course ye right way as he
ought to doe, he hath need to know precisely
the Meridian wherin he is: for not
knowing it there may follow great errour,
as by this example appeareth.
               
               If one shippe goe sayling, the Pilot
maketh her to be in the point. A. and
would goe seeking for B, and in truth
his point was the C. it is euident by
reason he is ignorant & without knowledge
of the Meridian beleuing that he
sayled from A. vnto B. his nauigation
was from C. vnto D. And therefore it
seemeth that so much as is erred in the
knowledge of the place where the shipp
is, as much more she is distant from the
place that she goeth to seeke: and this
is one of the causes, whereby the Pilots
doe finde themselues in great errour in
theire nauigatiō, and loose much time,
and other inconuententies happen
to them. Therfore let the Pilot take
this for a good aduise, in long wayes to
keepe for him selfe a booke of account of
his nauigation, where he should be put
in remembrance of the winde yt serueth
him euery day, and in what sorte and so
how much the singlenes may bee, that
his shippe maketh, looking by his clocke
how many leagues he may runne euery
houre: and you shal vnderstand, that
the most which she can runne is foure
leagues in an houre, and three leagues
in an houre is a great tunne, and in one
houre two leagues is reasonable, and
and in an houre to runne a league and
a halfe or sometime but a league. It
must be well looked vnto, and great aduise
must be had in this, for it will profit
much to pricke the carde to knowe the
Meridian, and therby to choose the true
course as it is sayd.
            
            
               The twelfth chapter, how you should prick
your carde to know the place, wherein
the shippe is.
               
                  ONE of the thinges that
the Pilot ought to know
perfectlie, is to pricke his
carde very precisely, for it
is verye necessarye for
good nauigation. Therfore
whē ye pilot wil prick his card for to
knowe the place where hee is, he ought
first of al to looke in his card, ye place frō
whence he departed in what height of
degrees it is in, according as hee shall
finde by the graduation which the rard
hath, and let him looke also in how many
degrees of height he findeth himselfe
in according as he tooke it, and this being
knowen let him take his two compasses
and put the pointe of one of them
in the place from whence he departed, &
the other pointe of the same compasse
let him put in the course or winde which
he hath had, and take the other compas
and put the one pointe in the degrees
of height which he hath found, seeking
them in the graduation of the card, and
the other pointe of this compasse
in the winde East, and West that
is neerest, and make these compasses
to runne the one vnto the other not
taking away ye two points which come
vpō the winds, (that is to say) the one,
is it which the ship hath gone, and the
other the East or West and comming in
this manner where ioyntly you shall
ioyne the two pointes of both compasses,

the one which was put in the place
from whence the shippe departed, and
ye other in the height or altitude where
in ye found your selfe. In this point is
the place wherin the ship is, & to knowe
if this point be certeine make the proofe
in this māner. Look in the point where
you finde your selfe in, and from thence
with the compasse measure how many
leagues are frō it to ye place frō whence
you departed, & this being known, looke
into ye wind that brought you how many
leagues is to be reckoned for a degree,
according as you shall finde in the
fifteeneth chapter of this third booke, &
beeing seene howe many degrees you
haue raised or descended from the place
where you departed, vnto ye place wher
you make your selfe to bee, you shall
reckon the leagues that these degrees
doe amount vnto, and if the leagues of
the degrees bee iust with the leagues
that you finde of your way, your reckoning
is good, and if the reckoning be not
agreeable the one with the other, looke
wherein the errour is, for because that
these two summes or reckonings should
come iust. And if the place where you
finde your selfe be iust in altitude with
the place from whence you departed,
heere is no rule that can instruct you
iustly that which you haue sayled, but
by iudgement that which your shippe
may goe, according to ye dayes & houres
that she hath sailed, and according to ye
weather she hath had, and so the reckoning
is made little more or lesse. But let
the pilot 
                     ••
                  atke that 
                     ••
                   this account or
reckoning of little more or lesse, ought to
be considered the currents or tides that
may be in your way, for ye many times
the winde and tide are one way, & whē
it is so the shipp runneth more way thē
the Pilot thinketh: at other times the
windes & tides are contrary in such sorte
that as much as the winde carrieth so
much the currēt or tide reteineth or keepeth
backe, & for this cause you ought to
consider that if the winde doe cast ye ship
to one parte & the currents to another,
the race of the ship will be in that parte
where is lesse strength or power, & if the
winde & the currents be equall the race
of her will be of ye side where the currēt
is. Let the pilot cōsider the falling down
or holding vp that the shipp may make,
and so let him make the account that is
conuenient. This aduise is to bee had
whē he pricketh his card by squarenes
or by fancie, which is by reckoning the
singlenes that the ship hath made, and
arbitrar or indg how much way it may
be that shee hath gone in euery one, and
by what course, of all these the Pilot
must keepe a good reckoning in his nauigation
as much as in him lieth.
            
            
               The 13. chapter, howe the Pilot ought to
looke that his carde be iust & certeine
that there be no errour in his nauigation.
               IN the chapter before hath beene declared
the manner yt the Pilot or sayler
should haue in the pricking of his
card & know the place where he is, & be
cause my intēt is to declare how ye sailers
should know to make their nauigatiōs
with out perill or danger, as well
of the ignorance of the rules & instructions
of the nauigation, as also to knowe
the defectes of the cards & instrumentes
wherewith they gouerne thēselues by
the sea.
               I say let the Pilot or any other persō yt
shall sayle, be well aduised that the card
which he shal prick, and order his nauigation
by, be iust & true, as well in the
courses as in the setting down of ye coast
in such sort yt euery one thing bee in his
proper place both true & certein as well
in the course as in ye altitude. So that
the errour or defect of the card be not occasion
that in nauigation you erre, and
you must note yt amōg the cards of nauigatiō
yt vntil now haue byn vsed in ye
way of ye 
                  Indiās of his maiesty, there are
many which haue 2 graduatiōs differēt
one frō the other, in such sort that from
one graduatiō to the other is more thē 3
degrees of difference, these cardes are
false and in the nauigations that by thē
are made may followe much hurte and
greate incōuenience by reason of the
differēce, that these 2. graduatiōs haue
betweene them, because their difference
doth cause that al the courses yt reache

frō one graduatiō to the other are false,
being seen frō ye place where they begin
vnto ye place where they make an end.
The reason is, yt as they begin in one
graduatiō, and make an end in another,
yt is different from that: so ye said courses
doe make the selfsame differēce, & so
the way that is sayled by them, shalbe
erred, & you shall not find the place that
you doe seeke by it: seeing yt the ports,
baies, Ilandes, & shooldes, & the other
thinges of the cardes, where these said
courses doe beginne, beeing looked on
where they end, they bee foorth of their
owne places & true altitude, making it
equall with the altitude where the nauigation
began. Also looking in euerie
course of the card, ye distance of leagues,
that are from one place to another, or
from one porte to another, I say, from
the place where the course began, vnto
the place where it endeth: and these
Leagues beeyng taken with the compasse,
& the Leagues being seene which
are reckoned for a degree in euerye
course of the nauigatiō shalbe found, yt ye
leagues of the courses be not agreable
with those leagues, which are of the distance
of the way. This is in the courses
that doe reach frō one graduatiō to
another: the which is caused by reason
of the difference that the two graduations
haue: so that by these saide cardes
cānot be made any good nauigatiō, seeing
that they in themselues doe varie:
likewise because they haue 2. equinoctiall
lines, and many other errors, al the
which I haue made declaration of before.
The Coūsel royall of the Indians, of
his Maiestie, wherevpon it hath beene
commaunded that the said cards be not
vsed by reason they haue two different
graduations, and therefore are false
and erronious as it is said. Therefore
I say, that the Pilot or sayler ought to
looke well that the carde whereby hee
doth sayle, be of one only graduation: I
wil say if they haue two graduations or
more: let them bee equall or vniforme
and not different, the one frō the other.
And likewise the other instruments, let
them bee certayne and true, that they
cause no errour, whereby may followe
hurt and daunger, as it is most certeine
that with false instrumentes it maye
and doth oftentimes happen.
            
            
               The fourteenth Chapter, of the number of
the Leagues, which are reckoned for a degree
in euery course of the nauigation.
               
                  FIrst, before I declare
the nūber of ye leagues,
that ought to bee giuen
to euery degree in euery
one of ye courses of nauigation;
it is conueniēt to
speake here what is the cause wherfore
to the roundnes of the worlde, from the
East to the West, or from the North to
the South, was giuen to euery degree,
17. leagues and a halfe, and no more.
And in ye other courses, although they
be equal: with these are reckoned more
leagues for a degree then in them. To
this is to be noted, what degree is taken
in one of two sortes, is to be vnderstood
a degree of the roundnesse of the
world, or a degree of eleuatiō or height
of the pole. For the first which is a degree
of roundnesse, in this all the degrees
of the courses or winds be equal,
for all the windes are as the greater
circles in the sphere, & as it hath beene
declared, they haue three hundreth and
sixtie degrees of longitude, and for that
cause is giuen to euery degree of roūdnesse
seuenteene leagues and a half: but
in the secōd māner, which is the degrees
of the eleuation of the pole, these are
different vnto those of the roundnesse.
For if in sayling towards the north going
17. leagues & a half, the pole is raised
a degree, whē you saile towards the
Northeast, although you goe these 17.
& a halfe, you haue not raised ye pole 
                     •
                  
degree: but it is necessary that you goe
by this course 24. Leagues and a halfe,
for euery degree of eleuatiō of the pole,
and like in all the rest of the courses,
by howe muche euerie one is more
straight from the pole vnto the Lyne:
so manye more Leagues, or lesse shall
be gone for euery degree of eleuation of
the pole, so that the roūdnes wherwith
the world is girded, is not to be looked
on in all the courses of the nauigation.
But do you also look how much should

bee gone by euery course for to raise vp
or to put down euery degree of ye height
of ye pole, because this altitude of ye pole,
is to bee reckoned from the halfe of the
world, which is from the Equinoctiall
line: for that from thence they begin to
reckon the degrees, as well for the part
of the North, as for that of the South,
so that in the cardes of nauigation, are
put the coastes and all the rest that are
marked in it according to the degrees
yt euery thing is distant of the sayd line:
in such sort, that sailing by any manner
of course, from what place a man is in,
towards the Equinoctiall, or from the
saide Equinoctiall or any other part, by
as much as the course is more straight
or crooked, by so much they shall reckon
more or lesse leagues in euery degree in
this manner.
               
                  
               
               
                  The Equinoctiall line.
                  I put the case, that two shippes bee
in ye poynt A. which is a port towards
the North, sixe degrees distant from
the Equinoctial, and both of them doe
depart from thence towardes the sayde
line, & the one departeth with North,
& the other with Northeast towardes
the Southwest: It is certayne, that she
which carrieth the winde at North, sailing
by the same course from the North
towardes the South after shee hath
gone a hundreth & fiue leagues whiche
are the said sixe degrees, by that course
she shalbe in the Equinoctiall: And the
other that saileth with Northeast towards
the Southwest, by reason that
that winde goeth more leaning towards
the sayde line, the way is longer
to her. And so although that in the altitude
shee goeth not downe more then
sixe degrees, but for to come to ye Equinoctiall
she shall goe one hundreth fortie
seuen leagues, by ye which shee hath
euery degree by this course 24. leagues
& a halfe: so that only from the North,
to the South, and from the East to ye
West, & contrariwise euery degree hath
17. leagues & a halfe, but in the other
courses euery degree hath the leagues
following.
                  The second course hath a hundreth
and eight leagues deuided into sixe degrees,
which commeth foorth euery degree
18. leagues.
                  The thirde course hath a hundreth
and fifteene leagues and a halfe, so that
euery degree hath nieneteene leagues
and a terce.
                  The fourth course hath a hundreth
twentie sixe leagus, so that euery degree
hath 21. leagues.
                  The fifth course hath a hundreth fortie
seuen Leagues, so that euery degree
hath 24. leagues and a halfe.
                  The sixe course hath a 189. leagues,
so that euery degree hath 31. leagues
and a halfe.
                  The seuenth course hath two hundreth
seuenty three leagues, so that euery
degree hath forty fiue leagues and
a halfe.
                  The eight course hath fiue hundreth
thirtie fiue leagues, so that euery degree
hath eighty and niene leagues.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
               
               The fifteenth Chapter, of number, and measure,
and of how many parts a degree is
compounded.
               
                  IT is writtē in the book
of wisedome, that God
made all things in number,
waight, & measure,
therfore without knowledge
of the numbers we
can knowe nothing, of the time, of the
houres, or of the moouinges, or other
thinges, by the which it seemeth that
without knowledge how to reckon we
cannot know any thing.
               There are two sortes of quantities,
or numbers: one is continuall, another
is deuided or discrete: The continuall
is in 3. sorts, yt is to say, towardes the
length only like to a line, and this is called
quantitie lineall: Another is continued
in length, & bredth, but not deepe,
& this is called superficial: The third is
cōtinued in length, bredth, & depth, & is
called corporal, or set together. The quā
                  titie
deuided or discrete, is whē we say,
one, two, three, &c: wherby it seemeth by
the diuersitie of the nūbers are vnderstood
diuers meanings of writinges, &
so he that knoweth them not, ought not
to bee called a man. Plato saith, for this
cause is man so wise a creature, because
he knoweth the manner how to accoūt:
for the which he had written at ye doore
of his Academia, yt who could not make
a reckoning or account, should not enter
in, to heare him. The measures, & ye reasōs
for thē & their properties haue sprōg
of Geometry: for Geometry is a science
of measure, the which doth containe
lines, superficies, and bodies, as appeareth
in any circle three square, foure
square, & other figures, of Geometrie:

many Authors haue written, and principally
Euclides, the father of Ypocras.
Plurtarch saith, that Archimedes made an
artificiall thing by Geometry, with the
which, Marcellus a captayne of the Romaines,
hauing besieged the citie of Syracula,
in Sicilia with the saide artificiall
thing Archimedes tooke out the ships of
Marcellus, that were in the Sea, by raising
them vp into the aire, he put them
within the Citie: this science is called
Geometry, as Saint Isidore saith, for the
distribution of landes and fieldes: Geometry
properly is of ye corporal things
for that all corporall thinges haue their
proper measure.
               And of the spaces or distances that
are frō one prouince or citie to another,
which are measured by Escadios, miles,
Leagues, & Degrees: And this measure
whereby that all may be alike in equalitie
is ordayned in this manner.
               Foure graines of Barley doe make
one finger.
               Foure fingers one hand.
               Foure handes one foote.
               Fiue foote maketh one pace.
               An hundreth twentie fiue paces maketh
one Escadio.
               
               Eight Escadios which are a thousand
paces, doe make a Mile.
               
               Three Miles doe make a league.
               Seuenteene leagues and a halfe doe
make a degree.
               Euery degree hath lx. minutes.
               Euery minute 60. seconds.
               Euery second 60. thirdes.
               And so vnto tenthes.
               The reason why this account is diuided
into this number of 60. more thē
into any other. Ptholome declareth in
the first of ye 
                  Almagesto, the nienth chapter:
where he saith, that yt Astronomers,
sought a number, that hath many numbers
in proportionall partes, which we
call parts, Alicotas, and there cannot be
giuē any other number vnder sixtie, for
that this number may bee parted into
many diuisions and numbers, as in
two times thirtie, in three times twentie
&c.
            
            The ende of the thirde Booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The fourth booke of the height or altitude of the Sunne, and
how the nauigation ought to be ruled thereby.
            
               The first Chapter, wherein are declared 17. Fundamentall principles, which ought to be
knowen in the Altitude of the Sunne.
               
                  ONe of the things
most subtile and
of greatest vnderstanding
cō
                  teyned
in ye Art
of nauigation, is
the altitude of
the sunne: for it
sheweth truely
the way, that hee which sayleth, maketh,
or shall make in suche sorte, that if
hee hath made any errour in his voyage:
by this altitude hee knoweth it:
and so by reason that it is a thing so excellent
and subtile, ye auncient writers
in old time did highly esteeme of ye practise
therof, chiefly that great Ptholome,
& other singuler authors, for the which
they used diuers instruments as ye 
                  Astrolabio,
& the 3. rules, and others.
               
               This altitude is so effectuall for good
nauigatiō, that those which doe saile to
farre coūtries, cānot make their nauigations:
if this should lacke. For among
all the rules and aduises that I haue
declared in this art, and will declare as
wel touching the altitude of the North
as of others which serue in the nauigation:
This altitude 
                     〈◊〉
                   the sunne hath
excellency among all others, because he

is as a proofe of Arithmeticke, that
soeweth the errours whiche are in the
numbers: so that by the altitude of the
sunne, being precisely taken, the Pilot
may know the want or lacke that hath
beene in his nauigation. And because
this altitude of the Sunne is a matter
delicate and subtile as I haue sayd. In
this fourth booke, I will treate therof
as plainely as possible I can, shewing
the rules by Text, and giuing thē their
declaration & true vnderstanding, that
they ought to haue. And likewise giuing
to euery one an example and demonstration
that they may bee the better
vnderstood, and for this shalbe noted
17. fundamētal beginnings, which
are these following.
               
                  Altitude.
                  Degree.
                  Horizon.
                  Zodiake.
                  Equinoctiall line.
                  Declination.
                  Circles.
                  Tropikes.
                  Part of the North.
                  Part of the South.
                  Longitude.
                  Latitude.
                  Parelius.
                  Meridian.
                  Hemisphera.
                  Zenith.
                  Centrum.
               
               
                  Altitude is the degrees which the sūne
or the 
                     •
                  ole doe raise themselues aboue
the Horizon. Likewise an altitude is
vnderstood by those degrees, that anie
citie, port, Iland, &c, are distant from the
Equinoctiall line. A degree is one part
of three hundreth and sixtie: wherein
the world is deuided, it hath seuēteene
Leagues and a half of way, by the longitude
which is the length or bredth of
the water and earth.
               
                  Horizon is a circle which wee doe imagine
vpon the vppermost part of the
earth: in the whiche our sight is fixed,
which is as farre as our sight cāreach,
and by this circle half the heauen is deuided
which we see, from the other half
which we see not.
               
                  Zodiake is a circle really scituated in
the eight heauen, vnder the which the
sunne mooueth it selfe in all the yeere.
This Zodiake deuideth ye Equinoctiall
line, into two equall partes: the one frō
ye Equinoctial line by ye part of ye north,
& the other by the part of the South, by
euery part of these it hath 180. degrees,
so that the Zodiake hath 360. degrees.
               The Equinoctiall is a s
                     •
                  rcke or circle
imagined by the halfe of the worlde frō
the East into the West in equal distance
from both the poles, so that from the
Equinoctiall vnto euerye one of the
poles are nientie degrees. It is called
Equinoctiall, because the sunne passing
by it causeth Equinoctio, whiche is as
much to say, the day and the night to be
equall.
               
                  Declination is the distance which the
sunne by his owne mouing maketh frō
the Equinoctial line, 6. monethes of the
yeere to the North part, & 6. monethes
to the South parte.
               
                  Circles are the waye whereby the
poles of the Zodiake doe moue in roundnesse
from the poles of the world. These
doe take their names of the said poles:
and so they are called circle Articke, and
circle Antartike, these circles are distant
of the saide poles of the worlde, 23. degrees,
and 33. minutes.
               
                  Tropicos or Tropikes are 2. circles
where ye sunne last of all doth come once
in a yeere. One vnto the parte of the
North, and the other vnto the parte of
the South. It is called the Tropike
of Tropos which is a greeke name, and
is as much to say as conuersion, for the
sunne being come to euery one of these
Tropickes conuerteth her selfe and turneth
backe.
               
                  The parte of the North is taken for
halfe the worlde, whiche is from the
Equinoctiall line vnto the Pole articke.
               
                  The parte of the South is the other
halfe of the roundnesse of the worlde,
which is from the Equinoctial line vnto
the pole antartike.
               
                  Longitude or length, is vnderstood by
the way from the East into the West, or
from the West into the East, for that

this is the length of the world.
               Latitude or bredth is the way which
is taken from the North to the South,
which is frō one pole to ye other, for this
is the bredth of the world.
               
                  Parelius is a way imagined to goe
straight by the heauē, or by the Sea, or
by▪ ye land, from the East into the West,
or from the West into the East, with,
outcomming
neere to the Equinoctiall
line, or to the poles more in one parte
then in another.
               The Meridiā is a line, which is imagined
frō one pole of the world to the other,
right ouer our heades, and when
the sunne commeth to this line, it is the
middest of the day vnto suche as inhabite
vnder it.
               
                  Hemisphera is as muche to say, the
halfe sphere▪ and it is to be vnderstood,
that alt the worlde is one Sphera Esphera,
and is taken for a rounde thing,
and because the worlde is rounde,
it is called Sphera, and seeing that in
what place soeuer a man is, hee seeth
the halfe of Heauen: This halfe of
the Heauen, which wee see, we call Hemisphera.
               
               
                  Zenith is apoynt imagined in ye heauen
very precisely put ouer our head, &
frō this point or Zenith to any manner
of place of our Horizon are 90. degrees.
               
                  Center is a point in the middest of the
sphere imagined, & so in the middest yt
from it to the superficie, al the lines that
frō foorth right shalbe layde, shalbe equall:
and from any part of the superficie
to this point is to descend, and from
it to the superficie is to rise vp.
            
            
               The second Chapter, of the excellencies of
the sunne, and of his moouings.
               
                  
                     SAint Ambrose saieth▪ in
the Exameron, that the
sunne is the fountaine of
light, the fairenesse of ye
day, the ornamēt of heauen,
the measure of time,
the vertue and strength of all thinges
which are borne, and according as the
Philosopher saith, is cause of all generation
and corruption. It is of a very
great quantitie, so much that Ptholome
saith in the Almagesto and Alfragano,
in the difference 22. that the sunne
in an hundreth sixtie & sixe times greater
then the earth, his mouing is more
swift then any arrow, and we doe not
see him mooue by reason of his greate
brightnesse which is of more strength
to be seene, then our sight can see: And
to our iudgement hee goeth by leasure.
But the quātitie of ye way being knowen
which he goeth, his lightnesse is innumerable:
so yt for the greate distance
that is from vs to him, we cānot determine
his moouing. And it is to bee noted,
that the sunne hath two moouings
contrary, which are one forcible, and the
other proper: the forcible mouing is it
that we see that euery day he maketh a
forcible going by the first moueable, &
in euery 24. houres, hee goeth round
about the world from the East into the
West. The other mouing which is naturall,
with proper to himselfe, woorketh
contrary to the first, that is to be vnderstood
from the West into ye East, in his
circle Excentrico: the which moouing, he
maketh in three hundreth sixtie and
fiue dayes & sixe houres, & lesse a little
quantity: And this mouing he maketh
in this maner, from the eleuenth day of
Marche, that the sunne passeth by the
line Equinoctial vntil the eleuenth day
of June, the sunne goeth rising vp, by
the parte of the North, and so putting
himselfe from the said line, the eleuenth
day of June, he commeth to the tropike
of Cancer, and in this rising vp that he
maketh these three monethes hee departeth
from the sayd line twenty three
degrees and thirtie three minutes:
which is his greatest declination, or
distaunce that hee maketh from the
fayde line; and from the twelfthe of
June, vnto the thirteenth of September,
the sunne descendeth from the
sayde Tropike vnto the line: and from
the fourteenth of September, vnto
the thirteenth of December: the sunne

descendeth by the parte of the South
from the line to the Tropike of Capricorne,
from whence he departeth other
twentie three degrees, and thirtie three
minutes, which is likewise his greatest
declination of that parte: and from the
fourteenth of December, vnto the tenth
of Marche, the sunne goeth using vp
from the Tropike of Capricorne vnto
the line: so that of the twelf-monthes
of the yeere, sixe of them, the sunne goeth
from the line to the parte of the
North, and the other sixe to the parte
of the South. And all the moouinge
which the sunne maketh, is from one
Tropike to another: in the whiche are
47. degrees, and 6. minutes. This is
the latitude of the Zona, whiche the
auncient Writers called Torrida, which
is as muche to saye, tosted, because
alwayes the sunne maketh his moouing
by her within these Tropikes,
without going worth of them at anye
time.
               And it is to bee vnderstood, that the
time which the sunne goeth towarde
the parte of the North, and the time
hee goeth towarde the parte of the
South, Is not equall, for the sunne
goeth towarde the parte of the North,
a hundreth eightie and seuen dayes,
and hee goeth towardes the parte of
the South, a hundreth sixtie and eight:
where it appeareth that the sunne goeth
more time of the yeere vnto the
parte of the North, then vnto the part
of the South. The cause is, because
this circle Excentrico: wherein the
sunne maketh his moouing, is so shut
into the Sphera, that of one parte hee
commeth more neere to the firmament,
then of the other, for the which cause be
is described foorth of the Conter of the
worlde.
               The parte of this circle that commeth
more neere to the firmament, is
called auxe, which is as much to say eleuation,
and this hee doth, when hee
commeth to the tropike of Cancer, and
that when he is most distant is called
opposite of auxe, and this is when hee
commeth to the Tropike of Capricorne:
so that when the sunne is in Auxe, hee
is more neere to the firmament; and
when hee is in his opposite, hee is
more neere to the earth, in suche sorte
that in the Sommer the sunne goeth
farre from the earth, and in the Winter,
is more neere to the earth. This
is to bee vnderstoode in respect of vs in
the Winter 
                     〈◊〉
                   respect of suche as
inhabite towardes the parts of the
South in Sommer. The Cardinall
Peter de Aliaco proueth, that aforesaid in
the twelfth question, in the first article
of the seconde notable, where hee
sayeth that the sunne maketh his moouing,
beeyng come to the ende of Gomini,
is in the Auxe: of his Excentrieo,
and in the ende of Sagitarius is in the opposite.
               This seenteth by the demonstration
that Ptholome putteth in the thirde
distinction of the Almagesto. And seeing
that the Center of the Excentrico of the
sunne is distant from the Center of the
worlde, by so muche when the sunne in
his Auxe is more distaunt from the
earth; and when hee is in the opposite,
hee is more neere to it. And so it is
prooued that the sunne is more neere
to the earth in our Winter, then in
Sommer.
            
            
               The thirde Chapter, of the yeere called
Solar, & other manner of yeeres, & how
the leape yeere is reckoned.
               
                  THE yeere Solar is the
time, wherein the sunne
passeth ye twelue signes
of the Zodiake, and returneth
where hee begā.
It is called a yeere,
whiche is, as if one shoulde say, a ring,
or circle, because the sunne hath gone
his circle, he returneth to the same place
where he began.
               The Egyptians as S. Isidore saith, before
they had ye knowledge of learning,
they accustomed to figure the yeere in a
dragon, that bitt the taile, but since they

had learning and account of the yeere,
they began it in September, because
they say that in that moueth the world
was made. And the Arabians beginne
in the same time, the Hebrues beginne
in the moneth of March, because it was
geuen to them by lawe, wee begin it in
I
                     •
                  nuarie, because then did our 
                     〈◊〉
                  
yeere begin, which was the birth of the
sonne of iustice, Christ our God. And because
the sunne doth begin to come 
                     〈◊〉
                  
vs, In the scripture I finde fiue sortes
of yeeres. Anno Solet Anno Lun
                        ••
                     
Anno Emergence, Anno Grande, Anno
Mundano. The yeere 
                     •
                  ol
                     ••
                   is it the therfore
hath beene declared. The yeere
Lunar is the time which doth containe
twelue moones, of twentie niene daies
and a halfe, which amounteth to th
                     ••
                  
hundreth fiftie foure d
                     ••
                  es vnto the
which is added the eleuen dayes of the
concurrent, because the yeere Lunar
which is of the moone may come with
the Solar which is of the sunne. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
yeere Emergente is when there happeneth,
a thing very not
                     ••
                  le, and in the
time following is speech thereof, euen
as they talked in the time of Caesar▪
                   
                  
                     •
                  od
now of the birth of our Lorde Jesus
Christ. Anno Grande is as much to far,
as a great yeere, according as the maister
of the histories sayth, that it is a
time of sixe hundred yeeres. Anno Mundano
according to Macrobio, is when
the Starres and all the Planets
will come to the pointe of our degree
where they began their first moouing.
And this hee sayth shall bee in fifteene
thousand yeres, likewise the other saith
that it will come in fortie & niene thousand
yeeres. But any manner of thing
that the philosopher speaketh of in this
matter, is according to his owne opinion,
we ought to holde that the time
and the moouing of the things and the
end of them is in the hand of him that
made them of nothing, and vnto men
doth not appertaine to iudge nor determine
of the time or ending of the world.
For ye most high prouidēce of ye father eternall
did put it in his owne bosome,
as our redemer Jesus Christ teacheth
vs, answering to such as asked him the
saide question, as it is written in the
Actes of the Apostles the first chapter,
Therefore I say that the yeere called

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   hath three hundreth sixtie fiue

                     •••
                  yes and sixe houres lacking twelue
minutes giuing to euery houre sixtie
minutes and because in the yere are accounted
sixe whole houres of this hath
come although the quantitie bee little,
that it is no more but one fifth parte of
an houre ins euery one yere, in so many
number of yeeres they haue not made
eleuen dayes of difference in the time, so
that these sixe houres which are accoū
                  ted
in the yeere besides these sayd daies
from foure to foure yeres doth amount
to twentie foure 
                     •
                  oures which maketh
& natural day, and so this fourth yeere
bath three hundreth sixtie sixe dayes
and this is called the leape yeere, it is
also called Bissiesto by the minutes
which are as called Bises the which minutes
the sun tarieth in euery one signe
most then the thirty dayes Bissiesto is

                     ••
                  oun
                     ••
                   to say two times six, for because

                     〈◊〉
                   of Bissiesto the day that is sixe
dayes before the Kalendes of march is

                     〈◊〉
                   so that in one onely letter
of the Kalender there are two daies
which are the twentie foure, and twentie

                     〈◊〉
                   of Februarie, that is to saye the

                     〈◊〉
                   which 
                     〈◊〉
                   the saide letter, and
more the day whiche is encreased by
the Bissiesto or leape yeere by the which
the leape yeere in the moneth of February
hath twentie nine dayes and the
other yeeres twentie eyght.
               Therefore it is to be seene, when the
altitude of the sunne is taken to knowe
his declination if it be a leape yeere, or

                     〈◊〉
                  , the seconde, or the thirde after
the leape yeere as is plainely to bee
founde in the seuenteene Chapter,
which treateth of the declination, and
according to the yeere, so must the declination
of the Sunne bee sought
for.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, what thing a shadow
is, & how the shadow which the
sunne maketh ought to be looked on,
for to take his altitude.
               
                  
                  THe shadowes are caused
when any darke body is
opposite to the light, and
so the shadow hath an
apparance or shewe of a
body, and it is none The
shadowe flyeth away from such as followe
it, and followeth such as flye from
it. The shadow by how much the sunne
is higher, by so muche it is lesser,
and how much the lower, the greater:
whereby the shadow of a man is greater
in the morning and in the euening,
then at the middest of the day, and it is
to be noted, yt the sun goeth alwaies is
one of these 3 places, which is toward
the part of the north, or in the equinoctiall,
or towardes the part of the south:
& in these three partes to such as inhabit
in the world it maketh 5 shadowes:
(That is to saye,) a shadow at the east,
a shadow at the west, a shadow at the
north, a shadow at ye south, & a straight
shadow. The shadow at the east, is
when the sunne doth set. The shadowe
at the west is when the sunne riseth.
               The shadowe at north is when the
sunne commeth to the middest of the
day, and he that maketh the shadow is
more towardes the north then the sun.
And the shadow at south is when he
that maketh the shadowe is more towardes
the south then the sunne there
is likewise a straight shadowe, when
the sunne is in our Zen
                        •••
                     
                   Al these shadowes,
such as dwel within ye tropikes
haue. Those which inhabite vnder the
tropikes, haue 4 shadowes, (that is to
say) shadow at east shadow at west and
those of ye tropike of Cancer, haue ye shadow
at north and those of the tropike of
Capricorne haue the shadowe at south:
and once in the yere a straight shadow,
which is when the sunne entreth into
that tropike. Such as dwel without ye
tropikes haue three shadowes, at east,
and at west, and those of the parte of the
north, haue shadowe at north, and those
of the parte of the south, haue shadowe
at south, and neuer any straight
shadowe. But do you note, yt although
the sunne doth make in the yeere fiue
shadowes to such as dwell in the world
not onely in fiue partes, but in xiii. differēces
of parts, you may be with ye sunn
and haue xiii. differences of shadowes,
and no more, (that is to say) fiue when
the sunne goeth towardes the parte of
the north, and three when hee is in
the line, and fiue when he is towardes
ye part of the south, ye which by xiii. rules
with their demonstratiōs shalbe noted
in this manner.
               
                  
                  VVhen the Sunne is towardes
the north.
                  The Sunne being towardes the north, if the
shadowes be towardees the north, you are
more towardes the north then the Sunne,
and the Sunne betweene you and the line.
                  
                  The Sunne towardes the north, if the shadowes
be to no parte, then are you towards
the north as farre from the line as the
Sunne.
                  
                  The Sunne towardes the north, if the shadowes
be towards the south, you may be
towardes the north betweene the Sunne &
the line.
                  
                  
                     
The Sunne towardes the north, and the shadowes
going towards the south you may be
in the Equinoctiall line.
                  
                  The Sunne towards the north, and the shadowes
going towardes the south you may
be towardes the parte of the south, and the
line betweene you and the Sunne.
                  
               
               
                  When the Sunne is in the Equinoctiall
Line.
                  The Sunne in the Equinoctiall if the shadowes
be towardes the north, you are towardes
the part of the north.
                  
                  
                     
The Sunne in the equinoctiall, if the shadowes
be straight you are in the equinoctiall.
                  
                  The Sunne in the Equinoctiall, if the shadowes
be towardes the south you are towardes
the part of the south.
                  
               
               
                  When the Sunne is towardes the
south.
                  The Sunne towardes the south, if the shadowes
be towardes the south you are towardes
the south, and the sunne is betweene
you and the line.
                  
                  
                     
The sunne at the south if the shadowes bee
straight you are towardes the south as farre
from the line as the sunne.
                  
                  The sun at south if the shadowes be towards
the north you may be towardes the south
beetweene the sunne and the line.
                  
                  The Sunne towardes the south, and the shadowes
going towardes the north you may
be in the Equinoctiall.
                  
                  
                     
The sunne towardes the south, and the shadowes
towardes the north you may be towardes
the north, & the line betweene you
and the sunne.
                  
               
            
            
               The fifth chapter, wherein is declared what
thing the height of the sunne is, and how
it ought to bee taken to knowe the place
where a man is.
               
                  SEing there hath beene
declared the difference
of shadowes which the
sunne maketh, or maye
make by all the yeere in
any manner of place that
a man is, ye which shadows are necessary
to be knowne. For to knowe precisely
how to take the altitude of the sunne,
I will speake, what thing the altitude
of the sunne is, and the manner
that must be had, for to take it well. For
this is to bee noted, that Ptholomie
saieth in the firste of Geographia,
that wheresoeuer a man is, hee seeth
halfe the heauen and the other halfe is
hid from him, in such sort that of three
hundreth and sixtie degrees that the
heauen hath in roundnes wee alwaies
see the hundreth and foure score which
is the halfe wherein is contayned our
Hemispherio, so that wheresouer a man
is, and in any manner of time, from his
heade or Cenith, vnto the horizon are
ninetie degrees, and so from what place
that a man is in euen vnto the sunne,
when he riseth in the morning, that hee
doe begin to appeare in the horizon are
ninetie degrees, and how much more
the day goeth forwarde, and the sunne
goeth rising, so much more he commeth
neerer towardes our Cenith. And this
rising vp that the sunne maketh, is called
the altitude of the sunne, because he
goeth rising, and going vp vppon the
horizon, the which altitude he that shall
take him at the middest of the day, let
him vnderstande that the degrees that
he shall finde in his Astrolabio, lesse then
ninetie, those should be from him to the
sunne, for that the sunne shall be so many
distant from his Cenith, which is
from the right of his heade. Therefore
I say to know the altitude that ye sunne
hath euery day vpon the horizon which
the pilot or any otherpersō that would
take it, ought, first of all to looke on syue
thinges which are these following.
               The first, that it be taken in the middest
of the day.
               The second, that hee see to whiche
parte of the line, the sunne goeth that
day.
               The third, to what part the shadows
goe.
               The fourth, what declination the sun
hath.
               The fifth, that he knowe how to applye
the rule that is conuenient according
to the time and place wherein he
findeth himselfe. Vnto the first I say,
yt the altitude of the sunne ought to be
taken at the middest of the day iustly,
this is because vntill the sunne commeth
to the Meridiā he goeth alwaies
rising aboue the Horizon, and if hee bee
taken before or after hee wil not bee so

iustly taken, but although that in this
be some difference of time being but a
little thing before or after, it is no great
inconuenience, because the most times
it cannot be punctually knowne whē he
commeth to the Meridian. Although
you looke on the clock, the Astrolabio,
or any other instrumēt, but alwaies doe
you procure to take him at the houre aforesaide.
               To the second, it ought to bee seene
at what parte of the line, the sunne goeth,
if it be at the north or at the south,
considering that the time, which the sun
goeth to the part of the north, is frō the
eleuenth of March vnto the thirteenth
of September, and from the fourteenth
of September vnto the tēth of March
hee goeth to the parte of the south.
               Vnto the thirde, he that taketh the
altitude ought to see to what parte the
shadowes are from him, (that is to say)
the shadow of his person, or of the maste
of his ship, or of any other thing yt is put
vpright. And so by the shadowe hee
shall knowe at which parte of the line
hee is, for being knowne to which parte
the sunne goeth, it may be easily known
by the sayde shadowe, towardes what
parte he is of, as in the fourth chapter
hath beene declared.
               To the fourth, the yeere ought to be
looked vnto, if it be a leape yeere, or
the first, the second, or third yeere after
the leape yeere, and according as the
yeere is, let him looke on the moneth,
and day wherein he is: and what declination
the sunne hath towardes the
parte where he goeth, that is how many
degrees and minutes hee is distant
from the sayde line.
               To the fifth, yt hee apply euery rule of ye
altitude in his proper time and place,
and this the pilot ought alwais to procure
and knowe the rules of the altitude,
not onely the woordes but the
meaning of them for he that onely knoweth
the rule, and doth not attaine to
the reason or foundation thereof, as it
ought to be vnderstoode, it procureth to
him many harmes, and hee knoweth
not of what they proceede, and finding
him selfe in the errour he putteth faulte
in the instrumentes and rules, the fault
being in him selfe, because he vnderstandeth
them not.
               And because these rules of the altitude
of the sunne may bee well vnderstoode,
and that their shoulde be no ignorance
in any thing, here shal be put euery
one with his declaration, figure,
and example, in manner following.
               
                  The first rule, when the Sunne goeth towarde
the parte of the north, and the shadowes
goes towardes the north.
                  
                     THE Sunne towardes the
parte of the North, if
the shadowes be towardes
the North you bee towards
the north, and the Sun
is betweene you and the
line, see howe many degrees you tooke of
altitude and how many doth lacke of ninetie,
and with those whiche lacke, ioyne
the declination of that day, and all ioyned
together you are distant from the line
towardes the north.
                  This first rule doth shewe how you
shall knowe the altitude of the sunne,
when he goeth towardes the north,
and hee that taketh the altitude is
more towardes the north then ye sunne,
and so he sayth.
                  
                     The Sunne towardes the parte of the
North, is as muche to say, that when
you doe take the altitude of the Sunne
in any day of the sixe monethes, that
he goeth from the line vnto the parte of
the north.
                  
                     If the shadowes bee towardes the
North, if in this daye that you take
the altitude of the Sunne the shadowes
bee from you towardes the
north.
                  
                     You are towardes the North and
the Sunne is betweene you and the line, in
such sorte that by the shadowes you doe
know that the Sunne is between you
and the line, at such time as when they
are in this manner.
                  
                     Beholde how many degrees you take
of altitude, these degrees are those that
you take the sunne in your Astrolabio,
therfore looke on these degrees howe
many they are.
                  
                     
                     And how many lacketh for nientie, is to
be vnderstood vpō those that you found
of Astrolabio, looke how many they are,
which doe lacke for to come to nientie,
And with those whiche lacke, as if you
had taken fiftie, there lacke fortye: and
if you had taken 65. there lacke 25.
Therfore with those forty, or twenty, or
more or lesse, Ioyne the declination of that
day, which are those degrees & minutes
which ye sunne is distant frō the line, as
you shall finde in the declination of the
sayd day, And all put together, that is to
say, the declination of ye sunne, & the degrees
which lacke for nienty, and that
which this shall summe or amoūt vnto,
you are distaunt from the line towardes the
North.
                  
                  
                     An Example.
                     The sixte day of April, I taking the altitude
of the sunne, the shadowes were
from mee towardes the North, and
I tooke the sunne in sixtie degrees of Astrolabio,
there lacked 30. for 90. with
these 30. I ioyned 10. degrees, which
the Sunne had this day of declination,
whiche did amounte to fortie
degrees, so much was I distant frō the
line towards the part of ye North. The
reason is, for because in the moneth of
Aprill, the sunne goeth towardes the
part of the North, & as the shadowes
were from me towardes the North, I
knewe that I was more towardes the
North, then the sunne, therefore the
sunne beyng taken in sixtie degrees, the
thirtie which lacked for nientie, was
I distant of the sunne.
                     This is because alwaies, when that
I shall take the altitude of the sunne,
those degrees that I shall finde in my
Astrolabio, lesse then nientie, the selfe
same am I distant from the sunne, and
the same day, the sunne was distant
from the line, ten degrees, which was
his declination, so that from mee to the
sunne, were thirtie degrees, & from the
sunne to the liue, tenne whiche make
fortie: so much was I distaunt from
the sayde line.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The seconde rule, that when the sunne is
towardes the North, and the shadowes
towardes the South, the declination
and altitude are more then nientie degrees.
                  
                     IF the sunne be towards the
North, and the shadowes
bee towardes the south,
ioyne the declination with
the altitude, and if they
passe nientie degrees, those
which are more, you are distant from the
line towardes the North, and you are betweene
the sunne and the line.
                  In the firste rule hath been declared
that when the sunne is towardes the
part of the North, & hee that taketh the
altitude is more towardes the North
then the sunne whereby the shadowes
goe frō him towardes the North. This
rule is, when the sunne goeth towards
the selfsame parte of the North, and he
which taketh the altitude, ye shadowes
goe from him towardes the South in
this manner. The sunne towardes the
North, the time which the sunne goeth
towards the North, hath beene declared.
Therefore in this time, If the shadowes
be towards the south, the south ioyneth
the declinatiō with the altitude, which
is as much to say, looke on the degrees
and minutes, that this day hath of declination,
and ioyne them with the degrees,
that you take the sunne in your
Astrolabio, and if they doe passe of nientie
degrees, if altogether the declination of
the sunne, and the altitude whiche you
tooke, were more then nientie degrees.
                  
                     Those which were more, you are distant
from the line towards the North. It is to
be vnderstood, that if the altitude and
declination were nienetie fiue degrees,
you are distant of the line, fiue degrees:
and if they were an hundreth, you were
distant tenne degrees: and so are to bee
reckoned those whiche are more then
nientie.
                  
                     And then are you betweene the sunne
and the line. The which you shall know
because the shadowes goe frō you towardes
the South, and because the altitude
& dedination did passe of nienetie
degrees.
                  
                     An Example.
                     The twenty day of May, I tooke the
sunne in 80. degrees, this day hee had
of declinatiō twentie and one degrees,
I ioyned the declination and the altitude,
& they amounted to an hundreth
and one degrees, so that they be eleuen
degrees more then nienetie. These eleuen
was I distaunt from the line towardes
the North, betweene the sunne &
the line, ye reason is, because this day ye
sunne was distaunt of the line, 21. degrees:
which was his declination towardes
the part of the North: so that I
hauing taken the sunne in fourescore degrees,
there was from me to the sunne,
tenne degrees, and as I am betweene
the sunne and the line, I beeyng tenne
degrees distaūt frō the sunne towards
the line, there was from mee to the line
eleuen degrees, which lacketh for the
twentie one, which is the declination
of the sunne.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The third rule, when the sunne is towardes
the North, and the shadowes towardes
the South, and the declination, and altitude,
are nienety degrees iust.
                  
                     THE sunne towardes the
North and the shadowes
towardes the South, if ioyning
the altitude and declination,
they be nienety degrees,
you are vnder the Equinoctiall
line.
                  Hee that taketh the altitude in the
time that the sunne goeth towards the
North in one of three partes, hee may
stande that the shadowes may be from
him towardes the South, The first is
when he is betweene the sunne and the
line, and this hath beene already declared
in the rule, before this. The second
is, the sunne being towardes the North
and hee that taketh the altitude in the
selfe same line. The thirde is, the sunne
beeyng towardes the North, and hee
that taketh the altitude towardes the
parte of the South, therefore of the seconde,
which is, the man beeing in the
line, the rule saith,
                  The sunne at the North parte if the shadowes
goe towardes the South, ioyne the
declination with the altitude.
                  It is to bee noted, that alwayes
when the sunne goeth to one parte, and
the shadowes to an other, the declination
is to bee ioyned with the altitude,
And if they be nientie degrees iust. Euen
like if there were seuentie degrees of altitude
and 20. of declination, or eightie
of altitude and tenne of declination, or
any other number, wherin the altitude
and declination be nientie degrees iust,
when it is so: you are vnder the Equinoctiall
liue.
                  
                  
                     
                     An Example.
                     The 11. day of Iuly I tooke the
sunne in my Astrolabio, in 68. degrees,
there was this daye of declination, 22.
degrees, ioyne the altitude & declination,
and they amounted to nientie degrees,
then was I vnder the Equinoctiall
line.
                     The reason is, because the sunne
was towardes the parte of the North,
and the shadowes going from me towardes
the South, I was more towardes
the South, then the sunne, there,
fore taking sixtie eight degrees of altitude,
I was distant from the sunne
twentie two degrees, and this day had
the sunne twētie two degrees of declination,
so that the sunne was distant
from the line twentie two degrees, and
I distant from the sunne towardes the
line, the saide twentie two degrees, by
the which I knewe that I was vnder
the said line. For by how much the sūne
was distant from the line, so much was
I distant of the sunne from the sayde
line.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The fourth rule when the sunne is towardes
the North, & the shadowes towardes
the south, and the altitude and declination
doe not amounte to nienetie
degrees.
                  THe sunne at North and the shadowes
at south, if ioyning the altitude and
declination, they come not to nientie
degrees, those that doe lack for nientie, you
are distant of the line towardes the parte of
the south, and the line wilbe betweene you
and the sunne.
                  It hath beene declared that when the
sunne goeth towardes the part of the
North, if the shadowes goe from him
that taketh the altitude towardes the

South, he may be in one of these three
places, yt is to say, towards the North,
betweene the sunne and the line, and in
the sayde line, and at the parte of the
South, the line beeing betweene him
and the Sunne, for in any parte of these
that a mā is, the sūne going towardes ye
North part, alwayes at the middest of
the day, the shadowes will goe towardes
the South, of these three, two
haue beene declared, of the thirde
this rule speaketh.
                  The sunne towards the North, if the shadowes
be towards the South, and ioyning
the altitude and declination, if they come
not to nientie degrees.
                  If the altitude which you haue taken
in the Astrolabio, were fiftie or sixtie degrees,
and the declination fifteene or
twentie, so that all being put together,
come not to nienetie.
                  Those whiche doe lacke for nienetie,
you are distaunt from the line towardes
the South.
                  So that those Degrees and Minutes
fewe or many, that bee lesse
then nienetye, You are distaunt of
the lyne, towardes the parte of the
South, & then The line wilbee betweene
you and the Sunne.
                  
                  
                     An Example.
                     The tenth of August, taking the altitude,
the shadowe was from mee
towardes the South: I tooke the
sunne in the Astrolabio, in seuentie degrees.
This day hee had of declination
twelue degrees: I ioyned the altitude
and declination, and they amounted
to eightie and two degrees,
there lacked eight degrees for nientie,
these eight degrees was I distaunt
from the line towardes the part of the
South. The reason is, that taking
the Sunne in seuentie degrees, there
was from mee to the Sunne, twentie
degrees, and this day the Sunne was
distaunt from the line, twelue degrees:
which was his declination towardes
the parte of the North: so that the
eight which lacketh for twentie, was
I distaunt of the line towards the part
of the South, so that from mee to the
line was eight degrees, and from the
line to the Sunne twelue, these bee
the twentie which were from me to the
Sunne.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The fifth rule, when the sunne is in the Equinoctiall,
and you take his altitude in lesse
then ninetie degrees.
                  
                     WHen the sunne is in the Equinoctiall,
if you take his
altitude in lesse then ninetie
degrees, those whiche are
lesse then ninety, you are distant
from the line towardes
that part which the shadowes are from
you.
                  There hath beene declared the rules
of the altitude of the sunne, when he goeth
towardes the parte of the North:
nowe this rule serueth for the dayes of
the yeere, that the sunne is in the Equinoctiall
line, and sayeth, when the sunne is
in the Equinoctiall line.
                  
                  The sunne is in the Equinoctiall, the eleuenth
of March, & thirteenth of September,
so that in any of these dayes, If
you take his altitude in lesse then ninetie degrees,
so that if you take it in 75. whiche
are lesse by fifteene then ninetie, or in
eightie or more or lesse:
                  
                     Those which you take lesse then ninetie,
These fifteene, or tenne, or fiue, or as
many as are lesse then nientie, you are
distant from the line vnto the parte whiche
the shadowes doc fall from you.
                  
                  So that if the shadowes goe from
you towards the North, those degrees
which you finde lesse then ninetie, you
are distant from the line towardes the
part of the North, and if the shadowes
goe from you towards the South, the
same degrees you shall finde your selfe
towardes the South.
                  
                     An Example.
                     The 11. of March I tooke the sunne
in eightie degrees, the shadowes
were from mee towardes the North,

this day the sunne hath no degree of declinatiō,
therfore the 10. degrees, which
I tooke lesse thē ninetie, I was distant
from the sunne. The reason is, because ye
sunne was in the line, the same degrees
that I was distant from the sunne, the
selfesame am I from the line, & because
the shadowes went from me towardes
the North, was I towards the part of
the North, the which if they had gone
from me towards the South, the selfesame
degrees should I haue been towards
the part of the South.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The sixt rule, when the altitude is taken in
nientie degrees, whether in the sunne be
a declination o
                        •
                      no.
                  VVHen you shall take the altitude
of the sunne in nienety degrees,
the sunne is ouer your heade,
looke vpon the declination of this day, & if
there bee no declination, you and the sunne
be in the line, & if there be any declination,
that which is, you are distant from the line,
towards that part which the sunne goeth.
                  This rule declareth how the altitude
of the sunne shoulde bee knowen, when
he that taketh him, hath him in the Cenith,
or poynte that is right ouer his
head, the which rule hath two partes,
that is to say, one, when the sunne is in
the Equinoctiall line, & the other when
it is foorth of it, of the first it speaketh.
                  
                     When you doe take the altitude of the
sunne in nientie degrees. It is to be vnderstood,
that the measurer of the worlde,
sheweth in your Astrolabio, the nientie
degrees iust, when it is so. Knowe yee
that the sunne is right ouer your head:
                  
                  In such sort, that your shadow shall
not goe to any part, therfore thē 
                     Looke
on the declination of this day:
                  
                  Is to bee vnderstood the degrees and
minutes, which the sunne is distant frō
the Equinoctial.
                  
                     And if there be no declination, Which

will be the eleuenth of Marche, and the
thirteenth of September, thē the declination
is of few minutes.
                  
                     You and the sunne be in the line, the sunne
beingin the 
                        ••
                     ne then he hath no degrete
nor halfe a degree of declination, and
you are in the line, seeing that you are
vnder the sunne.
                  
                     And if there be any declination: This is
the second part of this rule, wherein is
declared, when the sunne, and he that
taketh the altitude be out of the Equinectiall,
the which will bee knowne in
the degrees, that the sunne hath of declination,
because it saith, that which is,
is to be vnderstood few degrees, or many.
So much you are distant from the line
so that seesyng you are vnder the sunne,
and the sunne is distaunt from the line,
that the same degrees & minutes, that
the sunne hath of declination, the same
you are distaunt from the line, towards
the part where the sunne goeth.
                  
                  If it bee that the sunne goeth to the
North part, you are toward the North
part, & if he goe towardes the South,
you are towarde the same parte of the
South, and because with this that is
declared, this rule may be well vnderstood,
there is put in it no more declaration.
               
               
                  The seuenth rule, when the sunne is towards
the part of the South, and the shadowes
goe likewise towards the South.
                  THe sūne towards the part of the south,
and the shadowes towards the South,
the sunne is between you and the line,
looke how many degrees of altitude, you
tooke, and how many doe lacke for nientie,
and with those that lacke, ioyne the declinacion
of this day, and beeing altogether the
degrees that be, you are distaunt frō the line,
towardes the South.
                  This rule is, when the sunne is towards
the part of the South, and the shadowes
goe towardes the South, is agreeable
with the first rule, which was
declared whē the sūne goeth towards
the part of the North, and because it is
declared according to his proper meaning,
& this is agreeable to that, there
shall not be put here any other declaration,
but the same that is there declared,
is to be vnderstood in this. Onely
making difference of the names, that
is to say, from the North to the South,
but because this rule is for ye time when
the sunne goeth towardes the South,
I wil put an example of the part of the
South, in the manner following.
                  
                     An Example.
                     The fourth of October, taking the altitude,
ye shadowes went from me towards
the South, and I tooke the sunne
in 85. degrees in my Astrolabio, this day
ye sun had 8. degrees of declinatiō towards
the south, therefore taking the altitude
in 85. degrees, there lacketh siue,
for nienetie, these fiue was I distaunt
from the sunne, and with these fiue, I
ioyned the eight of declination, they amounted
to thirteene degrees, these
thirteene degrees was I distaunt from
the line, because from mee to the sunne
was fiue, and from the Sunne to the
line eight, which are thirteene, so
that I was distaunt thirteene degrees
from the line towardes the parte of the
South.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The eyght rule, when the sunne is towardes
the nouth, and the shadowes towardes the

                        •
                     orth, and the declination and altitude
are more then ninetie degrees.
                  THe Sunne towardes the south, if the
shadowes be towards the north, ioyne
the declination with the altitude, and
altogether if they passe of nientie degrees,
those which are more, you are distant of the
line towards the south, and you are between
the sunne and the line.
                  This rule is declared in the seconde
rule before written when the sunne goeth
towards the north parte, for the
same account or reckoning that is made
the sunne beeing towardes the north
and he that taketh the altitude at the
same parte of the north, betweene the
sunne and the line, the selfe same is to be
done, the sunne beeing towardes the
part of the south, and hee which taketh
the altitude in the same part betweene
the sunne and the line.
                  Therfore ye declaration which is writtē
for the one, by the selfe same fourme serueth
for the other, and to know that he
which taketh the altitude is betweene
the sunne and the line, the rule declareth
in what altitude and declination,
they shoulde passe of nienty degrees, as
it is shewed in this example.
                  
                     An Example.
                     The xiii. of Ianuary I tooke the sun
in seuentie eyght degrees, this day hee
had of declination nienteene degrees,
I ioyned the declination and altitude
as the rule sheweth and did amount to
nientie and seuen degrees, these seuen,
degrees yt past of nienty, was I distant
frō the line towards the south. The reason
is, that taking the sunne in seuentie
& eight degreees, I was distāt from ye
sunne xii. degrees, & seeing that ye sunne
was distāt from the line ri
                           •
                        . degrees, &
I being between the sunne & the line,
therfore there are frō me to the sunne xii
degrees, & frō me to the line seuē which
are nienteene, so many are the degrees
which the sunne is distant of the line.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The nienth rule, when the Sunne is at the
south, and the shadowes at north, and
the altitude and declination are nientie
degrees iust.
                  THE Sunne at south and the shadowes
at north if ioyning the altitude and
declination they bee nientie degrees,
you are in the equinoctiall line.
                  It hath beene declared that ye sunne
being at north, he which taketh the altitude,
may be in one of 3 partes wherby
his shadowes, may goe towardes
the south one of them is towardes the
parte of the north, betweene the sunne
and the l
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     e, another in the sayd line,
the other towardes the parte of the
south▪ the line betweene him and the
sunne▪ the same is vnderstood the sunne
going towardes the parte of the south,
that hee whiche toketh the altitude in
one of three partes, he may be that the
shadowes goe from him towardes the
north, the one being towarde the parte
of the south betweene the sunne and yt
line, the other being in the saide line.
The thirde being towardes the part of
the north the line betweene him and
the sunne.
                  Seeing of the first it hath beene written
of, and in the rule going before, of
the second, which is the sunne being towardes
the parte of the south, & for him
which taketh the altitude in the line is
put this present rule, the which because
in the third rule when the sunne goeth
towarde the parte of the north, it is declared.
Only here is to be noted, the example
following.
                  
                     An example.
                     The seconde of December I tooke
the sunne in sixtie seuen degrees, this
day he had of declination twentie three
degrees, ioyne the declination, and the
altitude they amounted to nientie degrees,
and being so I was in the equinoctiall,
for because the sunne at south,
the shadowes going from me towards

the north, I was more towardes the
north then the sunne, the sunne this day
was distant of the line twentie three
degrees which was his declination, so
that taking the altitude in sixtie seuen
degrees, there was from me to the sun
twenty three degrees, in such sorte that
the same twentie three degrees which
the sunne was distant of the line, the
same was I distant of the sun towards
the line, so thereby I knew that I was
in the saide line.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  The tenth rule, when the Sunne is towardes
the South, and the shadowes towardes
the North, if the Altitude and declination
beeing ioyned, they come not to
nientie degrees.
                  
                     THe Sunne at South, and the
shadowes at North, if the
altitude and declination
doe not come to ninetie
degrees, those which doe
lacke for 
                        〈◊〉
                      you are
distant of the line towarde
                        •
                      the parte of the
north, and the line should be betweene you
and the Sunne.
                  The thirde difference which hath
beene spoken of, wherein hee which
taketh the altitude, may bee the sunne
beeing towardes the South, and the
shadowes going towardes the North,
is, beeing towardes the parte of the
North, the line betweene him and
the Sunne, as this rule sheweth,
whose declaration is written in the
fourth rule, when the Sunne goeth
towardes the parte of the North.
And it is to lie noted, that at all times
whē ye sunne goeth towards one part, &

the shadowes towardes another, the
declination is to be ioyned with the altitude,
and if they passe nientie degrees,
those which are more, you are distant
of the line, towardes the parte which
the sunne goeth and if they bee nientie
iust, you shoulde be in the line, and if
they come not to nientie, those which
are lesse you are distant at the contrary
parte where the sunne goeth, as in
this rule is declared, and therefore in
this example following is to be noted.
                  
                     An Example.
                     The thirtie of Septēber I tooke the
sunne in sixtie degrees, and the shadowes
were from me towardes the
north, and the sunne this daye had
sixe degrees and a halfe of declination,
I ioyned the declination and the
altitude, and they amounted to
sixtie and sixe degrees and a halfe, there
lacked twentie three degrees and a half
for nientie. These twenty three degrees
and a halfe was I distant from the line
towardes the parte of the north. The
reason is, for that taking the sunne in
sixtie degrees there was from me to the
sunne thirtie. I was towardes the part
of the north, and the sunne towardes
the part of the south distant from the
line, sixe degrees & a halfe, so that of the
thirtie degrees, which were from me to
the sunne, taking out the sixe and a halfe
which the sunne is distāt from the line,
there will be from me to the line twenty
three degrees and a halfe.
                     
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The sixt chapter, wherefore the rules of the
height of the sunne doe shewe the degrees
that a man is distant of the equinoctiall
line more then by any other parte.
               IN the rules before written hath beene
declared how that euery day that you
wil take the altitude of the sunne, you
shall knowe at what parte of the line
you are, and how many degrees distant
as wel of the one part as of the other.
               
                  
Of this may be 
                     〈◊〉
                   what the cause
is, wherefore all the rul
                     •
                  s of the 
                     •••
                  
                  tude
of the sunne, are made and ord
                     ••
                  
                  ned
that a man should vnderstand how
many degrees he is distant of the equinoctiall
line, more then from the pole, or
from the other tropikes or from any other
parte.
               To this is to bee answered, that the
reason whereby onely we would know
the distance, that is from the sayd line,
more then from any other parte, is, because
the sayde equinoctiall line, as before
hath beene declared, is put and 
                     ••
                  
                  tuated
in the middest of the worlde, and
all the cardes of nauigation whereby
the pilots & sailers doe rule themselues
by. In the card of nauigation a
                     •
                   ordayned
and put the portes, and bayes,
riuers, capes, Ilandes, and shooldes, &
all other thinges, which are marked in
thē, according to the degrees that euery
thing is distant from the sayd equinoctiall
line, as wel towardes the part
of the north, as of the south: and beeing
knowne by the pilot or sayler, with the
altitude which he taketh, howe many
degreees he is distant of the sayde line,
to one parte or to another, or if he bee in
the sayde line, likewise he knoweth if he
be equall in altitude with ye place which
hee goeth to seeke according as in
his carde he hath pricked, or if he ought
to rise vp or goe downe, and how many
degrees, vntill he put him selfe right of
the place, and for this cause the line is
more sought for, then any other parte.
            
            
               The seuenth chapter, by what reason al rules
of the altitude of the sunne are reduced
to nienty degrees, more then to any other
number.
               
                  IT may be asked by what
reason all the rules of ye
altitude of the sunne, as
before hath beene declared
goe reduced to this
nūber of nientie degrees,
more then to any other, for that it is so
written, that the degrees of altitude
are to be seene, wherein the sunne is
taken in the Astrolabio, how many doe
lacke, vnto nientie and in other rules is
sayde that the altitude and declination
is to be ioyned and seene if they amount
to nientie degrees, or if they passe nientie
degrees, or if they come not to nienty
degrees, in such sorte, that all the rules
are made and ordained to this number
of nienty, therfore it ought to be known
wherfore more to this number thē to any
other. For the vnderstanding of this
doubt is to be immagined that wheresoeuer
a man standeth is the middest
of the worlde, and he seeth half the heauen,
in such sort, that as the roundnes
of ye worlde hath three hundreth & sixtie
degrees, the horizon discouereth ye
half which are a hundreth and eyghtie,
and they are vnderstoode in this manner▪
from any manner of part of the horizō
vnto ye 
                  Cenith are nienty degrees,
and from my Cenith vnto the other part
of the horizon other nientie. Which is
to be vnderstoode in this manner, immagine
that in what place so euer a
man is in, he is right in the middest of
this circle, which circle is his horizon.
               
               Therefore I saye that I am in the
middest of the circle, and from the point
A. which is the horizon vnto my heade
are nientie degrees, and from my Cenith
to the point C. other nientie, which are
a hundreth and eyghtie, and from the
point B. vnto my heade nientie, and
from my heade vnto the pointe D. other
nientie, and so there is nientie degrees
from my heade to any parte of my horizon.
Therefore declaring the doubt, I
say that the reason why the rules of the

altitude of the Sunne are reduced to
this number of nientie, is because the
Sunne cannot rise vp aboue the horizon,
more then nientie degrees, which
is vntill he come right ouer our heads,
and so when we take him in nientie degrees
of Astrolabio, wee saye that wee
haue the sunne right ouer our heades,
& when we take him in lesse, that which
is lesse then nientie is the sunne distant
from vs: so that because the sunne cannot
rise vp, vpon the horizon more then
nientie degrees, with the which as I
haue saide, he commeth vntill he be vpon
our heads: therefore the rules of his
altitude goe reduced to this number,
and not to any other.
            
            
               The eight Chapter, wherein is declared
wherefore we saie, that the man is distant
of the sunne, the degrees that he taketh in
the Astrolabio lesse then nientie.
               
                  OF the rules of the altitude
of the Sunne before
written, hath been
sayde, and declared,
that at all tymes when
the Altitude is taken,
the degrees are to bee looked for which
doe lacke in the Astrolabio of nientie,
and that those same, the man
is distante of the Sunne. And beecause
it is conuenient and expedient
that this rule bee well and throughly
vnderstoode and knowne, I will most
euidently declare it, in this manner following.
               It is to bee noted, when the Sunne
doth beginne to appeare by our horizon
which is, when he goeth foorth in the
morning, then he hath no Altitude but
from thence hee goeth rising vp, and
howe much more hee ryseth, so much
he goeth hauing more Altitude, vpon
ye Horizon, in such sort that if one houre
after he is come forth, hee hath raysed
him selfe vp fiue degrees, in two houres
hee shall haue raysed him selfe vp
tenne or twelue, and in three houres

                     〈…〉
                   vp vn
                  
                     •••
                  
the myddist the daye, and from
of thence hee t
                     •••
                  eth to desc
                     ••••
                   by the

                     〈◊〉
                   order that hee went risy
                     •
                  g vp, vntyll
hee put or hyde him selfe vnder
the horizon. Of that which hath beene
sayde, two thinges are to bee noted, the
fyrst is, that from the time the Sunne

                     〈◊〉
                   foorth, vntyl it be the middest
of the day, he goeth alwayes rising vp,
and aug
                     ••
                  nting in his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , vntyll
hee come to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Meridian, and alwayee
the Meridian is in the middest
of the bow, which the Sunne maketh,
from the time that hee commeth foorth
vntill hee is sette▪ This is because alwayes
the man is in the middest of the
roundnes, which roundnes is his horizon.
               The seconde is, that this Bowe
which the Sunne maketh vppon our
horizon, is not euery day equall, but at
some times is greater then at other
some, euen as the daye is great or litle,
but although that the bowe bee great
or little, alwayes the Sunne goeth rising
vp, vntill he come to the Meridian,
and from thence hee descendeth.
And it is to be noted, that alwayes
the Sunne commeth forth, and setteth
in equall distance from vs, but at the
middest of the day, he is not alwaies
in equal distance of vs, but at one time
hee is neere, and at another time farre
off, this is from the right of our heads,
which is to be vnderstood in this manner.
I put the case that I bee distant
from the equinoctiall line tenne degrees,
and the Sunne hath of declination
the same daye the same tenne
degrees, towards the part that I am,
and beeing so, when the Sunne came
foorth this daye, and beganne to appeare
in the horizon, then hee was from
mee nientie degrees, and from thence
hee went rysing vp vntyll the middest
of the day, and beeing come to my Meridian,
hee shall bee precisely right ouer
my head.
               Insomuch that if a lyne be imagined▪
that rightly doth descende frō the Sun

vnto the earth, this line woulde come
vpon my head, and this woulde bee so
at all times, when I were as distant of
the line, as the declination is, which the
sunne hath this day, because I am in
that way where the Sunne that day
doth make his moouing, by the which
that day at the middest of the day, I
shall haue it vpon my head: but if I be
distant of the waye of the sunue, although
that when he came foorth, hee
was from me ninety degrees, it is to be
vnderstood, that when it is the middest
of the day, I shall not haue it right ouer
my head, but I shal haue it as farre
of, as the distance is frō the place, where
I am, to ye place of the way of the sūne,
in such sort that if the distance, which is
of the place or way, where I am, to the
place or way where the Sunne came
foorth, were fiue degrees, or tenne, or
more, or lesse: Those same the Sunne
shalbe at the middest of the day distant
from ye right of my head, so that, if there
were layd two straight lines or strekes,
from the East into the West, the one by
the place where the Sunne commeth
foorth, and the other by the place where
I am: the degrees of distance yt shoulde
be from one line to the other, the selfesame
at the middest of the day, wilbe of
distance of the Sunne to my Cenith.
And doe you note, that in this distance,
which the Sunne maketh from mee is
not to bee looked, howe muche there is
from mee to the Sunne, but doe you
looke how much the Sunne is distant
at the middest of the day, from the right
of my head, for so much as this distance
is, so muche will I say, that I am distant
of the Sunne, to one parte or other.
            
            
               The nienth Chapter, wherein is declared,
howe it is vnderstoode, that a man
hath the Sunne right ouer his head.
               IT hath beene declared
in the Chapter going
before, that when a
man findeth himselfe in
the course where ye sun
maketh his way, that that day at the
middest of the day, he shall haue him
right ouer his heade, of this maye
bee had a greate doubt, (whiche is
this.)
               
                  A doubt.
                  It hath beene declared in the seconde
Chapter of this fourth Booke,
according to the opinion of Ptholome,
and Al
                           •
                        rag
                           •
                        no, that the Sunne is
an hundreth sixtie and sixe times greater
then the earth: and that the Sunne
is so great, it appeareth well, seeyng
that continually hee geueth light to all
the starres of the heauen, the heauen
beeing so greate, and the starres so many
in nūber, as the royall prophet saith,
that God only doth reckon and number
them. Likewise the greatnesse of the
Sunne doth shewe, in the which, although
that there bee alwayes put
all the roundnesse of the water and
earth betweene the Sunne and the
Heauen in such sort, that continually, he
putteth himselfe before, according to the
sight of man, whereby wee see not anie
more then halfe the heauen: and although
the earth and the water are so
great bodies, yet they occupie not anye
thing, nor deteyne the light of the
Sunne, that it doe not passe to geue
light to all the starres. This is because
the earth and water are so little things
in respect of the sunne, that well neere
they maye bee compared to a graine of
mustard seed, put before a great torche
lighted, which doth let nothing of the
light thereof, but that it doth extende
to all partes. Therefore all the earth
beeyng so little in comparison of the
Sunne, and the man beeyng well
neere of no quantitie in respecte of all
the earth, it seemeth to be farre out of
reason, to say that a man shoulde haue
the Sunne right ouer his head in anye
time or place, euen as there shoulde bee
no reason to saye, that a greate shippe
going by the Sea, may bee right
vppon the poynte of a little nayle,

which were in the depth of the water:
or that a great cloude shoulde be right
vpon a little worme of the earth, euen
as wel it seemeth, that there is no reasō
to say, that the sunne is right ouer the
heade of a man: seeing that the sunne is
alwayes, and sheweth it selfe vpon the
halfe of all the earth, by the which reason
likewise it seemeth, that it ought
not to be thought, that the sunne in one
time is in the Equinoctial, and another
time at the North part, and another at
the South parte, seeing that these are
partes of the earth, and the sunne not
only is greater then these parts, but in
very great quantity, greater then all of
them, as it is saide, and so it is prooued
& seemeth that it is an improper thing,
to say that the sunne is right vpon our
head, or that he is in one parte or other
of the earth.
               
               
                  A declaration.
                  For the declaring of this doubt, is to be
noted, that although the sunne is of so
great a quantitie, as before hath beene
declared, this doth not let, that a man
may haue him right ouer his head, and
in the discourse of the yeere he be in one
part or other of the earth, the which is
vnderstood in this manner, yt the greatnesse
of the sunne is not to be considered
how great it is in it selfe, but how great
it is to vs, I will say according to our
sight, and according to the effect which
it maketh with vs. (An exāple of this
is) that many times it happeneth to mē
that goe sayling, and they see very farre
of in the Sea a ship, and although shee
be very great, and goeth very swiftly, it
seemeth to him that beholdeth her, that
she is little, and that shee moueth not:
the same doth happē to vs with a great
cloude, which the wind doth carry with
great lightnesse: this is caused for the
great distaunce that is from the one to
the other, in such sort, that we iudge not
as it is, but according as the sight doth
represent it to vs: euen so the sunne although
he be very great, and mooueth
with great haste, we iudge not of it, but
according to our sense, for because in as
much as toucheth the hastinesse of his
mouing, as ye earth is wel neere a point
of the circle, which ye sunne maketh, it is
certayne, that it cannot bee perceiued or
knowne according as his moouing is,
this is by reason of the greate distance
that is betweeene him and vs, and so
by this greate distance hee commeth to
diminish himselfe so muche in our sight
that he may be right ouer the heade of
of one man, and not right ouer the
head of another, that is one league
from him.
                  This is shewed, that in taking the altitude
of the sunne, one man will take
him very precisely right ouer his owne
head, & another although hee bee neere,
will finde him sarre of from him, this is
bicause he was more right ouer ye head
of the one then of the other. Likewise
this is shewed by the shadowes, the
which doe shew infallibly the moouing
which the sunne maketh from one part
to another: in such sort, that in one place
one mā may haue his shadow so right,
that at the middest of the day, the sunne
doth make no shadow to any part, and
to another that is not farre from thence,
although he be in the same Meridian,
and at the same houre and minute, the
shadow wil decline to some part, wherby
it manifestly appeareth▪ to haue the
sunne right ouer our head, and howe if
mooueth not onely by the middest, but
likewise by the sides of ye earth. And for
the better declaration of that aforesayd
is to be noted, that naturally all things
which wee see, the sight doth comprehend
it by A piramide, so saith Alacen in
the perspectiue in the 17. rule, that the
comprehension of all thinges visible is
by a rooted pyramide. The pyramide
is to be imagined in this manner.
                  
                  So that although the thing be great,
it cōmeth diminishing by the lightning
of the sight, vntil it remayne in the litl
                        •
                     
                     
space or place of the light of our eye, so
that in our eye doth containe, a mountaine
or great hill, howe so euer it bee,
therefore we may say, that the greatnes
of the sunne, by a piramide commeth
deminishing vntil he be vpō our heads,
this is when a man is precisely put vnder
ye centre of the sun in this sort, and so

it is to be vnderstoode, when wee say to
haue the sunne vpon our head, or to bee
distant of vs to one part or other.
               
            
            
               The tenth Chapter, to knowe howe the altitude
of the Sunne ought to be seen if it be
leape yere, or what yere it is.
               
                  IN the sixth Chapter of
this fourth booke, I said
how it is necessary when
the altitude of the sunne
is taken to knowe the
yere, if it be the leap yere,
or the first or seconde, or thirde after the
leap yere, because the dayes of one yere,
with those of the other haue not the degrees
and minutes equall, and the reason
is, because as in the third chapter of
this fourth booke hath beene declared,
that the yere called Solar, hath three
hūdreth sixty fiue daies, & sixe houres,
and that those sixe houres of euery one
yeere, from foure to foure yeres, do make
a natural day, and that such a yeere is
called a leap yere, so that the first yere
after the leape yeere, hath three hundreth
sixtie fiue dayes and sixe houres. And
the seconde yeere, three hundreth sixtie
fiue dayes and twelue houres, the sixe
of the first yeere, and sixe his owne, and
the third yeere, three hundreth sixetie
fiue daies and eighteene houres, the
twelue of the two yeres the first and
seconde, and the vi. his owne, and the
fourth yeere three hundreth sixtie sixe
dayes, so that in this fourth yere is shut
vp the houres of al foure yeres, and the
fourth yere being past, The first begineth,
and so the other yeres successiuely
as it is said, and for this cause they bee
not equall in degrees and minutes all
dayes one with another: Therefore it is
conuenient, as it is before declared,
when the altitude of the sunne is to bee
taken, that it be seene what yere it is,
and seeke what daye and moneth you
are in, and there you shal finde the declination,
or distance which the sun hath,
from the line, as in the tables folowing
is conteined, therfore to knowe the yere
that you are in, if it be a leape yere, or
the first, second, or thirde after the leape
yeere, looke ouer the two rules of the
discourses folowing, for in them playnely
is shewed, by reckoning the yere of
our L
                     ••
                  be, a thousande fiue hundreth
fourtie fiue in the first house of the which
is the first yere, and so successiuely in euery
yere one house, & the house being
ended of the last rule, returne to the beginning,
and so this account is for euer.
               
                  A rule to knowe the leape yere.
                  1545. ☜ 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3.
B 1. 2. 3. B 1. 2. 3. B.
                  When you will knowe if the yeere be a leape yeere, or not without looking in the
booke, looke in the yere of the birth of our Lord, & leaue the thousand fiue hundreth,
the rest deuide in the middest, and when euery halfe were of euen number
in payers or cupples it is the leape yere.
               
               
                  The tables of the distance or declination which the Sunne maketh from the equinoctiall
line euery day of the foure yeres, aswell towardes the part of the north as towardes the
south.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The first yeere.
                           
                              Ianuarie.
                              Februarie.
                              March.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 i
                              1
                              xiii
                              iviii
                              1
                              iii
                              xxxix
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxi
                              xl
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              2
                              xii
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              xxxviii.
                              2
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 i
                              xv
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxi
                              xxxi
                              3
                              xiii
                              xviii.
                              3
                              ii
                              iii
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              xx
                              4
                              x
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              lviii
                              4
                              ii
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              ix
                              5
                              xii
                              xxxvii
                              5
                              ii
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              6
                              xx
                              lviii
                              6
                              xii
                              xvi
                              6
                              i
                              xli
                           
                           
                              7
                              xx
                              xiv
                              7
                              xi
                              lv
                              7
                              i
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              8
                              xx
                              xxxiii
                              8
                              xi
                              xxxiiii
                              8
                              0
                              liii
                           
                           
                              9
                              xx
                              xxi
                              9
                              xi
                              xii
                              9
                              0
                              xxx
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              viii
                              10
                              x
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 i
                              10
                              0
                              vi
                           
                           
                              11
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              lv
                              11
                              x
                              xxix
                              11
                              0
                              xviii
                           
                           
                              12
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              xli
                              12
                              x
                              vii
                              12
                              0
                              xiii
                           
                           
                              13
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              xxvii
                              13
                              ix
                              x
                                    •
                                 vii
                              13
                              i
                              v
                           
                           
                              14
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              xiii
                              14
                              ix
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 iii
                              14
                              i
                              xxix
                           
                           
                              15
                              xviii
                              lviii
                              15
                              ix
                               
                              15
                              i
                              lii
                           
                           
                              16
                              xviii
                              xlii
                              16
                              viii
                              xxxviii
                              16
                              ii
                              xvi
                           
                           
                              17
                              xviii
                              xxvii
                              17
                              viii
                              xv
                              17
                              ii
                              xl
                           
                           
                              18
                              xviii
                              xi
                              18
                              vii
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                              
                              18
                              iii
                              iii
                           
                           
                              19
                              xvii
                              liiii
                              19
                              vii
                              xxx
                              19
                              iii
                              xxvi
                           
                           
                              20
                              xv
                                    •
                                 i
                              xxxviii
                              20
                              vii
                              vii
                              20
                              iii
                              xlix
                           
                           
                              21
                              xvii
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 x
                                    •
                                 i
                              21
                              vi
                              xliiii
                              21
                              iiii
                              xii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xvii
                              v
                              22
                              vi
                              xxi
                              22
                              iiii
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              23
                              xvi
                              xlv
                                    •
                                 i
                              23
                              v
                              lviii
                              23
                              iiii
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvi
                              xxix
                              24
                              v
                              xxxv
                              24
                              v
                              xxi
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xi
                              25
                              v
                              xi
                              25
                              v
                              xliiii
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              liii
                              26
                              iiii
                              xlviii
                              26
                              vi
                              vi
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              xxxv
                              27
                              iiii
                              xxiiii
                              27
                              vi
                              xxix
                           
                           
                              28
                              xv
                              xvi
                              28
                              iiii
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              28
                              vi
                              liii
                           
                           
                              29
                              xiiii
                              lvi
                               
                               
                               
                              29
                              vii
                              xv
                           
                           
                              30
                              xiiii
                              xxxv
                                    •
                                 i
                               
                               
                               
                              30
                              vii
                              xxxvii
                           
                           
                              31
                              xiiii
                              xvii
                                    •
                                 
                              
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              vii
                              lix
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The first yeere.
                           
                              April.
                              May.
                              Iune.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              viii
                              xxi
                              1
                              xvii
                              14
                              1
                              23
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              2
                              viii
                              xliii
                              2
                              xviii
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              2
                              23
                              13
                           
                           
                              3
                              ix
                              v
                              3
                              xviii
                              24
                              3
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              4
                              ix
                              xxvi
                              4
                              xviii
                              39
                              4
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              5
                              ix
                              xlviii
                              5
                              xviii
                              54
                              5
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              6
                              x
                              ix
                              6
                              xix
                              8
                              6
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              7
                              x
                              xxx
                              7
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              21
                              7
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              8
                              x
                              lii
                              8
                              xix
                              35
                              8
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              9
                              xi
                              xii
                              9
                              xix
                              47
                              9
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              10
                              xi
                              xxxiii
                              10
                              xx
                              0
                              10
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              11
                              xi
                              liii
                              11
                              xx
                              13
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xii
                              xiiii
                              12
                              xx
                              24
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xii
                              xxxiii
                              13
                              xx
                              36
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xii
                              liii
                              14
                              xx
                              47
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xiii
                              xiii
                              15
                              xx
                              59
                              15
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              16
                              xiii
                              xxxii
                              16
                              xxi
                              10
                              16
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              17
                              xiii
                              li
                              17
                              xxi
                              20
                              17
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiiii
                              x
                              18
                              xxi
                              30
                              18
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiiii
                              xxix
                              19
                              xxi
                              40
                              19
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiiii
                              xlvii
                              20
                              xxi
                              49
                              20
                              23
                              18
                           
                           
                              21
                              xv
                              vi
                              21
                              xxi
                              57
                              21
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              22
                              xv
                              xxiiii
                              22
                              xxii
                              6
                              22
                              23
                              11
                           
                           
                              23
                              xv
                              xlii
                              23
                              xxii
                              14
                              23
                              23
                              6
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              lix
                              24
                              xxii
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                              
                              24
                              23
                              2
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xvi
                              25
                              xxii
                              29
                              25
                              22
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 7
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              xxxiii
                              26
                              xxii
                              36
                              26
                              22
                              51
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              l
                              27
                              xxii
                              42
                              27
                              22
                              45
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvii
                              vii
                              28
                              xxii
                              49
                              28
                              22
                              39
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              xxiii
                              29
                              xxii
                              58
                              29
                              22
                              32
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              xxxviii
                              30
                              xxii
                              0
                              30
                              22
                              25
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              xxiii
                              4
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The first yeere.
                           
                              Iulie.
                              August.
                              September.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxii
                              xvii
                              1
                              xv
                              xxxii
                              1
                              iiii
                              xivi
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxii
                              i
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              2
                              xv
                              xiiii
                              2
                              iiii
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxii
                              i
                              3
                              xiiii
                              ivi
                              3
                              iiii
                              0
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              ii
                              4
                              xiiii
                              xxxvii
                              4
                              iii
                              xxxvii
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xliiii
                              5
                              xiiii
                              xix
                              5
                              iii
                              xiiii
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              xxxiiii
                              6
                              xiii
                              0
                              6
                              ii
                              li
                           
                           
                              7
                              xxi
                              xxiiii
                              7
                              xiii
                              xli
                              7
                              ii
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              8
                              xxi
                              xilii
                              8
                              xiii
                              xxi
                              8
                              ii
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              9
                              xxi
                              iii
                              9
                              xiii
                              ii
                              9
                              i
                              xl
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                              
                              10
                              xii
                              xliii
                              10
                              i
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              xli
                              11
                              xii
                              xxii
                              11
                              0
                              liiii
                           
                           
                              12
                              xx
                              xxix
                              12
                              xii
                              iii
                              12
                              0
                              xxx
                           
                           
                              13
                              xx
                              xviii
                              13
                              xi
                              xliii
                              13
                              0
                              vi
                           
                           
                              14
                              xx
                              vi
                              14
                              xi
                              xxii
                              14
                              0
                              xviii
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              li
                                    •
                                 i
                              15
                              xi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              15
                              0
                              xli
                           
                           
                              16
                              xix
                              xl
                              16
                              x
                              xl
                              16
                              i
                              v
                           
                           
                              17
                              xix
                              xxvii
                              17
                              x
                              xix
                              17
                              i
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              18
                              xix
                              xiii
                              18
                              ix
                              lvii
                              18
                              i
                              lii
                           
                           
                              19
                              xviii
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 ix
                              19
                              ix
                              xxxvi
                              19
                              ii
                              xvi
                           
                           
                              20
                              xviii
                              xlv
                              20
                              ix
                              xv
                              20
                              ii
                              xl
                           
                           
                              21
                              xxviii
                              xxx
                              21
                              viii
                              liii
                              21
                              iii
                              iii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xviii
                              xv
                              22
                              viii
                              xxxii
                              22
                              iii
                              xxvi
                           
                           
                              23
                              xviii
                              00
                              23
                              viii
                              ix
                              23
                              iii
                              l
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvii
                              xliiii
                              24
                              vii
                              xlvii
                              24
                              iiii
                              xiii
                           
                           
                              25
                              xv
                                    •
                                 i
                              xxix
                              25
                              vii
                              xxv
                              25
                              iiii
                              xxxvi
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvii
                              xliii
                              26
                              vii
                              iii
                              26
                              v
                              0
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 vi
                              27
                              vi
                              xli
                              27
                              v
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xl
                              28
                              vi
                              xvii
                              28
                              v
                              xlvii
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xxiii
                              29
                              v
                              lv
                              29
                              vi
                              ix
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              vi
                              30
                              v
                              xxxii
                              30
                              vi
                              xxxiii
                           
                           
                              31
                              xv
                              xlix
                              31
                              v
                              ix
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The first yeere.
                           
                              October.
                              Nouember.
                              December.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes
                           
                           
                              1
                              vi
                              iv
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              1
                              xvii
                              29
                              1
                              23
                              7
                           
                           
                              2
                              vii
                              xix
                              2
                              xvii
                              45
                              2
                              23
                              11
                           
                           
                              3
                              vii
                              xli
                              3
                              xviii
                              2
                              3
                              23
                              16
                           
                           
                              4
                              viii
                              iiii
                              4
                              xviii
                              18
                              4
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              5
                              viii
                              xxvii
                              5
                              xviii
                              33
                              5
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              6
                              viii
                              xlix
                              6
                              xviii
                              49
                              6
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              7
                              ix
                              xi
                              7
                              xix
                              5
                              7
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              8
                              ix
                              xxxiii
                              8
                              xix
                              19
                              8
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              9
                              ix
                              lv
                              9
                              xix
                              33
                              9
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              10
                              x
                              xvii
                              10
                              xix
                              47
                              10
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              11
                              x
                              xxxix
                              11
                              xx
                              1
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              12
                              xx
                              14
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xi
                              xx
                                    •
                                 ii
                              13
                              xx
                              20
                              13
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              14
                              xi
                              xliiii
                              14
                              xx
                              38
                              14
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              15
                              xii
                              v
                              15
                              xx
                              51
                              15
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              16
                              xii
                              xxvi
                              16
                              xxi
                              3
                              16
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              17
                              xii
                              xlvi
                              17
                              xxi
                              14
                              17
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiii
                              vii
                              18
                              xxi
                              25
                              18
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiii
                              xxvii
                              19
                              xxi
                              36
                              19
                              23
                              19
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiii
                              xlvii
                              20
                              xxi
                              46
                              20
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              21
                              xiiii
                              vii
                              21
                              xxi
                              5
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              21
                              23
                              11
                           
                           
                              22
                              xiiii
                              xxvii
                              22
                              xxii
                              4
                              22
                              23
                              6
                           
                           
                              23
                              xiiii
                              xivi
                              23
                              xxii
                              13
                              23
                              23
                              1
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              v
                              24
                              xxii
                              21
                              24
                              22
                              56
                           
                           
                              25
                              xv
                              xxiiii
                              25
                              xxii
                              29
                              25
                              22
                              50
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              xliii
                              26
                              xx
                                    •
                                 i
                              36
                              26
                              22
                              4
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              i
                              27
                              xxii
                              44
                              27
                              22
                              35
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xi
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              28
                              xxii
                              51
                              28
                              22
                              28
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xxxvii
                              29
                              xxii
                              56
                              29
                              22
                              20
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              lv
                              30
                              xxiii
                              1
                              30
                              22
                              12
                           
                           
                              31
                              xvii
                              xiii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              22
                              3
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The second yeere.
                           
                              Ianuarie.
                              Februarie.
                              March.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxi
                              liiii
                              1
                              xiiii
                              iiii
                              1
                              iii
                              xliiii
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxi
                              xliiii
                              2
                              xiii
                              xliii
                              2
                              iii
                              xxi
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxi
                              xxxiii
                              3
                              xiii
                              xxiii
                              3
                              ii
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              xxiiii
                              4
                              xiii
                              iii
                              4
                              ii
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xiii
                              5
                              xii
                              xlii
                              5
                              ii
                              x
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              i
                              6
                              xii
                              xxii
                              6
                              i
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              7
                              xx
                              xlix
                              7
                              xii
                              i
                              7
                              i
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              8
                              xx
                              xxxvii
                              8
                              xi
                              xl
                              8
                              0
                              lix
                           
                           
                              9
                              xx
                              xxiiii
                              9
                              xi
                              xviii
                              9
                              0
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              xii
                              10
                              x
                              lvii
                              10
                              0
                              xii
                           
                           
                              11
                              xix
                              lviii
                              11
                              x
                              xxxv
                              11
                              0
                              xii
                           
                           
                              12
                              xix
                              xliiii
                              12
                              x
                              xiii
                              12
                              0
                              xxxvi
                           
                           
                              13
                              xix
                              xxxi
                              13
                              ix
                              li
                              13
                              0
                              lix
                           
                           
                              14
                              xix
                              xvii
                              14
                              ix
                              xxix
                              14
                              i
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              ii
                              15
                              ix
                              vii
                              15
                              i
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              16
                              xviii
                              xlvii
                              16
                              viii
                              xiv
                              16
                              ii
                              x
                           
                           
                              17
                              xviii
                              xxxi
                              17
                              viii
                              xxii
                              17
                              ii
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              18
                              xxviii
                              xv
                              18
                              vii
                              lix
                              18
                              ii
                              lvii
                           
                           
                              19
                              xvii
                              lix
                              19
                              vii
                              xxxvii
                              19
                              iii
                              xx
                           
                           
                              20
                              xvii
                              xlii
                              20
                              vii
                              xiiii
                              20
                              iii
                              xliii
                           
                           
                              21
                              xvii
                              xxvi
                              21
                              vi
                              li
                              21
                              iiii
                              vii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xvii
                              ix
                              22
                              vi
                              xxvii
                              22
                              iiii
                              xxx
                           
                           
                              23
                              xvi
                              lii
                              23
                              vi
                              iiii
                              23
                              iiii
                              liii
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvi
                              xxxiiii
                              24
                              v
                              xli
                              24
                              v
                              xv
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xvi
                              25
                              v
                              xviii
                              25
                              v
                              xxxviii
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              lviii
                              26
                              iiii
                              liiii
                              26
                              vi
                              i
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              xxxvii
                              27
                              iiii
                              xxxi
                              27
                              vi
                              xxiiii
                           
                           
                              28
                              xv
                              xxi
                              28
                              iiii
                              viii
                              28
                              vi
                              xlvii
                           
                           
                              29
                              xv
                              ii
                               
                               
                               
                              29
                              vii
                              x
                           
                           
                              30
                              xiiii
                              xliii
                               
                               
                               
                              30
                              vii
                              xxxii
                           
                           
                              31
                              xiiii
                              xxiii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              vii
                              liii
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The seconde yeere.
                           
                              April.
                              May.
                              Iune.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Daye
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              viii
                              xvi
                              1
                              xvii
                              x
                                    •
                                 x
                              1
                              23
                              8
                           
                           
                              2
                              viii
                              xxxviii
                              2
                              xviii
                              vi
                              2
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              3
                              viii
                              lix
                              3
                              xviii
                              xx
                              3
                              23
                              16
                           
                           
                              4
                              ix
                              xxi
                              4
                              xviii
                              xxxv
                              4
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              5
                              ix
                              xlii
                              5
                              xviii
                              l
                              5
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              6
                              x
                              iiii
                              6
                              xix
                              iiii
                              6
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              7
                              x
                              xxv
                              7
                              xix
                              xviii
                              7
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              8
                              x
                              xlvi
                              8
                              xix
                              xxxi
                              8
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              9
                              xi
                              vii
                              9
                              xix
                              xliiii
                              9
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              10
                              xi
                              xxvii
                              10
                              xix
                              lvii
                              10
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              11
                              xi
                              xlviii
                              11
                              xx
                              x
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xii
                              x
                              12
                              xx
                              xxii
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xii
                              xxviii
                              13
                              xx
                              xxxiii
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xii
                              xlviii
                              14
                              xx
                              xliiii
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xiii
                              viii
                              15
                              xx
                              lvi
                              15
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              16
                              xiii
                              xxvii
                              16
                              xxi
                              vii
                              16
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              17
                              xiii
                              xlvi
                              17
                              xxi
                              xviii
                              17
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiiii
                              vi
                              18
                              xxi
                              xxviii
                              18
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiiii
                              xxv
                              19
                              xxi
                              37
                              19
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiiii
                              xiiii
                              20
                              xxi
                              46
                              20
                              23
                              19
                           
                           
                              21
                              xv
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              21
                              xxi
                              55
                              21
                              23
                              16
                           
                           
                              22
                              xv
                              xix
                              22
                              xxii
                              4
                              22
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              23
                              xv
                              xxxvii
                              23
                              xxii
                              12
                              23
                              23
                              7
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              lv
                              24
                              xxii
                              20
                              24
                              23
                              3
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xii
                              25
                              xxii
                              27
                              25
                              23
                              58
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              xxix
                              26
                              xxii
                              34
                              26
                              22
                              53
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              xiv
                              27
                              xxii
                              41
                              27
                              22
                              47
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvii
                              iii
                              28
                              xxii
                              48
                              28
                              22
                              40
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvii
                              xix
                              29
                              xxii
                              52
                              29
                              22
                              33
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvii
                              xxxiiii
                              30
                              xxii
                              58
                              30
                              22
                              27
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              xxiii
                              3
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The second yeere.
                           
                              Iulie.
                              August.
                              September.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxii
                              xix
                              1
                              xv
                              xxxvi
                              1
                              iiii
                              lii
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxii
                              xi
                              2
                              xv
                              xviii
                              2
                              iiii
                              xxix
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxii
                              iii
                              3
                              xv
                              0
                              3
                              iiii
                              vi
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              liiii
                              4
                              xiiii
                              xlii
                              4
                              iii
                              xliii
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xlv
                              5
                              xiiii
                              xxiiii
                              5
                              iii
                              xix
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              xxxvi
                              6
                              xiiii
                              v
                              6
                              ii
                              lvi
                           
                           
                              7
                              xxi
                              xxvii
                              7
                              xiii
                              xiv
                              7
                              ii
                              xxxiii
                           
                           
                              8
                              xxi
                              xvii
                              8
                              xiii
                              xxvi
                              8
                              ii
                              x
                           
                           
                              9
                              xxi
                              vi
                              9
                              xiii
                              vii
                              9
                              i
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              lv
                              10
                              xii
                              xlvii
                              10
                              i
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              xliiii
                              11
                              xii
                              xxvii
                              11
                              0
                              lix
                           
                           
                              12
                              xx
                              xxxii
                              12
                              xii
                              viii
                              12
                              0
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              13
                              xx
                              xx
                              13
                              xi
                              xlviii
                              13
                              0
                              xii
                           
                           
                              14
                              xx
                              ix
                              14
                              xi
                              xxvii
                              14
                              0
                              xii
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              lvi
                              15
                              xi
                              vi
                              15
                              0
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              16
                              xix
                              xliii
                              16
                              x
                              xlv
                              16
                              0
                              lix
                           
                           
                              17
                              xix
                              xxx
                              17
                              x
                              xxiiii
                              17
                              i
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              18
                              xix
                              xvii
                              18
                              x
                              iii
                              18
                              i
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              19
                              xix
                              iii
                              19
                              ix
                              xii
                              19
                              ii
                              x
                           
                           
                              20
                              xviii
                              xlix
                              20
                              ix
                              xx
                              20
                              ii
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              21
                              xviii
                              xxxiiii
                              21
                              viii
                              iix
                              21
                              ii
                              lvii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xviii
                              xix
                              22
                              viii
                              xxxvii
                              22
                              iii
                              xx
                           
                           
                              23
                              xviii
                              liii
                              23
                              viii
                              xv
                              23
                              iii
                              xliiii
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvii
                              xlviii
                              24
                              vii
                              lii
                              24
                              iiii
                              viii
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvii
                              xxxiii
                              25
                              vii
                              xxxi
                              25
                              iiii
                              xxxi
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvii
                              xvii
                              26
                              vii
                              ix
                              26
                              iiii
                              liiii
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvii
                              i
                              27
                              vi
                              xlvi
                              27
                              v
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xliiii
                              28
                              vi
                              xxiii
                              28
                              v
                              xli
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 xviii
                              29
                              vi
                              0
                              29
                              vi
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              xi
                              30
                              v
                              xxxviii
                              30
                              vi
                              xxvii
                           
                           
                              31
                              xv
                              liiii
                              31
                              v
                              xv
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The second yeere.
                           
                              October.
                              Nouember.
                              December.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              vi
                              li
                              1
                              xvii
                              25
                              1
                              23
                              5
                           
                           
                              2
                              vii
                              xiiii
                              2
                              xvii
                              41
                              2
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              3
                              vii
                              xxxvi
                              3
                              xvii
                              58
                              3
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              4
                              vii
                              lviii
                              4
                              xviii
                              14
                              4
                              23
                              19
                           
                           
                              5
                              viii
                              xxi
                              5
                              xviii
                              29
                              5
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              6
                              viii
                              xliiii
                              6
                              xviii
                              46
                              6
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              7
                              ix
                              vi
                              7
                              xix
                              1
                              7
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              8
                              ix
                              xxviii
                              8
                              xix
                              15
                              8
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              9
                              ix
                              l
                              9
                              xix
                              29
                              9
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              10
                              x
                              xii
                              10
                              xix
                              43
                              10
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              11
                              x
                              xxxiiii
                              11
                              xix
                              57
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              x
                              lvi
                              12
                              xx
                              21
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xi
                              xvii
                              13
                              xx
                              23
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xi
                              xxxix
                              14
                              xx
                              36
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xii
                              0
                              15
                              xx
                              48
                              15
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              16
                              xii
                              xxi
                              16
                              xxi
                              0
                              16
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              17
                              xii
                              xli
                              17
                              xxi
                              12
                              17
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiii
                              ii
                              18
                              xxi
                              23
                              18
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiii
                              xxii
                              19
                              xxi
                              33
                              19
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiii
                              xlii
                              20
                              xxi
                              43
                              20
                              23
                              16
                           
                           
                              21
                              xiiii
                              ii
                              21
                              xxi
                              53
                              21
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              22
                              xiiii
                              xxii
                              22
                              xxii
                              2
                              22
                              23
                              7
                           
                           
                              23
                              xiiii
                              xlii
                              23
                              xxii
                              11
                              23
                              23
                              2
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              i
                              24
                              xxii
                              19
                              24
                              22
                              57
                           
                           
                              25
                              xv
                              xx
                              25
                              xxii
                              28
                              25
                              22
                              51
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              xxxix
                              26
                              xxii
                              35
                              26
                              22
                              44
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              lvii
                              27
                              xxii
                              42
                              27
                              22
                              37
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xv
                              28
                              xxii
                              49
                              28
                              22
                              30
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xxxiii
                              29
                              xxii
                              55
                              29
                              22
                              22
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              l
                              30
                              xxiii
                              0
                              30
                              22
                              14
                           
                           
                              31
                              xvii
                              viii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              22
                              5
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The third yeere.
                           
                              Ianuarie.
                              Februarie.
                              March.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxi
                              lvi
                              1
                              xiiii
                              viii
                              1
                              iii
                              l
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxi
                              xlvi
                              2
                              xiii
                              xlviii
                              2
                              iii
                              xxvi
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxi
                              xxxvi
                              3
                              xiii
                              xxviii
                              3
                              iii
                              iii
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              xxvi
                              4
                              xiii
                              viii
                              4
                              ii
                              xl
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xv
                              5
                              xii
                              xlvii
                              5
                              ii
                              xvi
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              iiii
                              6
                              xii
                              xxvi
                              6
                              i
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 i
                           
                           
                              7
                              xx
                              lii
                              7
                              xii
                              vi
                              7
                              i
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              8
                              xx
                              xxxix
                              8
                              xi
                              xlv
                              8
                              i
                              v
                           
                           
                              9
                              xx
                              xxvii
                              9
                              xi
                              xxiii
                              9
                              0
                              xli
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              xv
                              10
                              xi
                              ii
                              10
                              0
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              ii
                              11
                              x
                              xl
                              11
                              0
                              vi
                           
                           
                              12
                              xix
                              xlviii
                              12
                              x
                              xviii
                              12
                              0
                              xxx
                           
                           
                              13
                              xix
                              xxxiiii
                              13
                              ix
                              ivi
                              13
                              0
                              liiii
                           
                           
                              14
                              xix
                              xx
                              14
                              ix
                              xxxiiii
                              14
                              i
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              v
                              15
                              ix
                              xii
                              15
                              i
                              xli
                           
                           
                              16
                              xviii
                              l
                              16
                              viii
                              l
                              16
                              ii
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              17
                              xviii
                              xxxv
                              17
                              viii
                              xxvii
                              17
                              ii
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              18
                              xviii
                              xix
                              18
                              viii
                              iiii
                              18
                              ii
                              lii
                           
                           
                              19
                              xviii
                              iii
                              19
                              vii
                              42
                              19
                              iii
                              xiiii
                           
                           
                              20
                              xvii
                              xlvi
                              20
                              vii
                              xix
                              20
                              iii
                              xxxviii
                           
                           
                              21
                              xvii
                              xxx
                              21
                              vi
                              lvi
                              21
                              iiii
                              i
                           
                           
                              22
                              xvii
                              xiii
                              22
                              vi
                              xxxiii
                              22
                              iiii
                              xxiiii
                           
                           
                              23
                              xvi
                              lvi
                              23
                              vi
                              x
                              23
                              iiii
                              xlvii
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvi
                              xxxviii
                              24
                              v
                              xlvii
                              24
                              v
                              ix
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xx
                              25
                              v
                              xxiii
                              25
                              v
                              xxxiii
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              ii
                              26
                              v
                              0
                              26
                              v
                              lvi
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              xliiii
                              27
                              iiii
                              xxxvi
                              27
                              vi
                              xviii
                           
                           
                              28
                              xv
                              xxv
                              28
                              iiii
                              xiii
                              28
                              vi
                              xli
                           
                           
                              29
                              xv
                              vi
                               
                               
                               
                              29
                              vii
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              30
                              xiiii
                              xlvii
                               
                               
                               
                              30
                              vii
                              xxvi
                           
                           
                              31
                              xiiii
                              xxviii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              vii
                              xlviii
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The thirde yeere.
                           
                              April.
                              May.
                              Iune.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              viii
                              ix
                              1
                              xvii
                              46
                              1
                              23
                              7
                           
                           
                              2
                              viii
                              xxxi
                              2
                              xviii
                              2
                              2
                              23
                              11
                           
                           
                              3
                              viii
                              liii
                              3
                              xviii
                              17
                              3
                              23
                              15
                           
                           
                              4
                              ix
                              xvi
                              4
                              xviii
                              31
                              4
                              23
                              19
                           
                           
                              5
                              ix
                              xxxvii
                              5
                              xviii
                              46
                              5
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              6
                              ix
                              lviii
                              6
                              xix
                              l
                              6
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              7
                              x
                              xx
                              7
                              xix
                              14
                              7
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              8
                              x
                              xii
                              8
                              xix
                              28
                              8
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              9
                              xi
                              ii
                              9
                              xix
                              41
                              9
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              10
                              xi
                              xxii
                              10
                              xix
                              54
                              10
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              11
                              xi
                              xliii
                              11
                              xx
                              7
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xii
                              iiii
                              12
                              xx
                              19
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xii
                              xxiii
                              13
                              xx
                              30
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xii
                              xliii
                              14
                              xx
                              42
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xiii
                              iii
                              15
                              xx
                              53
                              15
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              16
                              xiii
                              xxii
                              16
                              xxi
                              4
                              16
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              17
                              xiii
                              xlii
                              17
                              xxi
                              15
                              17
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiiii
                              i
                              18
                              xxi
                              25
                              18
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiiii
                              xx
                              19
                              xxi
                              35
                              19
                              23
                              23
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiiii
                              xxxviii
                              20
                              xxi
                              44
                              20
                              23
                              20
                           
                           
                              21
                              xiiii
                              lvii
                              21
                              xxi
                              53
                              21
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              22
                              xv
                              xv
                              22
                              xxii
                              2
                              
                                 
                                    ••
                                 
                              
                              23
                              13
                           
                           
                              23
                              xv
                              xxxiii
                              23
                              xxii
                              10
                              23
                              23
                              9
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              l
                              24
                              xxii
                              18
                              24
                              23
                              4
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              viii
                              25
                              xxii
                              25
                              25
                              22
                              59
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              xxv
                              26
                              xxii
                              32
                              26
                              22
                              54
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              xli
                              27
                              xxii
                              39
                              27
                              22
                              48
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              lviii
                              28
                              xxii
                              46
                              28
                              22
                              42
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvii
                              xv
                              29
                              xxii
                              52
                              29
                              22
                              35
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvii
                              xxx
                              30
                              xxii
                              57
                              30
                              22
                              28
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              xxiii
                              2
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The third yeere.
                           
                              Iulie.
                              August.
                              September.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxii
                              xxi
                              1
                              xv
                              xl
                              1
                              iiii
                              lvii
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxii
                              xiii
                              2
                              xv
                              xxiii
                              2
                              iiii
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxii
                              v
                              3
                              xv
                              iiii
                              3
                              iiii
                              xii
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              ivi
                              4
                              xiiii
                              xlvi
                              4
                              iii
                              xlix
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xlviii
                              5
                              xiiii
                              xxviii
                              5
                              iii
                              xxv
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              xxxix
                              6
                              xiiii
                              ix
                              6
                              iii
                              ii
                           
                           
                              7
                              xxi
                              xxix
                              7
                              xiii
                              l
                              7
                              ii
                              39
                           
                           
                              8
                              xxi
                              xix
                              8
                              xiii
                              xxxi
                              8
                              ii
                              xvi
                           
                           
                              9
                              xxi
                              ix
                              9
                              xiii
                              xii
                              9
                              i
                              lii
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              lviii
                              10
                              xii
                              lii
                              10
                              i
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              xlvi
                              11
                              xii
                              xxxii
                              11
                              i
                              v
                           
                           
                              12
                              xx
                              xxxv
                              12
                              xii
                              13
                              12
                              0
                              xli
                           
                           
                              13
                              xx
                              xxiii
                              13
                              xi
                              lii
                              13
                              0
                              xviii
                           
                           
                              14
                              xx
                              ix
                              14
                              xi
                              32
                              14
                              0
                              vi
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              lix
                              15
                              xi
                              xi
                              15
                              0
                              30
                           
                           
                              16
                              xix
                              xlvi
                              16
                              x
                              l
                              16
                              0
                              liii
                           
                           
                              17
                              xix
                              xxxiii
                              17
                              x
                              xxix
                              17
                              i
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              18
                              xix
                              xx
                              18
                              x
                              viii
                              18
                              i
                              xl
                           
                           
                              19
                              xix
                              vii
                              19
                              ix
                              xlvii
                              19
                              ii
                              iiil
                           
                           
                              20
                              xviii
                              lii
                              20
                              ix
                              xxv
                              20
                              ii
                              xxviii
                           
                           
                              21
                              xviii
                              xxxviii
                              21
                              ix
                              iiii
                              21
                              ii
                              lii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xviii
                              xxiii
                              22
                              viii
                              42
                              22
                              iii
                              xv
                           
                           
                              23
                              xviii
                              viii
                              23
                              viii
                              xx
                              23
                              iii
                              xxxix
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvii
                              lii
                              24
                              vii
                              lviii
                              24
                              iiii
                              ii
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvii
                              xxxvii
                              25
                              vii
                              xxxvi
                              25
                              iiii
                              xxv
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvii
                              xxi
                              26
                              vii
                              xiiii
                              26
                              iiii
                              xlix
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvii
                              v
                              27
                              vi
                              lii
                              27
                              v
                              xi
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xlviii
                              28
                              vi
                              xxix
                              28
                              v
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xxxii
                              29
                              vi
                              vi
                              29
                              v
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              xv
                              30
                              v
                              xliii
                              30
                              vi
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 1
                           
                           
                              31
                              xv
                              lviii
                              31
                              v
                              xxi
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The thirde yeere.
                           
                              October.
                              Nouember.
                              December.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes
                           
                           
                              1
                              vi
                              xlv
                              1
                              xvii
                              21
                              1
                              23
                              4
                           
                           
                              2
                              vii
                              viii
                              2
                              xvii
                              37
                              2
                              23
                              9
                           
                           
                              3
                              vii
                              xxxi
                              3
                              xvii
                              54
                              3
                              23
                              13
                           
                           
                              4
                              vii
                              liii
                              4
                              xviii
                              10
                              4
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              5
                              viii
                              xvi
                              5
                              xviii
                              26
                              5
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              6
                              viii
                              xxxix
                              6
                              xviii
                              42
                              6
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              7
                              ix
                              i
                              7
                              xviii
                              57
                              7
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              8
                              ix
                              xxiii
                              8
                              xix
                              12
                              8
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              9
                              ix
                              xlv
                              9
                              xix
                              26
                              9
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              10
                              x
                              vii
                              10
                              xix
                              40
                              10
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              11
                              x
                              xxix
                              11
                              xix
                              54
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              x
                              li
                              12
                              xx
                              7
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xi
                              xii
                              13
                              xx
                              20
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xi
                              xxxiiii
                              14
                              xx
                              33
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xi
                              lv
                              15
                              xx
                              45
                              15
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              16
                              xii
                              xvi
                              16
                              xx
                              57
                              16
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              17
                              xii
                              xxxvi
                              17
                              xxi
                              9
                              17
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              18
                              xii
                              lvii
                              18
                              xxi
                              20
                              18
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiii
                              xvii
                              19
                              xxi
                              31
                              19
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiii
                              xxxvii
                              20
                              xxi
                              41
                              20
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              21
                              xiii
                              lvii
                              21
                              xxi
                              50
                              21
                              23
                              13
                           
                           
                              22
                              xiiii
                              xvii
                              22
                              xxii
                              0
                              22
                              23
                              8
                           
                           
                              23
                              xiiii
                              xxxvii
                              23
                              xxii
                              9
                              23
                              23
                              3
                           
                           
                              24
                              xiiii
                              lvi
                              24
                              xxii
                              17
                              24
                              22
                              58
                           
                           
                              25
                              xv
                              xv
                              25
                              xxii
                              26
                              25
                              22
                              52
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              xxxiiii
                              26
                              xxii
                              33
                              26
                              22
                              46
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              lii
                              27
                              xxii
                              40
                              27
                              22
                              39
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xi
                              28
                              xxii
                              47
                              28
                              22
                              32
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xxix
                              29
                              xxii
                              53
                              29
                              22
                              24
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              xlvi
                              30
                              xxii
                              59
                              30
                              22
                              16
                           
                           
                              31
                              xvii
                              iiii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              22
                              7
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The leape yeere.
                           
                              Ianuarie.
                              Februarie.
                              March.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxi
                              lviii
                              1
                              xiiii
                              xiii
                              1
                              iii
                              xxxii
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxi
                              xlix
                              2
                              liii
                              liii
                              2
                              iii
                              ix
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxi
                              xxxix
                              3
                              xiii
                              xxxiii
                              3
                              ii
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              xxix
                              4
                              xiii
                              xiii
                              4
                              ii
                              xxii
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xvii
                              5
                              xii
                              liii
                              5
                              i
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              vii
                              6
                              xii
                              32
                              6
                              i
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              7
                              xx
                              lv
                              7
                              xii
                              xi
                              7
                              i
                              x
                           
                           
                              8
                              xx
                              xliii
                              8
                              xi
                              l
                              8
                              0
                              xlvii
                           
                           
                              9
                              xx
                              xxx
                              9
                              xi
                              xxix
                              9
                              0
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              xviii
                              10
                              xi
                              vii
                              10
                              0
                              i
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              v
                              11
                              x
                              xlv
                              11
                              0
                              xxiiii
                           
                           
                              12
                              xix
                              li
                              12
                              x
                              xxiii
                              12
                              0
                              xlviii
                           
                           
                              13
                              xix
                              xxxviii
                              13
                              x
                              i
                              13
                              i
                              xi
                           
                           
                              14
                              xix
                              xxiiii
                              14
                              ix
                              xxxix
                              14
                              i
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              ix
                              15
                              ix
                              xvii
                              15
                              i
                              lix
                           
                           
                              16
                              xviii
                              liiii
                              16
                              viii
                              lv
                              16
                              ii
                              xxii
                           
                           
                              17
                              xviii
                              xxxix
                              17
                              viii
                              xxxiii
                              17
                              ii
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              18
                              xviii
                              xxiii
                              18
                              viii
                              x
                              18
                              iii
                              ix
                           
                           
                              19
                              xviii
                              vii
                              19
                              vii
                              xlvii
                              19
                              iii
                              xxxii
                           
                           
                              20
                              xvii
                              l
                              20
                              vii
                              xxv
                              20
                              iii
                              lv
                           
                           
                              21
                              xvii
                              xxxiiii
                              21
                              vii
                              ii
                              21
                              iiii
                              xviii
                           
                           
                              22
                              xvii
                              xviii
                              22
                              vi
                              xxxix
                              22
                              iiii
                              xlii
                           
                           
                              23
                              xvii
                              i
                              23
                              vi
                              xv
                              23
                              v
                              iiii
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvi
                              xlix
                              24
                              v
                              lii
                              24
                              v
                              xxvii
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xxv
                              25
                              v
                              29
                              25
                              v
                              l
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              vii
                              26
                              v
                              v
                              26
                              vi
                              xiii
                           
                           
                              27
                              xv
                              xlix
                              27
                              iiii
                              xliii
                              27
                              vi
                              xxxvi
                           
                           
                              28
                              xv
                              xxx
                              28
                              iiii
                              xix
                              28
                              vi
                              iviii
                           
                           
                              29
                              xv
                              i
                              29
                              iii
                              lvi
                              29
                              vii
                              xxi
                           
                           
                              30
                              xiiii
                              lii
                               
                               
                               
                              30
                              vii
                              xliii
                           
                           
                              31
                              xiiii
                              xxxiii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              viii
                              v
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The leape yeere.
                           
                              April.
                              May.
                              Iune.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              viii
                              xxvii
                              1
                              xvii
                              58
                              1
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              2
                              viii
                              xlix
                              2
                              xviii
                              13
                              2
                              23
                              14
                           
                           
                              3
                              ix
                              x
                              3
                              xviii
                              28
                              3
                              23
                              18
                           
                           
                              4
                              ix
                              xxxii
                              4
                              xviii
                              43
                              4
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              5
                              ix
                              liii
                              5
                              xviii
                              58
                              5
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              6
                              x
                              xv
                              6
                              xix
                              11
                              6
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              7
                              x
                              xxxvii
                              7
                              xix
                              25
                              7
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              8
                              x
                              lviii
                              8
                              xix
                              38
                              8
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              9
                              xi
                              xviii
                              9
                              xix
                              51
                              9
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              10
                              xi
                              xxxix
                              10
                              xx
                              4
                              10
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              11
                              xii
                              0
                              11
                              xx
                              16
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xii
                              xx
                              12
                              xx
                              28
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xii
                              xxxix
                              13
                              xx
                              39
                              13
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              14
                              xii
                              lix
                              14
                              xx
                              50
                              14
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              15
                              xiii
                              xix
                              15
                              xxi
                              2
                              15
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              16
                              xiii
                              xxxviii
                              16
                              xxi
                              13
                              16
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              17
                              xiii
                              lvii
                              17
                              xxi
                              22
                              17
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiiii
                              xvi
                              18
                              xxi
                              33
                              18
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiiii
                              xxxv
                              19
                              xxi
                              42
                              19
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiiii
                              liii
                              20
                              xxi
                              51
                              20
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              21
                              xv
                              xii
                              21
                              xxii
                              0
                              21
                              23
                              14
                           
                           
                              22
                              xv
                              xxx
                              22
                              xxii
                              8
                              2
                                    •
                                 
                              
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              23
                              xv
                              xlvii
                              23
                              xxii
                              16
                              23
                              23
                              6
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvi
                              iiii
                              2
                              xxii
                              24
                              24
                              23
                              0
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvi
                              xxi
                              25
                              xxii
                              31
                              25
                              22
                              35
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvi
                              xxxviii
                              26
                              xxii
                              37
                              26
                              22
                              49
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              iv
                              27
                              xxii
                              44
                              27
                              22
                              43
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvii
                              xii
                              28
                              xxii
                              50
                              28
                              22
                              37
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvii
                              xxvii
                              29
                              xxii
                              56
                              29
                              22
                              30
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvii
                              xliii
                              30
                              xxiii
                              1
                              30
                              22
                              23
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              xxiii
                              6
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The leape yeere.
                           
                              Iulie.
                              August.
                              September.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              xxii
                              xv
                              1
                              xv
                              27
                              1
                              iiii
                              xl
                           
                           
                              2
                              xxii
                              vil
                              2
                              xv
                              ix
                              2
                              iiii
                              xvii
                           
                           
                              3
                              xxi
                              lviii
                              3
                              xiiii
                              l
                              3
                              iii
                              liiii
                           
                           
                              4
                              xxi
                              l
                              4
                              xiiii
                              xxxii
                              4
                              iii
                              xxxi
                           
                           
                              5
                              xxi
                              xii
                              5
                              xiiii
                              xiii
                              5
                              iii
                              vii
                           
                           
                              6
                              xxi
                              xxxi
                              6
                              xiii
                              lv
                              6
                              ii
                              xlv
                           
                           
                              7
                              xxi
                              xxi
                              7
                              xiii
                              xxxv
                              7
                              ii
                              xxi
                           
                           
                              8
                              xxi
                              xi
                              8
                              xiii
                              xbi
                              8
                              i
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              9
                              xxi
                              0
                              9
                              xii
                              lvi
                              9
                              i
                              xxxiiii
                           
                           
                              10
                              xx
                              xlix
                              10
                              xii
                              xxxvil
                              10
                              i
                              x
                           
                           
                              11
                              xx
                              xxxviii
                              11
                              xii
                              xvii
                              11
                              0
                              xlvii
                           
                           
                              12
                              xx
                              xxvi
                              12
                              xi
                              lvii
                              12
                              0
                              xxiii
                           
                           
                              13
                              xx
                              xiiii
                              13
                              xi
                              xxxvii
                              13
                              0
                              0
                           
                           
                              14
                              xxi
                              il
                              14
                              xi
                              xvi
                              14
                              0
                              xxiiii
                           
                           
                              15
                              xix
                              xlix
                              15
                              x
                              lv
                              15
                              0
                              xlviii
                           
                           
                              16
                              xix
                              xxxvi
                              16
                              x
                              xxxiiii
                              16
                              i
                              xi
                           
                           
                              17
                              xix
                              xxiii
                              17
                              x
                              xiii
                              17
                              i
                              xxxv
                           
                           
                              18
                              xix
                              x
                              18
                              ix
                              li
                              18
                              i
                              lviii
                           
                           
                              19
                              xviii
                              xvi
                              19
                              ix
                              xxx
                              19
                              ii
                              xxii
                           
                           
                              20
                              xviii
                              xli
                              20
                              ix
                              ix
                              20
                              ii
                              xlvi
                           
                           
                              21
                              xviii
                              xxvli
                              21
                              viii
                              xlviii
                              21
                              iii
                              ix
                           
                           
                              22
                              xviii
                              xi
                              22
                              viii
                              xxv
                              22
                              iii
                              xxxiii
                           
                           
                              23
                              xvii
                              ivi
                              23
                              viii
                              iii
                              23
                              iii
                              lvi
                           
                           
                              24
                              xvii
                              xl
                              24
                              vii
                              xli
                              24
                              iiii
                              xix
                           
                           
                              25
                              xvii
                              xxv
                              25
                              vii
                              xix
                              25
                              iiii
                              xliii
                           
                           
                              26
                              xvii
                              ix
                              26
                              vi
                              lvii
                              26
                              v
                              vi
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              lii
                              27
                              vi
                              xxxiiii
                              27
                              v
                              xxix
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xxxv
                              28
                              vi
                              xi
                              28
                              v
                              liii
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xix
                              29
                              v
                              xlix
                              29
                              vi
                              xvi
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvi
                              ii
                              30
                              v
                              xxvi
                              30
                              vi
                              39
                           
                           
                              31
                              xv
                              xliiii
                              31
                              v
                              iii
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The declination of the Sunne.
                           The leape yeere.
                           
                              October.
                              Nouember.
                              December.
                           
                           
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                              Dayes
                              Degrees.
                              Minutes.
                           
                           
                              1
                              vii
                              ii
                              1
                              xvii
                              33
                              1
                              23
                              8
                           
                           
                              2
                              vii
                              xxv
                              2
                              xvii
                              50
                              2
                              23
                              12
                           
                           
                              3
                              vii
                              xlviiii
                              3
                              xviii
                              7
                              3
                              23
                              17
                           
                           
                              4
                              viii
                              x
                              4
                              xviii
                              22
                              4
                              23
                              21
                           
                           
                              5
                              viii
                              xxxiii
                              5
                              xviii
                              38
                              5
                              23
                              24
                           
                           
                              6
                              viii
                              lv
                              6
                              xviii
                              53
                              6
                              23
                              26
                           
                           
                              7
                              ix
                              xxii
                              7
                              xix
                              8
                              7
                              23
                              28
                           
                           
                              8
                              ix
                              xxxix
                              8
                              xix
                              23
                              8
                              23
                              30
                           
                           
                              9
                              x
                              i
                              9
                              xix
                              37
                              9
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              10
                              x
                              xxiiii
                              10
                              xix
                              50
                              10
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              11
                              x
                              xlvi
                              11
                              xx
                              4
                              11
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              12
                              xi
                              vii
                              12
                              xx
                              17
                              12
                              23
                              33
                           
                           
                              13
                              xi
                              xxix
                              13
                              xx
                              30
                              13
                              23
                              32
                           
                           
                              14
                              xi
                              l
                              14
                              xx
                              42
                              14
                              23
                              31
                           
                           
                              15
                              xii
                              xi
                              15
                              xx
                              54
                              15
                              23
                              29
                           
                           
                              16
                              xii
                              xxxi
                              16
                              xxi
                              6
                              16
                              23
                              27
                           
                           
                              17
                              xii
                              lii
                              17
                              xxi
                              17
                              17
                              23
                              25
                           
                           
                              18
                              xiii
                              xii
                              18
                              xxi
                              28
                              18
                              23
                              22
                           
                           
                              19
                              xiii
                              xxxii
                              19
                              xxi
                              38
                              19
                              23
                              18
                           
                           
                              20
                              xiii
                              liii
                              20
                              xxi
                              48
                              20
                              23
                              14
                           
                           
                              21
                              xiiii
                              xiii
                              21
                              xxi
                              57
                              21
                              23
                              10
                           
                           
                              22
                              xiiii
                              xxxii
                              22
                              xxii
                              7
                              22
                              23
                              5
                           
                           
                              23
                              xiiii
                              lii
                              23
                              xxii
                              15
                              23
                              22
                              59
                           
                           
                              24
                              xv
                              xi
                              24
                              xxii
                              23
                              24
                              22
                              54
                           
                           
                              25
                              xv
                              xxx
                              25
                              xxii
                              31
                              25
                              22
                              48
                           
                           
                              26
                              xv
                              xlviii
                              26
                              xxii
                              38
                              26
                              22
                              41
                           
                           
                              27
                              xvi
                              vi
                              27
                              xxii
                              46
                              27
                              22
                              33
                           
                           
                              28
                              xvi
                              xxiiii
                              28
                              xxii
                              52
                              28
                              22
                              26
                           
                           
                              29
                              xvi
                              xlii
                              29
                              xxii
                              58
                              29
                              22
                              18
                           
                           
                              30
                              xvii
                              0
                              30
                              xxiii
                              3
                              30
                              22
                              9
                           
                           
                              31
                              xvii
                              xvii
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              22
                              0
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The Callender.
                           
                              Ianuarie.
                              Februarie.
                              March.
                           
                           
                              1
                              a
                              Newe yeeres day.
                              1
                              d
                               
                              1
                              d
                           
                           
                              2
                              b
                               
                              2
                              e
                              Pruficatiō of Ma.
                              2
                              e
                           
                           
                              3
                              c
                               
                              3
                              f
                               
                              3
                              f
                           
                           
                              4
                              d
                               
                              4
                              g
                               
                              4
                              g
                           
                           
                              5
                              e
                               
                              5
                              A
                              Shroue Sunday.
                              5
                              A
                           
                           
                              6
                              f
                              Twelfe day.
                              6
                              b
                               
                              6
                              b
                           
                           
                              7
                              g
                               
                              7
                              c
                               
                              7
                              c
                           
                           
                              8
                              a
                               
                              8
                              d
                               
                              8
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              9
                              b
                               
                              9
                              e
                               
                              9
                              e
                           
                           
                              10
                              c
                               
                              10
                              f
                               
                              10
                              f
                           
                           
                              11
                              d
                               
                              11
                              g
                               
                              11
                              g
                           
                           
                              12
                              e
                               
                              12
                              A
                               
                              12
                              A
                              S. Gregorie.
                           
                           
                              13
                              f
                               
                              13
                              b
                               
                              13
                              b
                              S. Leonard.
                           
                           
                              14
                              g
                               
                              14
                              c
                               
                              14
                              c
                           
                           
                              15
                              a
                               
                              15
                              
                                 
                                    •
                                 
                              
                               
                              15
                              d
                           
                           
                              16
                              b
                               
                              16
                              e
                               
                              16
                              e
                           
                           
                              17
                              c
                               
                              17
                              f
                               
                              17
                              f
                              S. Gabriel archan.
                           
                           
                              18
                              d
                               
                              18
                              g
                               
                              18
                              g
                           
                           
                              19
                              e
                               
                              19
                              a
                               
                              19
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              20
                              f
                              S. Fabian & Seba.
                              20
                              b
                               
                              20
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              21
                              g
                               
                              21
                              c
                               
                              21
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              22
                              A
                              S. Uincēt martyre.
                              22
                              d
                               
                              22
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              23
                              b
                               
                              23
                              e
                               
                              23
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              24
                              c
                               
                              24
                              f
                              S. Matthias apost.
                              24
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              25
                              d
                              Conuer. of S. Paul.
                              25
                              g
                               
                              25
                              g
                              Anuntia. of Marie.
                           
                           
                              26
                              e
                               
                              26
                              A
                               
                              26
                              A
                              Easter day.
                           
                           
                              27
                              f
                               
                              27
                              b
                               
                              27
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              28
                              g
                               
                              28
                              c
                               
                              28
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              29
                              A
                               
                               
                               
                               
                              29
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              30
                              b
                               
                               
                               
                               
                              30
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              31
                              c
                               
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The Callender.
                           
                              April.
                              May.
                              Iune.
                           
                           
                              1
                              g
                               
                              1
                              b
                              S. Phil. and Jacob.
                              1
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              2
                              A
                               
                              2
                              c
                               
                              2
                               
                               
                           
                           
                              3
                              b
                               
                              3
                              d
                              Innuenci. of ye crosse.
                              3
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              4
                              c
                               
                              4
                              e
                              Ascention day.
                              4
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              5
                              d
                               
                              5
                              f
                               
                              5
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              6
                              e
                               
                              6
                              g
                               
                              6
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              7
                              f
                               
                              7
                              A
                               
                              7
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              8
                              g
                               
                              8
                              b
                               
                              8
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              9
                              A
                               
                              9
                              c
                               
                              9
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              10
                              b
                               
                              10
                              d
                               
                              10
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              11
                              c
                               
                              11
                              e
                               
                              11
                              A
                              Barnabe apostle.
                           
                           
                              12
                              d
                               
                              12
                              f
                               
                              12
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              13
                              e
                               
                              13
                              g
                               
                              13
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              14
                              f
                               
                              14
                              A
                              Whitsunday.
                              14
                              d
                              .
                           
                           
                              15
                              g
                               
                              15
                              b
                              S. Isidore archbish. of Seuill.
                              15
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              16
                              A
                               
                              16
                              c
                              16
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              17
                              b
                               
                              17
                              d
                               
                              17
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              18
                              c
                               
                              18
                              e
                               
                              18
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              19
                              d
                               
                              19
                              f
                               
                              19
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              20
                              e
                               
                              20
                              g
                               
                              20
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              21
                              f
                               
                              21
                              A
                               
                              21
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              22
                              g
                               
                              22
                              b
                               
                              22
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              23
                              A
                              S. George matyre.
                              23
                              c
                               
                              23
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              24
                              b
                               
                              24
                              d
                               
                              24
                              g
                              S. John Baptist.
                           
                           
                              25
                              c
                              S. Marke Euang.
                              25
                              e
                               
                              25
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              26
                              d
                               
                              26
                              f
                               
                              26
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              27
                              e
                               
                              27
                              g
                               
                              27
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              28
                              f
                               
                              28
                              A
                               
                              28
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              29
                              g
                               
                              29
                              b
                               
                              29
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              30
                              A
                               
                              30
                              c
                               
                              30
                              f
                              S. Peter and Paul.
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              d
                               
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The Calender.
                           
                              Iulie.
                              August.
                              September.
                           
                           
                              1
                              g
                               
                              1
                              c
                               
                              1
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              2
                              A
                               
                              2
                              d
                               
                              2
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              3
                              b
                               
                              3
                              e
                               
                              3
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              4
                              c
                               
                              4
                              f
                               
                              4
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              5
                              d
                               
                              5
                              g
                               
                              5
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              6
                              e
                               
                              6
                              A
                              Transfigu. of our Lord
                              6
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              7
                              f
                               
                              7
                              b
                               
                              7
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              8
                              g
                               
                              8
                              c
                               
                              8
                              f
                              The natiuitie of our
                           
                           
                              9
                              A
                               
                              9
                              d
                               
                              9
                              g
                              Ladie.
                           
                           
                              10
                              b
                               
                              10
                              e
                              Saint Laurence.
                              10
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              11
                              c
                               
                              11
                              f
                               
                              11
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              12
                              d
                               
                              12
                              g
                              S. Clare virgin.
                              12
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              13
                              e
                               
                              13
                              A
                               
                              13
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              14
                              f
                               
                              14
                              b
                               
                              14
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              15
                              g
                               
                              15
                              c
                              Assumption of Ma
                              15
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              16
                              A
                               
                              16
                              d
                               
                              16
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              17
                              b
                               
                              17
                              e
                               
                              17
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              18
                              c
                               
                              18
                              f
                               
                              18
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              19
                              d
                               
                              19
                              g
                               
                              19
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              20
                              e
                               
                              20
                              A
                               
                              20
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              21
                              f
                               
                              21
                              b
                               
                              21
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              22
                              g
                              Marie Magdalen.
                              22
                              c
                               
                              22
                              f
                              S. Matthewe apo.
                           
                           
                              23
                              A
                               
                              23
                              d
                               
                              23
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              24
                              b
                               
                              24
                              e
                              S. Bartholomewe apostle.
                              24
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              25
                              c
                              Saint James.
                              25
                              f
                               
                              25
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              26
                              d
                              Saint Anne.
                              26
                              c
                               
                              26
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              27
                              e
                              Saint Christopher.
                              27
                              A
                               
                              27
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              28
                              f
                               
                              28
                              b
                              S. Austin.
                              28
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              29
                              g
                               
                              29
                              c
                              The cutting off of saint John Baptist
                              29
                              f
                              S. Michael archan
                           
                           
                              30
                              A
                               
                              30
                              d
                               
                              30
                              g
                              S. Jerome.
                           
                           
                              31
                              b
                               
                              31
                              e
                              head.
                               
                               
                               
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        
                           ¶The Callender.
                           
                              October.
                              Nouember.
                              December.
                           
                           
                              1
                              A
                               
                              1
                              d
                              All Saintes day.
                              1
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              2
                              b
                               
                              2
                              e
                              The remembrance
                              2
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              3
                              c
                               
                              3
                              f
                              of them that are.
                              3
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              4
                              d
                               
                              4
                              g
                              dead.
                              4
                              b
                              Saint Barbara.
                           
                           
                              5
                              e
                               
                              5
                              A
                               
                              5
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              6
                              f
                               
                              6
                              b
                               
                              6
                              d
                              S. Nicholas bisho.
                           
                           
                              7
                              g
                               
                              7
                              c
                               
                              7
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              8
                              A
                               
                              8
                              d
                               
                              8
                              f
                              Conception of Ma.
                           
                           
                              9
                              b
                               
                              9
                              e
                               
                              9
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              10
                              c
                               
                              10
                              f
                               
                              10
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              11
                              d
                               
                              11
                              g
                              Saint Martin.
                              11
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              12
                              e
                               
                              12
                              A
                               
                              12
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              13
                              f
                               
                              13
                              b
                               
                              13
                              d
                              S. Luce virgin.
                           
                           
                              14
                              g
                               
                              14
                              c
                               
                              14
                              e
                               
                           
                           
                              15
                              A
                               
                              15
                              d
                               
                              15
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              16
                              b
                               
                              16
                              e
                               
                              16
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              17
                              c
                               
                              17
                              f
                               
                              17
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              18
                              d
                              S. Luke euangelist.
                              18
                              g
                               
                              18
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              19
                              e
                               
                              19
                              A
                               
                              19
                              c
                               
                           
                           
                              20
                              f
                               
                              20
                              b
                               
                              20
                              d
                               
                           
                           
                              21
                              g
                              The xi. M. virgins.
                              21
                              c
                               
                              21
                              e
                              S. Thomas apost.
                           
                           
                              22
                              A
                               
                              22
                              d
                               
                              22
                              f
                               
                           
                           
                              23
                              b
                               
                              23
                              e
                              Saint Clement.
                              23
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              24
                              c
                               
                              24
                              f
                               
                              24
                              A
                               
                           
                           
                              25
                              d
                               
                              25
                              g
                              Saint Katheren.
                              25
                              b
                               
                           
                           
                              26
                              e
                               
                              26
                              A
                               
                              26
                              c
                              Christmas day.
                           
                           
                              27
                              f
                               
                              27
                              b
                               
                              27
                              d
                              S. Steuen martyre.
                           
                           
                              28
                              g
                              S. Simon & Jude.
                              28
                              c
                               
                              28
                              e
                              S. John euangelist.
                           
                           
                              29
                              A
                               
                              29
                              d
                               
                              29
                              f
                              Holy Innocentes.
                           
                           
                              30
                              b
                               
                              30
                              e
                              S. Andrew apostle.
                              30
                              g
                               
                           
                           
                              31
                              c
                               
                               
                               
                               
                              31
                              A
                               
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶A Rule to knowe the Dominicall letter
euery yeere.
                  
                     FOr to knowe in what day of the weeke is euery feast of the yeere.
It is necessarie you know what letter it is that serueth for sunday.
This is to be knowen by the rules of the letters vnder written, in
the which, the first letter which is D. serueth for the Dominicall
letter, this yere of 1545 and so successiuely in euery yeere one letter
serueth, and the two rules being ended, returne againe to the begining,
and this is for euer. And it is to be noted that in the leape yeeres are
two Dominicall letters. The letter aboue being vppermost serueth from the first
day of Januarie, vnto ye xxv of Februarie, and the other vnto the end of the yeere.
1545. D C B. A F E D. C A G F. E C B A.
G B D
G E D C B G F E. D B A G. F
F A C E
               
            
            
               The eleuenth Chapter, wherein is declared
howeby the Calender before written, a
man may know the moneth, and the day
wherein he is.
               
                  THe Philosopher saith,
that the art doth emitate
nature as much as hee
may, Likewise the saide
art many times helpeth
the defects of nature, this
is prooued, wherein we see that a man
which by nature doth want his sight,
the art doth help and remedy his want,
that is, by looking on a payre of spectacles,
whereby in such sort, the sight is
gathered together, and is cause that he
seeth, the which he doth not without
thē for that it is scattered abroad. The
selfe same which is said of the sight, may
be said of the memory, that many times
it lacketh in mē, but it is certain that in
some it commeth by nature, but in others
by their owne vncarefulnes that
they forget themselues so much, that in
things which standeth them much vpon,
they take no heede. And concerning
this I doe remember as we came sayling
in a shippe, nienteene men, which
were seuen passengers, and twelue mariners,
and hauing bin many dayes at
the sea, because the weather was contrary,
there happened a cause whereby
it was conuenient that the purser shuld
write it downe in his booke for to giue
reason thereof when time should serue,

and he with the other that were there,
knewe not what day of the moneth it
was, nor there was any yt had it in his
remembrance, nor knew what day was
the first day of the moneth, vntil I told
him, nor any booke in the ship to looke
in whereby it might be knowen. And
this being brought for my purpose, I
say that here before hath bene declared.
that one of the thinges which ought
to be seene and knowen, for to take the
altitude of the sunne, is the declination
or distance which it hath that day from
the equinoctiall line, for not knowing
the declination how much it is, the said
altitude can not be knowen, whereby it
is necessary that ye Pilote or any other
person which shal take the said altitude
should knowe in what moneth he is in,
and howe many dayes of the moneth it
is, without hauing any errour or
want therein. And because of that
as I haue spoken of before, which
happened, it may happen the like in others,
or likewise if hee that taketh the
altitude be alone, or with little company,
and do not remember the reckoning aforesayde,
for this it seemeth to me to be
a conuenient thing to helpe the memorie
by putting here the calender before
written, wherby may be kept a certaine
remembrance & a reckoning of the moneth
and day wherein he is, by looking
what day euerye moneth beginneth,
without any need to aske it of any. And
because such as do goe by some wayes
which hath not much used it, are accustomed
to set marks to know it the better.
So in this Calender, for the better
knowledge thereof, I haue put
marks which are ye saints daies. Therfore
I saye to knowe what day in the
weeke is euery holy day of them aforesayde.
The letters must be seene which
standeth before those daies of euery moneth,
& see what letter of these serueth
in this yere for sunday, and is called the
the Dominicall letter, which shall bee
knowen by the rule afore written, and
being knowen, to stay in it which is sunday,
& in another which is next mūday,
& in the other tewsday. And so al the seuen
dayes of the weeke named by the
seuen letters ABCDEFG. And by
reckoning in this maner, see what day
is the letter that is next to the holy day,
and in that yeere that is the proper day
of such a feast, the leape yeeres as before
hath beene declared, haue two dominicall
letters, the one serueth vnto ye
xxv day of Februarie, and the other vnto
the ende of the yeere.
            
            The ende of the fourth booke.
         
         
            
            
            ¶The fifth booke of the Altitude of the Poles.
            
               The first Chapter, what thing a pole is, and how betweene the two poles the roundnesse of
the worlde is deuided.
               
                  THis name pole
sometimes is taken
for all ye heauen,
and at other
times for ye ends
of the heauens, &
so the poles are
vnderstood here,
by the two ends
of one Ex, which is imagined, wherevpon
ye heauens doe moue. These poles
are not seen but are imagined, and they
are imagined to be in ye first moueable.
In this manner, the roundnesse of the
worlde is called Sphera, as before hath
been declared: in ye middest of ye which,
according to the definition of Theodosio,
is a point which is called Center, this
poynt is taken in two sortes, one according
to the truth, and of this speaketh
Euclides in the beginning of the Booke
entituled De Elementis, It is a poynte
which hath no parte, in another sorte,
this poynt is taken respectiuely, and so

the earth to 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the heauen is a

                     〈◊〉
                   which is 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the
worlde, so saieth the Philosopher 
                     〈◊〉
                  
fourth of the natural philosophie 
                     ••
                  ing
that by the middest of this

                     〈…〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
partes whereof doe 
                     〈◊〉
                   or teach
                     •••
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   this 
                     〈◊〉
                  
whiche some doe call Diameter, is called
the Ex of the Sphe
                        •
                     a, & the endes of this
line are called poles. There is a difference
betweene the Ex, & the Diameter,
although yt many times the one is takē
for the other because a Diameter properly
is called any manner of line, whiche
deuideth any body into 2, equal parts,

but the Ex is called a line, set in both
p
                     ••
                  les, in the whiche is imagined that
some body turntth it selfe in circle manner,
of the which doth followe, that in
the heauen is no more then one Ex:
and there are an infinite number of Dia
                        ••
                     ers
imagined. Therefore I say that
those endes of the Ex are called poles,
the one is called Articke, and the other
Antarticke, and in the middest of these
two poles all the roundnesse of ye world
is deuided into fiue partes, and the Astronomers
and Philosophers doe call
them Zonas, & they are deuided in this
manner. The first zone is from the pole
articke, vnto the circle articke, and this
hath in latitude twentie three degrees,
and thirtie three minutes. The seconde
from the circle articke to the Tropike of
Cancer, hath in latitude fortie two degrees,
& fiftie foure minutes. The third
from the Tropike of Cancer, to the tropike
of Capricorne, hath in latitude forty
seuē degrees & sixe minutes. The fourth
from the tropike of Capricorne, to ye circle
Antarticke, hath in latitude fortie &
two degrees, and fiftie foure minutes.
The fifth from the circle Antarticke to
the pole Antarticke, hath in latitude,
twentie three degrees, and thirtie
three minutes: so that from one pole to
the other, are a hundreth and fourescore
degrees.
               These Zonas the first is called Septentrionall,
the second solstitiall, the
thirde Equinoctiall, the fourth 
                     •
                  emall,
the fifth Australl. And it is to bee noted,
that these two poles▪ the one is superiour,
and the other is inferiour. And
according to Albertus the great in the second
booke of the heauen, & the world,
the first treatie, ye sixe chapter, they are
to bee considered in this manner, in as
much as toucheth the moouing of the
circle of the fired starres.
               The pole Antarticke is the superiour,
and the pole Articke is the inferiour,
and according to the circle of
the Planets, the pole Articke is the
Superiour, and the Antarticke the inferiour,
and it is to be vnderstood that
such as dwell in the Equinoctiall line,
onely the place of the one pole they
see, and so we doe onely see in the heauen,
the place where wee imagine the
one pole to be: & this is called Articks,
likewise Septeritrional, or Boreal: It
is called Articke, because it is neere to
the image called Arture. It is called
Septentrionall, by the seuen starres of
the Vrsa minor, whiche doth mooue
round about the sayde pole. It is called
Boreall by the winde Boreas, which we
cal North. The other pole is called Antartico,
which is against, as though it
were put contrarye or opposite to the
Articke, and Australl, because from that
part commeth the winde called Austro:
it is also called Meridionall, because it
is towardes the parte of the middest of
the day, it is to bee vnderstood, that it
standeth towards the parte of the middest
of the day to suche as doe dwell
towardes the North, out of the tropicke
of Cancer, because in all times of
the yeere at the middest of the daye,
wee haue the Sunne towardes that
parte▪
               
            
            
               The seconde chapter, how the altitude of
o
                     •
                   the pole Articke is to be taken, and of the
effect wherefore he is taken.
               
                  THe P
                     ••
                  ot or an
                     •
                   other
person that will take the
Altitude of the pole articke,
which cōmonly we
call the Altitude of the
North, let him take his
Ballestila or quadrāt, or the instrument
that he hath most vsed, let him take the
altitude of the sayde starre, as precisely
as hee can, and for the better taking
thereof, let him put himselfe neere to
the maste of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , 
                     ••
                  there shall

                     〈◊〉
                   feele lead
                     ••
                   all the moouing a
                     •
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
And it in to 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that the altitude
of ys 
                  
                     •
                  ole to token, to know ye distāce
of the degrees, that are 
                     〈◊〉
                   hori
                     •
                  d
vnto the p
                     •
                  le, 
                     〈◊〉
                   there degrees
beeyng knowne, is knowne how many degrees

are from him which taketh the altitude
vnto the Equinoctiall line, and it is
knowne in this manner. The pole articke,
or the antarticke either of them, is
distant from the Equinoctiall line, ninety
degrees, therefore let him looke that
taketh the altitude how many degrees
he hath raysed the pole vpon the Horizon,
& he shall vnderstand, that the selfesame
degrees are frō the place where he
is vnto ye Equinoctial line, so that if hee
be vnder the Equinoctiall, hee shall not
take altitude of any of the poles, because
he shall haue them in the Horizon. But
beeing come foorth of the Equinoctiall,
how much he is distant from her, so
much hee shall haue the one pole raised
vp, and the other put downe, so that
how many degrees hee is distant from
the line, in so many he shall take the altitude
of that pole, towardes 
                     •
                  he parte
where he is. For so many, hee hath raysed
vpon him his Herizon, In such sort,
that if he tooke the altitude of the pole
in tenne degrees, the sayde tenne degrees
hee is distant of the Equinoctiall,
& if in twentie, twentie, and so the
rest. In such sorte, that whensoeuer the
altitude of the pole is taken, looking by
her the degrees that are raysed vpon
the Horizon, the selfe same he which taketh
the altitude is distant from the Equinoctiall
line.
            
            
               The thirde Chapter, howe the reckoning
whiche is taken of the height of the
pole articke or North is, to bee vnderstood.
               
                  IT hath beene declared
in ye chapter before this,
that how many degrees
are taken of the altitude
of the pole, so many is he
which taketh her distant
of the Equinoctiall line, because for this
effect to know the distance of the sayde
line, the sayde altitude is taken, therefore
in this present, I will speake how
this altitude which is taken of the pole
is to bee vnderstood. Of the which it
is to bee vnderstood, that when a
man is in the Equinoctiall line, he hath
both poles in the Horizon, as before
hath beene declared, and by how muche
hee is going from the sayde line, and
comming towardes the pole articke or
North pole, which is this that wee
speake of, by so much the sayde pole goeth
rising vpon his Horizon, so that if
the man bee distant of the line twentie
degrees, the same twentie hee hath the
pole, aboue his Horizon. Of this is to be
noted, that the degrees which are taken
of the altitude of the pole, are not
to bee vnderstoode of those whiche are
from him, that taketh the altitude vnto
to the pole it selfe: But it is to be vnderstood,
that those haue gone raysing vp
the saide pole aboue his Horizon. For
because like as in the altitude of the
sunne, is not noted how much the sunne
is raysed aboue him that taketh his altitude,
but it is to be seene, howe muche
he is raysed aboue the Horizon, whiche
is seene by these degrees, which are taken
in the Astrolabio, so that in the altitude
of the North, it is not to be looked,
howe muche the pole is risen vpon him,
which taketh his altitude, but yt which
hee is risen aboue his Horizon, in such
sorte, that to knowe the height of the
pole, there is no account or reckoning,
to bee taken betweene him that taketh
it and the pole, but the reckoning is betweene
the pole and the Horizon. For if
the man shoulde keepe reckoning with
the pole, it woulde be said in this manner,
from the Equinoctiall line, to the
pole, are nienty degrees, therefore if he
which taketh the altitude is twenty degrees,
distant frō the Equinoctial line:
then it shoulde bee threescore and tenne
degrees from the pole, and woulde say,
seeyng I am in seuentie degrees of
altitude, I am so manye from the
pole.
               This ought not to bee vnderstood
so, for it woulde bee a verye great errour,
so muche that beeyng in twentie
degrees of altitude, hee that should
so make his reckoning, shoulde make
that he were in seuentie. But let the

reckoning be kept, as aforesayde, which
is, that how many degrees I doe take
of altitude with my Ballestisa, or other
instrumēt: these haue I raised the pole,
not aboue me, but aboue my Horizon, &
the selfe same degrees am I distant of
the Equinoctiall line.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, of the North starre,
and of the guardes of his moouing.
               
                  THE North starre beeyng
very well seene and
knowne of al the saylers,
is the first of ye 7. starres,
which yt 
                  Vrsa minor doth
set in order, and commō
                  ly
he is called Bozina. These 7. starres
doe seeme cleere & bright, & three of thē
are like to a halfe circle, & the other 4.
like to a quadrangle in this manner.

The seuen starres doe alwayes mooue
rounde about the pole, describing their
circl
                     •
                  s from the East into the West, and
alwayes in one selfe distance one with
the other, and in euery foure and twentie
houres they geue a turne about the
pole. But as the North starre is more
neere the pole, then any of the others,
his turne is lesser and done with more

                     •
                  eysute, then any of the other starres:
because howe muche more euery starre
goeth farther of from the pole, so much
the greater circumserence hee maketh,
and so much the hastier hee mooueth.
Therefore I say, that by this statre of
the North is knowne, howe much the
altitude is, which the pole hath vpon
the Horizon: In suche sorte, that although
the pole is seene, yet by this
starre is knowne the place where the
pole is, the whiche is knowen by an
other starre of the same seuen, the most
shyning. Of the two called guardes,
which are in the moneth of the Bozina,
                  
which star is called the formest guarde,
and also he is called the horologial star,
because hee goeth alwayes like to a
whele of a clocke, giuing to vnderstand
in all times of the yeere, what houre of
ye night it is, by that reckoning, that is
called the middest of Aprill, midnight
in the head. And note ye, that between
the north starre, and the guardes, is alwayes
the pole, in suche sorte, that
when the guardes are aboue the pole,
the north starre is vnder, and so contrary,
seeing by ye course or place where
the guards are, is knowen to what part
of the pole, and in what distance of
him, the sayde starre is.
            
            
               The fifth Chapter, howe that according to
the course wherein the guardes are, is
knowen howe many degrees the north
starre is vnder or aboue the pole.
               IT hath beene declared in the chapter
going before, that the north starre
moueth him selfe rounde about the
pole, and that likewise the two starres
called the guards, doe make their mouing
rounde about the saide starre, and
of the pole. By the which it is necessarie
to know, in what course the guards
are in, with the saide starre, because
with this, wil be knowne by the rules
here vnder written, in what course the
saide starre is in with the pole, as also
howe many degrees he is vnder or aboue
him: for the which knowledge, the
rules following are so be looked on, in
the which is to bee noted that besides
the rules of the principall windes, you
shal finde rules for the half
                     •
                   partes, because
the saide altitude more easely at
any houre of the night may bee taken.
               The which rules goe set with their
figures in such sort, that in euery course
that the guards are in, may be knowne
likewise in what course the saide north
starre is in, it is ordayned in the maner
following.
               
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the east, themost
fore guarde is with the north starre,
east and west, and the sayde starre a degree
and a halfe vnder the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the east northeast,
the north starre is three degrees vnder
the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the northeast,
the one guarde is with the other east
and west, and the north starre is three
degrees and a halfe vnder the pole.
                  
                  
                     
                     The guardes in the north northeast,
the north starre is three degrees
and a halfe vnder the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the north, the
formost guarde is with the north starre
north and south, and the sayd starre 
                        〈◊〉
                     
three degrees vnder the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the north north
                     
                     
                        •
                     est,
the north starre is two degrees 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     
                        ••
                     r the pole.
                  
                  
                     
                     The guardes in the northwest,
the one guarde is with the other north
& south, the sayd starre is halfe a degree
vnder the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the west northwest,
the north starre is one degree aboue
the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the west, and formost
guarde is with the north starre
east and west, and the sayde starre is a
degree and a halfe aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     
                     The guardes in the West Southwest,
the North starre is three degrees
aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guardes in the Southwest,
the one guarde is by the other East and
West, and the North starre is three degrees
and a halfe aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guards in the South Southwest,
the North starre is three degrees
aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     
                     The guardes in the South, the
North starre is with ye foremost guard,
North and South, and the sayde starre
is three degrees aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guards in the South, Southeast,
the North starre is two degrees
aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     The guards in the Southeast, the
one guarde is by the other North, and
South, and the North starre is halfe
a degree aboue the pole.
                  
                  
                     
                     The guardes in the East Southeast,
the north starre is halfe a degree
vnder the pole.
                  
               
            
            
               The sixt Chapter, howe the rules of the altitude
of the North starre ought to be applied,
and howe they ought to be put to,
or taken away, according to the place
where the guardes are.
               
                  THerefore when you take
the altitude of the pole,
looke in what place the
guardes are, & by them
you shall vnderstande if
the north star be vnder
or aboue the pole, as it is sayde. And
marke, if the starre be vnder, you shall
ioyne with the altitude that you take,
those degrees that are vnder and altogether
so much is your altitude: and if
the star be aboue the pole, you shall take
away from the altitude that you tooke,
ye degrees that the star is aboue, & that
which remaineth, is the altitude wherin
you are.
               
                  Example.
                  I say the guardes being in the northeast,
you tooke xl. degrees of altitude;
ioyne with these xl. three degrees and
a half, that the starre is vnder the pole▪
which doth amount to fourtie three degrees
and a half, this is your altitude▪
and if the guardes bee in the southwest,
take a way of the fourtie degrees,
three and a halfe that ye star is ouer the
pole, there doth rest thirty sixe & a half
and this is the altitude wherin you 
                        〈◊〉
                     
to that when the star is vnder the poles
you shall ioyne with the altitude those
degrees that he is vnder, and when he
is aboue, you shal take away ye degrees
yt he is aboue, & so you shall make your
account iust, and you shall knowe the
place where you are.
               
            
            
               The seuenth Chapter, wherein be declared
certain doubts that in this mouing of the
north starre may be had.
               IN the third chapter of this fifth book
hath bin said, that the starres which
are nere to ye pole, do moue thē selues
more slowly then they that are farre off,
& it seemeth yt of this may be a doubt,
because yt euery thing which mooueth
their parts in rule, do moue so equally,
that one moueth not more siow, nor the
other more hasty. And as al the heauen
doth moue equally, as ye sight both manifest
it, and so is the beginning of Astronomy,
that the mouing of euery day
is in rule, whereby it ought to bee said,
that the parts of heauē do moue equally,
& not the one part more slowly then
ye other Likwise this is proued because
that one self intelligence, moueth al the
circle and all his partes seeing that the
parts nerest to the pole, are lesse then
those which are far off, therfore the said
intelligence hath a greater proportion
vpon thē, and of the great proportion
cōmeth greater swiftnes, whereby may
be saide, that the parts which are most
nere to the pole, do moue more speedely
or with m
                     ••
                   hast then the others.
               Item, in the fifth chapter of the first

booke hath been declared how the heauen
is round, and seeing that it is so, it
may be said, that in ye heauen is no part
from aboue the pole, nor part vnder the
pole, because that all round bodies, naturally
haue no part high nor lowe: for
if one parte were more high or lowe
then the other, then the body should not
be rounde, whereby it seemeth, that it
cannot bee saide, that the starre of the
North, nor the guardes are in no time
vnder nor aboue the pole.
               The third doubt is, that likewise we
say, that the North starre doth geue an
equall turne rounde about the pole, and
seeing it is so, that it is equall: wherefore
at sometimes is he distaunt of the
pole vnder or aboue halfe a degree, and
at other times three degrees and a
halfe.
               To that which is saide in the first
doubt, all the Philosophers and Astronomers
are agaynst, for that al of them
holde that the pole mooueth not, but
is fixed, and vpon him all the partes of
heauen doe moue in circle manner and
in such sort, yt that which is neere, mooueth
slowlie, and that which is farre of,
moueth with more haste, wherby that
which mooueth it selfe by the Equinoctiall,
because that there it is farthest of,
there the moouing is more hastie, then
in any other part, and this sheweth it
selfe by experience. We see in the moouing
of a wheele, that the Ex standeth
still, and alwayes remayneth in one
place, and all the partes of the wheele
doe cōpasse it about, of the which, those
partes that are neere to the Ex, goe
more slowly, and those that are farther
of they moue with more hastie mouing,
so the vppermost part of the wheele his
moouing is more hastie then any of the
other partes: as Aristotle sheweth it in
the Mechanica.
               
               To that which is saide, that the heauen
mooueth it selfe equally, it is to be
vnderstood in equallitie of time, but
not in equality of place, in such sort, that
in equall time they make their partes
in equall moouing, because these parts
cannot of continuance 
                     〈…〉
                   by
thēselues. A continuance is that whose
mouing is one, and is to be vnderstood
wholly together: so that it cannot be,
that at one time one parte is mooued, &
at another time another, but at the mouing
of one parte, all the other partes,
and all together are mooued: so that
when the Heauen mooueth, because his
moouing is a pure mouing, of his place
to his mouing all the partes doe moue
place.
               Item although that one selfe intelligence
doe moue the partes of the poles
& likewise the others, which are more
distant, because all be continuall, they
are mooued together. And it is so, because
these partes are not put asunder,
nor deuided ye one from the other. And
if they were it is certayne that the lesser
partes should mooue more hastily then
the greater partes, the which is not because
the sayd intelligence doth mooue
them together, & the moouer hath his
proportion to all, and not to part.
               And this is manifest, because in the
continuall moueable, there are partes
of an infinite smalnesse, for that to any
part that is marked maye bee geuen a
lesser.
               To the second doubt which is in the
rounde bodie, that there is no part high
nor lowe: truth it is, that naturally
there is not, respectiuely there is. And
to saye that the North starre is sometime
aboue the pole, and at other times
vnder, it is to be vnderstood, not naturally,
but to our respect, and so hee that
were in such a place, that had y• pole for
Cenith: the North starre should not be
from him more high nor more lowe, at
one time then at another. But to him
whose Cenith is not vnder the pole in
the mouing which the starre maketh at
some time, he wilbee vnder the pole, &
at other t
                     ••
                  es aboue and to know how
the North starre is vnder or aboue the
pole, doe you imagine the f
                     ••
                  ure of a

                     •
                  an in the pole articke, which hauing
his face towardes the middest of the
day, and beyng so put, the left arme
shalbee towardes the East, and the
right towardes the West, therefore

when the North starre doth goe from
the left to the right, which is from the
East towardes the West by the heade
which maketh the halfe of his circle,
wee saye that hee is aboue the pole,
because then the pole is betweene the
starre and the Horizon, so there are
more degrees, from the Horizon to the
starre, then to the pole: and when he goeth
from the right arme to the lefte,
which is from the West to the East, in
the other halfe turne that he maketh by
the foote, we say, that hee is vnder the
pole, because then the starre wilbee betweene
the pole and the Horizon, and
then there are more degrees from the
Horizon to the pole, then to the starre,
as appeareth by this figure.
               
                  The Horizon,
               
               And so it is to bee vnderstood, that the
North starre to bee vnder or aboue the
pole.
               To the third is to be noted, that the
north starre doth goe rounde about the
pole, but although the turne, which hee
geueth, be in equall roundnes, he goeth
distant from the pole, more in one place
then in another, this is to be vnderstod
not as much as toucheth ye roundnes,
but as muche as toucheth the straightnesse
of the pole, in this manner.
               When the star is in any of the armes
of the east or of the west, then hee is neither
more high nor more low then the
pole but in one equallitie with him.
               And for as muche as toucheth his
turne, hee goeth from the sayde armes,
by the part of the head, or by the part of
the foote, so much he goeth aside of, from
the straightnesse of ye pole. In such sort,
that when he is in ye head, is, whē he is
farthest of the pole, by ye vppermost part:
and when hee is in the foote, is, when
hee is farthest of by the lower parte,
the whiche is not to bee vnderstood,
that the circumference is greater in the
head or the foote, then in the other
partes.
               But vnto our respect is that whiche
he goeth distant aboue or vnder ye pole
as here it is shewed.
               
            
            
               The eight Chapter, howe the altitude of the
North, is to be taken, although the guards
be not seene.
               
                  IT happeneth manye
times to such as bee saylers,
whē they goe neere
the Equinoctiall by reason
the pole is neere to
their Horizon, they see
not wholly the turne which the guards
doe make, round about the pole, so that
when the guards doe descend from the
West; and goe towardes the East, in all
those courses of the west Southwest,
South West South Southwest,
South, South Southeast, Southeast,
East Southeast, they cannot take the
altitude, because he is not seene whē ye
                  
guardes doe come to euery one of these
sayd courses. And for this in this chapter
shalbee declared, howe it shalbee
knowen, when the guardes doe come to
euery one of these courses aforesayde, &
taking the altitude how much it is that
iustly shalbe taken away from the altitude,
according to the place where the
starre is, is to be vnderstood, yt which is
aboue the pole: for the which it is to bee
noted, yt besides the two starres which
we call guards, which before haue been
spoken of, there are other three starres,
whiche goe well neere in the same distance,
that the guardes goe in, that goe
rounde about the North starre: and
although the guardes be not seene, yet
by these three starres, or by any of
them, the altitude of the pole is to bee
knowne, as well as by the guardes,
which is to be knowne in this manner.
These three starres which before are
spoken of, are called the third, the sixt,
and the nienth, and although they haue
other names, these names wee name
them by, because it maketh for our purpose,
and the reason is, because ye starre,
which we call Tercera, or thirde starre,
goeth three houres, which is one course
or winde before the foremost guard: and
the Sesta or sixe, two courses or winds
which are sixe houres: and the Nouena
or nienth, three courses or windes
which are nine houres. And to know
these starres, doe you note that ye third
starre hath neere to him other two
starres, and all three doe make well
neere one triangle, in this manner.
               
               This starre whensoeuer that the
foremost guard is in the head, then is
she in the Northeast, and if the guard be
in the West, then is she in ye Northwest,
and if the guarde bee the South, then
is she in the Southwest, & so it is to bee
vnderstood of the other courses, that alwayes
he goeth one winde behinde the
guarde.
               The sixt is one starre alone, the which
goeth wel neere as distant of the North
starre as the guards.
               
               This starre goeth two windes behinde
the guarde, so that if the guarde
be in the head, she is in the East, and if
the guarde be in the West, shee is in the
North, and so it is to bee vnderstood in
the other courses.
               The nienth is one starre alone which
is neerer to the North starre, then the
guards, this starre goeth three windes
behinde the guarde, so that if the guard
be in the West, shee is in the Northeast,
and so contrary.
               
               And these three starres being knowne,
although the guardes bee not seene, by
these or by any of thē is to bee knowen,
in what course the guardes are in
reckoning the courses in the manner,
as it hath beene declared: the whiche
rule I haue had experience of, and haue
found it certayne.
            
            
               The nienth Chapter, how the altitude of the
North, is to be taken, although the Horizon
be not seene.
               
                  IT happeneth manye
times to suche as sayle,
that they cannot take ye
altitude of the North,
because they cannot see
the Horizon. This is because
either the earth doth couer it, or

some cloude or vapour which riseth of
the water, or it maketh so much darknesse,
that it cannot bee discerned, or for
some other cause. And howe to know ye
Horizon is a thing so necessary, that lacking
it the altitude of the North cannot
any manner of way bee taken with the
Ballestilla of this cause the saylers receiue
very great hurte, for that manye
times it happeneth to them, to passe
many dayes without taking the altitude
and most of all in the winter.
               Therefore to take away this hurte
& inconuenience, I will declare in this
present Chapter, in what manner the
sayde altitude may bee taken although
the Horizon be not seene, the which is
this. The pilot or other person, that
shoulde take this altitude, let him take
a staffe or rodde of the greathes of a finger
little more or lesse, and so high, that
beeyng put vpright in the grounde, it
come iustly to his sight, and beeyng
made of this greatnesse, no more nor
lese: let him make at the toppe of it a
Crosse, and when hee will take the altitude,
let him ioyne his feete together,
and laye downe the rodde straight and
equall from the poynt of his feete, as
farre as the rodde will reache, and let
him make two poyntes, the one where
he hath his feete, and the other as
farre as the rodde doth reache, and in
that poynt where the rodde doth reach,
there doe you take him vp, and let some
bodye holde him vpright, and the Ballestilla
beeyng taken his feete beeyng
put in the poynt that he first had them
put, let him take his altitude, making
the Horizon in the highest parte of the
rodde or staffe where hee marked the
Crosse. And yee shall vnderstand that
this is his Horizon, wheresoeuer hee
findeth himselfe. And it is to be noted,
that if the night were as darke, that ye
highest parte of the rodde cannot bee
seene. That which I haue saide is his
Horizon, then put vpon the toppe of the
rodde, a signe or shew of fire, by the
sight of the which hee may hit to put
his Ballestilla right with the sayd rod,
and so he shall take his altitude precisely
doing in the rest, to take away or put
to the degrees, according to the place
wherein the guardes are, as before
hath beene declared.
            
            
               The tenth chapter, of a clocke by the north
starre whereby may bee knowne what
houre of the night it is, in any 
                     •
                   anner of
time and place that a man is in.
               
                  IN the third Chapter of
this fifth booke, I sayd,
yt the foremost guard is
called horologial, because
he goeth alwaies round
about the North starre,
like to the wheele of a clocke geuing
knowledge what houre of the night it
is. And because this knowledge bringeth
much profite, and it is conuenient
that euery one should know it, therfore
in this present Chapter, I will speake
howe it should be knowne in any manner
of place, whersoeuer a mā is, & in any
time of the yeere, what houre of the
night it is, and for to know it, is to bee
noted that which followeth.
               First of all, looke vpon the North
starre and imagine vpon him a Crosse
in this manner.
               
               Of this crosse the vppermost part, we
cal head, and the lower most part foote,
and the other two the right arme, and
the left, in this manner.
               
                  
                  
               
               This being had, is to be vnderstood,
that betweene these foure courses or
strekes, wee put other foure which doe
deuide or parte these in the middest
which wee call lines, in this manner.
               
               So that there is a line betweene the
right arme and the head, and a line betweene
the head and the left arme, and
a line betweene the left arme and the
foote, & a line betweene the foote and
the right arme: this imagination beeing
made, it is to be vnderstood, that ye
greater starre of ye two guardes, which
is the foremost, which before hath been
named the starre of ye clocke, this starre
in twenty foure houres doth passe these
eight partes, tarrying three houres frō
the one to the other. So that it at xii. of
the clocke in the night, hee bee in the
head at three, hee shalbe in the line betweene
the head and the left arme, and
at sixe in the sayd arme, & in that sorte,
the rest is to be reckoned.
               Of this doth remayne, that beeing
knowne in what part this starre should
be when it is midnight, foorthwith wil
be seene, yt if he be there it is mydnight,
and if he be not come thither it is not, &
if he be past, it is more then mydnight.
For this, it is necessary to knowe two
thinges: the one is, to know in euerie
moneth of the yeere, in what parte the
guarde starre ought to bee in, to knowe
when it is mydnight: & the other, howe
it is to bee knowne, what houre it is,
more or lesse thē mydnight. Of the first
this is to be noted, yt the accoūt or reckoning,
that is to bee vsed in this, is, that
at the middest of the moneth of Aprill,
when it is mydnight, then the sayde
guarde starre will be in the head, with
the North starre, and from thence forwarde
euery fifteene dayes, the middle
of the night, is one houre forwarde: for
in euery day hee goeth forwarde foure
poyntes or minutes, and geuing to euery
houre threescore poyntes, so that it
commeth to passe in euery fifteene daies
one houre forwarde. But in this I say
that I haue made experiēce sometimes
with clockes of precise houres, and setting
them punctually, at the poynt that
the Sunne setteth, and I finde that
vnto the twentie daye of Aprill, the
guarde and the starre, doe come precisely
at mydnight in opposite, but because
the difference is little: I doe followe
the order of the figure following.
To the seconde is to bee noted, as
before hath beene declared, that in euery
three houres the starre called the
guarde, doth passe from one course to
another, by the whiche there is to
bee deuided with the imaginatiue, that
space in three partes, and euery parte
of space will be one houre. In such sort,
that the place of the guarde starre beeyng
knowen where hee shoulde bee at
mydnight, is to bee knowne, if hee be

there, or if hee bee one houre, two, or
three, behinde or before, and so it wilbe
knowen what houre it is: and to know
in what parte the guarde is in at midnight,
euery halfe moneth of the yeere,
it must bee seene in this figure of following.
               
            
            
               The eleuenth Chapter, how the altitude of
the pole, antarticke is to be taken.
               
                  SEeing there hath beene
declared the altitude of
ye pole articke, or North
with his demonstratiōs,
it is conuenient to speake
of the altitude of the pole
antarticke, how he should be knowne,
because the saylers or any other person
finding himselfe towardes the South
parte▪ they may know how to take him,
and to gouerne themselues thereby. Of

                     〈◊〉
                   is to be knowen, that the tokens or
knowledge, that we haue of ye pole antarticke,
are foure starres, put Crosse
wise in this manner.
               
               These starres be not of any of ye signes
of the Zodiacke, nor of the other thirtie
sixe images of the heauen, therfore they
are called Cruzero, and these foure

starres we name, head, foote, & armes,
and to know which starre is the head,
and which are those of the other parts,
is to be vnderstood, that the starre of
the foote is greater then any of the others,
& by this, the other are knowne.
               Therefore it is to be noted, that whē
these foure starres are a crosse, the head
being right with the foote, that then ye
greater starre which is the foote, is
more neere the Horizon, and then he is
distant of the pole antarticke thirtie degrees
aboue the sayde pole, and the altitude
of this starre is taken, and of no
other: And hee is to be taken when he
is in right of the head, for there is his
owne place. Therefore when you will
knowe the altitude of the saide pole, doe
you stay vntill the starre of the foote, be
in his place, because with the moouing
of the heauen, hee mooueth with the others,
and being in his place, then take
his altitude, euen as you take that of
the North, and looke that the altitude
which you take of him, either they must
be thirty degrees or more or lesse, if they
be thirtie 
                     •
                  ust, you are in the Equinoctiall:
If they be more then thirtie, those
whiche are more, you are distant of the
line towardes the part of the South, &
if they be lesse then thirtie, that which
is lesse you are distant of the line towards
the part of the North.
               
                  An Example.
                  I say that the saide starre beeing in
his place, I tooke his altitude in fortie
degrees, then I say that I am in tenne
degrees, distant of the line towards the
part of the south, the reason is, because
this saide starre hath thirtie degrees of
declination or distance of the pole, therfore
if I had taken him in the saide thirtie
degrees, then should I haue had the
pole in the Horizon, and hauing the pole
in the Horizon, I am in the Equinoctiall,
and so the degrees, which are more
then thirtie, in the which I tooke the
altitude those am I distant of the line
towardes the parte of the South: for
thirtie from the starre to the pole, and
tenne from the pole to the Horizon, are
forty, in so many tooke I the altitude, so
that these tenne degrees, is the pole raised
aboue my horizon, so that by howe
muche, I shalbe distant of the line, so
muche the pole shall rise vp aboue my
horizon, and in so many more degrees,
I shal take ye altitude of the saide starre
and the thirtie being taken out, whiche
the starre is aboue the pole, those which
are more, I am distant of the line towardes
the sayde pole, and so many shall
the saide pole be raised aboue my horizon,
and if I should take the altitude in
twentie, I am distant of the line tenne
degrees towards the part of ye North,
and if I shoulde take him in tenne, I
am distant twenty, and if I should take
him in fiue, I am distant twentie fiue, &
if I had the saide starre in the horizon,
I am distant thirtie degrees of the said
line, towards the part of the North, so
that when I shall take him in thirtie
degrees, I am in the Equinoctiall, and
when in lesse, towards the part of the
North, and when in more, towards the
part of the South.
               
            
            The ende of the fifth booke.
         
         
            
            
               ❧The sixt booke, of the Compasses to sayle by.
            
               The first Chapter, of the Compasses to sayle by, and of the defectes which they may haue,
and how they may be amended.
               
                  THe instrument
that moste precisely
and with
greatest perfection,
the pylot
ought alwayes
to haue, is the
Cōpasse to saile
withall, for that
no instrument so muche as this doth
shewe the way, that hee shoulde make.
And likewise because the other instrumentes,
without this are to little effect,
and this without the others doe profit
much: and so the compasse among other
instrumēts of ye nauigatiō, may be
compared to the sight of a man, among
the other senses. And seeing that this
instrument is so delicate and subtile, it
happeneth that for small occasion he cō
                  meth
to haue defect in such sort, that he
cānot serue. Therfore in this Chapter,

I wil speake of the defectes that a compasse
may haue, and how the pylot hauing
necessitie, may amend it. For the
which is to be noted, yt for one of these
sixe causes, the Compasse cannot iudge
the North.
               The first is, by the stiles not beeing
well touched with the Lodestone, that
he lacketh the vertue. And this ceasing
whiche is the cause, the effect ceasseth,

which is to shew the North.
               The seconde, because the capitall is
wrested, and not vpright, that he doth
not suffer the rose to goe right in his
steppe.
               The thirde, because the steppe is
brode, so that the rose cannot moue with
quickenesse.
               The fourth, because the rose lieth
downe, and hangeth more to one side
then to another.
               The fifth, because the chest of the rose
is open, in such sort that the aire entreth
into it.
               The sixt, if the sphere or the hinges,
whe
                     •
                  eby the said boxe or chest is sustained,
are not so light that the chest and
the rose may goe equall.
               To the first, the pilot ought to carrie
in his chest a Lodestone, & that he haue
experience that it be good, and with the
face thereof to rubbbe or touch ye points
of the cōpasse subtlely vntil there cleaue
to it, a little of the saide stone, & see that
it be with the face of the said stone, the
which hee ought to haue marked, to
which parte it is, for if it bee with another
part it maketh not the true effect.
               To the second, which is the capital to
be layde downe, for to know when it is
so, take a cōpasse & put the one point in
ye head of the capitall, and the other in
one of the circles of ye rose, & therby you
shal know to which part he is wrested,
& how much it is needful to dresse him,
& it is to be vnderstood, that if the capital
be not very vpright, the rose wil put
him cleane out of his place, although he
be very well touched.
               To the third, if the steppe bee broade
or flat, he ought to be finely filed, so that
it be seene, yt the rose run not hastie nor
to slowly, and if by 
                     •
                  yling of him, it bee
seene that the rose doth run ouer much,
touch him subtilly with some yrō in the
poynt, yt he may be somewhat brode, so
that the rose may run ordinately.
               To the fourth, if the rose goe somewhat
laide downe, & doe not goe very equall,
you may put to him some waxe, or
pitche▪ or a thing that may cleaue fast
to him in the vnder part, vntill that hee
goe vpright, without leaning to one
part more then to the other.
               To the fifth, he ought to look that the
boxe or chest where the rose goeth be so
neere, that there goe not in any ayre as
well by the parte of the glasse, as by the
parte whiche is shutte, and if it bee
open in anye parte, with the sayd waxe
or pitch, it ought to be shutte.
               To the sixt, I saye that hee ought
so looke to the Sphera or hinges, wherein
the said chest or boxe goeth put, vpon
the which it is sustayned or helde
vp that it bee so good and light that
the sayde boxe or chest goe alwayes
equall, in suche sorte, that although
the shippe doe hilde or doe lye downe
to one side or to the other, the sayde
boxe and rose bee alwayes right, for if
the yrons, wherein they mooue, be hurt
they cause that when the shippe doth
hilde to one side or other, the boxe
and the rose cannot iudge the North in
his proper place.
               So that it is conuenient that the
sayde Compasse or needle bee precisely
made without hauing defecte or
lacke, or if there bee any inconuenience,
although it bee verie little, it
causeth muche errour.
            
            
               The seconde Chapter, how the windes of
the Compasse ought to bee vnderstood,
and how the sunne passeth euery
day by them.
               
                  IT is necessary, that the
pilot vnderstande two
thinges in his compasse,
the one is, how the East
& West, which are marked
in the Compasse
ought to be vnderstood.
               The seconde, howe that in euery
foure and twentie houres, the Sunne
doth passe all the courses of the Compasse.
               To the first is to bee noted, that this
name East and West is taken two
wayes, (that is to say) natural and respectiue:
the East and West is naturall,
and is vnderstood by the Equinoctiall

line, & not by any other part, because it is
ye middest betweene the two extreame
partes, (that is to say) the two poles, as
his definition declareth.
               The respectiue is by any other manner
of parte where a man is, now neare
the line, now farre off, so that if a man
be fiue degrees from the line, or tenne,
or more or lesse, all that he is in the same
degrees, hee shall be towardes the east
and respectiue towardes the west, in
such sorte, that all that hee is from the
place, where the Sunne riseth to the
Meridian where the man is, hee shal be
towardes the east, and that which hee
is from the man vnto the place where
the sunne setteth, hee shal be towardes
the west, and this likewise, is to be vnderstoode
being in the equinoctial, as
also foorth of the equinoctiall.
               
                  An example.
                  Of this may be asked, if the citie Seuill
be towardes the east or west, that is,
towardes Leuante or Poniente, it is answered,
that it is not in the east & west
naturall, and as much as toucheth the
respectiue, it is towardes the east, and it
is towardes the west, I will say, that
likewise it is towardes the Leuante, &
it is towards the Poniente, in this manner.
Of that which it is most occidental
is towardes Leuante, and of that which
is most orientall, is towardes the Poniente,
so that if Seuill bee in thirtie seuē
degrees of the equinoctial, towards
the part of the north, all that it is in the
right course of the thirtie seuen degrees
it is with Seuill east and west, in such
sorte that all that it is from the Meridian
of Seuill vnto the parte of Poniente,
Seuill hath towardes the Leuante, and
that which is from Seuill towardes the
parte of the Leuante, Seuill hath it towards
Poniente. We haue an authour of
this, who is Saint Luke in the first
chapter, where he sayth, that the three
kinges came from the orientall partes
to Hierusalem, it is to bee vnderstoode,
that as Hierusalem was more occidentall,
then from whence they came, so
they came from the orient, to occident,
which is from the east to the west.
                  Therfore I say to our purpose it is not
to be vnderstoode that the course which
is marked in the compasse, is the east
& west, respectiue, or accidentall, but the
natural which is by that straight course
which the Sunne doth describe in that
moouing which he maketh the eleuēth
of march, and thirteenth of September,
for that is east & west, that is marked
in the compasse, (that is to say) by
the equinoctiall, so that from the east
vnto the north are nientie degrees, and
seuen courses, besides the east and the
north, and the like vnto the south, And
if the east of the compasse were respectiue
the nientie degrees, nor the seuen
windes or courses, shoulde not bee
reckoned the which woulde bee a verye
great errour.
                  To the seconde, I saye that how
muche a man is farthest of the equinoctiall,
so much the dayes will bee greater
to him when the Sunne goeth of
this parte where he is, and by reason
that the dayes are greater to him,
the rising of the Sunne maye bee different
to him, in this manner, those
whiche inhabite vnder the equinoctiall,
or in any other parte, when the
Sunne doth describe the sayde lyne,
alwayes hee commeth foorth to them
in the east, and setteth to them in the
west, and they haue twelue houres
of day, and twelue of night, so that
in the foure and twentie houres wherin
the Sunne maketh his daylie woouing
hee passeth all the eyght windes
or principall courses of the nauigation,
In suche sorte, that from three
to three houres, hee goeth from one
winde to another, and so hee riseth
and commeth foorth to vs at si
                        •
                     e of
the clocke, at the east, and at niene
at the southeast, and at twelue at
the south, and at three at the southwest,
and at sixe at the west, and
there he setteth. So that in xii. houres
he goeth foure courses, but out of the
equinoctial, how much ye day is greater

so many more courses the sunne goeth
in the day, and lesse in the night, so that
if the day be of fifteene houres, the sun
goeth in the day fiue courses and by
night three: and if the day be of eighteen
houres the sunne goeth in the day sixe
courses and by night two: and if the day
be of one and twentie houres, the sunne
goeth in the day seuen courses, and by
night one: and if the day be of foure and
twentie houres the sunne goeth twenty
foure houres in the day, whiche are
eyght courses, and that day there is no
night: as it happeneth to those whiche
inhabite in the circles, when the sunne
commeth to the tropikes. And that
which is vnderstood of the dayes when
they goe increasing, and the nightes
deminishing, the same is to bee vnderstoode
by the courses which the sunne
goeth by night when the day goeth deminishing,
and the night increasing: as
shall be declared in the sixt chapter of
the eyght booke, so that the quantitie of
houres being knowne which the daye
hath, ye pilot may knowe to what course
of the compasse the sunne riseth and setteth
from him euery daye, this reckoning
will serue for many thinges of the
nauigation.
               
            
            
               The thirde chapter, wherein is declared, the
opinion that is had in the northeasting,
and northwesting of the compasses.
               
                  THere is an opinion among
such as sayle that
the compasses doe north
stear, and northwestear,
and it is sayd that in the
Meridian of the Ilādes
of the Acores, that there the Compasse
doth shewe the pole in his place. And
from thence passing towards the west,
it doth Northwestear, this is that hee
sheweth not the pole in the place where
hee was first, but that hee goeth aside
towardes the Northwest. And
if they come from the saide Meridian,
towardes the East, that the Compasse
doth Northeastear, that is, to
make the sayde difference towardes
the parte of the Northeast, so that they
saye, that onely in that Meridian
the Compasse doth shew the pole, and
not in any other place: but to one part
or other: and howe muche more they
departe from him, so muche the Compasses
haue more the sayde defect, but
those whiche vnderstande this, giue
no cause nor any reason, nor howe
much this difference is, which the Cō
                  passe
maketh, nor howe farre it goeth,
so that they knowe not what to saye
more, but marking their Compasses,
it seemeth that whiche is sayde to bee
so.
               Hereupon I haue procured to seeke
some Authour or reason, or some thing
wherin this should haue a foundation,
and I say that of this variacion which
is spoken of the compasse. I finde not any
thing written, nor reason, nor experience,
that is certaine: therefore here I
will speake my opinion, touching this,
perswading my selfe to that which is
most naturall and true of the nauigation.
               Therefore comming to the cause, I
say putting an example, if I make two
compasses of one selfe stile, and of one
temperance, and touched with one
selfe stone, and two shippes goe sayling
with them, departing from the sayde
Meridian one towardes the east, and
the other towardes the west, that these
compasses shall make, different effectes
in such sort, that in the one, the stone
and the stile, shoulde haue vertue to
cause northeasting, and in the other
to cause northwesting which are contrary
effectes, it seemeth not to mee,
that there is any foundation, or reason
to haue the like. But let vs see if
this bee in any thinge of the nauigation,
lette vs seeke it in three partes,
which is in the pole or the compasse,
or in the waye where sayling now is
vsed.
               To the first, to saye that the pole
doth make any variation or distaunce
from his place or poynte, this ought
not to bee thought, because it should

bee to put out of order all the order of
the Sphera, in such sort yt all ye 
                  
                     •
                  ixed circles;
should be moueable▪ besides this,
if ye pole should moue with him that saileth
towards ye east, it would moue it
selfe in the same tune with him whiche
saileth towardes the west. This is
vnpossible how much more, that the
pole cannot mooue to one parte or to another
because it is a point immagined
alwaies fixed in one place.
               To the seconde, I say that it ought
not to be thought or vnderstoode, that
the compasse by himselfe maketh the
sayde difference, for it is certaine, that
the sayde naturall vertue or propertie
which the stone and steele haue in the
place where the compasse was made,
the selfe same they haue in the sayde
Meridian, and in the new Spaine, and
in Calicut, and in all partes. And there
is no reason to say, that this propertie
is of such qualitie, that in the saide Meridian
it hath one vertue, and in all others,
which are well neere infinite, it
hath it in euery one, different, for if it
were so, it woulde bee to geue a greate
inconuenience, the which is that 
                     〈◊〉
                   no
parte foorth of the sayde Meridian,
there coulde bee made a true compasse,
seeyng that in no parte the compasse
doth shew the pole but there, and to say
so it were a very greate errour, because
an instrument, so important to the nauigation,
should not bee sayde, that in no
parte it coulde be made certayne, for if
it were so, it were to geue to the nauigation
an instrument with a knowne
errour.
               To the thirde, that is by the way
where you sayle, this is knowne, that
in any manner of place where a man
is, there hee hath his Meridian, the
whiche goeth precisely to remayne at
the poynt, whiche is the pole, without
making any distaunt or difference
in any thing.
               And if it shoulde bee sayde, that by
reason of the waye which the Shippe
sayleth, the compasse maketh the saide
difference as well towardes the one
parte, as to the other, this woulde be
to make manye Meridians different,
the one from the other, and so they
shoulde goe to remayne at different
poles in such sort that how many differences
the compasse went making,
by reason of the way: so many different
Meridians, the waye shoulde haue:
and too euerye Meridian of necessitie,
there shoulde a pole 
                     〈◊〉
                   geuen, where
hee shoulde make an ende, for otherwise
it woulde bee an infinite processe,
so that there shoulde bee geuen an infinite
number of poles. And to thinke
this shoulde bee a verye greate errour▪
so that it appeareth well, that neither
by the parte of the pole, neither of the
compasse, nor of the waye where you
sayle, the sayde compasse doe make anye
variation or difference from his
proper place, but making more inquirie
of this variation, which of the compasse
is spoken: I say that commonly is vnderstood
that the compasse doth shewe
the pole, but of this there is no writing
which doth say so: that which I finde
written of the Lodestone, and of yron
is, that Plinie in his thirtie sixe booke
of the naturall historie saith, and also
Saint Isidore in the sixteenth of the Etimologi
                        •
                     s,
that the Lodestone by one
hidden vertue or propertie, that it hath
doth specifie that it draweth to it yron
of this Auicen speaketh in the Booke of
Viribus Cordis, the tenth Chapter, hee
asketh what the cause is, wherefore
the Lodestone doth draw vnto it yron,
to the whiche hee aunsweareth, that
there is no other thing can bee sayde,
but because it hath a naturall vertue
to drawe it to him, and hee saieth that
some vnderstoode that hee draweth it
to him by reason of heate or coldnesse,
or because of similitude, that both of
them haue in nature, or for other reasons,
all the whiche hee saith is false,
for that hee draweth it not, but onely
with his propertie, and declaring
what thing propertie is, he sayth, propertie
is found in nature in the cōpounded
bodies, proceeding in them, a most

high and full influence, so that wee see
the loade stone doth drawe to him the
yron: likewise we see that the yron being
rubbed with the sayde stone, I say in
one onely parte of it the vertue renia
                     •••
                  th
with the yron to shewe alwayes
one point, which is answerable to the
place where we doe shewe in the horizon
the winde at north: so that 
                     •
                  eeing
the pole is imagined in the heauen, and
is not seene, & the compasse doth shewe
him in the horizon without any rising,
one only degree aboue the horizon: it is
cleare that neither the compasse doth
shewe the pole nor by the said compasse
the pole can be seene when it is equall
with him, nor when it is at one parte
nor at another, euen as I shoulde not
know, when I am right with yt which
I see not, nor when to one part nor to another.
This being vnderstood, I mind
to declare here whervpon they ground
them selues, which are of opinion that
the compasse hath a Northeasting & a
Northwesting, and the manner whereby
they say, that they know it, which is
this. The pilots which doe ma
                     ••
                  e their
compasses doe behold the North starre
to marke them by her, but because this
starre doth alwayes mooue, as before
it hath beene declared, therfore they tarrie
vntill the guardes be in the Northeast,
or in the Southeast, for then they
thinke, that the saide starre is in opposite
of the pole, vnder or aboue him, and
then they imagine a streke which descendeth
from the saide starre vnto the
Horizon, & they imagine another streke
which goeth frō the poynt of the flower
of the compasse, vnto that poynt of
the Horizō, so that in these two strekes,
which they put in that poynt, they looke
if that poynt be straight vnder ye North
starre, and so they speake what their opinion
is without hauing in this anye
other account or reason.
               To this is to be noted two thinges.
The first that the guardes being in any
of these sayde courses are not in opposite
of the North starre, and the pole rather
is a poynt different, for because to stand
in opposite, ye guards ought to be in the
Northeast, and by North, or in the
Southwest and by South.
               The seconde, that this making iust of
the compasse is alwayes done by night,
because by day there is no starre seene.
And from the starre vnto the Horizon
the distance is very great, by which the
true poynt that is corespondent to the
sayde starre, cannot be knowen in the
Horizon: But that at one time is 
                     ••
                  dged
one, and at another time another.
Likewise for the greate distance, that
is from the sayde compasse vnto the
poynt which is imagined in the horizō:
And as that poynt is imagined, and
inuisible, alwayes the sight goeth wauering
without establishing it selfe,
whiche hath happened sometimes to
me, making experience in this. And
therefore I saie, that according to the
perspectiue rule, the precise poynt of the
Horizon cannot be taken with the only
sight which is imagined vnder the said
starre, nor it can make iustly equall,
the poynt of the flower of the compasse,
by reasō there is no certayne poynt, and
the distance very great, which is to that
as is imagined. For the sight fayleth
when the obiect is very distāt. Wherby
I conclude, that it cannot bee precisely
knowen in the compasse, by the manner
as it is said, if he make the said distance
of the pole, nor howe muche it is, nor
I by this waye coulde euer attayne
to it.
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, of the inconueniences,
which may followe by the
Northeasting, and Norwesting of the
Compasses.
               
                  AMong other inconueniences,
that will follow in
the nauigation, if the
Compasses should make
the sayde variation or
difference, I finde foure
verye principals, which are these following.
               The first if it be true, that the compasses
haue a Northeasting, & a Norwesting,
likewise it may bee sayde, that

they haue a southeasting and southwesting,
and the reason is this, it is certain
that the variation or difference which
the compasse doth make to the parte of
the north, the same ought to bee made,
towardes the parte of the south, I will
say that how much the north pointe of
the compasse departeth from his owne
pointe, so much the south pointe of the
sayde compasse goeth distant to the other
parte, and so the north poynt of the
compasse doth northeast a quarter or
more, and the south pointe doth southwest
the like, for the north point cannot
goe aside, but the south pointe doth the
like. And so when you shall sayle towardes
the parte of the south, seeing that
there the north star is not seen to marke
by her, either it must be sayde, that of
that part the compasse doth not make
variation, or if it doe, that in the south,
it is to be known: and so when you shall
sayle to the riuer of plate, otherwise called
Rio de Plata, or to the straight of Magalanes,
or by the south sea, or to the cape
of Buena Esperanca which is in englishe,
good hope, and from thence to Calicut
or the Maluco, then wil be said, that the
south point of the compasse doth southeast
or southwest, and to say so shoulde
be a great errour.
               The second if the north point of the
compasse doe make the sayde distance of
his proper place and point, it is certaine
that the selfe same difference and distance
all the other windes of the nauigation
shoulde make from their proper
places, because howe muche any
winde doth departe from his proper
place, the selfe same all the others
shoulde doe by the agreeable order,
and equall distance, that they haue
in the compasse, the one with the other,
and so none woulde answere
to the certaine pointe, that is shewed
in the Horizon, so that likewise, there
woulde mooue from theire place, the
east, and the west, and all the other
windes, this woulde bee a great inconuenience,
for the compasses, woulde
neuer agree with the cardes, this is
because alwayes the windes of the
cardes are fixed in one pointe, without
moouing from thence, therefore if
the windes of the compasse doe make
many differences, it is certaine, that
they cannot be agreeable, and not agreeing:
The place whiche you goe
to seeke cannot in any manner of wise,
bee precisely hitte, but with greate
compasse, this will cause it by reason
the carde sayth one thing and the compasse
another, and so there cannot bee
had a certaine accounte, in the degrees
and leagues whiche are sayled,
rather all the accountes or reckoninges
of the leagues whiche is geuen
for a degree in euery course, shoulde bee
false seeing the pilot doth not sayle by
the course, whiche he thinketh he doth,
and so the reckoning whiche is made
by such a course, should not be certaine,
and if hee woulde geue allowaunce it
woulde bee nothing woorth, for hee
knoweth not of what parte nor howe
much, and so it woulde bee to adde one
errour to another.
               The thirde, if the variation or
difference whiche is spoken of the compasse,
were certaine it woulde followe,
that the compasses which were verie
distant of the sayde Meridian at the
east or at the west, they shoulde haue
great difference, if it be true, that howe
much more they are distant, so muche
more they haue the sayde defect, and
so all the earth, that shoulde be discouered,
with these compasses, and should
bee sette downe in the carde, shoulde
not be in his true pointe, the reason is,
because the principall windes of the
carde (that is to saye) the north and the
south, the east and the west, are marked
in foure fixed pointes equally distant,
which are the two poles and the
equinoctiall line: and according to
these all the other windes of the carde
are marked and parted, for if there
were put into the cardes any other
thing it woulde bee to make an errour
at the beginning, whiche is not conuenient
in a thing so certaine, as the
nauigation is, so that all these windes
are alwaies stedfast and fixed, in their

owne poyntes, without making variation
or any difference, so that all
which is placed with the compasse by
reason of his difference, will not be
aunswearable with the certayne point;
according to the windes which are in
the carde.
               The fourth, if the variation of the
Compasse bee true, immediatly would
follow greate difference betweene the
course and the altitude, because if I,
by my way or course doe seeke a lande,
whiche I knowe is in thirtie degrees,
or more or l
                     •
                  sse, and I sayle by one point
the whiche I haue chosen agreeable
to the Altitude. It is certayne, that
by reason of the variation of the sayde
Compasse. I shall not goe by this
course to that Lande whiche I goe to
seeke, but rather when I haue gone,
the sayde way, I shall finde my selfe
foorth of that place, whether I goe very
different, of the whiche, the errour
of the Compasse was cause thereof.
               And so in long wayes will alwayes
happen great hurtes & inconueniences.
Therefore I say, seeing that the said opinion
hath no more reason nor foundation,
then that which is before saide, that
such as doe followe it, let them looke to
the hurtes and daungers whiche may
followe them.
            
            
               The fifth Chapter, of the allowance, which
the Compasses haue, and howe it ought
not to be geuen them.
               
                  SOme which make compasses
haue a custome,
that at such time as they
doe set the stiles in the
rose of the windes, they
doe not precisely put the
flower of the rose vpon the pointes of
the stiles, whiche are touched with the
Lodestone, but they put them aside of
the flower halfe a poynt for̄ the Northeast,
and this they say they doe to geue
allowance to that whiche the Compasses
doe Northeast, so that the Compasse
doth remayne, made in suche manner
that the stiles, and the slower are not
vniforme in shewyng the North point,
because the flower doth shewe him to
one part, and the stiles doe shewe him
to another: this is a knowne errour,
and it ought not to bee done in no manner
of wise, for the reasons following.
               The first, if it be true, that the Compasses
doe northeast and northwest: it
is also said that they doe as well northeast
as northwest, so that the difference
which is giuen to the one part, the selfesame
is giuen to the other, and if it bee
so, by what reason shoulde bee giuen to
it the allowance, alwayes to the one
parte, and not to the other, therefore it
is certayne, that it to the nauigation
that is made towardes the West, the
allowance doth profite that whiche is
made towards the East, it would hurt,
seeing they are different the one with
the other, so that what it doth benefite
the one, it will hurt the other. Likewise,
with the selfe same cōpasses, which they
goe one any voyage, with the selfesame
they returne, without taking away, or
putting to any thing in them, thereby it
is cleere, that the saide errour is to bee
perceiued, seeing that the allowance
cannot serue to both partes.
               The seconde, if it bee true that in the
Meridian of the Acores the Compasse
doth not make anie difference from the
pole, I say that this cannot be knowne,
by the sayde compasses. (The reason is)
because the vertue of the Compasse is
in the stiles, and not in the flower, and
the pilot looketh not vnto the stiles, but
to the flower, because hee cannot see
the stiles, and the flower sheweth one,
and the stiles another, whereby as hee
ruleth himselfe by the flower he cannot
knowe the truth.
               Likewise what reason is there,
that there is geuen there to the Compasse,
as much allowance, as in other
partes which are farre of. Of this doth
follow, yt for the allowance or difference

put in ye said cōpasse cannot be knowne,
when the pilot is in the saide Meridian.
Therefore it is so as it hath beene
said, whē the stiles doe shew, the flower
doth not shew. And so ye said Meridian
cānot be knowen, if it be not in seeing
the saide Ilandes, by reason of the
difference that is betweene the stiles &
the flower.
               The third I say, that there is no reason,
wherfore so much allowance should
be geuen to the Compasse in the sayling
of a hundreth leagues, as in the sailing
of two thousand by the which reasons,
it is not conuenient, that to any cōpasse
the saide allowance or difference be geuen
betweene the flower and the stiles,
but yt they be made euen very precisely,
so that they may bee vniforme in their
shewing.
            
            
               The sixt Chapter, of an instrument, with
the which the Compasses may bee marked,
and knowne if they bee certayne
and true.
               
                  IT hath beene saide, that
by the poynt of the Horizon,
which is corespondent
to the North starre
the compasses cannot be
marked, because it is an
vncertayne point, so that because the cō
                  passe
is an instrument so litle & so subtil,
it is necessary to bring him in order with
another instrument, suche a one as the
sight and the reason may rectifie.
               Therefore when the pylot wil marke
his compasse, and know if he be true or
not, let him make ye instrument following:
with ye which I haue many times
marked compasses, and haue founde it
certayne, set downe your compasse vpright,
and put vpon him a little thinne
table & plaine, a little longer thē the cō
                  passe,
and narrower thē the rose, so that
the North and the South bee seene of
the rose: And in this table make a circle
with the compasse, wel neere of ye greatnesse
of the rose, & make in the saide circle
a streke very equall & straight, that
may goe from the North to the South
of the rose, so that the rose standing stil,
the streke of the circle of the table, bee
such, yt he come precisely with ye North
& south of the rose, this being done, put
in the poynt with the compasse made
in the middest of the circle of the table,
a little small maste vpright, and that he
be so great that the shadowe whiche he
maketh goe foorth of the circle, & being
put so, then set your compasse in the sun
before ye middest of the day, & there make
equall the streke of the circle with the
rose, as before is declared, & the cōpasse
standing quiet & the table fixed aboue,
doe you stay vntill the shadowe whiche
the little maste doth make, doe come
shortning vntill he come to the said circle,
and when he is come, make a point
there. And after that stay vntil the said
shadowe doe turne to goe foorth of the
circle, & when hee commeth to it, make
there another poynt, this being done,
take your compasse, and part iustly that
which is from one point to the other.
               And to this point of the partition, the
Meridian of that place is corespondent,
it is to be seene if the streke which was
made in the circle of ye North & South,
of the compasse doe come by the sayde
poynt of the partition, then the cōpasse
is good, and if not, there it is to bee
seene, to which parte hee maketh
difference, and howe much it is.
            
            The ende of the sixt booke.
         
         
            
            ¶The seuenth booke of the Moone, and how her ebbings and
flowinges doe serue in the Nauigation.
            
               The first Chapter, what thinge the moone is, and wherefore her light is not equall, but
alwayes increaseth or diminisheth.
               
                  THE Moone is
one of the seuen
Planettes, constituted
in the
first Heauē more
neere vnto vs
then anye of the
others, of this
some had opinion,
that shee had light of her selfe, and
when shee was in one signe with the
Sunne, by meanes of the greate light
of the Sunne, shee gaue no light, and
howe muche the more shee went from
the Sunne, so muche her light began
to appeare, and the neerer shee was,
the lesse it did appeare. This is not so,
because the Moone hath no cleerenesse

nor brightnesse of her owne, as in the
first booke the seuenth Chapter, hath
beene declared, the whiche is seene by
experience, because the Moone doth suffer
Eclipses, when shee is depriued of
the light of the Sunne, as there is
a lette, that shee cannot receiue it, she
remayneth darke. This light is let by
meanes of the Earth, as the Philosophers
and Astronomers doe shewe, because
in the moouing which the Sūne
and the Moone make, as they come

into the point, that the earth is directly
betweene the Sunne and the Moone,
the light of the Sunne geueth in the
earth, and so the Moone remayneth in
her owne likenesse, whiche is darke, so
that of her selfe, shee hath no light nor
cleerenes, but the sunne which is ouer
her, doth light her, although not euery
day alike towards vs, because as the
Moone is a body darke, when shee is
right vnder the sun, she is lightened of
the vppermost part, & remayneth darke
towards the earth, & therfore in her cō
                  iunction
with the sunne, we see her not.
And it is to be noted, yt in the coniunction
of ye moone, she & the Sun rise not in
one selfe place, but they rise at one selfe
time, & so by meanes of the light of the
sun, ye moone doth not appeare, because
comming foorth at one selfe time and in
one place the sunne woulde be eclipsed,
and so the eclipse of the sunne happeneth
in the coniunction of the moone, when
shee is in the heade or tayle of the Dragon.
And as by her moouing, shee goeth
away from the sunne, shee beginneth to
appeare vnto vs, and appeareth in the
manner of a thinne horne, and the farther
she goeth from the sunne, the more
she shineth to vs. And at the eyght day
she shineth parted in the middest, and
at the fifteenth day she is full, for then
she is farthest of the sunne, the which is
prooued because it happeneth, when the
sunne doth set to vs in the west, shee beginneth
to come foorth in the east, and
then all the brightnes, which the moone
receiueth of the sunne descendeth towards
vs, and after she beginneth to goe
neerer to the Sunne, by the same
manner that shee went departing, and
when the light goeth vpwarde the shadow
descendeth, and so she turneth decreasing,
in the like sort as she went increasing.
And it is to bee noted, that the
moone doth passe the circle of ye zodiack,
in tweentie seuen dayes & eight houres,
and although that in this time, she maketh
an end of her circle, there is geuen
to euery moone twenty niene daies & a
halfe. The reasō is, because in those said
twentie seuen dayes & eight houres, she
doth not ouertake the sunne, and therefore
passeth forward other two dayes,
and foure houres, a little thing more or
lesse, and so twentie nine dayes decying
past, aud twelue houres, and a few minutes,
in some more, and in others lesse,
the coniunction of the Moone and the
Sun is made. This is according to the
halfe mouing of the Moone, wherwith
is made equall, the mouing of all the
dayes, because according to the true
mouing which she maketh, at sometime
it is sayd to be slow, and at other times
swift, the which moouing is also made
equall by the middle moouing, this is
largely declared by the king Don Alonso
in his tables.
            
            
               The seconde Chapter, of the Golden number,
& how it is to be reckoned from
one to nienteene, and wherefore no
more nor lesse.
               
                  IT is a necessary thing to
take out the reckoning
of the Moone by the
Golden number, for that
the Golden number is
a thing whereby many
reckonings are made, and therefore
it is called the number of Golde, wherof
I minde to declare in this Chapter,
that of the Golden number whiche maketh
to our purpose, where I saye that
this reckoning of the Golden number
is, from one to nieneteene, so that the
Golden number is accomplished in the
time of nieneteene yeeres, and the nineteene
yeeres beeing past, returneth agayne
to one and so for euer. The reason
why it hath this number, & no more nor
lesse is because the nineteene yeeres beyng
past, the Moone turneth to one only
day, of the yeere, of the Sunne, and in
this time shee finisheth and endeth all
those diuersities of coniunctions and
fulnesse, and other aspectes, which shee
hath with the Sunne in one only day,
degree, and minute, in this manner following.
               I put the case that the Moone made
coniunction the first daye to Ianuarie
of this yeere. The yeere followyng

shee will not make the same coniunction
in the same poynt, but before or after,
and so we will speake the like of the
fulnesse, and other aspectes. And as
these bee not in an infinite number, it
is certaine that they are comprehended
vnder some number, or space of time.
               These are those sayde nieneteene
yeeres, in the which are to be noted, as
it is saide, all the diuersities of aspectes,
aswell of coniunctions, and fulnesse,
as of any other cause, which the moone
maketh with the Sunne, in such sorte,
that the nieneteene yeeres beeyng ended.
The Moone doth not turne to
make a new coniunctiō or opposition in
any degree or poynt of the Zodiacke,
that in the sayde time, shee hath not already
done, and by this reason this reckoning
of the golden number is ended
and finished in the time of nieneteene
yeeres, and not in more nor lesse.
               
                  
                     ❧A Rule to knowe the Golden number of euerie
yeere.
                  TO knowe euery yeere howe many are of the Golden number, looke on the numbers
following and counting in the first house, the yeere of our Lorde 1545. which
are seuen of the Golden number, and one house is to bee reckoned euerye
yeere, and the last house beeyng ended, returne to the first and so for euer.
                  1545. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.
                  16. 17. 18. 19. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
                  VVHen you will knowe in any yeere that you are in, howe many are of the Golden
number, without looking on the booke, see in what yeere you
runne, and leauing out the thousand fiue hundreth, of the rest take out
the nieneteenes, and that which remayneth, so much is of the Golden number
that yeere, and if the number of the yeeres come iust in nieneteenes, that
yeere is nieneteene of the Golden number.
               
            
            
               The thirde Chapter, wherein is declared
the day and houre, wherein
the Moone maketh coniunction
in euerye Moneth of the yeere for
euer.
               
                  THere hath been declared
in the Chapter before,
how it should be known
euery yeere howe manye
are of ye golden nūber, according
as the account in it is declared,
and because it is necessary for the nauigation
to knowe in euery moneth the
day and houre of the coniunction, therfore
in this Chapter, shalbee declared,
how a man may know euery day what
day and houre the coniunction of the
Moone was, or shalbe. And for this are
to be noted, two things, the first, yt this
account goeth taken out by the Golden
number, and by him you must rule

your selfe, euen according as the number
is, which that yeere, wherein you
are, doe runne of the Golden number.
In that sayde yeere, looke the Moneth
where you are, or the Moneth that you
woulde knowe, and in him you shall
find the day, and houre that the Moone
was or shalbee in coniunction. The seconde
is, that in this account a day is
vnderstood from this day the middest
of the day, vntill to morrowe, the middest
of the day, so that if wee saye, this
day is the fifteenth day of the Moneth
it is vnderstood, frō this day the middest
of the day, vntill to morrowe the
middest of the day, and from the middest
of the day to morrowe, doth sixeteene
beginne, because this is the manner,
that the Astronomers doe reckon
the dayes, so that those houres which
are ouer and aboue, the dayes are from
the halfe day forwarde.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           If they be one of the Golden
number.
                           If they be two of the Golden
number.
                           If they bee three of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           19
                           16
                           Ianuarie.
                           8
                           20
                           Ianuarie.
                           27
                           14
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           18
                           6
                           Februarie.
                           7
                           13
                           Februarie.
                           25
                           9
                        
                        
                           marche.
                           19
                           7
                           marche.
                           8
                           4
                           marche.
                           27
                           1
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           18
                           1
                           Aprill.
                           6
                           16
                           Aprill.
                           25
                           4
                        
                        
                           may.
                           17
                           9
                           may.
                           6
                           2
                           may.
                           25
                           0
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           15
                           15
                           Iune.
                           4
                           9
                           Iune.
                           23
                           8
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           14
                           23
                           Iuly.
                           3
                           15
                           Iuly.
                           22
                           16
                        
                        
                           August.
                           13
                           8
                           August.
                           1
                           7
                           August.
                           21
                           0
                        
                        
                           September.
                           11
                           21
                           September.
                           29
                           19
                           September.
                           19
                           8
                        
                        
                           October.
                           11
                           12
                           October.
                           29
                           9
                           October.
                           18
                           19
                        
                        
                           Nouember
                           10
                           6
                           Nouember.
                           28
                           1
                           Nouember.
                           17
                           7
                        
                        
                           December.
                           10
                           1
                           December.
                           27
                           20
                           December.
                           16
                           22
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           If they bee foure of the Golden number.
                           If they bee sixe of the Golden number.
                           If they be eight of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           15
                           0
                           Ianuarie.
                           23
                           20
                           Ianuarie.
                           2
                           3
                        
                        
                           Februarie
                           14
                           19
                           Februarie.
                           22
                           9
                           Februarie.
                           31
                           22
                        
                        
                           Marche.
                           16
                           3
                           marche.
                           22
                           22
                           marche.
                           31
                           22
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           14
                           19
                           Aprill.
                           21
                           8
                           Aprill.
                           29
                           17
                        
                        
                           May.
                           14
                           9
                           may.
                           21
                           4
                           may.
                           29
                           3
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           12
                           11
                           Iune.
                           19
                           19
                           Iune.
                           27
                           14
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           12
                           7
                           Iuly.
                           19
                           9
                           Iuly.
                           27
                           3
                        
                        
                           August.
                           10
                           16
                           August.
                           18
                           0
                           August.
                           25
                           29
                        
                        
                           September.
                           9
                           1
                           September.
                           16
                           13
                           September.
                           24
                           12
                        
                        
                           October.
                           8
                           10
                           October.
                           16
                           2
                           October.
                           23
                           6
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           6
                           20
                           Nouember.
                           14
                           14
                           Nouember.
                           22
                           23
                        
                        
                           December.
                           6
                           7
                           December.
                           14
                           1
                           December.
                           22
                           15
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           If they bee fiue of the Golden number.
                           If they bee seuen of the Golden number.
                           If they bee niene of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           4
                           20
                           Ianuarie.
                           12
                           11
                           Ianuarie.
                           21
                           4
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           3
                           11
                           Februarie.
                           10
                           21
                           Februarie.
                           19
                           15
                        
                        
                           Marche.
                           5
                           3
                           March
                           12
                           8
                           Marche.
                           21
                           0
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           3
                           20
                           Aprill.
                           10
                           19
                           Aprill.
                           19
                           8
                        
                        
                           May.
                           3
                           13
                           May.
                           10
                           7
                           May.
                           18
                           16
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           2
                           2
                           Iune.
                           8
                           20
                           Iune.
                           17
                           0
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           1
                           4
                           Iuly.
                           8
                           10
                           Iulie.
                           16
                           9
                        
                        
                           August.
                           29
                           16
                           August.
                           7
                           2
                           August.
                           14
                           21
                        
                        
                           September.
                           28
                           2
                           September.
                           5
                           17
                           September.
                           13
                           12
                        
                        
                           October.
                           27
                           12
                           October.
                           5
                           10
                           October.
                           13
                            
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           25
                           22
                           Nouember.
                           4
                           1
                           Nouember.
                           12
                           1
                        
                        
                           December.
                           25
                           8
                           December.
                           3
                           15
                           December.
                           11
                           19
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           If they bee tenne of the Golden number.
                           If they be twelue of the Golden number.
                           If they bee foureteene of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           10
                           12
                           Ianuarie.
                           17
                           9
                           Ianuarie.
                           25
                           7
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           9
                           3
                           Februarie.
                           18
                           15
                           Februarie
                           23
                           23
                        
                        
                           marche.
                           9
                           16
                           marche.
                           17
                           21
                           Marche.
                           24
                           15
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           8
                           
                              
                                 •
                              
                           
                           Aprill.
                           16
                           11
                           Aprill.
                           23
                           7
                        
                        
                           may.
                           7
                           9
                           may.
                           15
                           23
                           May.
                           22
                           22
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           5
                           16
                           Iune.
                           14
                           8
                           Iune.
                           21
                           13
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           4
                           23
                           Iuly.
                           13
                           16
                           Iuly.
                           21
                           1
                        
                        
                           August.
                           3
                           7
                           August.
                           12
                           00
                           August.
                           19
                           13
                        
                        
                           September.
                           1
                           18
                           September.
                           10
                           8
                           September.
                           18
                           1
                        
                        
                           October.
                           31
                           8
                           October.
                           9
                           17
                           October.
                           17
                           11
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           29
                           19
                           Nouember.
                           8
                           5
                           Nouember.
                           15
                           22
                        
                        
                           December.
                           29
                           14
                           December.
                           7
                           18
                           December.
                           15
                           8
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           If they be eleuen of the Golden number.
                           If they be thirteene of the Golden number.
                           If they be fifteene of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           28
                           8
                           Ianuarie.
                           6
                           10
                           Ianuarie.
                           13
                           18
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           27
                           1
                           Februarie.
                           5
                           3
                           Februarie.
                           12
                           6
                        
                        
                           March
                           28
                           15
                           Marche.
                           6
                           21
                           Marche.
                           13
                           19
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           27
                           1
                           Aprill.
                           5
                           15
                           Aprill.
                           12
                           9
                        
                        
                           May.
                           26
                           9
                           May.
                           5
                           6
                           May.
                           12
                           0
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           24
                           16
                           Iune.
                           3
                           19
                           Iune.
                           10
                           20
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           23
                           23
                           Iulie.
                           3
                           6
                           Iuly.
                           10
                           5
                        
                        
                           August.
                           22
                           7
                           August.
                           1
                           15
                           August.
                           8
                           20
                        
                        
                           September.
                           20
                           17
                           September.
                           29
                           10
                           September.
                           7
                           10
                        
                        
                           October.
                           20
                           5
                           October.
                           28
                           19
                           October.
                           7
                           0
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           18
                           21
                           Nouember.
                           27
                           6
                           Nouember.
                           5
                           13
                        
                        
                           December.
                           18
                           14
                           December.
                           26
                           18
                           December.
                           5
                           0
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           If they be sixteene of the Golden number.
                           If they be eighteene of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           3
                           10
                           Ianuarie.
                           12
                           2
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           2
                           20
                           Februarie.
                           10
                           14
                        
                        
                           marche.
                           3
                           6
                           marche.
                           11
                           0
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           1
                           17
                           Aprill.
                           0
                           7
                        
                        
                           may.
                           1
                           4
                           may.
                           8
                           8
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           29
                           15
                           Iune.
                           6
                           23
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           28
                           21
                           Iuly.
                           6
                           8
                        
                        
                           August.
                           27
                           13
                           August.
                           5
                           19
                        
                        
                           September.
                           26
                           6
                           September.
                           3
                           8
                        
                        
                           October.
                           25
                           22
                           October.
                           3
                           1
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           23
                           13
                           Nouember.
                           1
                           19
                        
                        
                           December.
                           24
                           1
                           December.
                           1
                           14
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           If they bee seuenteene of the Golden number.
                           If they be nineteene of the Golden number.
                        
                        
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                           Monethes
                           Daies
                           Houres
                        
                        
                           Ianuarie.
                           22
                           12
                           Ianuarie.
                           30
                           5
                        
                        
                           Februarie.
                           20
                           22
                           Februarie.
                           28
                           14
                        
                        
                           March
                           22
                           7
                           Marche.
                           30
                           1
                        
                        
                           Aprill.
                           20
                           16
                           Aprill.
                           28
                           9
                        
                        
                           May.
                           20
                           1
                           May.
                           27
                           16
                        
                        
                           Iune.
                           18
                           11
                           Iune.
                           25
                           13
                        
                        
                           Iuly.
                           17
                           23
                           Iulie.
                           25
                           6
                        
                        
                           August.
                           16
                           14
                           August.
                           23
                           16
                        
                        
                           September.
                           15
                           7
                           September.
                           22
                           4
                        
                        
                           October.
                           15
                           1
                           October.
                           21
                           20
                        
                        
                           Nouember.
                           13
                           19
                           Nouember.
                           20
                           14
                        
                        
                           December.
                           13
                           11
                           December.
                           20
                           19
                        
                     
                  
                  It is to be noted, that for
the coniunctions of the
moone before written, shalbe
taken out, the opposition
or the fulnesse of the moone
that is, by reckoning fourteene
dayes, and sixeteene
houres, after the coniunction,
a little thing more or
lesse.
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, of a
shorte account or reckoning
to knowe without
the booke briefly the
dayes whiche the moone
hath in any mooneth of the
yeere.
               
                  OF the accounte
of
ye Moone
which before
hath
beene declared,
you may at all
times when you will,
know how many dayes
olde ye moone is, & what
day & houre the coniunction
was, but because

without the booke it cannot be known.
I thought good to put heere a short account;
that by memorie it may bee
knowne, howe many dayes olde the
Moone is, at all times when you will
know it: the which is to be reckoned i
                     •
                  
this manner.
               In what day soeuer you are in, looke
howe many bee of concurrent in that
yeere which you runne, according as
you shall finde in the account before

                     〈◊〉
                   and ioyne with them the number
of the Monethes whiche are past
from March vnto that moneth, & likewise
ioyne the dayes of the moneth
which you haue vnto the day wherein
you are: these three numbers together
if they passe of thirtie, those whiche are
more, the Moone is olde, and if they
bee thirtie iust, the Moone is in couiunction,
and if they come not to thirty,
those which are, so many dayes old the
Moone is.
               
                  An Example.
                  In the yeere of 1545. we haue seuē
                     teene
of concurrent, therefore the twentie
of August, I will knowe how many
dayes old the Moone is: I say that
of cōcurrent is seuenteene, ioyne sixe of ye
monethes which are frō March to August,
it amounteth to twentie three, and
twentie of the Moneth are forty three,
take away thirty, there remaineth thirteene,
so many daies the Moone is old,
the twentie day of August. And by this
manner you shall take out the dayes yt
the Moone is old, euery time that you
will.
                  1545 17 
                        •
                     8 9 20 1 12 23
4 15 26 7 18 29 11
22 314 25 6
               
               
                  In the yeere of 1545. we haue seuenteene
of concurrent, the next yeere following, we
haue tweentie eight, and so reckoning in euery
yeere one house of these and it serueth
for euer.
                  OF this account of the concurrent,
knowe yee, that it increaseth euerie
yeere eleuen, and it cannot passe aboue
thirtie, and if they doe passe thirtie, you
must leaue the thirtie, and take that
which remayneth. And so know this
reckoning of the concurrent quickly by
the head, doe you in this manner set
downe in the roote of the thumbe, ten,
and in the ioynt of the middest twenty,
and the vppermost thirtie, and this being
done put the Goldē number in the
three ioynts, reckoning one in the roote
of the thumbe, and in the middle ioynt,
two, and aboue three, & turning againe
beneath foure, and in the middest fiue,
and so discoursing vntill you come to
the Golden number of that yeere, and
if it staye in the roote of the thumbe you
shall ioyne that whiche it is of Golden
number, with the tenne that was put
there, & ioyning one number with as
many more: you shal haue of concurrent
as much as both nūbers doth amount
too, and if the Golden number d
                        •
                     e rest
in the middle ioynt you shall ioyne with
the Golden number, the twentie that
was put there, and all beeyng ioyned
together, it wilbe so many of concurrēt,
and if the Goldē number, doe rest in the
vppermost parte of the thumbe, ioyne
with the Golden number, the thirtie
which was put there, hauing alwayes
remembraunce, when all the number
doth passe thirtie, you shall leaue the
thirtie, and that whiche remayneth, is
the concurrent.
               
            
            
               The fifth Chapter, how by the dayes of the
Moone, and the course where the Sunne
will bee, shalbee knowen at what houre
the tyde will come euery day.
               
                  ALL persons which doe
doe sayle, it is necessary
that they knowe howe
the tides doe fall euerye
day, & at what houre it
is full Sea, or lowe water,
for this is conuenient, aswell for to
enter in by any bard hauen, as for other
things, which may serue in the nauigation.
               Therefore in this Chapter, I wil declare,
howe the reckoning of the sayde
tides ought to be kept, & at what houre
they come, for to profite thereby, of the
whiche is to bee vnderstood, that the

Moone goeth the thirtie two windes
of the nauigatiō in 24. houres, in the
which she maketh her dayly moouing,
with more yt she hath gone of her owne
mouing, & in this time she bringeth two
tydes, that is to say, two floods & two
ebbes, so yt the sea floweth sixe houres,
& ebbeth other sixe, which are twelue,
and the like is done in other twelue,
but it is to be noted, yt these flowinges
and ebbinges are not equall, nor alike
in all times & places, as muche as toucheth
the time they bee not equall, because
seuen dayes the waters goe rising,
and wee call them spring rides, &
other seuen they goe decreasing or 
                     •
                  ayling,
& we call them nepe tides: so that
from the first day of the Moone vnto
the eight day, which is the quarter, the
waters goe decreasing, and from the
quarter vnto ye fifteenth which is ye ful
Moone, they goe increasing, and from
the full Moone to the thirde quarter,
they goe decreasing, and from that to
the coniunction they goe increasing: &
declaring this more at large, I saye
that the first daye of the Moone, is the
head of the water, and the second day,
the increasing is as greate, and the
thirde day well neere the like, and the
fourth day it decreaseth, and so it goeth
euerye daye decreasing, vntill the
Moone bee eight dayes olde, and
then it is altogether nepe tydes: and
the nienth is the like, and the tenth
well neere alike. The eleuenth it beginneth
to increase something, and so
it goeth increasing euery day vnto the
fifteenth which is full Moone, whiche
doth turne to bee the head of the water.
And the sixeteenth it increaseth
the like, and the seuenteene well neere
the like. The eighteenth it decreaseth ,
and so it goeth decreasing euerye daye
vnto the two and twentie, whiche is
altogether nepe tides, and the three
and twentie it is the point of the water,
and goeth increasing euerye day
vnto the thirtye day which is the coniunction.
And the first day it turneth
to bee the head of the water, and so
successuiely, it goeth increasing and decreasing
as it hath becue
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  eclare
                     •
                  .
Likewise it is to be vnderstood, that
these increasinges, are not at all tunes
equall or alike, but in some 
                     〈◊〉
                  
they are greater and in other 
                     〈…〉
                  
as by experience wee see.
               Likewise it is to bee noted that
these increasinges and decreasinge
                     •
                   in
all plates are not alike, for th
                     •
                  rauses
that I will speake of.
               And for to knowe the howe, when
the tides doe come, it is to bee vnderstood,
that alwayes the Moone being
in the Northeast it is full Sea, and in
the Southeast lowe water, and in the
Southwest full Sea, and in the
Northwest lowe water.
               And to knowe when the Moone is
in euery one of these courses, it must
bee taken out by the course where the
Sunne is in this manner.
               The first day, of the Moone, the
Sunne beeyng in the Northeast and
by East, the Moone is in the Northeast,
and that houre full Sea.
               The seconde day, of the Moone,
the Sunne beeyng in the Northeast is
full Sea.
               The thirde day, when the Sunne
is in the East and by north it wilbe ful
Sea.
               The fourth day, the Sunne in the
East full Sea.
               The fifth day, the Sunne in the
East, and by South, the Moone in the
Northeast.
               The sixte day, the Sunne in the
Southeast, the Moone in the Northeast.
               The seuenth day, the Sunne in the
Southeast, and by east, the Moone in
the Northeast.
               The eight day, the Sunne in the
Southeast, the Moone in the Northeast.
               The nienth day, the Sunne in the
Southeast and by south, the Moone in
the Northeast.
               The tenth day, the Sunne in the
South Southeast, the Moone in the
Northeast.
               The eleuenth day, the Sunne in the

South, and by east, the Moone in the
Northeast.
               The twelfth day, the sunne in the
South, the Moone in the Northeast.
               The thirteenth day, the sunne in the
South, and by west, the Moone in the
Northwest.
               The foureteenth day, the sun in the
South, Southwest, the Moone in the
Northeast.
               The fifteenth day, this day we reckō
two quarters together, by reason that
the poyntes are thirtie two, and the
daies thirty, we giue in the middest one
quarter, and in the end another, so that
at the fifteenth day the Sunne beeyng
in the Southwest, the Moone wilbee
in the Northeast, & this houre it wilbe
full Sea.
               The sixeteenth day, the sun being in
the Southwest & by west, the Moone
wilbe, in the Southwest, & that houre
wilbe full Sea.
               The seuenteenth day, the sun in the
West, Southwest, the Moone in the
southwest is full Sea.
               The eighteenth day, the sunne in the
West, and by south, the Moone in the
southwest full Sea.
               The nineteenth day, the sunne in the
West, the Moone in the South West,
full Sea.
               The twentieth day, the sunne in the
West, and by north, the Moone in the
Southwest.
               The twenty one day, the sunne in the
West, Northwest, the Moone in the
Southwest.
               The twenty two day, the sunne in the
Northwest, and by west the moone in
the Southwest.
               The twentie three day, the sunne in
the Northwest, the moone in the southwest.
               The twentie soure day, the sunne in
the Northwest, and by north, the moone
in the Southwest.
               The twenty fiue day, the sunne in the
nor northwest, the moone in the southwest.
               The twenty sixe day, the sunne in the
North and by west, the moone in the
Southwest.
               The twenty seuen day, the sunne in the
North, the moone in the southwest.
               The twenty eight day, the sunne in
the North, and by east, the moone in
the southwest.
               The twenty niene day, the sunne at
North Northeast, the moone at southwest,
and at that houre full Sea.
               The thirtie day, which is the cōiunctiō
is to be reckoned two points, which
are the Northeast and by north, and
the Northeast.
            
            
               The sixte Chapter, wherein is declared
more at large, the aforesaide Chapter,
with a demonstration.
               
                  OF the account which before
hath beene declared,
you shall take out euery
day at what houre the
tyde commeth, the sunne
beeing in the poynt or
course as before is mentioned. But for
ye better vnderstanding therof, it is to be
noted, that alwayes at 12. of the clocke
in the day you haue the sunne at south,
if you be more towards the North thē
the sunne, so that at sixe of the clocke in
the morning you had it at East, and at
nine at Southeast, and at three after
the middest of the day, you shall haue it
at southwest, and at sixe, at West, and at
nine, at Northwest, and at twelue of
the night, at North.
               And at three after midnight at northeast,
and if the sunne be more towardes
the North, then at the middest of
the day, you shall haue him at North,
and at twelue of the night at South.
And by these courses you shall take out
the rest, according to the place and time,
wherein you shal finde your selfe. Likewise
it is to bee noted, as before hath
beene declared.
               The Moone beyng in the Northeast
or Southwest, it is full Sea, and in the
Southeast and Northwest, it is low
water. And to knowe when hee is
in these courses, the course must bee
sought where the Sunne should stand
according as the dayes of the moone
are,
               
                  
And of this is vnderstood that although
here goeth written, the courses
where the Sunne ought to bee, because
the Moone should be in the Northeast,
and that houre full Sea. Likewise it
is to bee vnderstood, that the Sunne
being in the contrary course of that, the
Moone 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the Southwest, and
it wilbe likewise full Sea, and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
wilbe at the lowe water. And in this
sort the account serueth, as well 
                     〈◊〉
                  
the first tide, as for the secōd, the which
may bee, taken out by the figure 
                     〈◊〉
                  
lowing.
               
               Of this figure is to bee noted, that beeyng knowne howe many dayes the
moone is olde, and seeking it in this account, and the Sunne beeing come to
that course, where the like number is, or to his contrary, that houre will bee
full Sea, keeping reckoning that at twelue of the clocke of the day the Sunne
is at South, and at twelue of the night at North: And that in three quarters
of an houre the Sunne passeth from one poynt to another.
            
            
               
               The seuenth Chapter, howe by the houre
wherein the coniunction was, the tyde
may be knowen, and the allowance that
ought to be giuen to the riuers.
               
                  IT hath beene declared,
howe it shalbe knowne,
at what houre the tides
come euery day, by counting
the number of daies
of the moone, & by that
meanes looking in the course where ye
sunne shoulde bee, as in the Chapters
before written hath beene declared. And
besides this, it seemed good to mee, to
put here a rule, and account, because not
only by the dayes of the moone, & courses
of the sunne, but by the houres, the
houre beeyng knowen wherin the coniunction
was, shalbee knowen euerye
day, at what houre of the day or the
night, the tide will come: and for this
you must knowe the account following.
               Looke in what day and what houre
the moone was in coniunction, and beyng
knowne, you shall finde that euerie
day the tyde doth come foure quintos
or foure fiue partes of an houre
forwarde, so that if the tyde come this
day at one of the clocke, to morrowe
hee will come at one and foure fiue
partes of an houre, and the nexte day
at two, and three fiue partes, and so the
rest of the dayes as by this account appeareth.
               
                  
                     
                        Dayes.
                        Houres.
                        Fifthes.
                     
                     
                        1
                         
                        4
                     
                     
                        2
                        1
                        3
                     
                     
                        3
                        2
                        2
                     
                     
                        4
                        3
                        1
                     
                     
                        5
                        4
                         
                     
                     
                        6
                        4
                        4
                     
                     
                        7
                        5
                        3
                     
                     
                        8
                        6
                        2
                     
                     
                        6
                        7
                        1
                     
                     
                        10
                        8
                         
                     
                     
                        12
                        8
                        4
                     
                     
                        12
                        9
                        3
                     
                     
                        13
                        10
                        2
                     
                     
                        14
                        11
                        1
                     
                     
                        15
                        12
                        2
                              •
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        16
                        12
                        4
                     
                     
                        17
                        13
                        3
                     
                     
                        18
                        14
                        2
                     
                     
                        19
                        15
                        1
                     
                     
                        20
                        16
                         
                     
                     
                        21
                        16
                        4
                     
                     
                        22
                        17
                        3
                     
                     
                        23
                        18
                        2
                     
                     
                        24
                        19
                        1
                     
                     
                        25
                        20
                         
                     
                     
                        26
                        20
                        4
                     
                     
                        27
                        21
                        3
                     
                     
                        28
                        22
                        2
                     
                     
                        29
                        23
                        1
                     
                     
                        30
                        24
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
IT is to bee noted that the houres here

                     〈◊〉
                  , being ioyned with the houres
of the moone which she hath in the coniunction,
besides those dayes that bee
more then foure and twentie, there shalbe
taken out once twelue, or twise if it
he needefull, and t
                     •
                  ose whiche remayne
shall bee the houre in the which the tide

                     〈◊〉
                   come. Item it is to be noted that
the accountes which before hath beene
declared, whereby may be knowne, at
what houre the tide will come, is as
much as to the naturall course of the
moone, more it is so that accidentally, it
is not in all partes, or in all coastes that
the tides are equall, although they bee
in one Meridiā, they come not so at one
time, by reason of the great currents, or
the straightes of the Sea, great gulfes,
or entraunce of Lande into the Sea, or
windes, or for other cause, by the which
alwaies the practise of the Land ought
to be looked vnto.
               Likewise, it is to be vnderstood, that
there ought to bee giuen allowance to
the riuers, because they make not the
tides according to the barre, and there
should be giuē them allowance, a quarter
later because in the coastes, the tides
beginneth to ebbe more speedily, and in
the riuers it cannot bee done, by reason
of the holding backe or stay of ye waters
that commeth from aboue, and the like
is to bee giuen at the flowing, this is
common, but the allowance is not alwayes
equall to all riuers, because
some doe flowe and ebbe more then other
some.
               This is by reason that some riuers
haue more current then other some,
and likewise when the flowing is
holpen with winde, therefore the disposition
of the place is to bee looked
on.
            
            The ende of the seuenth Booke.
         
         
            
            
               ❧The eight booke of the dayes of the yeere.
            
               The first Chapter, what thing a day is, and howe it is reckoned, and in howe manye
partes it is deuided.
               
                  THis name day, is
takē in 2. sortes,
that is to saye, a
natural day, and
an artificial day.
The naturall
day is a time of
foure & twentye
houres, and is
called a naturall day, because hee is equall
in all partes of the earth, habitable,
the which day diuers nations doe
reckon by different wayes. The Athenienses,
and Egyptians doe reckon it
from the setting of the sunne, vntill the
next day, at ye same houre. The Greeks,
Persians, and Babilonians from the
time that it riseth. The Romaines doe

reckon it from mydnight. The Astronomers
doe reckon it from the middest of
one day to the middest of the next day:
the reason wherefore the Astronomers
doe reckon them so, is that which Ptholome
writeth in the seconde and thirde
of the Almagesto, and Alstragano in
the eleuenth difference where they say,
that the cause wherefore the Astronomers
doe begin the naturall day, the

sunne being in the Meridian, & not whē
he riseth, nor when he setteth, is because
the dayes in the rising of the sunne, and
setting of him, are different according as
euery habitation is neere, or distant of
the Equinoctiall line, & the Meridians
in all the habitations are vniforme, because
all them doe passe by the poles:
so that the day is greater or lesser in one
habitation then the another, because as
it is not equall, which the Sunne doth
light in the Horizontes, Obliques, so it
is not equall in all partes, when hee riseth,
and when he setteth.
               In such sort, that how much the variation
of the Horizon is, so much is the
variation of the daies in length or shortnesse,
and if this shoulde hee made euen
for all Horizontes, it were conuenient,
to haue for euery one a Table of equallitie
of the dayes, where shoulde bee
well neere an infinite number, so that
the Astronomers to flie so great adiuersitie,
began the day, in the middest of the
day, because one is sufficient for al parts,
and seeing that wee haue spoken of the
natural day, let vs speake also of the artificiall
day.
               The artificial day is the time which
the sunne doth shewe light vnto vs, going
aboue our Hemispherio, and is called
the artificial day, because he is different
in diuerse parts, & because ye Artificers
doe make their woorks in him, the
which is deuided into foure parts accoring
to 4 differēces, which the Sun maketh.
In ye first he shineth, in the secōd he
heateth, in the third hee burneth, in the
fourth hee warneth, the night consequently
hath foure partes. The first is
the first sleepe, the second is mydnight,
when all thinges holde their peace, because
it is no apt time to woorke anye
thing, the thirde when the Cocke croweth,
ye fourth whē the day doth begin to
appeare. There is another time called
Cropusculo, and is, when it is neyther
day nor night: so betweene day and
night, as betweene night and day.
               This Cropusculo is that bright time,
whiche wee haue in the Morning, before
the Sunne riseth, as likewise that
whiche wee haue in the Euening, after
that the Sunne is set: vntill the darknesse
of the night doe come.
               This Cropusculo is greater or lesser,
according as the day is greate or little,
and so in the Sommer wee haue a
greater Cropusculo then in the Winter,
and in that parte it shoulde bee greater,
where the dayes are greater, and so we
see, that in Flaunders in the Sommer,
at tē of the clocke in ye night, although it
be two houres after Sunne let, there is
so muche light, that any letter may be
read.
            
            
               The second Chapter, howe in the artificiall
day the Sunne riseth and setteth,
differently to suche as inhabite in the
worlde.
               
                  IT hath beene declared,
what thing a daye is,
and howe the naturall
day, and artificiall day,
are vnderstood. In this
I will speake howe the
sunne comming foorth in the Horizon, &
rising vp by our Hemispherio, commeth
to the Meridian, and from thence descē
                  ding,
and cōmeth to the orrident, where
he setteth to vs, and as this is done indifferently
to suche as inhabite in the
worlde, of the which it is to be vnderstoode,
that the going foorth which the
sunne maketh, euery day by our horizon,
is not equall one day with another, and
that this is true, experience doth shewe
it. And to be likwise so, the quantitie or
greatnes is not equall one day with another,
but of this is to be noted, that in
ye degrees or distance of the equinoctial,
wherein the sunne cōmeth foorth euery
day, in the same he setteth, likewise it is
to bee noted, that although the day bee
great or litle, alwayes a man being in
one place, the sun commeth euery day at
the middest of the day, into one self Meridian,
without any manner of variation.
               
                  
Likewise it is to be vnderstood, that
because the sunne commeth not foorth
equally at one time to all such as inhabite
in the world, nor all of them doe see
him at one time, so the middest of the
day is not made at one time to all. In
such sort, that how much the more anie
place is more easterly, then other, by so
muche, such is inhabite there, doe see
the sun rather, & doth begin to appeare
rather to thē then to suche as are more
westerly. And in this māner successiuely,
euen as ye sun goeth rising aboue the
Horizon of some, so hee goeth shewing &
appearing indifferent partes to others:
so that when to vs it is the middest of
the day, suche as are more westerly, to
some it wilbe xi. a clocke, to other x, &
to others it. And so how much more distant
he is of vs towardes the west, so
much the later the sunne cōmeth foorth
to them, and so by the saide reason, hee
commeth later to their Meridian, I say
more late to our respect, and such which
are from vs more easterly, because the
sunne came foorth to them first, then to
vs, they had the day first. And in this
manner, is to be vnderstood that at the
xxiiii. houres, that the sunne goeth about
the world, when to some it is day,
to othersome it is night, & whē to some
it is ye morning, to others it is the Euening,
and when he riseth to some, he setteth
to othersome, and when to some it
is midday, to others it is midnight.
This is because as the sunne mooueth
himselfe rounde about the world, & alwayes
goeth lightning the halfe of the
roundnes, doth cause the said differēces.
And it is to be noted, yt in the moouing
which the sunne maketh, he mooueth euery
house by the roundnesse of water
and earth, 262 leagues, because the vi.
thousand three hundred leagues being
parted, which ye roundnesse hath in the
xxiiii. houres of the natural day, it commeth
to euery houre 262 leagues. And
so by this reckoning, looking what
houre it is of the day in the place where
a man as, he shall knowe what houre it
is in any other parte, knowing the distance
of the leagues which are to that
said place.
            
            
               The third Chapter, howe that vnder the Equinoctiall,
the dayes and nightes are alwayes
equall.
               
                  IT was an opinion of
some auncient writers,
that vnder the Equinoctiall,
and likewise all the
Torrida Zona was inhabitable,
the whiche they
beleeued, because yt there the sunne doth
send his perpendiculer beames, there
should bee such excessiue heate, that it
was not habitable: of this opinion was
Virgil, and Ouid, & other singular men.
Others there were, whiche healde that
some parte was habitable, following
Ptholome, which in the booke that was
compared to the arte of the Sphera, saith,
it is not conuenient, yt we should thinke
the Torrida Zona to be altogether inhabitable.
Other there were, which heald
that there it was not only temperate, &
without too much beate, but also most
temperate. And this is affirmed by S.
Isidore, in the first of the Etimologias,
where hee saith that the earthly Paradise
is in the East part vnder the Equinoctiall,
a most temperate place, and
Ptholome likewise saith in the thirde of
the Quadri partiti, that all the temperate
complections doe proceede of the Equinoctiall.
The experience doth nowe
shew vs, that not only vnder the Equinoctiall,
but al the Tortida which is from
one Tropike to the other, is habitable,
riche, and plentifull, because well neere
all the yeere, the dayes and nights are
almost equall: so that the freshnesse of
the night, doth temper the heate of the
day, and so continually the earth hath
season to bring foorth and increase her
fruites.
               But it is to bee noted, that touching
the equalitie of the dayes & the nights,
there may be had a doubt, and say that
the sunne in no time doth make equalitie
of the day with the night, but alwayes
the artificiall daye is greater
then the night by these reasons following.
               
                  
It is certaine yt a shining body being
greater, lighteth the darknesse more thē
halfe, and as the sunne is greater then
all the earth, so that as it hath beene
saide, that it is the opinion of Alfragano
in the difference twentie two, that ye
Sunne is 166. times greater then the
earth, so that the Sunne doth light the
earth more then the halfe.
               The lesser parte remayning darke, in
suche sorte, that the Sunne is seene in a
greater parte of the earth, then in that
part where he is hidde, and as the presence
of the Sunne is cause of the day,
and his absence causeth the night, it
followeth, that the sunne neuer maketh
equalitie of the day, and of the night.
Likewise the aforesaid is proued, wherin
a case is giuen, that the halfe of the
Equinoctial, is aboue the Horizon, and
the other halfe beneath, for the greatenesse
of the Sunne is the greater parte
where hee lighteth, then in that whiche
he hideth himselfe: it seemeth euident,
that the parte is greater that the sunne
lighteth, then that whiche hee leaueth
darke. By the which reason is proued
that the Sunne maketh not equality of
the day with the night.
               
                  A declaration.
                  Contrary to that which is said are many
reasōs, I will speake of three in short
time. The first is, that our sight doth
manifest, how all dayes are not equall,
but some daies greater, and some lesser,
by the which whersoeuer is giuen greater
and lesser, is like wise necessary that
there be giuen an equalitie, so that as
there is a day greater then the night, &
a night greater then the day, of necessitie
must be giuen day and night equall,
because it cānot passe from one extremitie
to another, but by the meane: To
the seconde, the Philosopher saith in the
sirt of the naturall philosophie, that the
sunne being come to the Equinoctiall,
the moouing which hee maketh aboue
the earth, is equall with that which he
maketh vnder. And in like sort, the time
of the day is equall with the time of
the night.
                  The thirde, aunswearing to the reasons
aforesayde, I say that it is true,
that the Sunite lighteth more then
halfe the eart, as the perspectiue reason
sheweth it, but it is to bee denied,
that the day in the Equinoctial is greater
then the night, not because when soeuer
any part of the light of the Sunne
is seene, the day beginneth, but it beginneth
when the Ce
                           ••
                        er of the sunne commeth
foorth, and not the partes circumferentials.
And so likewise when he setteth,
the night beginneth. The reason
is because the Planets, and the starres
doe occupie a great quantitie, and their
place, and moouing is not to bee taken,
by any manner of parte, but it ought to
bee taken by the Center, and so it is said
that the Sunne is in the Equinoctiall,
when his Center is there.
               
            
            
               The fourth Chapter, howe the dayes and
the nightes goe alwayes increasing or diminishing
vnto such as inhabite foorth of
the Equinoctiall.
               
                  IN the first Chapter of ye
fourth booke hath beene
declared, that from the
Eqniuoctiall, to the pole
articke is called ye North
part, & frō the Equinoctiall
to the pole antarticke, is called the
South part. Therefore it is to bee vnderstood,
that such as inhabite from the
Equinoctiall, towards the North part,
or the pole articke, as the sunne cōmeth
to the tropike of Capricorne, the thirteenth
of Decēber, & so beginneth to returne
to the line, howe much hee commeth
from the said tropike, so much the
dayes goe increasing, and to such as inhabite
towardes the South parte, they
goe decreasing. And the sunne beeyng
come to Aries the eleuenth of Matche,
he describeth the Equinoctiall line, and
maketh in all partes the dayes and
nightes equall, and beeing past the first
poynt of Aries, the daies begin to waxe
greater then the nights & to those of the
other part, the daies lesser, & the nights
greater, & the sun being come to Cancer
the eleuēth of June, the day is greater,
and the night lesser, & to the other parte

the contrary: for then the sunne is more
neere to some and more distant to other
some, & frō thēce ye sun turneth to descēd,
& as he goeth away frō that parte, the
daies goe decreasing, & ye nights increasing,
& being come to Libra, ye 13. of September,
he returneth to describe the Equinoctiall,
and the dayes & the nights
are to al equal, & frō thence he goeth descending
to Capricorne, & the nights begin
to be greater then the daies, & towards
ye South part, the dayes greater,
and the nightes lesser, & as he commeth
to the saide tropike, it maketh a greater
night, and a lesser day, & to those of the
other parte, the day greater, and the
night lesser, for there the Sunne goeth
more distant from some, and commeth
neerer to other some.
               Wherby it is to be noted, that if there be
taken two dayes of the yeere, equally
distant of ye Equinoctiall line, of cōtrary
partes, that howe greate the artificiall
day is of the one, so greate the artificiall
night is of ye other. Likewise it is to bee
vnderstood, that howe much in euerye
habitation, the pole is more raysed aboue
the Horizon, so muche the daies &
the nightes are greater, so that those
whose Cenith is in the circle articke. To
whom the pole riseth aboue the Horizō,
sixtie sixe degrees and a halfe, when the
sunne cōmeth to the first point of Cācer,
the eleuenth of June is to them one day
24. houres, and the night very short, because
in one moment the sunne toucheth
that day his Horizon and immediatly
cōmeth foorth, and that touching they
haue for night. And ye thirteenth of December,
whē the sunne commeth to the
first degree of Capricorne, then he is to
then a night of 24. houres, and a little
moment for the day, for in one instāt, the
sunne toucheth his horizō, & foorthwith
he hideth himselfe, and that touching
they haue for a day, by the cōtrary, such
as inhabite vnder the circle antartike,
haue the like. And those whose Cenith
is betweene the circle and the pole of
the worlde, whiles the Sunne goeth
towardes the North parte, it wilbee to
him one day, that whiche his Horizon
doth discouer of the Equinoctiall, continually
without night, and if that
were of the quantitie of one signe that
day woulde bee of one Moneth. And if
of two signe, it would bee of two Monethes,
and so the rest: and hee that
were vnder anye of the poles, all the
yeere would be to him one day and one
night: In such sort, that if he were vnder
the pole articke, the sixe monethes
whiche the Sunne goeth to the part of
the North, woulde bee to him one day
without any night, and the other sixe
which he goeth towards the part of the
South, woulde bee one night, without
day, and so contrary it woulde bee, if he
were vnder the pole antarticke, so that
halfe the yeere, it would bee to him one
day, and the other halfe, one night. The
cause is, by reason the roundnesse of the
worlde, how much it goeth towardes
the poles, so muche it goeth to be lesser,
and so the Horizon of such as are neerest
to the poles, doe discouer more parte of
the turne whiche the Sunne giueth in
the heauen, when hee goeth from that
parte: In suche sorte, that the earth,
nor the water, doth not occupy the sight
of the Sunne, all the time that hee goeth,
rising vp, and turneth descending,
vntill hee commeth where his Horizon
doth not discouer any thing of the circle
or turne, that the Sunne maketh to the
worlde, and so how much more, the part
is which is seene of this turne, so muche
the day wilbe greater.
            
            
               The fifth Chapter, how the increasing and
diminishing of the day is not in all parts
alike.
               
                  MAny thinges are put in
the common opinion of
the people that reason, &
truth doth shewe it to be
in another manner. And
amōg others, one is that
many doe thinke yt the increasing, & decreasing
of ye dayes through all ye yeere
are made equall, I will say yt the time,
whiche those dayes goeth increasing, so
muche increaseth one day as another,
and so when they decrease euen by the
like sort.
               
                  
And according to the quātitie of houres
which the day increaseth, from the lesser
day to the greater, those being parted
by ye time of the 6. monethes, which
the day doth increase, they cōsider how
muche it is that it increaseth euery day,
giuing equall number or quantitie of
time to one day, & so much to another.
And likewise when the day goeth decreasing
how much it is that it decreaseth:
in such sort, that the lesser day, hauing
nine houres, and the greater 15.
these 6. houres which he increaseth, deuided
into 6. Monethes, the dayes
shoulde increase one houre euery Moneth.
And so by the contrary in the other
6. Monethes, it woulde decrease
an houre euery Moneth: (This is not
so) for in truth only in the Moneth of
March, the dayes doe increase as much
as they did increase in the 2. Monethes
of Januarie and Februarie, and by the
contrary, they doe decrease so muche in
the onely Moneth of September, as
they doe decrease in July and August:
also in the Kalenders, in the head of all
the Monethes is writtē, that the dayes
haue in euery Moneth, so many hours,
and the night so many. Of this is to be
vnderstood, that neyther the dayes are
equall in all the Moneth, nor the number
of the houres are one in all places.
For in the citie of Ceuill, the dayes are
of one quantitie, and in Toledo, of another,
& in Burgus another, and so proceeding
to the place where the daye is of
24. houres: so that the dayes of euerye
Moneth be not equall in houres, nor ye
dayes bee not equall in all partes, the
cause is, as the sunne maketh differēce
from one Moneth to another in cōming
neere, or going from the Equinoctiall
line, so the daies goe increasing or diminishing
this comming neere, or going
away of the sun, he doth it not alwaies
alike, but he doth it in this manner.
               From the 12. of Marche, that hee goeth
foorth of the Equinoctiall, he beginneth
to rise vp, by the part of the north,
from thence vntill the 12. of Aprill, hee
hath gone frō the saide line, 12. degrees,
and from the 12. of Aprill, to the 12. of
May, he hath gone distant other 8. degrees,
& from the 12. of May, to ye 11. of
June, which hee commeth to the Tropike,
hee goeth distant other three degrees
and a halfe, whiche are in all 23.
degrees and a halfe, whiche the sunne
hath of declination or distance, from the
saide line, in such sort, that the first Moneth
hee goeth distant, the halfe of the
said declination, and the seconde Moneth
the thirde parte, and the thirde, the
sixt part, and so in the increasing of the
dayes. The 11. of Marche, the daies &
nightes are equall, and from thence to
the 11. of Aprill, the day increaseth halfe
of all the time that hee will increase, &
from the 12. of Aprill, to the 12. of May,
he increaseth the thirde parte, and from
the 12 of May to the 11. of June, hee increaseth
the sixt part, whereby that in
the straight course, where the greatest
day hath 15: houres, the 12. of March, it
hath 12. and the 12. of Aprill, 13. & a halfe,
and the 12. of May 14. and a halfe, and
to the 11. of June 15. And by this reasō
in ye straight course, where the greatest
day hath 16. houres, and in him where
hee hath 14. or more, or lesse: the 12. of
May, or in any other day, except in the
Equinoctials, the dayes will not bee equall,
but one wilbe greater then another,
in suche sorte, that the day hath
more increased to them which haue 16.
houres then to them which haue foureteene,
so that such as haue sixeteene, the
twelfth of May, the day hath increased
two houres, and to such as haue foureteene,
it hath not increased more then
one, And as the day went increasing at
the rising vp of the sunne, so hee returneth
diminishing or decreasing, when
hee descendeth. And so the reckoning
ought to bee kepte in all partes, according
to the quantitie of the time and
houres, whiche the greatest day hath.
               And it is to bee noted, that howe
much the day increaseth of twelue
houres vpwarde: so much hee decreaseth
of twelue houres downward, therfore
to knowe the quantitie of houres,
and points, that the greatest day of the
yeere hath in euery degree of distance
of the Equinoctiall line: In the table
hereafter written, shalbee declared, the

which is likewise to bee vnderstood for
the part of the South, as for the part of
the North.
               And it is to be knowen what day it is
called in this reckoning frō ye time that
halfe the body of the sun riseth, vntill the
other half be set, & all the other is night,
also the houres or parts of the day are
not vnderstood by ye twelfth part of the
day, or of the night, but by these vulgar
things of the clocke, for by another name
they are called Equinoctials: for in euery
one of them riseth fifteene degrees of
ye Equinoctiall, & other fifteene setteth.
And likewise it is to bee vnderstood, yt
in this account threescore points or minutes
doe make an houre, & thirtie, half
an houre. And so of the rest.
               
                  A Table of the houres, and minutes which the greatest day of the yeere hath, to such
as inhabite in any manner of distance of the Equinoctiall.
                  
                     
                        
                           Deg.
                           Hour.
                           Minut.
                           Deg.
                           Hour.
                           Minut.
                           Degrees
                           Houres
                           Minuts.
                        
                        
                           1
                           12
                           1
                           23
                           13
                           27
                           45
                           15
                           27
                        
                        
                           2
                           12
                           3
                           24
                           13
                           30
                           46
                           15
                           33
                        
                        
                           3
                           12
                           5
                           25
                           13
                           34
                           47
                           15
                           40
                        
                        
                           4
                           12
                           8
                           26
                           13
                           39
                           48
                           15
                           50
                        
                        
                           5
                           12
                           12
                           27
                           13
                           43
                           49
                           16
                           2
                        
                        
                           6
                           12
                           17
                           28
                           13
                           48
                           50
                           16
                           11
                        
                        
                           7
                           12
                           21
                           29
                           13
                           52
                           51
                           16
                           22
                        
                        
                           8
                           12
                           25
                           30
                           13
                           57
                           52
                           16
                           34
                        
                        
                           9
                           12
                           29
                           31
                           14
                           2
                           53
                           16
                           45
                        
                        
                           10
                           12
                           34
                           32
                           14
                           7
                           54
                           17
                           0
                        
                        
                           11
                           12
                           40
                           33
                           14
                           12
                           55
                           17
                           15
                        
                        
                           12
                           12
                           45
                           34
                           14
                           17
                           56
                           17
                           30
                        
                        
                           13
                           12
                           49
                           35
                           14
                           22
                           57
                           17
                           45
                        
                        
                           14
                           12
                           54
                           36
                           14
                           27
                           58
                           18
                           0
                        
                        
                           15
                           12
                           57
                           37
                           14
                           32
                           59
                           18
                           20
                        
                        
                           16
                           13
                           0
                           38
                           14
                           38
                           60
                           18
                           40
                        
                        
                           17
                           13
                           4
                           39
                           14
                           45
                           61
                           19
                           0
                        
                        
                           18
                           13
                           7
                           40
                           14
                           52
                           62
                           19
                           30
                        
                        
                           19
                           13
                           11
                           41
                           14
                           59
                           63
                           20
                           0
                        
                        
                           20
                           13
                           15
                           42
                           15
                           6
                           64
                           21
                           0
                        
                        
                           21
                           13
                           19
                           43
                           15
                           12
                           65
                           22
                           0
                        
                        
                           22
                           13
                           23
                           44
                           15
                           19
                           66
                           23
                           0
                        
                        
                           66m
                           24
                           0
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The sixt Chapter, of the houres, pointes or minutes, that euery day of the yeere hath in
the altitude of fortie degrees.
               
                  IN the table before written, hath beene declared the number of the
houres and minutes, or points that the greatest day of the yeere
hath in any māner of distance, of the Equinoctiall line, and because
it is likewise profitable, to knowe the houres & points, that successiuely,
euery day in the yeere, hath in euery parte. But for to
make this apparant, to al persons, it were needfull to haue many
tables. Therefore this is only taken out for the altitude of fortie degrees, where
the greatest day hath foureteene houres &, and fiftie two minutes, which are well
neere fifteene houres. For in this altitude, is the middest of Spayne, so that
with little difference or more or lesse, it may serue in all Spayne.
               In the other partes may bee taken out the reckoning, according to the
greatnesse of the greatest day, agreeable to the Table before written.
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Ianuarie.
                        Februarie.
                        March.
                     
                     
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                     
                     
                        1
                        9
                        22
                        1
                        10
                        22
                        1
                        11
                        34
                     
                     
                        2
                        9
                        23
                        2
                        10
                        24
                        2
                        11
                        36
                     
                     
                        3
                        9
                        24
                        3
                        10
                        26
                        3
                        11
                        39
                     
                     
                        4
                        9
                        25
                        4
                        10
                        29
                        4
                        11
                        43
                     
                     
                        5
                        9
                        26
                        5
                        10
                        3
                        5
                        11
                        44
                     
                     
                        6
                        9
                        28
                        6
                        10
                        34
                        6
                        11
                        47
                     
                     
                        7
                        9
                        30
                        7
                        10
                        37
                        7
                        11
                        50
                     
                     
                        8
                        9
                        32
                        8
                        10
                        40
                        8
                        11
                        53
                     
                     
                        9
                        9
                        34
                        9
                        10
                        42
                        9
                        11
                        56
                     
                     
                        10
                        9
                        36
                        10
                        10
                        44
                        10
                        11
                        59
                     
                     
                        11
                        9
                        38
                        11
                        10
                        46
                        11
                        12
                        2
                     
                     
                        12
                        9
                        40
                        12
                        10
                        48
                        12
                        12
                        4
                     
                     
                        13
                        9
                        42
                        13
                        10
                        50
                        13
                        12
                        8
                     
                     
                        14
                        9
                        44
                        14
                        10
                        53
                        14
                        12
                        11
                     
                     
                        15
                        9
                        46
                        15
                        10
                        56
                        15
                        12
                        14
                     
                     
                        16
                        9
                        48
                        16
                        10
                        59
                        16
                        12
                        16
                     
                     
                        17
                        9
                        50
                        17
                        11
                        4
                        17
                        12
                        18
                     
                     
                        18
                        9
                        52
                        18
                        11
                        7
                        18
                        12
                        21
                     
                     
                        19
                        9
                        54
                        19
                        11
                        10
                        19
                        12
                        24
                     
                     
                        20
                        9
                        57
                        20
                        11
                        12
                        20
                        12
                        26
                     
                     
                        21
                        9
                        0
                        21
                        11
                        15
                        21
                        12
                        29
                     
                     
                        22
                        10
                        2
                        22
                        11
                        18
                        22
                        12
                        32
                     
                     
                        23
                        10
                        4
                        23
                        11
                        20
                        23
                        12
                        35
                     
                     
                        24
                        10
                        6
                        24
                        11
                        23
                        24
                        12
                        37
                     
                     
                        25
                        10
                        8
                        25
                        11
                        26
                        25
                        12
                        39
                     
                     
                        26
                        10
                        10
                        26
                        11
                        28
                        26
                        12
                        41
                     
                     
                        27
                        10
                        12
                        27
                        11
                        30
                        27
                        12
                        43
                     
                     
                        28
                        10
                        15
                        28
                        11
                        32
                        28
                        12
                        45
                     
                     
                        29
                        10
                        46
                         
                         
                         
                        29
                        12
                        48
                     
                     
                        30
                        10
                        18
                         
                         
                         
                        30
                        12
                        50
                     
                     
                        31
                        10
                        20
                         
                         
                         
                        31
                        12
                        53
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Aprill.
                        May.
                        Iune.
                     
                     
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                     
                     
                        1
                        12
                        56
                        1
                        14
                        4
                        1
                        14
                        47
                     
                     
                        2
                        12
                        59
                        2
                        14
                        6
                        2
                        14
                        47
                     
                     
                        3
                        13
                        2
                        3
                        14
                        8
                        3
                        14
                        48
                     
                     
                        4
                        13
                        4
                        4
                        14
                        10
                        4
                        14
                        48
                     
                     
                        5
                        13
                        6
                        5
                        14
                        12
                        5
                        14
                        49
                     
                     
                        6
                        13
                        9
                        6
                        14
                        14
                        6
                        14
                        49
                     
                     
                        7
                        13
                        12
                        7
                        14
                        16
                        7
                        14
                        49
                     
                     
                        8
                        13
                        14
                        8
                        14
                        18
                        8
                        14
                        50
                     
                     
                        9
                        13
                        16
                        9
                        14
                        20
                        9
                        14
                        50
                     
                     
                        10
                        13
                        18
                        10
                        14
                        22
                        10
                        14
                        51
                     
                     
                        11
                        13
                        20
                        11
                        14
                        24
                        11
                        14
                        52
                     
                     
                        12
                        13
                        22
                        12
                        24
                        26
                        12
                        14
                        52
                     
                     
                        13
                        13
                        24
                        13
                        14
                        27
                        13
                        14
                        52
                     
                     
                        14
                        13
                        26
                        14
                        14
                        28
                        14
                        14
                        51
                     
                     
                        15
                        13
                        28
                        15
                        14
                        29
                        15
                        14
                        50
                     
                     
                        16
                        13
                        31
                        16
                        14
                        30
                        16
                        14
                        50
                     
                     
                        17
                        13
                        34
                        17
                        14
                        32
                        17
                        14
                        49
                     
                     
                        18
                        13
                        36
                        18
                        14
                        33
                        18
                        14
                        49
                     
                     
                        19
                        13
                        39
                        19
                        14
                        34
                        19
                        14
                        48
                     
                     
                        20
                        13
                        42
                        20
                        14
                        36
                        20
                        14
                        48
                     
                     
                        21
                        13
                        44
                        21
                        14
                        38
                        21
                        14
                        47
                     
                     
                        22
                        13
                        46
                        22
                        14
                        39
                        22
                        14
                        47
                     
                     
                        23
                        13
                        48
                        23
                        14
                        40
                        23
                        14
                        46
                     
                     
                        24
                        13
                        50
                        24
                        14
                        41
                        24
                        14
                        46
                     
                     
                        25
                        13
                        52
                        25
                        14
                        42
                        25
                        14
                        45
                     
                     
                        26
                        13
                        54
                        26
                        14
                        43
                        26
                        14
                        45
                     
                     
                        27
                        13
                        56
                        27
                        14
                        44
                        27
                        14
                        44
                     
                     
                        28
                        13
                        58
                        28
                        14
                        45
                        28
                        14
                        43
                     
                     
                        29
                        14
                         
                        29
                        14
                        45
                        29
                        14
                        42
                     
                     
                        30
                        14
                        2
                        30
                        14
                        46
                        30
                        14
                        41
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                        31
                        14
                        46
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        Iulie.
                        August.
                        September.
                     
                     
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                     
                     
                        1
                        14
                        40
                        1
                        13
                        50
                        1
                        12
                        38
                     
                     
                        2
                        14
                        39
                        2
                        13
                        48
                        2
                        12
                        33
                     
                     
                        3
                        14
                        38
                        3
                        13
                        46
                        3
                        12
                        29
                     
                     
                        4
                        14
                        37
                        4
                        13
                        44
                        4
                        12
                        26
                     
                     
                        5
                        14
                        36
                        5
                        13
                        42
                        5
                        12
                        23
                     
                     
                        6
                        14
                        35
                        6
                        13
                        39
                        6
                        12
                        19
                     
                     
                        7
                        14
                        34
                        7
                        13
                        36
                        7
                        12
                        17
                     
                     
                        8
                        14
                        33
                        8
                        13
                        34
                        8
                        12
                        15
                     
                     
                        9
                        14
                        31
                        9
                        13
                        32
                        9
                        12
                        11
                     
                     
                        10
                        14
                        30
                        10
                        13
                        30
                        10
                        12
                        7
                     
                     
                        11
                        14
                        28
                        11
                        13
                        28
                        11
                        12
                        4
                     
                     
                        12
                        14
                        26
                        12
                        23
                        26
                        12
                        12
                        2
                     
                     
                        13
                        14
                        25
                        13
                        13
                        24
                        13
                        12
                        0
                     
                     
                        14
                        14
                        24
                        14
                        13
                        22
                        14
                        11
                        59
                     
                     
                        15
                        14
                        22
                        15
                        13
                        20
                        15
                        11
                        57
                     
                     
                        16
                        14
                        20
                        16
                        13
                        18
                        16
                        11
                        55
                     
                     
                        17
                        14
                        18
                        17
                        13
                        16
                        17
                        11
                        52
                     
                     
                        18
                        14
                        16
                        18
                        13
                        14
                        18
                        11
                        49
                     
                     
                        19
                        14
                        14
                        19
                        13
                        12
                        19
                        11
                        46
                     
                     
                        20
                        14
                        12
                        20
                        13
                        9
                        20
                        11
                        44
                     
                     
                        21
                        14
                        10
                        21
                        13
                        6
                        21
                        11
                        41
                     
                     
                        22
                        14
                        8
                        22
                        13
                        4
                        22
                        11
                        38
                     
                     
                        23
                        14
                        6
                        23
                        13
                        1
                        23
                        11
                        36
                     
                     
                        24
                        14
                        4
                        24
                        12
                        59
                        24
                        11
                        33
                     
                     
                        25
                        14
                        2
                        25
                        12
                        56
                        25
                        11
                        30
                     
                     
                        26
                        14
                        1
                        26
                        12
                        53
                        26
                        11
                        28
                     
                     
                        27
                        14
                        0
                        27
                        12
                        50
                        27
                        11
                        25
                     
                     
                        28
                        13
                        59
                        28
                        12
                        48
                        28
                        11
                        22
                     
                     
                        29
                        13
                        58
                        29
                        12
                        46
                        29
                        11
                        20
                     
                     
                        30
                        13
                        56
                        30
                        12
                        43
                        30
                        11
                        17
                     
                     
                        31
                        13
                        54
                        31
                        12
                        40
                         
                         
                         
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        October.
                        Nouember.
                        December.
                     
                     
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                        Daies
                        Houres
                        Points
                     
                     
                        1
                        11
                        15
                        1
                        10
                         
                        1
                        9
                        15
                     
                     
                        2
                        11
                        12
                        2
                        9
                        58
                        2
                        9
                        15
                     
                     
                        3
                        11
                        9
                        3
                        9
                        56
                        3
                        9
                        14
                     
                     
                        4
                        11
                        6
                        4
                        9
                        54
                        4
                        9
                        14
                     
                     
                        5
                        11
                        4
                        5
                        9
                        52
                        5
                        9
                        13
                     
                     
                        6
                        11
                        1
                        6
                        9
                        50
                        6
                        9
                        12
                     
                     
                        7
                        10
                        58
                        7
                        9
                        34
                        7
                        9
                        11
                     
                     
                        8
                        10
                        56
                        8
                        9
                        46
                        8
                        9
                        11
                     
                     
                        9
                        10
                        53
                        9
                        9
                        44
                        9
                        9
                        10
                     
                     
                        10
                        10
                        50
                        10
                        9
                        4
                              •
                           
                        
                        10
                        9
                        9
                     
                     
                        11
                        10
                        48
                        11
                        9
                        40
                        11
                        9
                        9
                     
                     
                        12
                        10
                        46
                        12
                        9
                        38
                        12
                        9
                        8
                     
                     
                        13
                        10
                        44
                        13
                        9
                        36
                        13
                        9
                        8
                     
                     
                        14
                        10
                        42
                        14
                        9
                        34
                        14
                        9
                        8
                     
                     
                        15
                        10
                        39
                        15
                        9
                        33
                        15
                        9
                        9
                     
                     
                        16
                        10
                        36
                        16
                        9
                        32
                        16
                        9
                        9
                     
                     
                        17
                        10
                        34
                        17
                        9
                        30
                        17
                        9
                        10
                     
                     
                        18
                        10
                        31
                        18
                        9
                        28
                        18
                        9
                        10
                     
                     
                        19
                        10
                        29
                        19
                        9
                        26
                        19
                        9
                        11
                     
                     
                        20
                        10
                        26
                        20
                        9
                        24
                        20
                        9
                        12
                     
                     
                        21
                        10
                        23
                        21
                        9
                        23
                        21
                        9
                        13
                     
                     
                        22
                        10
                        20
                        22
                        9
                        22
                        22
                        9
                        13
                     
                     
                        23
                        10
                        18
                        23
                        9
                        21
                        23
                        9
                        14
                     
                     
                        24
                        10
                        16
                        24
                        9
                        20
                        24
                        9
                        14
                     
                     
                        25
                        10
                        14
                        25
                        9
                        19
                        25
                        9
                        15
                     
                     
                        26
                        10
                        12
                        26
                        9
                        18
                        26
                        9
                        16
                     
                     
                        27
                        10
                        10
                        27
                        9
                        17
                        27
                        9
                        17
                     
                     
                        28
                        10
                        8
                        28
                        9
                        17
                        28
                        9
                        18
                     
                     
                        29
                        10
                        6
                        29
                        9
                        16
                        29
                        9
                        19
                     
                     
                        30
                        10
                        4
                        30
                        9
                        16
                        30
                        9
                        20
                     
                     
                        31
                        10
                        2
                         
                         
                         
                        31
                        9
                        21
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The seuenth Chapter, of the houre, and point
which the sunne riseth, and setteth in euery
one day of the yere.
               
                  ANd seeing there hath bin
declared in the Chapter
going before, the houres,
and minutes which euery
day hath, it is conuenient
to speake in this at what
houre and minute the sunne riseth and
setteth, in euery day of the yeere: for the
which first of all, it is to be noted, that
for to take out the houre when the sun
shall rise, is to be reckoned from xii. of ye
clocke in the night. And the houre when
it shall set, is to be reckoned from xii. of
the clocke in the day. Therfore looke ouer
the houres and pointes which the
sunne hath, and deuide them in the middest,
& that which one half doth amount
to, take it out of twelue, and that which
remaineth shalbe the houre, wherin the
sunne riseth, and the same halfe shal bee
the houre wherin the sunne setteth, so
that for when hee riseth take out of xii.
half of the number which the day hath:
And to yt which remaineth, is ye point,
where the sunne riseth and setteth him
self after the middest of the day, at the
point which is halfe of the number that
the day hath.
               
                  An example.
                  The first day of Januarie, hee hath
niene houres, and xxii. points, halfe this
is iiii. houres, and fourtie one pointes,
therefore these foure houres, and fourtie
one pointes, taken out of xii. houres, remaineth
vii. houres & nienteene points,
and so the first day of Januarie, the sun
commeth forth at vii. of the clocke, and
nienteene pointes after midnight, and
setteth at foure of the clocke, and fourtie
one points, after the middest of the day,
which was halfe the number that the
day hath.
               
            
            
               The eyght Chapter, howe the sunne giueth
his light at equal time of the yeere to such
as inhabite in the worlde.
               
                  IN the rules and accoūts
beefore declared, there
might bee a doubt saying,
seeing that in some
parts of the world, The
dayes be great, and in other
partes litle, let vs see if in any one
part of the world the sunne shineth in al
the yeere more time then in other. To
this is to be noted, that although it bee
true, yt in some part of ye world, & times
of the yeere, ye dayes & nights be greater
then in other some, it is to be taken, that
the sunne by his owne mouing, that hee
maketh in the yeere, at equal time of the
yeere is seene and giueth light in all
partes, so that as long time of the yeere
he is seene in the part where the dayes
be little, as in the part where they bee
great, the which is knowen in this mā
                  ner,
consider that which euery part hath
in it, of the day, and that which it hath
of the night in this manner, such as inhabite
vnder the equinoctiall, as they
haue continually, the dayes equall with
the nights, euery one of thē xii. houres,
it is certaine that halfe the time of the
yere they haue day, and they see the sun,
and he sheweth light to them, and the
other half they haue night, that they see
him not, and such as dwell in fourtie
and two degrees which haue the greatest
day of xv houres, they haue also day
of niene houres, and so as the day goeth
increasing from xii. to xv. houres, so they
come decreasing vnto niene, in such sorte
that the said time, which they haue of
day, the same they haue of night, so consequently
those which inhabite in
sixtie degrees which haue the greatest
day of xx. houres, they haue likewise
day of foure houres, and as the sunne
goeth lighting of them, & the daies increasing
vnto twentie houres, likewise
they goe decreasing vntill the day be no
more but iiii. houres, and the night goeth
increasing and diminishing the like.
And of those which inhabite in sixty sixe
degrees and a half, haue ye greatest day
of twentie foure houres, likewise they
haue night of ye said xxiiii. houres, and
such as haue day of one moneth without

night, haue likewise a moneth of night
without day, and such as shoulde haue
sixe monethes of day without night,
shoulde haue other sixe monethes of
night without day, and so the time beeing
considered which euery part hath of
day, and being seene, that as much iustly
it hath of night: So shalbe founde that
not onely in the torrida zona, by the
which the sunne continually moueth,
but likewise in the other partes very distant
and farre off, and also vnder the
poles them selues, so long time of the
yeere it is that the sunne is seene, as the
time that he is not seen, in such sort, that
the sunne giueth his light in equall time
in all parts, and not in one more then in
another. So the omanipotent God, maker
of the heauens, of the earth, & of all
that is in them, did dispose and ordeine,
whose name be blessed, in the worlden
worldes. Amen.
            
            The ende of this booke of Nauigation.
            God saue the Queene.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧Imprinted in London at
the three Cranes in the vinetree, by Thomas
Dawson, and are there to be solde.
1581.
            
         
      
   