
      
         
            
            
            ¶ AN EXCELLENT AND A right learned meditacion, compiled in two Prayers, most frutefull and necessary to be vsed and said of al true English men, in these daungerous daies of affliction, for the comfort and better stay of the christen cōscience, bewailing the deserued plages of England.
            
               Psalme. I. Call vpon me (saith the Lorde) in the day of trouble, and I shall, deliuer the, and thou shalt honor me.
            Prynted at Roane by an Englysh Scolers copie, by Michael VVodde, the third daye of Ianuarye. Anno Do. M. D. LIIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Praier.
            OH almightie, euer liuing, & most merciful Lorde God the dere father of our lord and sauiour Iesus Christe, and through him our most gratious good father, whose prouidence is ouer al, whose wisdom and righteousnes is sene ouet al, as thi mercy, euen in the middest of most miseries is tasted of all. In dede we haue deserued most horrible plages, by re ason of our vnthankfulnes, cōtempt and slaundrous abusing of thy most holy gospel, which most plēteously & putely thou diddest geue vs, with such a Prince to propagate and set furth the same, as neuer sith Englād was Christened, was known the like. VVe I say haue deserued, not onely the taking awaye of this our deare Prince, and the benefite of the mistery of thy pure gospel, but also all other most terrible plages, that can be deuised: for great and hainous are our offences, & therfor iust thouPsa, cxix. art, & righteous are thy iudgements if (as thou hast begunne) thou shalt continue to poure out vppon vsthy searful plagues and indignations.

But gratious Lorde, in thine anger, bicause thou art accustomed to rememberPsal. ciii. merci, and ful wel knowest, wherof we are made, & what we at able to beare: we besech the which art rich in mercy, and plentiful to allRoma. x. thē that cal vpō the, that for thi names sake through Christ, thou woldest correct vs acordīg to thy swetePsal. vi. mercye, and not in thy soure fury & indignation. Much better it is for vs (deare father) and more tollerable, that we should yeld our selues into
                  
                     ••
                  . Samu. xxiiii. thy handes, to be chastened of the, then to fall into the hands of thy enemies, as Dauid praied. For great is thy mercy, against the, against thePsalm. li. only haue we sinned, and broken thi holy commaundements. But louing Lord, and almightie God, & father wel thou knowest, we haue not sinned against the deuil, the world, the pope & his prelates, neither against the quenes highnes, and politik maiestrates of the Realme, so that iustly haue thei no right or power to punish vs. How be it thou mayest iustly vse them as thi fearse rodde against vs. But good God and heauenly

father, against them haue we not be haued oure selues, that rightly and iustly, thei can be thought to punish vs: Yea, rather thei wishe, that with them horribly we would displease and sinne against thee, for nothing shuld it greue thē, if we were horrible rebels against the, blasphemers of thi name, idolaters, worshippers of stockes and stones, false seruers of the, adulterers, theues, dronkerds murtherers, glottons, oppressours, and altogether ouerwhelmed in mischief. But this is our sinne, and offence against thē: bicause we prech, beleue, and confesse the, God the faIohn. xvii ther, to be the true and only God, & Iesus Christ thi dere sonne to be thei. Cor. viii only Lord, Sauiour, Bishop, Prist, & mediatour: and the holy spirit to beMath. i. Heb. vii. i. Tim. iiii Iohn. xiiii xv. &. xvi. Psal. cxix▪
                the only comfortor, viuificator, coū celour and master of all truth, & thy written worde, to be the lantern of our feet, the sufficiēt doctrine of our saluation. This dere Lord is a sinne against thē: bicause we wil not serue the, after the tradicions of men. But as in thy worde, by thy sonne and Apostles, thou hast taught vs, therei. Tim. iii
               
fore are thei angry, wroth, and persecute vs. If we wold worship breadHeb. vii. ix. &. x. instead of Christ, cast of our care and Crede of the satisfactori and propiciatory sacrifice, whiche thy sonne our Lorde, did make once for all, in his owne body himselfe, to the perfect sanctifying foreuer, of all that shalbe saued: and come and bi their propiciatory sacrifices in that abho minable idoll the masse. Yf we wold cast of thy commaundements, to folow good intentes, to serue the in a tong we know not, to prai vnto sain tes, to bie pardons, to runne a pilgrimage gate going, to offer candels & tapers to images, to bie trentals, dirigies: to say as they say, and do as thei do, submitting our selues to the faith of the Antichristian popysh & diuelish church, cleane contrary frō the faith of thy catholicke and true church, which is groūded and builded vpō thi dear child Iesus Christ, who as he is the foūdation, so is he1. Cor. iii. the fulnesse of al, whereof we al receyue, & the very glew which couplethEphe. i, & knitteth together euery one of vs, to grow & go forwardes into aCollos. i.
               
perfect man, being made of thee vntoIohn. i. vs, wisdome, righteousnes, sancti fying, and redemption, that our reioysingEphe. iiii. might be in him, which also is our head, from whom cōmeth ouri. Cor. i. life, by the woorkyng of his spirite, which is kept alwaies aliue in vs, soEphe. i. long as we sucke of the bloud & natural ioyse which descendeth from our head into the mēbers, that is toPhil. ii. say: so long as we stycke and abyde by his written word & Gospell, not suffering the same to putrifie & corrupt, by admitting false gloses and expositions of mens own braynes & deuises, not contained in thy booke of the Byble. I sai deare Lord, if we would do thus, leauing the water in the wel of life, & drink of their dyrtie dygged pittes and cestorns, then shoulde we haue peace with them, then would not the diuel rage, then would the world wrestle no more against vs, then wold the Pope & his prelates promote vs, then wold the quene be mercifull, & the Magistrats our good masters, euen as thy deare child saith: If you wer of the world,Iohn. xvi the worlde woulde loue his owne.

Here therfore looke downe, O merciful father towards vs, and a fearce iudge towards al such our enemies, as are not to be conuerted, for they are no lesse thine enemies then ours▪ so that in perse cuting vs, they persecute the, and punish the. For this word which we preach, beleue and confesse, is not our worde, but thy word, not our expositions or cōstruinges, but the expositions and construinges of thy holye Spirite. This geare the deuyll can not abyde, but would haue this place, and be to vs a god. The Pope & his prelats wold raigne in mens consciences, and for gods word, they woulde haue vs to beleue theyr stynckyng tradicions, councels, decrees & lies. The quene and Magistrates, in place of thy son Iesus Christ, woulde place their abhominable idol of bread: in place of our prest, after the order of Melchisedecke, they would place preestes after the order of Baal & Antichrist. In steede of Christes sacrifyce, they wold thrust out vnto vs, an horrible sacriledge, and spoylyng thy sonne Iesus Christ of his glory. If thē this

be a synne, to stycke to the our God & father, to stycke to thy Christ our Lord, alone sauiour, perfect preest, prophet, bishop, sacrifice, propitiatiō, propiciatorie, and Medyatour, thy holi spirit our doctour, comfortour, viuificatour, expositour of thy word: and thy written word & gospel, our only square, rule, and line to serue the by: If it be a syn to preach this, beleue this, and after our callinges, euery one of vs to confesse & protest this: then Lorde thou art a synner which commaundest and requirest this of vs. VVherfore awake (O Lord our God) sanctifie thy holye name, whiche they blaspheme. Stablishe and strengthen thy kyngdome, which they disturbe in vs, & worke parfectly thy wyl, which thei go about to hinder in vs, and suffer not thy selfe to be troden vnder fote of them, because of the greuousnes of our synnes, for they (O Lord) do not punish in vs our synnes, but they seke to suppresse, and wholi to take away thy holye worde▪ which doth worke in vs: that thou shouldest not be trulye worshipped, & that thou

myghtest haue no people to preach the, beleue in the, and confesse the. Oh vouchesafe therefore to heare mercifully, and to graunt graciousli this our poore complaint, deare father of mercy, which hast bydden vsPsal. l. in our nede to cal vpon the, and dost promise that thou wylt heare and helpe vs, so that we shal praise thy name. For Christes sake therfore, in whome thou art well pleased, although in vs for our manifold syns thou hast iust cause to be displeased (but great is thy mercie) for his sake (I saye) in this our neede helpe vs, in such sorte, as most may be to thy glorye, our consolation, conuercion of suche as are to be conuerted, and subuertion, confusion, and eternall shame of such as seeke thy dishonour, and ar not to be cō
               uerted. For thine is the kingdom, the power & the glory, for euer & euer
            Amen.
         
         
            
            Another Praier
            O Almightite, eternal, and euerliuing Lord, the eternal father of our Lorde Iesus Christ, thou great & moost fearful God, thou that kepest couenaunt & merci, with theim that loue the, and seke to do thy commaundmentes: yea thou, that (as the Prophet saith) euē in thy wrath thinkestAbac. iii. vpon mercy: cast doune thy louinge countenaunce vpon thy pore flocke that doth professe the here in England: and regarde the mischief that is imagined against vs.
            Consider (Lord) howe thei counsail and cōuent, against the doctrin, and pore members of thi deare sōne Iesus Christ. We are certaine, that it was thou, which diddest confound the crueltie of the tiraunt Haman,Hest. vii. the enemy of thy people, ouerthrowīg him in the mischief that he him self had imagined. And we sureli be leue (Lord) that thi hād (as the prophet saith) is not shortned, but thatEsaye. lv▪
                thou art alwaies hable to healpe, al though our ambicious pride, our vn saciable couetousnes, our carnal life our careles securitie, & other vnspekeable

most greuous offences, haue separated vs frō thee, & our sinfull infidelitie hath caused the to turne thy face frō vs, & not to heare vs. we confesse Lord, that we haue sinned excedingli, we haue bene disobedientDani. ix. & gon backe frō thi preceptes & iudgementes: we wold neuer faithfully folow thy seruantes the Preachers, whyche spake vnto vs in thy name truly as thou cōmaundest thē, but rather we gaue eare to the enchaūtings of the popish charmers, & folowed the vaine enticements of the wicked world, liuing & waloing in the lustes, delites & appetites of our fraile flesh and carnal securitye, flattering our selues in such faults & naughtines, wherein we put our pastime & feliciti. wherfore this crosse (yea rather this cursse) is iustlye for our vnthankfulnes poured vpon vs. Vnto vs (O Lorde our God) belongeth open shame & confusion, but yet vnto the pertaineth mercye and forgeuenes. we haue sinned (o lord) and done wickedlye agaynst all thy righteousnes: yet let thy wrathfull displeasure be turned away (we beseche

thee) from vs thy feable flock and poore miserable afflicted congregacion, And in thys (O LORD) shal thi goodnes be declared, magnified, and pray sed, if thou be mercifull vnto vs myserable wretches, which are not rich in good workes.iiii. Esd
                     ••
                   viii. Be not alwayes wroth at vs (O lord) but spare thi people, and haue mercye vpon thyne owne congregacion. O be mercyfull vnto vs.
            Beholde Lorde, howe thyne enemies haue entred thine enheritaūce,Psa▪ lxix. and daylye defyle thy holy temple. Se how thy word is shut vp, & with holden frō thy congregaciō, so that thi flocke is like to famish for lacke of foode. Lo, we are become an opē shame to our neighbours, yea a veri scorne & laughing stocke to al that dwel about vs. O remember not our old sinnes & offences, but haue mer cie vpon vs, and that quickly, for cls we are come to great miserie▪ Helpe vs (O Lord our sauiour) for the glori of thine own name: Let not the enemies triūphe ouer vs, lest they saye, that we haue no God.
            O regarde the sorowfull sighyng of the prisoners that lye in bandes

for thy glorious gospel and wordes sake, & let their teares ascend vp into thy presence: & according to the greatnes of thy power, preserue & strengthen those that ar appointed to the slaughter, for professyng of thy holy worde & name. Suffer notMath. vii the dūme dogges to turne againe, & with their teethe to teare in pieces, the true teachers of thy holy word. Suffer them not to sucke the bloud of such as haue purely preached thi truth. Suffer not the swynish sorte of Sodomites, to treade in the myre that precious pearle the gospell of thy glory, the only schole and learning of our saluation. O Lord, sufferGen, xxvi not these proude Philistines, to stoppe vp thy swete springes of lyuīg water, & instede therof to make vs drink perforce, of their stincking puddles of abhominable popyshe masses & mens imagined traditiōs. Suffer not the stout sturdie rammes with their filthie fete, to tread doun & trouble the pure pasture, & faireEzechiel. xxxiiii. fountaine of thy holy word, prepared to fede & refresh thi flock withal. Suffer not the sede of Antichrist,

the sonnes of perdicion, to sette vp them selues, & their owne vaine inuencions to be embraced & honoured instede of the. Suffer not them (O Lord) to bring this thy churche of England backe agayne, in to the blinde bondage of that bloudy Babilon, the bawdye beast of Rome. And for as much as the harts of Prin ces, magistrats, & gouernors ar in thi hand, suffer not lord, these subtil sor cerers, so to be witch & enueagle the quenes highnes (whō thou, hauing for our vnworthines & hainous offences taken thy blessed seruaunt & confess our Edward the .vi. our late most christen king & Gouernour frō vs, hast of thy wōderful power, placed in the roial seate of this realme) from the hearing & readyng of thy blessed woorde, whereat she bothe might & ought to learne her duetie. Suffer them not (for thy mercyes sake, O lord) to withstād the truth, & to kepe her grace backe, from the knowledge of thy gospel, which is the onli rote, wherof true faith sprī
               geth: no more than thou suffredest their aūciēt grandfather Elimas theActe. xiii.
               
Sorcerer, to preuaile against Paule, preaching to the prudent grouernor Sergius Paulus, whom the said Elimas sought to turne away from the faith. O lord open ye eies of the nobiliti of Englād, & strēgthē their harts with thy spirite of strength & magnanimiti, that thei become no more subiects to the proud popish prelates, & shameles shauelings the Angels of satā, not be made their slaughtermen and sheadders of gyltles bloud (as in times past) in murtherīg thy prophets & ministers, & so prouoke thy wrath & vengeance, to the vtter cōfusion of this English realm & naciō
               ▪ whō thou hast adourned, & mercifulli blessed with so mani boū teous gyftes: But as thou dyddest moue the harts of the princes & nobiliti of Hierusalem, to help & deliuer Ieremithi prophet. frō the handesIere. xxvi of the prests, which cried out vp ō him, & sought his death, because he earnestlie & sincerelie preached thi word, euen so lord stir vp the har tes of our nobiliti & magistrats, that thei maie be vnfained fauourers of thy truth, & of the teachers therof,

and so to kepe their hands cleane frō innocent bloud. Geue grace, O Lord to the counsail of England, that thei may faithfully fauour thi blessed Bible: & endue them with the spirit of thy counsail, to occupie them selues in the studie therof, according to the coūsaile of the most noble kyng Dauid: Be ye learned you that iudge the earth: so as they being our guydes & gouernours, mai serue the in feare & trembling, and apply their endeuours to gouerne according to thi rule, and ordinaūce. Put thi spirit of strength, vertue, boldnes▪ sobrietie and loue (O gracious Lord) into the harts of the states of this realme, aswel the nobilitie & gentilmen as the cōmōs of the same, that they al together agreeing in thi truth, repenting them of theyr horrible sinnes, wher with thei haue most greuously offended thi hie maiestie, & linking their hartes together in a vniforme concord, peace & christian loue of minde faithfully one to another, hauing the alwaies before theireies, & beigaided with the most mighty protectiō of thi stretched out arme, suffer not thi holi sacred word

nor thi blessed & most cōfortable sacraments, after this lamentable sorte to be blasphemed & banished awaye from vs, by these bloudy Edomites, & shauen swarme of Sodomites, the chaplaines of Baal, our popish pestiferous prelates, nor thy realme & heritage of England & Calise with the dominions and mēbers of the same, to be deuoured, ouertūned, betraied, nor brought to slauery or confusion, through domestical or foraine cruell warre, or by ambicious coulourable meanes of craftie confederacie, subtil fetches, rauenous desires, or forceable power of vnnaturall forainers & straunge nacions, deuised or brought in by the sleighti enticements or traiterous conspiracie, of popish prestes and their adherentes (the enemies of thi glorious gospel) vnder pretēce of honour, frendshyp, cōmon weale, & safegarde of the realme, which haue the befor their eies▪ but secretli mind or not regarde the daūger of subuersiō & ruine of thi realme & people of Englād, for the aduaūcing & settyng vp of their god Moasim. in their abhominable idolatrous masses, and other

supersticious wykednes, & to the entent to restore Antichrist of Rome the deuils vicare vpon earth, into hys pristine tirānous power, & estate here in England again, to sit in the consciences of thi people, & (his woūd, whiche the stroke of thi mighti spirituall sword gaue him here among vs, being healed again) to make hauocke of thi chosen flocke, whō thou boughtest with the price of thi deare sonne our onli sauiour Iesus Christes most precious heart bloude. And although (O Lord) our froward necligēce, our impenitent behaucour, & carnal disobediēce towards thi holy law, haue caused the iustly to take the libertie & fre vse therof awai from vs, & leaue vs▪ to our selues in the sluttish swine tubbes and dirtie dregges of idolatrie, supersticion and barborous ignoraunce: Although our stubburnes & wilful repyning against the gospel like gouernement, and prudent procedings of our most learned, merciful, wife, louing, & natural English christian soueraygne liege lord thi seruaūt Edward the .vi. late king & gouernour of this realme, deserueth an insolēt mocker, an enemie of thi truth & testament, an vnnatural

forainer, & a merciles oppressor to haue rule & gouernment ouer vs: al beit our couetous cloining, beastlishe bribing, extreme extorcioning, deuylish deceiuing, spightful spoyling, & rauenous robbing of our natural brethren & coūtrimen, iustly demerite the inuasion of bloudi tiraūts, and proud straungers, to spoile and strip vs of al that is our own, house, land, goodes, substaūce & liberti, although the adultrie, fornication, filthy whoremonging, rude ribawdrye, and lycencious life of vs Englishmē, in abusing other mēs wiues, & defiling virginity, might occasion the rauishing & defilyng of our wiues, daughters and maidens, bi pocky papists, forain fraikes, & lecherous epicures, that cōtemne chast mariage, & puritye of life: although our proude lokes, our parcial parttaking, and contempt of our poore brethren, & nedy neighbours: albeit (I say) our petuerse persecutīg, merciles murthering, & shameful sheading of innocēt bloud, prouoke iust recōpence of tirā
               nie, murther, & bloudshed vpon vs, by the hands of stout straūgers and braue souldiours: & generally, although our manifold sinnes, infidelitie, & wikednes

haue vndoutedly earned & deserued (O Lord) thi terrible curse & vengeaunce▪ for breaking of thy most sacred holi law and blessed cōmaundements, to be poured vpon vs, in town and in fielde, vpon our bodies & children, vpon the frutes of our grounde, our cataile and al that we haue: yea & though we deserue to be dryuen out of our natural countri, and to be beaten downe, & slame of our enemies, & to be plaged withal the curses mencioned in the blessed boke of thi seuereDe. xxviii law & iustice (as we euen from the bocome of our hartes confesse, we haue don in dede) yet O most gracious lord whose mercy is aboue al thy works, & hast promised by thi prophet, that inEze. xviii what hour soeuer a sinner groneth, & repenteth him of his sinnes, thou wilt gracioussi heare him, & remember his sinnes no more. we thi miserable crea tures, most humbly be sech thi fatherly goodnes & mercy▪ bi the merites of thi deare sōne our Lord Iesus Christ, forgeue vs our wickednes, forsake vs not, leaue vs not as Orphanes, cōfortles & helples. The holy ghost (by thy seruant Dauid) cōmaundeth vs to calPsalm. 
                     •
                  . vpon the in the dai of our trouble, assuring

vs of remedi. And is not this a time of trouble? Are not these dayes, daungerous daies? Is not this a world wherin thi wrath doth plainly apear?Romo. ii. wherfore O lord, be merciful vnto vs. Holde thy hand of blessing ouer thy real me & people of Englād, wyth the dominions of the same, and be theirPsal. lxi. buckler, shield & towre of refuge frō the face of the enemi. Let not the vncircumcised papists & carnal epicures triumphe ouer vs. Let them not giest vpon vs, with mockes & tauntes, in rimes and balades for their pastime, & say: wher is now their God? where is their christ? wher is their gospel? wher it their safegarde? Their natural king is gon, a straunger is their ruler, theyr enemi of Rome hath the vpperhand, prestes and women bear the bel, their diuiniti is turned to idolatri, their chri stianitie to poperi, their policie to foleri, their nobiliti to ignominie, theyr chiualrie to slauerie, their manhoode to miserie, their libertie to captiuitie, their yomanrye to drudgerye, theyr weale into wo, their mirth into mour ning, their cōmons cōfounded, theyr wiues rauished, their maidēs defiled, their men murthered, their widowes

pined, their substaunce spoiled, they
                  •
                land cōquered, English chaunged to Spainish, Calise into 
                  •
               lemishe; Lordanes made lordes▪ & Englād become a grange. O lord, which art the helth,Psa. xxvii▪
                & help of al that faithfulli trust in the, deliuer vs in the multitude of thi mercies, frō the multitude of our sinnes, &Psalm. l
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                from these deserued plages. O Lord, infatuate & confound the counsails & deuises of thine and our enemies▪ as thou diddest at the earnest sute of thi seruaunt Dauid, to that subtil traiterousii. Re. xvii Sire Ahitophel. Let them be turned back, & come to shame, that wold euil to Englād, or to ani member therof. O mercifull father, whō thi sonneIohn. xv. Esai. v. Mat. xxi. calleth a husbandm
                  •
               
               ̄, defend thi vineyard of England, which he (with the instruments of his gospel) hath planted here among vs, frō the violent raging furies of these rauenous wylde Boares: for hys sake, that is the truePsa. lxxx. vine. And seing we be braūches that can do nothīg without him, nourish vs with the sappe of thi holy spirit & dewe of thi grace, that we may fruitfully abide in the vine vnto thend, & not to whither through the stormes

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
of tēptatiō & peril, to be cut of, & fal before our enemies. we most hartelyPsalm. li. besech the (O lord) take not thy holi word & spirit frō vs. O merciful lord our God, heare the praiers & peticiōs of thy sorowful seruauntes. O let thy face & bright countenaunce (at leastPsa. lxvii once againe) shine ouer thi Englishe congregation, which now is in woful case. Deliuer vs not (O heauenlye father) into the handes of the wicked, least their handle vs after their owne lust. O incline thine eare & hearken, open thine eies, for the glorie of thyne own names sake, & behold our trouble. For we do not cast our praiers before the trusting in our owne righteousnes, but only in thy great mercies declared vnto vs in Iesu christ O lord heare vs. O forgeue vs Lord. O Lord consider and tarie not ouer long, but for thine own sake, send vs help, and defend vs: for we are thi people, and do cōfes thi name, To the, O heauenly father, with thi deare sonne Iesus Christ our onli redemer, & thi holi spi rit the cōfortour, beal honour, glory, praise and dominion for euer and euer. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
   