
      
         
            
            THE IMPERIALL AND PRINCELY
PEDEGREE OF THE TWO MOST NOBLE
and vertuous Princes lately maried,
FRIDERICK
the Fift of this Name, Prince Palatine,
Duke of Bauiere, Knight of the
moſt noble order of the Garter, Firſt
Prince of the Imperiall blood, ſprung
from glorious CHARLE-MAIGNE,

and
ELIZABETH
Infanta of Albion, Princeſſe Palatine,
Dutches of Bauiere, the
onely Daughter of our
moſt gracious Soueraigne
CHARLES-IAMES.
                  depiction of Frederick V and Elizabeth of Bohemia.
                  
                     Both from Auguſtus and Auguſta ſpring,
                     One and the ſame, ROBERT ELIZABETH
                     
                     Both in one month Ioue to the light did bring,
                     
                        Auguſtus nam'd; which this good preſage hath,
                     
                        Auguſtus Fate, one day muſt them befall,
                     And him Auguſtus, her Auguſta call.
                  
               
            
            Being both of them on their moſt noble Fathers ſide lineally
deſcended, He in the ninth, She in the tenth degree, (which numbers
in them vnited, make vp King Iames his auſpicious and
luckie number of ninteene) from two moſt noble,
vertuous and worthy
Princes,
ROBERT Prince Palatine and
Emperour,
and
ELIZABETH princeſſe Palatine and
Empreſſe.
            
               
                  
                     1 ROBERT ſurnamed the Noble, Prince Palatine, Duke of Bauiere, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter, King and Emperour of Romaines
and Germaines; a Prince renowned for his great ſpirit, quick wit, heroicall courage, for his loue and ſtudye of Iuſtice, and his carefull endeauoring
to repaire the ancient glory of the Empire. His great vncle ROBERT the firſt of this name, did once chooſe EDWARD the 3. the
victorious King of England, to be Emperour, as LODOVICK his great great Grand-father had likewiſe choſen RICHARD Earle of Cornwall, ſonne of
King IOHN, to be Emperour. The ſaid Prince ROBERT, being the 3 of this name, came into England with a goodly company, as FABIAN writes,
to ſee the magnificence of the Court, and the commodities of the Countrie: who of King HENRIE the 4. was honorably receiued, and feaſted, and
during his abode lodged at Saint Iohns, and laſtly, conueyed toward the ſea ſide, where either departed from other with exchange of rich and precious
gifts; for this ROBERT was a Prince of great bountie, liberalitie and magnificence, ſaith the ſaid Engliſh author Fabian. His wife Elizabeth, Princeſſe Palatine,
and Empreſſe; was a Lady of great vertue, piety, bounty, chaſtety, and charity towards the poore: and brought him forth many fine children.
                  
                  
                     2 STEVEN Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere and Bipontz,
Earle of Obrink, Veldentz, and Spanheim, Landgraue of Alſace, the youngeſt
of ROBERT the Emperours fiue ſonnes by his wife ELIZABETH
the Empreſſe: for his elder childrens Race in proceſſe of time did faile.
                     2 MARGARITE the eldeſt daughter of Robert the Emperour by his
wife Elizabeth the Empreſſe, maried to the moſt noble and valorous
Prince Charles ſurnamed Marcelle or the Warlike, Duke of Lorraine,
from whom I haue deriued our hopefull prince Charles his pedegree, aſ well
on his moſt noble Mothers, as on his Fathers ſide, and yet more, from Emperors,
Kings and princes or the name of Charles to the number of nine, beſides
thoſe of other names.
                  
                  
                     3 FREDERICK Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere, Earle of
Simmer, Obrink and Spanheim, ſonne to Prince STEVEN.
                     
                     3 ELizabeth Alias Iſabelle, Dutcheſſe of Lorraine the eldeſt daughter of
prince Charles the Warlike; by his wife Margarite, maried to Reny
Duke of Aniow, Calabrie and Barre, Earle of Prouence and Guiſe, and King of
Sicily and Naples.
                     
                  
                  
                     4 IOHN the firſt of this name, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bauiere,
Earle of Simmer, Veldentz and Spanheim, ſonne to Prince FREDERICK.
                     
                     4 IOlanthe Dutcheſſe of Lorraine eldeſt daughter of Reny Duke of Aniow,
King of Sicile, and Naples, by his wife Elizabeth, maried to Friderick
Earle of Vadimont of the ancient and honorable ſtock of the Dukes of Bullion.
                     
                  
                  
                     5 IOHN the Second of this Name, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke
of Bauiere, Earle of Simmer, Veldentz and Spanheim, ſonne to Prince
IOHN the Firſt; he is celebrated to haue beene a Prince very learned, well
ſeene in antiquities, and a great fauourer and foſterer of the Muſes.
                     5 REny Duke of Lorraine, Calabrie, and Barre, Earle of Vadimont, King of
Sicile, Naples and Aragon ſonne to Earle Friderick, by his wife Iolanthe
Dutcheſſe of Loraine.
                     
                  
                  
                     6 FREDERICK the Third of this name; prince Palatine, Elector and
Archſewer of the holy Romaine Empire, Duke of Bauiere, Earle of Obrink,
Simmer, and Spanheim, ſonne to Prince IOHN the Second; a Prince father-like,
peaceable, learned, a ſingular Patron to Schollers: he likewiſe
planted the reformed Religion in his Citie of Heidelberge.
                     
                     6 CLaude de Lorraine Duke of Guiſe and Aumale, ſonne to Reny Duke of
Lorraine and King of Sicile and Naples, brother to prince Antonie; all
of them, princes of great ſpirit, prudence and heroicall courage.
                  
                  
                     7 LODOVICK the fift Elector of this Name, Prince Palatine Elector
and Arch ſewer of the ſacred Romaine Empire, Duke of Bauiere and
Biponts, Earle of Simmer and Spanheim, ſonne to Prince FRIDERICK the 3.
a Prince godly, and vertuous, carefull to eſtabliſh Iuſtice, policie and peace
in his Princedome: he enriched the famous Colledge of Heidelberg with new
reuenues.
                     7 MArie de Lorraine Dutcheſſe of Longouille daughter of prince Claude,
a Lady of a heroicall heart maried to the moſt noble and worthy
Britanniſh prince, Iames the 5. King of Scotland, and knight of the moſt noble
order of the Garter, Grandchild of the moſt prudent and puiſſant prince
Henry the 7. King of England.
                  
                  
                     8 FFRIDERICK the fourth of this name, Prince Palatine, Elector and
Arch-ſewer of the ſacred Romaine Empire, Duke of Bauiere and ſon
to Prince LODVICK; a prince endued with many heroicall parts, a louer
of learning and of the learned, the moſt magnificent houſe-keeper of all the
Germaine Princes; he was exceeding officious towards our Soueraigne, King
IAMES, and very kinde and curteous, both to Engliſh and Scottiſh trauailers.
                     8 MArie, ſurnam'd Clarabelle, for her incomparable bounty and beauty
and fortitude of minde; the onely childe of King Iames the 5. and
Marie de Lorraine, Qneene heire of Scotland, Queene Dowager of France, and
princeſſe apparent of England, France, and Ireland, after the death of King
Francis the 2. her firſt husband, maried to her neareſt and deareſt Cooſin, the
moſt comly & noble prince, Henry Lord Darley Earle of Roſſe, Duke of Albanie
King of Scotland, and Knight of the moſt noble order of S. Michaell. It pleaſing
God to diſappoint all the policies and practiſes of the deuill and euill
men tending to the hinderance of the foreſaid happy mariage.
                  
                  
                     9 FRIDERICK the fift of this Name, the Inheritor of his Noble
Fathers Princely dignitie, vertue, and worth; ſonne in Law to our
moſt gracious Soueraigne Charles-Iames, of whome I will vtter this one
thing, worthy of obſeruation; that they are both in one, and the ſame degree
of lineall deſcent (as I can ſhew) from 20. Emperours and aſ many
Kings of diuers countries.
                     9 CHarles-Iames ſurnamed the Concorder, Britaines King of concorde, the
onely Sonne and heire of King Henry and Queene Mary of Scotland.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     10 ELizabeth, ſurnamed the Beloued, the mirrour of mildneſſe, courteſie
and humanity, the onely daughter of our moſt gratious Soueraigne
King Iames, and of his moſt noble wife Queene Anne, the deare ſiſter of our
late peerleſſe prince Henry, ſurnam'd the glorie of Gallants; & of prince Charles
Albions hearts-ioy, whoſe Pedegree I haue deriued from Otho once Earle of
Yorke and Emperour, brother to Henry Prince Palatine: and likewiſe from
prince Albert Marquis of Brandeburge, who for his incomparable courage
was called the Achilles of Germany, wiſhing that like as prince Charles was
borne on his day, and doth participate of his bloud, ſo he may likewiſe inherite
his heroicall proweſſe and one day be enſtiled the Achilles of Britanny.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               This Imperiall Princely Pedegree is Dedicated by the Author to the valorous reſcuer
of our King, the right honorable Iohn Lord Ramſey, Vicount Hadington,
whoſe Eagle, heauen make to ſoare as high, as euer did the Eagle of his noble ancesters,
Iohn Lord Ramſey Earle Bothwell, and William Lord Ramſey Earle of Fife.
               
                  Iames Maxwell.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   