
      
         
            
            
            Whereas the Profeſſor
hereof, Iacobus
Maximinus, borne
in Italy, and lately
come out of Germanie,
hath attained vnto
the demonſtration
of the making of
Foure moſt ſtrange
and rare Artificiall
Stones, and a ſweete
Ball, and the true

                  ❀ HONI SOIT ❀ QVI MAL ❀ Y ❀ PENSE
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
vertues thereof: and
the Names and Colours
of euery ſtone.
            The firſt, is the
Moraccolocius Stone
is white: The famous
Am
                     •
                  thiſt is the redde
Stone: The famous
Safaris is the purple
Stone: The Safonya,
which is the Straw
coloured Stone, &c.
            THE Moraccolocius ſtone is white, it is very good to helpe the Canker in the mouth or
throat, and all euils that come of Blood or rhewme: it muſt be diſſolued in white wine,
it helpeth in thrée waſhings, with Gods helpe. Probatum eſt.
            
            2 It is approoued helpe for the Tooth-ach, and all rotten and ſtinking Téeth: put this
ſtone to the hole or aking tooth, and it brings foorth the worme, and rhewme, and is preſent
helpe (with Gods helpe) and maketh the mouth ſwéete. Probatum eſt.
            
            3 It is good for a ſtopping, or a ſtuffing in the ſtomack with any kinde of flegme or glart,
or heart-burning, and heart-aking, take it faſting in halfe a pinte of Béere, or Ale, and it is
preſent helpe. Probatum eſt.
            
            THE famous Safonya ſtone, is the ſtraw coloured ſtone, it is very good for the cornes
in your féete and eares, ſoaking your cornes in warme water, and then pare them, and
ſhaue ſome powder of the ſtone, and it helpes them ſodainly, the powder being layd thereto.
Probatum eſt.
            
            2 Make this ſtone into powder, and mixe it with oyle of Bayes, and it will kill the itch,
and make no Lice ſhall trouble any one if the body be annointed therewith. Theſe ſtones
haue béene prooued, and haue holpen many one in this Citie of London. Probatum eſt.
            
            The Profeſſor hereof doth make a ſwéet Ball of diuers colours, which is good to take off
the Morphew, and all ſpots, and Sunburnes, and cleareth and beautifieth the face, if you
waſh it in the mornings, and rub it with a ſtammell cloath. And this Ball will take out
ſtaynes out of any woollen or ſilke in faire water to be waſhed. Probatum eſt.
            
            THE famous Amothiſt ſtone is red, it is good for the paine in the huckle-bone, or ſhins,
take the ſtone, beat it to powder, and mixe it with Swine greaſe, and annoint it by the
fire very well, and it is preſent helpe, it takes away the paines and ſwellings. Probatum eſt.
            
            2 Make a playſter of this Oyntment, and lay it to the ſtomacke, or to the nauell of Children,
and it brings away the Wormes, both Cheſt-wormes and other, in foure and twenty
houres. Probatum eſt.
            
            3 Diſſolue this ſtone into foure ſpoonefuls of water, and ſnuffe vp part of a ſpoonefull at
the noſtrils, and hold ſomewhat betwixt the tooth, and let the rhewme voyd out, and it helps
the paines of the head, and the hearing, and the Megrim, and ſore eyes, and brings away
the rhewme out of all parts of the head. Probatum eſt.
            
            4 This red ſtone is very good to ſtanch Blood: put it to the bléeding place, or weare it
about the necke. Probatum eſt.
            
            THE famous Safaris ſtone is the purple ſtone, it is very good to helpe the ſhaking Palſie
and the ſhaking Ague, and all ſhaking of the Ioynts. Sowe this ſtone in a little ſilke
bagge, and weare it about your necke, and with Gods helpe it is holpen in twenty dayes.
Probatum eſt.
            
            2 This ſtone is very good, and a preſent helpe for the Crampe: ſowe it in a little bagge,
and weare it about your necke. Probatum eſt.
            
            The Profeſſor hereof, doth make a blew ſtone, which is good for the gréene ſickneſſe, and
procureth vrine, and cauſeth the ſtone to voyde, and doth expell the winde in the body: you
muſt take it in the morning with Poſſet-Ale, foure mornings together, and deuide it into
foure parts. Probatum eſt.
            
            
               
                  1622. October the 24.
                  
                
               
                  Your louing friend, Iacobus Maximinus.
God ſaue the King.
         
      
   