
      
         
            
            
            The true deſcription of two monſterous children,
laufully begotten betwene George Steuens and Margerie his wyfe, and borne in the pariſh of Swanburne
in Buckyngham ſhyre, the .iiii. of Aprill. Anno Domini. 1566. the two children hauing both their belies faſt ioyned together,
and imbracyng one an other with their armes: which children wer both a lyue by the ſpace of half an hower, and
wer baptized, and named the one Iohn, and the other Ioan.
            
               
                  depiction of conjoined twins
               
            
            
               I Read how affrique land was fraught
               for their moſt filthy life,
               With mōſtrous ſhapes, confuzedly
               that therin wer full rife.
            
            
               ¶But England now purſues their vyle
               and deteſtable path,
               Embracyng eke all miſchéefs great
               that moues Gods mightie wrath.
            
            
               ¶As theſe vnnaturall ſhapes & formes,
               thus brought forth in our dayes:
               Are tokens true and manifeſt,
               how God by dyuers wayes:
            
            
               Doth ſtyrre vs to amendment of
               our vyle and cankred lyfe:
               Which to to much abuſed is,
               in man, in chylde, and wyfe.
            
            
               ¶We wallow ſo in filthie ſin,
               and naught at all regarde:
               Nor wyll not feare the threats of God
               tyll we for iuſt rewarde:
            
            
               Be ouerwhelmd with miſchéefs great,
               which ready bent for vs
               Full long a go decreed wer,
               as Scriptures doth diſcus.
            
            
               ¶Both tender babes & eke brute beaſtes,
               in ſhape disfourmed bée:
               Full manie wayes he plagues the earth,
               (as dayly we may ſée)
            
            
               ¶Thus mightie Ioue, to pearce our harts
               theſe tokens ſtraunge doth ſend,
               To call vs from our filthie lyfe
               our wicked wayes t'amend.
            
            
               And thus by theſe two children here,
               forewarnes both man and wyfe:
               How both eſtates ought to bewayle,
               their vile and wretched lyfe.
            
            
               ¶For ſure we all may be agaſt,
               to ſée theſe ſhapes vnkynd:
               And trēblyng feare may pearce our harts
               our God to haue in mynd.
            
            
               ¶For yf we printed in our breſt,
               theſe ſignes and tokens ſtraunge:
               Wold make vs from our ſinnes to ſhrike
               our liues a new to chaunge.
            
            
               ¶But ſome proude boaſtyng Phariſie,
               the parents wyll detect:
               And iudge with heapes of vglie vice
               their liues to be infect.
            
            
               ¶No no, but leſſons for vs all,
               which dayly doe offend:
               Yea more perhaps, then hath the fréends,
               whom God this birth did lend.
            
            
               ¶For yf you wyll with ſingle eye,
               note well and view the text:
               And marke our Sauiours aunſwer eke,
               that thereto is annext:
            
            
               Where his diſciples aſked him,
               to know therein his mynd:
               Yf greatter wer the parents ſinnes,
               or his that was borne blynd.
            
            
               ¶To whom Chriſt aunſwered in a bréef,
               that neither hée, nor they:
               Deſerued had that crooked fate,
               although they ſin each day.
            
            
               But to the end Gods glorie great,
               and miracles diuine:
               Might on the earth apparaunt be,
               his workes for to define.
            
            
               ¶Such lyke examples moued me,
               in theſe forgetfull dayes:
               To rue our ſtate that vs a mong,
               vice beares ſuch ſwings and ſwayes.
            
            
               ¶Wherein the goodneſſe great of God
               we way and ſet ſo light:
               By ſuch examples callyng vs,
               from ſin both day and night.
            
            
               Where we doe runne at randon wyde,
               our ſelues flatteryng ſtyll:
               And blazyng others faults and crimes,
               yet we our ſelues moſt yll.
            
            
               ¶But if we doe conſider right,
               and in euen balaunce way:
               The ruine great of hartie loue,
               among vs at this day:
            
            
               And well behyld with inward eyes,
               th'embracyng of theſe Twinnes:
               That God by them vpbraides vs for
               our falſe diſcemblyng ſinnes.
            
            
               We would with Niniuie repent
               our former paſſed yeares,
               Bewaylyng eke our ſecret ſinnes
               in ſacke cloth and in teares.
            
            
               ¶Therfore in time amend your ſtate,
               and call to God for grace:
               Bewayle your former lyfe and ſinnes,
               while you haue time and ſpace.
            
            ¶FINIS. ꝙ
            
               Iohn Mellys Nor.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Alexander Lacy, for William Lewes: dwellyng in Cow lane
aboue Holborne cundit, ouer againſt the ſigne of the Plough.
         
      
   