
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     THE Foreſte or Collection of Hiſtories, no leſſe profitable, then pleaſant and neceſſarie, dooen out of Frenche into Engliſhe, by Thomas Forteſcue.
                  
                     Aut vtile, aut iucundum, aut vtrum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        .
                  
                  ¶ Imprinted at London by Ihon Kyngſton, for Willyam Iones.
                  
                  1571.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  A VIRTVTE ORTA OCCIDVNT RARIVS.
                  Haec tua prima, haec antiqua ſunt, non alia pene.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To the worſhipfull Ihon Forteſcue Eſquire, maiſter of the Queenes Maieſties greate Garderobe, Thomas Forteſcue wiſſheth continuaunce of health, with increaſe of worſhippe.
            
               PAſſyng hence into ſome the partes beyonde the ſea, not yet long ſince (righe worſhipfull) of parte for myne experience to acquainte my ſelf with the nature of ſtraūgers, to ſe their order, and gouernment, in the adminiſtration of the weale publique, to ſee the ſoïle it ſelf; and the commodities therof, to ſauour of their language, with others the ſemblable but chiefly for myne increaſe, in the ſtudie of good letters, wherein as Englande lacketh not good ſchooles, for that purpoſe, ſo thought I theim leſſe able yet, in the other reſpectes to ſatiſfie, and aunſwere my deſire. VVhere afewe monethes after myne arriuall, the worlde grewe to bee ſuche, ſo tumultuous, and troubleſome, that no manne could aſſure hymſelfe, or promiſe him ſelf ſafe beyng: gates eche where were ſhutte, tounes and holdes were fenced, caſtles, and fortes furniſhed, all paſſeges ſtraightly, and diligently obſerued, the

fieldes full of armed menne, readie to the battaile, and in fine, throughout one onely face, and countenaunce of hoſtilitie. By meanes whereof, the lawes were lockte vp, as if thei neuer had been knowen, iuſtice was then to none, or ſure to fewe menne miniſtred, all artes Mechanicall, and Sciences ſurceaſed, euery corner full of cloaſe, and whiſperyng mutterers, no manne from others malice, or ſafe, or well aſſured. In ſchooles now were the chairesvoide of their learned doctours, no man deliuered lawes from Iuſtinian the Emperour, the ſolace of the ſicke Hippocrates was then, and Galene eke vnknowen, the ſciences exiled then, the ſcriptures were not taught, the tonges were all forgotten, Philoſophie, the loue of wiſedome, there a ſtraunger. Beſides theſe I nothyng ſpeake of the greate nomber of houſes, churches, chapelles, and villages, vtterly waſted, and conſumed with fire, of the wilfull profuſion of wine, oyle, corne, and the ſemblable: of the moſte lamentable, and marueilous penurie, and want of neceſſarie victualles, of the pitifull complainte of the indigente, and neadie, of the frownyng faces betwixt neighbour, and neighbour, of the little truſte the maiſter had in his ſeruaunte, the father eke in his childe, or one manne in an other. Thus therefore,

when all thynges grewe on, to ſuche diſorder, when policie gaue rome, and place to hoſtilitie, when armes, and armed menne had all thynges in poſſeſsion when none liued voyde of feare, when no ſtate was aſſured, then knewe I not what better to dooe, or how better to ſpende the long, and wearie howers, then at tymes to buſie my ſelfe in ſome lighte, and pleaſant ſtudie. By meanes whereof, I choſe to wade into this Foreste, wherein I muſte confeſſe, I had ſuche preſent likyng, as ſeldome my happe hath been or neuer to finde the ſemblable. So hauyng then bothe redde hym, and redde hym through againe, with due conſideration of the excellencie, and great learnyng of the aucthour, I thought I could not better ſpende that ſo wearie a tyme, then in tranſlatyng this Foreſte, into our naturall language, to gratifie my countrie therwith, to whiche not to our ſelues we liue ſtill, and ſtill are borne. Eſpecially for that I knewe it written, in three ſunderie tounges, in the Spaniſhe firſte, by Petrus Meſsia, a gentlemanne of Siuile, and thence dooen into the Italian, and laſte into the Frenche, by Claudius Grugette, late Citezein of Paris: wiſhyng that wee were ſo labourous, and ſo diligent, that no thyng emongeſte them were written, whiche we with theim imparted

not. And yet I muſte confeſſe, that in this preſente vertion, diuers chapiters are lefte out of purpoſe, and aduiſedly, not by ouerſight, by ſlouth, or by negligence, whiche I thought I might with as good warrante dooe, as others ſome to adde, or chaunge at their pleaſure, eſpecially for that the matter ſo dependeth not, one parte of the other, that the firſte without the ſeconde, or the ſeconde without the thirde, or that without theim bothe, might pleaſe or contente in any thyng the reader. For beyng as it is a collection of ſunderie matters, the lacke of one annoieth not, or maihemeth not th' other, yet for my full diſcharge, and purgation herein, I wiſhe that the ſkilled in the tounges, at their leaſure ſhould cō
               ſider, what thei are, how many, of what weight, or importance, that whileſte my deſire was onely to giue that, whiche was profitable, and pleaſyng therin, I might not be thought more daintie, then truſtie to carue hym at my pleaſure. Neither would I againe be thought ſo rough, and harde a cenſor with idle ſuperfluitie, to charge in oughte the aucthour, whoſe vertues and learning, I reuerence and honor. And farther doe promiſe, that if it maie be thought expedient, at ſome tyme hereafter, to collecte alſo the remnante. In the meane ſeaſon, I beſeche your

worſhippe to accepte herein my doynges, garde and defende from wrong this little Foreſte, for whoſe cauſe onely, I tooke it firſte in hande, of parte, that if the reader conceiue herein any likyng, that he therfore ſtande bounde to none, but to you onely, of part alſo, to leaue you ſome ſmall ſhewe, or token of my poore minde, readie alwaies, and vowed to dooe you all kinde of ſeruice, truſtyng that you will as fauourablie accepte it, as in caſes not diſſemblable, hath been your wonted vſage, whiche if I maie perceiue, (wherof I neuer doubted) it ſhall cauſe me to attēpte ſome other thyng in tyme to come, percaſe with my greater paine, and laboure. And this trustyng that this rude, and ſimple vertion ſhall finde ſome grace, and fauour with the indifferent reader, ſhadowed eſpecially with the countenance of your willyng, and fauourable protection, I ende, wiſhyng you many, and good daies in this world: and in the other to come, eternall ioye, and felicitie.
            
               Your worſhippes where ſo it ſhall pleaſe you to vſe or commaunde hym,
Thomas Forteſcue.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE GENTLE READER
            
            
               NEuer was I ignorante (gentle reader (to howe many daungers he willyngly expopoſeth hymſelf, that for thy ſake taketh paine to publiſh any thyng in writyng, ſo daintie, and ſo diuers are the iudgementes of menne, ſo prone to depraue, and contemne the ſweate of others. How be it, to dooe thee pleaſure, I would not leaue to haſſarde my credite, moſte aſſured that I ſhall not pleaſe all, and glad not withſtandyng, if I might content ſome. The learned I truſte, will take all in better parte, coueryng, and excuſyng whatſoeuer thei finde leſſe abſolute, or perfecte, knowing that there neuer yet wrote any ſo aduiſedly, who had not, or at leaſt neded not, the file againe of ſome one other. And as touchyng the others, I no more dread their harde, and ſiniſter iudgement, then I hunte, or thirſte in any thyng, their praiſe, or commendation. To profite neuertheleſſe generally, was my deſire, but chiefly the leſſe learned, with this preſent Foreste, whiche for good cauſe me thought, I ſo might name, or title, for that beyng a collection of diuers, and ſundrie matters, is as a Foreste, well

furniſhed with many trees, birdes, and beaſtes, of different, and contrary natures. And if ought herein maie pleaſe thee, or profite thee in any thyng, accepte it thanckfully, other price thou paieſt none, and giue by thy good example, occaſion to the ſtudious, and learned in good letters, to take in hande, or attempte with like good will ſome other thyng, to thyne onely profite, furtheraunce, and commoditie. Aſſuryng thy ſelf, that none in any ſorte, do better deſerue of their countrie, that none in any exploite dooe toyle, or trauaile longer, that none ſwincke, or ſweate with like paine, and anguiſhe, that none in like ſorte haſſarde, or aduenture their credite; that none deſire leſſe ſtipende, or ſalarie for their trauaile, that none in fine, are worſe in this age recompenſed. Shewe thy ſelf therefore gratefull, bee thankefull to the aucthour, enter into his Foreste, diſportyng thee therein, ſome laune, ſome range, perchaunce maie pleaſe thy indifferent mynde, ſome walke, or ſome thyng els, maie lende thee contentation, nothyng I trust ſhall greue, or annoye thee hedgde therein. And as for me, this onely in recompence I craue, that thou fauourablie wilte accepte, and iudge of theſe my paines, whiche if I maie perceiue, I will not leaue to greue me, to doe thee greater pleaſure. Fare thou well, and ſuche lette

bee thy cenſure, as is towardes thee my meanyng.
            Suche faultes as haue paste in Printyng, as thei in deede bee many, and euery where aboundante, ſo of thy courteſie excuſe vs, whether thei bee but letters, whole woordes, or otherwiſe, and as the ſenſe ſhall leade thee, ſo amende what ſo thou findeſte, or lackyng, or ſuperfluous, aſſuryng thy ſelf, that it ſomtymes paſte vs, in more perfecte wiſe, then thou in theſe receiueſt them.
            
               Giudica de gli altri come vorreſte di te ſigiudicaſſe.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ An aduertiſmente, written by the tranſlatour, to his booke.
            
               GOe hence thou little booke,
            goe ſhewe thy ſelf aboute:
            Goe roome abrode and vewe eche place,
            goe ſeke ſome harbour out.
            Goe vp and doūne I ſaie,
            no tyme dooe thou miſpende:
            Goe ſeke the learned, and ſerue thou theim,
            on them dooe thou attende.
            Bee gladde and ioyous then,
            when thei thee in hande ſhall take:
            And when thei thee dooe open then,
            to reade thee for my ſake.
            Beake then, and bowe thee lowe,
            ſtoope doune with all thy might:
            Lette then thy painfull ſeruice make,
            thee gracious in their ſight.
            And feare not euery wieght,
            his force that ſtraight will bende:
            With cenſure harde thee to oppreſſe,
            of follie to condemne.
            But thinke then with thy ſelf,
            reuenge none looke thou ſeke:
            That ſuche with eaſe more ſoner will,
            comptroll then dooe the like.
            And feare not though againe,
            thy papers faultes doe fill:
            In Printyng whiche eſcaped haue,
            and paſte againſte our will,
            Correctours hadſte thou fewe;
            and Printers ofte doe miſſe:
            The ſence and meanyng eaſily,
            the reader yet maie geſſe.
            Ne dread though ſtraunger thou,
            and geaſte vnknowen ſhalte runne:
            Though Frenche ſomtyme and Thofcane eke,
            
               
from forraine lande doeſte come.
            In ſuche eftſones the beſte,
            and learned crewe dooe like:
            And theim eche where ſome thyng to learne,
            with carefull iye dooe ſeke.
            And yet no ſtraunger greate,
            though newe come to this laude,
            Sithe that in Engliſhe hahite thou,
            in Englande now dooeſt ſtande.
            Greate thynges doe promiſe none,
            ne make thou ſhewe of muche,
            Emong the meaner ſorte goe on:
            contente thee to bee ſuche.
            For thei that ſoare a loafte,
            and ouer looke the reſte:
            That matters greate doe promiſe, and
            compare them with the beſte.
            Of tymes dooe proue but fooles,
            and ſhoote wide from the marke:
            Thei promiſe more then thei doe paie,
            thei paie not halfe their parte.
            Therefore bee thou contente,
            where ſo thou happe to come:
            To promiſe leaſte what ſo thou paie,
            this is of all the ſomme.
            That I to thee in charge,
            before the worlde giue:
            That I ſtill would thou ſhouldſte obſerue,
            whileſte ought of thee doeth liue.
            Farewell I canne no more,
            thy fathers bleſſyng haue:
            Bee mindfull of his preceptes, and
            thine honour looke thou ſaue,
            And ſithe thou neuer ſhalte,
            to hym retourne againe,
            Woorke thou hym good if that thou canſte,
            for he thee peude with paine.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ The Firſt parte of the Collection of Hiſtories.
            
            
               ¶ Why in the firste Age men liued longer, then in this our Age preſent. Chap. 1.
               
                  
                     WHo ſo euer is ſtudious in Holy Write, ought in manner of neceſſitie to knowe, that in the Firſte Age, and before that for Sinne, the general Fludde ouerranne the whole Worlde, Mans life was then longer, then it is nowe preſently. For euidente is it, that Adam lyued nine hundred and thirtie yéeres: Sethe, nine hundred and twelue: Caine, nine hundred and tenne. And ſo afterwardes deſcending from the one vnto the other, who ſo lyued leaſte, lyued ſeuen hundred yéeres. And in theiſe our dayes, fewe reache to eightie, or nintie: which who ſo at any time paſſeth, rare is his hap, very ſtrange, and marueilous, in ſutche ſorte, that wée lyue not the tenthe parte of theire time. The Learned therefore, as well Diuines, as naturall Philoſophers, whiche haue hereof carefully diſcourſed, findinge the ſame Nature, whiche hathe géeuen vs cauſe of Béeinge, to be the very ſame, with that of theiſe forepaſſed Ages: and that theſe our Forefathers here lyued ſo longe naturally, and not by Myracle: féeling them ſelues not a litle herewith trobled, beganne curiouſly herein to ſearche the cauſes, or reaſons. The whiche thinge, as well vnto M. Varro, as alſo vnto infinite others, in the woorkes of Nature appeared ſo difficill, that they ſuppoſed the yéeres of the former Ages paſt, not to haue bene ſutch, as are theſe of our time. Which opiniō is open folly, an errour too too great, and altogeather inexcuſable, as wée ſhall make euidente

in the Chapter folowing, hauinge here firſt remembred the aduice of certaine graue, wiſe, & learned Authours. When therefore I reade the iudgemente of others, and in fine thence deſcende vnto mine owne opinion, the principal reaſon, mée thinketh, why we in this time, liue not as longe as did others in the firſte, and Olde Age, is, that our Forefathers had not then any the cauſes, whiche in vs newe ingender diuers maladies, and diſeaſes, whence neceſſarily enſue Stoopinge Age, & Deathe. Here muſte wée alſo conſider, that our firſte Parentes, Adam, and Eue were created, and framed by the very hande of God, without any other aide or meane: whence it is to be preſumed, that he perfected them with complexion moſte excellent, with a true Sympathia, and proportion of humours, the cauſe of theire continued healthe in theſe their many yéeres. By meanes wherof, their Children, iſſuinge of Parentes of ſuche perfecte conſtitution, as alſo theire Ofſpringe riſinge to them againe, whiche naturally lyued ſo longe, and many daies, muſte reſemble theire Elders in like perfection, and conſtitution of bodye, as men takinge either theire beginninge, or béeinge, of a matter moſt pure and ſimple, vntill ſutch time as by the chaunge of Ages (whoſe propertie is to alter, and to impayre al thinges) the ſtate of Man beganne to weaken, yéeldinge his daies in number fewer then before. Againe in that Age, one thinge to them was very helpinge, and profitable: the whiche ſame to vs is very noyſome, and contrary: whiche was the greate temperancy vſed in Drinkinge, as well in quantitie, as in qualitie alſo, with the ſmall chaunge, and varietie of Meates: for neither had they ſo many ſortes, or ſundrie diſhes, as wée, ne knewe they any, or newe, or dainty inuentions. To eate Fleaſhe, what it was, before the generall Floudde, was vnto Man altogeather vnknowen. Further, ſome hold for common, & moſt aſſured opinion, that bothe Fruites, and Hearbes without all compariſon,

were in thoſe daies of farre greater efficacie, and vertue, then any, founde any where in this our latter Age: for that they then ſprange out of a new, and fyned ſoyle, and not of ſutche as nowe it is worne, waſted, weryed, and conſumed. For the Generall Inundation tooke from it, his woorthe or fatneſſe, leauinge it in reſpecte, infertile and barren, reſtinge ſalte and vnſauery, by the rage of the Sea, whiche many wéekes flowed ouer it. Theſe reaſons then are good, and eche of them ſufficient to conclude, that it neither was ſo ſtraung, or marueilous, but rather a thinge moſt agréeant vnto nature, that men then lyued longer, then in theſe daies preſently. Farther it maie be ſaide, (that whiche wée for an aſſured truthe holde) that Adam well knewe the vertues of all Hearbes, Plantes, and Stoanes, whiche alſo his Succeſſours, of him in ſutche ſorte learned, that to the like perfection after them, neuer any attained. This then was graunted them of ſomme parte for the preſeruation of their healthe, for the continuance, and protraction of their daies in this worlde: who to expel the cauſes of diſeaſes, if any grewe on them, only vſed to miniſter Simples, abhorring our venemous compoundes of this Age: whiche in place to purge, and purifie mans bodye, weaken, and diſpatche for the moſte parte the poore patiente. Againe in theſe aboue remembred firſte yéeres, both the life, and healthe of man was propte, and ſuſtained by the courſe of the Heauens, with ye influence of the Starres, and Planettes, then farre more beneficiall, then they preſently nowe are: for that then there neither had paſte ſo many Aſpectes, Coniunctions, Eclipſes, with other infinite Impreſſion Celeſtiall, whence nowe procéede ſo many chaunges, variations, & alterations on the Earth, and emonge the Elementes alſo in thoſe daies principal occaſion of healthe, and continuance, contrarye nowe in this our Age of all ſickeneſſe, and deathe. But aboue all that, that wée haue here alleaged, or by reaſon haue

any waye proued, I nowe mainteine the many yéeres of theſe our Firſte Fathers, to haue procéeded of the only, and inſpeakeable prouidence of God, whoſe Maieſtye would their continuance ſhoulde be ſutch, and ſo longe, and that theſe aboue remembred cauſes, ayded mutually one the other, to the only intente, that of twoo perſons might then increaſe many, that the Earthe might be inhabited, and mankinde increaſed. Alſo farther conſideringe, that for as mutche as Man after the fludde, liued not ſo longe as before: God licenſed that they ſhould enter into the Arke, and there ſaue them ſelues, more Men and Woomen then him ſelfe in the beginning, and at the firſt had Created, to the only ende, that the world might the ſooner be inhabited. S. Auguſtine, of this matter, writinge ſome thinge, reporteth, that our Forefathers Li. 15. de Ciuitate Dei. hadde not only in health, and many daies, aduantage of vs, but alſo in huge and greate ſtatures of body, as is euident, remembred by many, their boanes as well found in their Sepulchres, and Graues, as alſo at times vnder great Mountaines and Hilles: in ſutche ſorte that ſome aſſuredly hold, that thei were the boanes of ſuch as liued before the Inundation. The ſame S. Auguſtine affirmeth, that being at 
                     Ʋtica a towne in Aphrike, beholding there the boanes of a dead mans bodie, amonge others, founde there ſome of his Iawes, ſo great and weighty, that they well would haue poiſed an hundred of theſe in our Age. Notwithſtanding though yet our life be ſhort, yet maie wée not for iuſte cauſe any where complaine: for that, if wée abuſe it in contempt of the Diuine Maieſtie, a rare benefite receiue we that thei to vs be ſo ſhortned: for wée will now no longer acknowledge our God: and yet if wée would as becometh vs in all feare to ſerue him, a time ſufficient hath he to that purpoſe lente vs, for that the bountie of our Sauiour is ſo great and ready, that he receiueth for Attonement ſufficiente, mans bowinge harte and humble ſpirite.
            
            
               
               ¶ That the opinion of thoſe, that ſuppoſed the yeeres of the former Ages paſte, to haue benne more ſhort then theſe of our time, is falſe. As alſo whiche was the firste Cittie of the worlde, and finally that our Forefathers had more Children, then theſe that are remembered to vs in the Scriptures. Chap. 2.
               FOr that it appeared vnto ſome, that the ſpace of nine hundred yéeres, in our firſte Fathers ſéemed a thing altogether impoſſible, leſſe able to cōpriſe or receiue theſe aboue remembred reaſons by vs alleaged, the only and ſole cauſes of that ſo longe a life. And where as they durſte not to denie the foreſaide number of yéeres, ſo plainely and openly ſpecified, and geuen vs out of holy Write, they affirme, that the yéeres of the firſt age, were farre more ſhorter, then theſe of our time: ſo that the aduantage of longe life, whiche is vnto them attributed ſo farre aboue vs, is not ſo greate as it hathe benne ſuppoſed. Somme others emonge them would alſo aſſure vs, that one of our yéeres, containeth tenne of that age paſt. Alſo many others haue ſaide, that eche courſe of the Moone yéelded vnto them one whole, full, and compleate yéere, whiche it pleaſed them to tearme, Annus Lunaris. Others ſome alſo dreamed, that thrée of our Monethes gaue to them a yéere: ſo that this accoumptinge, foure of theire yéeres lendeth vs iuſte one, and no more. For that in this ſorte, as wel the Chaldeans, as alſo the Arcadians parted theire yéeres, as remembreth Lactantius. M. Varro a moſte learned Romaine, in others many, beſides this matter, was of the opinion, that theſe Anni 
                  Li. 2. Diuinarū Inſtitutionum. 
                  Lunares, were to be numbred from the Coniunction of the Moone, vntil the newe Moone againe, whiche maie be the ſpace of xxix. dayes, and certaine odde houres. Pline in like māner reckeneth it fabulous, that any in the firſt Age ſhoulde liue ſo many dayes, affirminge that the Inhabitauntes of Arcadia ſo numbred theire yéeres (as wée

aboue haue remembred) by the ſpace onely of thrée Monethes without more. There is alſo emonge vs Chriſtians, a certaine Booke, of the Ages of the worlde, written by Eliconienſis, where he alſo ſéemeth to be of the ſaide minde, and aduice. Notwithſtanding it appeareth moſte euidently, that the yéeres mentioned in the Holy Scriptures, were none others, then theſe of our time, & that if there were any kinde of difference, ſutche it was, as was not almoſte ſenſible. Which thinge is very well proued by Ioſephus, as alſo by Lactantius Firmianus, but yet more perfectly, and more plainely by S. Auguſtine: by whoſe authoritie, and reaſons, eaſily may be confounded who ſo leaneth to the contrarye. Touchinge the firſte, that eche Moone in that Age gaue them one full yéere, accoumptinge euermore from the one Coniunction vnto the other, it reſteth an eroour moſte open, and euidente: for that wée wel know, that, that conteineth not thirtie dayes full, ſo that one hundred yéeres folowing this our accoumpte, would mounte vnto aboue one thouſand and twoo hundred of theirs of that time. Whence it woulde folowe contrarye to the opinion of all, that men in our Age nowe preſently lyue longer, then they did immediately after the Creation of the world, for that neuer was there any man, that liued one thouſande and twoo hundred yéeres, whiche nothinge ſurmounteth this Age of ours. It alſo is apparente, that ſomme emonge vs liue an hundred yéeres, ſomme alſo (thoughe rare it chaunce) an hundred and twelue, whiche woulde riſe to more then a thouſande and thrée hundred yéeres, accoumpting them accordinge to the courſe of the Moone. Like errour to this, was not alſo theirs, which affirmed tenne yéeres of the firſte Age paſte, to be iuſte one, and no more of this our time? For had that their opinion bene true, then ſhould men haue benne able in the acte of Generation, at the Age of ſeuen, eighte, and tenne yéeres, which ſquareth with no rule, or parte of Philoſophie. For

proofe whereof, wée reade in Geneſis, that Seth the ſonne Geneſis. 5. of Adam begatte Enoch, beinge then olde an hundred and fiue yéeres. If then ten yéeres of that Age, had anſweared by iuſt proportion but vnto one of theſe oures, it then ſhoulde followe, that theſe of the firſte Age, at the Age of tenne yéeres and a halfe, of this time preſent ſhoulde be ſtronge and able in the acte of Generation. Cain alſo hauinge iſſue at thréeſcoare and tenne yéeres, ſhould haue alſo benne Father, followinge our accompt at the ende of his firſt ſeuen yéeres, yea and that whiche more is, at a farre yonger Age, if one of our yéeres had counterpeaſed twelue of the firſte Age, as diuerſe haue not leafte lightly to ſurmiſe. But wée ſhall more plainly yet vnfolde this their fowle faulte, and by this reaſon weaken their inexcuſable errour. If their yéere were but the tenth, or tweluth parte of oures, then conſequently muſt it follow, that their yéere had not twelue Moneths, or at leaſt that their Moneth had but three daies: whiche is falſe, for that the ſayde texte of the Scripture ſaithe, that the generall Floudde began the ſeuentiene daye of the ſeconde Moneth: whence wee euidenily learne, that the moneths of that time, where none other then are oures. Concerninge the others whoſe opinion was, that a yeere in the firſte Age, was but the fourth parte of one in this: their yéere beinge the ſpace of thrée moneths only, is proued by the ſaide péece of Scripture, to be in like manner falſe. For in the ſame place is it readde, that the Arke of Noë flottinge on the waters, arreſted it ſelf, the ſeuen and twentie daie of the ſeuenth Moneth, whiche (the waters fallen) firſt ſtaide it ſelfe in the Mountaines of Armenia. Againe, after is it written, that the waters Geneſis. 8. dayly diminiſhed vntill the tenth Moneth, and that in the firſte daie of the ſaide moneth, the toppes of highe Hilles and Mountaines, eche where diſcouered them ſelues. Whence nowe lie euident the errours of thoſe, whiche meaſured for their yéere, the onely ſpace of thrée

Moneths, for that mention is here made bothe of the ſeuenth and tenth. Then may wée well learne, that the auncient yéere had alſo twelue Moneths, as haue in this laſte Age ſemblably oures, for that remembringe the tenth, it mindeth leſſe nothing then the ende, or the laſt. And as ill alſo may that be ſaide, that their Moneth had but thrée daies onely: for of the ſeuen and twentie daye of the Moneth, plaine and expreſſe mention lieth open in the Texte. But leaſt of all may it be ſuppoſed, that their daies had of length but twoo or thrée howers, for that the ſame Texte againe reporteth, that it raigned, and the windowes of Heauen were opened, by the full ſpace of fourtie daies and fourtie nightes. So now then is it euident that the daies were naturall of foure and twentie howres, the Moneths and yéeres none other then are oures, or at leaſt very ſmall and inſenſible was the difference. Whiche thinge to that ende, I onely haue ſpoken, for that all men accompted the courſe of the Heauens as wée doo, ſo that this order amonge the learned, the Hebrewes I meane, as well as the Egyptians, hath benne reuerently eche where, and alwaies obſerued: among whom Moyſes the Hiſtoriographer was brought vp, Author of thoſe holy Bookes, where theſe longe liues are recorded. Now if wée would ſubſcribe to the opinion of many, who affirme the Hebrewes to haue meaſured their Moneths by the courſe of the Moone, geuinge forth their yéere complete by the twelue Moneths Lunaries, eche Moneth hauinge onely niene and twentie daies, & fouretene howres, or at the leaſt very litle more or leſſe, by meanes whereof, the yéere might ende aboute twelue daies ſhorter, then that whiche wée meaſure by the paſſage of the Sunne, whiche is thrée hundreth, thirty and fiue daies, and ſixe howres. This difference notwithſtandinge, ne yet leaueth doubtfull, or of any parte vncertaine, the longe and great Age of our forepaſſed Fathers: for a ſmal matter is it in niene hundred, or a thouſande

yéeres, to exempte twentie, or thirtie: for that the Monethes Lunaryes were not full thirtie dayes. Hence then conclude wée by this authoritie, certaine, that the nine hundred and thirtie yéeres whiche Adam liued, the nine hundred alſo of the others, were ſutch, as were the hundred thrée ſcoare and fiuetiene of Abraham, and ſutch alſo as are the thrée ſcoare and tenne, and foure ſcoare of of our time, for the moſte parte, the extreame tearme, & ende of our lyues. There is alſo one other, and ſemblable conſideration to be noted, to this pourpoſe alleaged by S. Auguſtine. Admitte (ſaithe he) that in the Scriptures Li. 15. de Ciuitate Dei. no mention be made, that Adam, and his Poſteritie had any other Children before theſe that are in the ſaide Scriptures remembred: yet is it for a veritie aſſuredly to be mainteined, that bothe before, and after, they had diuers, and ſundrye, yea and that in theire tenderer Age alſo, then is any where in holy Write, in any wiſe ſpecified. Wherof to yéelde more ſufficient proufe, when it is ſaide, that Caine had builte to him a Cittie, the firſt of all others that euer was in this worlde (of whiche Ioſephus 
                  Ioſephus, Lib. 1. de Antiquitatibus. reporteth, ſayinge: That it was bewtified with diuers Towers, enuironed, & compaſt with aſſured good walles: to which he gaue the name of his Sonne Enoch, whiche was to him then very newely borne), it hathe ſmall ſhewe of trothe, that there ſhould then be but twoo or three men in the worlde onely, for that the Scriptures make mention of no more vnto vs: but to builde a Cittie the ayde of many men, was of neceſſitie to be required: the Texte notwithſtanding remembreth onely the principall doers thereof, as appeareth, where it is ſaide, that their Sonnes, and Daughters begat alſo others, whoſe names in holy Write, are no where remembred. The ſemblable wée finde in the holy Euangeliſtes, as whereas S. Mathew treatinge of the Genealogie of Chriſte, accordinge to the Fleaſhe, beginneth from Abraham, thence deſcendinge vnto Dauid, ſayinge: Abraham begat Iſaac,
                  
remembringe not one woorde at all of Iſmael, and incontinently followinge, Iſaac begat Iacob, not ſpeakinge of Eſau, no, though they were in déede, as is euident: their Elders, lineally mindinge to deſcende vnto Dauid, who not beinge of the Line of Iſmael, neither here remembreth, or Iſmael, or Eſau. Straight againe, Iacob begat Iudas and his Brethren, Iudas not being of them the Eldeſt. In ſutche ſorte that treatinge of this Generation, he onely remembreth thoſe, from whom, in right line he deſcendeth vnto Dauid. Sufficient proufe, to force the gayneſayers to thinke, that Moyſes alſo vſed the ſayde practiſe in his Hiſtorie, and that our Forefathers had alſo other iſſue, then theſe that are to vs remembred in the Scriptures.
            
            
               ¶ Of the excellency of Secretes, and in what forte a ſecrete ought to be couered, with certaine Examples ſeruinge to that purpoſe. Chap. 3.
               ONe of the perfecteſt notes to knowe a Wiſe man, is, if he well can couer the Secrete committed to him by an other, holdinge euermore his owne affayres cloaſe and vnknowen. Who ſo of the time paſte will reade the Auncient Hiſtories, ſhall finde that a number of vertuous enterpriſes, miſte farre, and fowly failed of their deſired ende, in time of Peace, as well, as alſo in that of Warre, by the onely reuealinge of ſome deuiſed Secretes, whence infinite miſchiefes haſtely inſued and followed. But amonge ſundry examples, one wée finde excellent and ſurpaſſinge the reſte, as immediatly, or directly, procéedinge from God: who to him ſelfe ſo well reſerueth his Secretes, that he ne reuealeth to any the things that ſhall happen, or betide vs tomorrow: as alſo neither they that liued in ye Ages paſt, could at any time Diuine any thinge, of the thinges this daye preſent. Whence it is eaſie for eche man to conſider, that

vnto God him ſelfe, to conceale wel a Secrete, is a thing agreant, acceptable, and pleaſinge. Who though he haue for mans ſake, to him diſcouered ſome thinge, yet to let, or preuent, his prouident intention, was neuer to any Creature yet of any parte poſſible. By meanes whereof the wiſe, and ſage in al Ages, haue loued and learned, to conceale, and couer their Secretes. Wée reade that Cato the Cenſour confeſt oftentimes to his Friendes, that he of thrée thinges right often, and greuouſly repented him: The firſt, that he to any body had vnfolded his Counſels, or Secretes, but aboue al others eſpecially vnto a Wooman: The ſeconde, that he had paſte ſome iourneys by Sea, whiche he more ſafely might haue paſt with litle payne by the Lande: The third, that he idlely, and without fruite, had ſpente in his time any one daye. The twoo laſte, merite well of all men to be noted, and the firſte well aunſweareth to this our preſent purpoſe. Alexander on a time, receiuinge from his Mother certaine letters of importance, whiche after he had peruſed ſecretely with Epheſtion, cloſde vp his lippes, with his ſecrete Seale or Signet, geuinge openly thereby to all men to vnderſtand, that he to whom a man in his Counſels affieth him, ſhoulde euermore haue his mouthe well cloſde, and ſhutte vp. When the Kinge Liſimachus had offered vnto the Poëte Phillipides, what ſo ſhould pleaſe him to aſke or demaunde, he incontinently anſweared: the greateſt good turne that your grace can do mée, is not to communicate with me any parte of your Counſels. Antonius Sabellicus retcieth to the ſaide purpoſe, ſurely a notable and marueilous example. In the time of Pope Eugenius, ſaith he, the Senate of Venice had a Capitaine named Cremignoll, by whoſe Treaſon, and diſloyalty, the Army of the Venitians was to their great harme diſcomfited. By meanes whereof the Senatours driuen to further conſultation, how & in what ſorte they ſhould deale with this Capitayne, ſome beinge of the opinion

preſently to ſende for him, to laye him in hold, and to d
                     •…
                   iuſtice on him: but others yet then were of opinion contrary. In fine therefore this was their concluſion, that preſently, and for that time, they woulde diſſemble the matter, as though they nothinge had felte of his barbarous treacherie, attendinge notwithſtandinge ſomme fitter occaſion then that, mindinge euermore to execute him, that ſo iuſtly had deſerued it. This their determination was deferred for the ſpace of eight Moneths, duringe whiche time (ſo well could eche man conceale theſe affaires) yée though they were in number many, many alſo moſte aſſured friendes of the ſaide Cremignoll, ſome poore, and of meane condition, whiche to haue aduertiſed him of theſe newes, mighte haue receiued large & ample rewardes. Theſe thinges not lettinge, their paſſed determination, was at the ende of theſe eight Moneths yet then cloſe and Secrete, at whiche time it was decreed that he ſhould come to Venice, where the Senate, with many woordes, & with faire countenances receiued him, whiche notwithſtanding, the nexte morninge apprehended him, and did him forth with for his diſloyaltie to die. This then might ſerue for example, vnto al Senatours, Iudges, Counſellers, and others of our time: to the end that they better kéepe and conceale their affayres, then others ſome that haue reuealed thinges to their greate hurte, ſhame, and detriment. To the confuſion of which, I ſhall here remember a pleaſant diſcourſe, recited by Aulus Gellius, Noctibus Atticis, as alſo by Macrobius in his Saturnales, & hath this. The Romaine Senatours enteringe into their Senate at Rome, accuſtomed eche one to bringe with him his Sonne, and that as ſoone as he was ones able to go, and to the Children of the Nobilitie was graunted this Priuiledge, vntill they were fully ſeuentene yéeres olde: to the intente, that beholdyng the reuerent order of their Parentes, they in time to come afterwarde, aduaunſed to ripe Age, and fitte for

Gouernment, might the better be inſtructed in common and Publike affayres? So carefully beſides were theſe Infantes inſtructed, that out of the Senate they neuer diſcouered, or diſcloſed any thinge. It happened on a daie, the Senate then ſittinge on greate, and weighty matters, and beſides their accuſtomed howre of departure, longer continuynge that their aſſemble, the determination notwithſtanding reſerued vntill the morrow, with ſtraght inhibitiō, that in the meane time no worde were thereof in any reſpect ſpoken. But amonge other children then that day there preſent, there was one yong boye, the Sonne of Papyrius, of one of the moſt Honorableſt families in Rome. This Childe at night beinge returned home, his Mother firſt by intreatie, in flatteryng ſorte deſired him, to learne her, what matters were debated that daie in the Senate, conſideringe their longe abode, beſides the woonted manner. To whom the boye anſweared that he might not well diſcloſe it, conſideringe it was prohibited, thereof to ſpeake any thinge. Shée this mutche vnderſtandinge (as is the common woonte, and vſage of Woomen) waxte then mutche more earneſt thereof to féele ſome thinge, in ſutche ſorte, that neither, by faire woordes, nor flattery able to gette any thinge, woulde with threates, and roddes finally force him, to anſweare her leſſe honeſt, & haſty importunitie. Whoſe malice to auoide, this wiſe, and wilye Boye, aduiſing him wel of this pretie guile, ſaide: that this deferrent was amongeſt them that daie carefully handled, whither as well for the ſtate Publike, as alſo for the augmentation, and more ſpéedy increaſe of Mankinde, it mighte be more conducible to the whole Empire of Rome, that one Man ſhoulde haue twoo Wiues, or contrary that one Wooman, ſhould be geuen to twoo Huſbandes, which bothe partes failed not, of moſt earneſt, & aſſured Factours: who the nerte day (ſaithe he) will conclude on ſome final & reſolute determination. The which

thinge, thus ones vnderſtoode by the Moother, to whiche ſhée lightly added, bothe faithe and credite: moued therewith, & ſomething perplexed, aduertiſeth other Ladies, & Dames of theſe newes: to the ende they might lette, and diſtourne that deuiſe, of geuing twoo woomen, as wiues to one man, furtheringe the other parte to the vttermoſt of their mighte, to enritche eche Dame with twoo Huſbandes at the leaſt. On the morninge folowing a great number of the Romaine Matrones, were in flockes aſſembled at the Gates of the Senate, effectuouſly, and in many woordes requitinge theire Lordes not to paſſe on any ſo vniuſte a Decrée, as to geue to one man in Marriage twoo wiues, but rather to goe forewarde without ſtaye to the contrary. The Senatours leſſe wetinge to what pourpoſe this tended, amazed, in entrance, one after the other into the Senate, demaunded eche of other, whence mighte procéede this ſo rare, and ſhameleſſe inciuilitie, altogeather vnable, thereof to yéelde any cauſe, or reaſon. But in the ende, the yonge boye, the little Papyrius, did them out of payne, layinge before them, what had chaunced him the night paſſed with his Moother, and howe that for feare of her thunderinge threates, and greate woordes, was forced for his diſcharge, in this pretie ſorte to deceiue, and beguile her. The matter thus then vnderſtoode by the whole Houſe, they highly commended the ſecrete conſtancie in the childe. Concluding notwithſtandinge, that thencefoorthe no Father ſhoulde bringe with him his childe into that place, beſides the younge Papyrius, whiche onely after entered, to the intente Papyrius. that by theſe meanes, no ſecretes ſhoulde out of that Houſe, or Place be reuealed. By the practiſe of this childe againe, maie the Elders of our Age, what to doo in their affayres, be very well aduertiſed: conſideringe that if a Priuate Secrete be not to be diſcloſed, mutche leſſe then a Common, and Publique Secrete, principally emonge the Aged, and men of aſſured Iudgemente.

                  M. Brutus, and Caſsius, with the others all, their accomplices, whiche had conſpired the deathe of Iulius Caeſar, ſuppoſinge it for the ſtate Publique, no leſſe expediente, then it alſo was neceſſary, for the maintenaunce of their Libertie, hauing laide their plotte, and deuiſed the manner howe to putte theſe thinges in perfecte execution, would notwithſtandinge thereof imparte nothing with Cicero, one of their eſpecial, and moſte aſſured friendes, who alſo aboue others moſte effectually deſired the abolition of that tyrannie, not for any diffidence, or miſtruſt they had in him, but for that he onely was reputed a ſimple, and badde Secretorie. A thinge aſſuredly woorthy of admyration, conſideringe howe many they were, that conſpired his Ruine, in howe priuie manner, and howe longe they concealed it, and that from theire approued, and beſte beloued friende. Fuluius ſommetime reuealed a greate Secrete to his wife, whiche, not longe before he had receiued of the Emperour Octauian: which after diſcouered by his ſaide wife, notis therof came immediatly to the Prince, who, for his ouer mutch lightneſſe, in maner moſt ſharpe, rebuked him tauntingely. By meanes whereof, he entred into deſperation, determining to doo preſente force on him ſelfe: but firſte charginge his wife with the greate wronge that ſhée hadde donne him: who ſaide, that he no reaſon, nor iuſte cauſe had at all to grieue with her, conſideringe the many dayes that they had lyued togeather: he yet had not felte her fickle complexion, or otherwiſe knowing it, that ſo londely would abuſe his owne knowledge therein, repoſinge his truſt, and affiance in her. Wherefore thoughe her Huſbande were the cauſe of this errour, yet determined ſhée to ſuffer the firſte paine due therefore, and with the ſame laid violente handes on her ſelfe, after whoſe deathe, poore Fuluius did the ſame. It is readde in the Life of the Emperour Nero, that his deathe beinge conſpired on a time Nero. in Rome (a thinge moſte expediente, as well for the Romaines,
                  
as alſo for all others his rare cruelties conſidered) hée, to whom it belonged by couenaunte, to doo the déede, mette by happe a certaine Priſoner, whiche by ordinaunce of the tyrannie, was then on paſſage, to place of Execution, and conſideringe with him ſelfe, that the wicked, & peruerſe nature of the Emperour was ſuche, that none, whome he apprehended at any time, eſcaped deathe, and therefore the Priſoner, whiche ſorrowfully lamented, mighte no waye eſcape his bloudy, and mercileſſe hande, drewe ſomethinge nighe him (not remembringe that his affayres demaunded ſecrete dealinge) Praye to God (ſaithe he) that it maie pleaſe him to preſerue thée vntil to morrowe, for if thou doo paſſe this day vnto an ende, I will aſſure thée, that Nero ſhall not doo thée to die. Whiche thinge vnderſtoode by that miſerable Priſoner, who incontinently ſuſpected that whiche in déede was, ſéeking the only meanes to ſaue his owne life, declared the matter foorthewith to the Emperoure, aduiſinge him to take good héede to him ſelfe. By occaſion whereof, Nero immediately apprehended him, that had comforted him in ſutche ſorte, the aboue remembred Priſoner, and by chaunge of tormentes, forced him to confeſſe the Coniuration. By reaſon whereof, him ſelfe was cruelly executed, theire Determination made fruſtrate, and voide. Pline recoumpteth the plaine contrarye of Anaxarchus, who beinge apprehended for the Lib. 7. Cap. 23. ſemblable matter, curragiouſly bitte of his tongue, with countenaunce vnappalled, to the intente that he neuer would diſcloſe therewith any Secrete, ſpittinge it manfully into the face of the Tyrante. The Athenians curiouſly framed a certaine Image of Iette, in the honour of a common wooman, who hight Lyonna, in memory of her excellente conſtancie, for that ſhée ſo wel, and ſo ſecretly Lyonna. had kepte, bothe ſilence, and conſell in a certaine conſpiracie: whiche Image was framed without any tongue, the better to geue foorthe the force of a Secrete. In like

manner the Vaſſaules, or Seruauntes of Plancus, are in Plancus Val. li. 6. Cap. 8. this place for iuſte cauſe to be remembred, for that no tormentes ſufficed to make them confeſſe any thinge of theire Maiſter to the enimies, whiche ſoughte him, and woulde haue ſlayne him, where ſo euer they mighte haue founde him. The Page of Cato, that famous Oratoure, Cato. priuie of a faulte committed by his Maiſter, was tormented in Racke, to confeſſe thereof ſommethinge, and yet for what ſo euer might be done to him in the world, neuer woulde he be broughte to witneſſe againſte him any thinge. Q. Curtius remembreth, that the Perſians 
                  Q. Curtius. had a Lawe, more ſtraightly to pouniſhe, then for any other faulte, theſe that vnaduiſedly reuealed any Secret. For confirmation whereof, he ſaithe, that the Kinge Darius, vanquiſhed by Alexander, not knowinge howe to eſcape, hidde him ſelfe: but no paine, or pouniſhment on the one ſide, or hope of rewarde on the other, might moue them, that knewe where he was, any thinge to ſpeake of him. And againe he remēbreth, that the Perſians maintaine for an opinion, that no man ſhould, in the man leſſe cloſe and ſecrete, affye him ſelfe, in caſes of charge, and importance. To be a good Secretorie then, is in all thinges neceſſarye, eſpecially in Warre, that whiche all aunciente Captaines in the Age paſte, well obſerued. Philippe the ſonne of Antigonus, Succeſſour to Alexander, demaunded of his Father in preſence of certaine others, when, & at what houre the Campe ſhould marche. To whom the Kinge in highe diſdeigne anſweared: Arte thou ſo deafe, that thou feareſt, thou ſhalte not heare the Trumpet, as wel as others. Letting him thence plainly to vnderſtande, that by that his Demaunde, he had committed an erroure, whiche merited no anſweare in the preſence of others. There was a Tribune in ye Hoaſt of Cecilius Metellus, a Captaine Romaine, which aſked his C. Metellus, Determination, vpon certaine pointes in their warres. To whome he anſweared: If I wiſte that my Shurte

knewe, whereon I haue reſolued, I woulde foorthwith and out of hande burne it. Horace, in his Lawes of Feaſtinge, commaundeth that eche man kéepe well to him ſelfe, what ſo euer ſhall there be ſaide, or ſpoken. By meanes whereof, the Athenians had emonge them ſutche an vſage, that when ſo euer they mette togeather at any Feaſte, the moſte aunciente, ſhould ſhewe to the others, the Gate, whereat they entered, ſayinge: aduiſe yée well, that no one woorde hence paſſe, that at this preſente ſhall emonge vs be ſpoken. The firſte thinge that Pythagoras learned his Schollers, was to holde theire peace, and carefully to kéepe ſilence, ſo that he euer kept them a certaine time without ſpeakinge, to the intents they mighte be learned well to kéepe a Secrete, and neuer to ſpeake, but when time requires. Which ſufficeth to learne vs, that to conceale a Secrete, is of all others a moſte principall, and rare Vertue. For proufe hereof, when Ariſtotle was ſommetimes demaunded, whiche was the moſte difficill, and hardeſt thinge in the world, he anſweared, that it was to holde our peace, and talke not. S. Ambroſe alſo to this purpoſe in his Offices, layeth emonge the principal foundations of Vertue, the patience that man ſhoulde vſe in ſilence. The Romaines emonge other the vanities of their Goddes, had a Goddeſſe Pline, Lib. 3. Cap. 5. of Silence, whiche had to name, Angeronna, which they painted euermore in token of ſilence, with finger continually preſte on her mouthe. Pline alſo writeth, that on the xxii. of December they Sacrificed ſtill vnto her. Which alſo witneſſe M. Varro, Solinus, and Macrobius. A God of Silence was in manner ſemblable honoured of the Aegyptians, whiche, they, as the others, with finger in mouthe purtrayed. In like ſorte hath Catullus, and Ouid deſcribed this Idolle. And hence is well knowen, howe thei reuerenced a good Secretorie, in that they adored theſe Idolles as Goddes. Salomon in his Prouerbes ſaith, That a Kinge ſhould drinke no Wine,

for other reaſon none, ſaue that, who dronke is, can in no wiſe kéepe, or Silence, or Counſell: and ſuppoſeth him further moſte vnwoorthye to Raigne, that cannot well couer his Secretes of importance. And againe he ſaith, That who ſo diſcloſeth a Secrete committed to him, is a plaine, and open Traytour: and who ſo well kéepeth it, is a loyall, and faithfull Friende.
            
            
               ¶ Howe commendable a thinge it is, to talke, or ſpeake fewe. Chap. 4.
               FEwe times to talke, and then to be ſhorte, and Sententious, is a thinge moſte rare, and commendable, neuer ſufficiently praiſed of the Wiſe, and Learned. Salomon ſaithe, That mutche talke is neuer without offence, and who ſo wel brioleth, & moderateth his tongue is prudent. And againe, He that maiſtereth his tongue, ſaueth his ſoule: but who ſo bableth inconſiderately, lyeth open, and in daunger to infinite diſcommodities. Here mighte be alleaged the Teſtimonies of ſundrye wiſe, and learned: but of ſomme parte maye ſuffice that texte of the Goſpell, That wée ſhall aſſuredly yéelde accoumpte of euery idle woorde. The Lacedemonians emonge all other Nations, pleaſured moſt to be Sententious, and briefe: in ſutch ſorte, that when any vſed fewe woordes in talke, they ſaide, that he diſcourſed Lacedemonianlike. Philippe, the Father of Alexander, on a time ſente to them, that he woulde paſſe ouer ſome parte of their Country with his Armye, and that they ſpéedely woulde certiāe him, in what ſorte he ſhoulde paſſe, either as their friende, or as their open enimie. To whom they anſweared in fewe, without any heape of woordes: Neither as the one, nor as the other. Artaxerxes in manner ſemblable, Kinge of Aſia, ſente them woorde, that he woulde comme to ſpoyle, and ſacke their Countrie. To whiche their threates, they in none other ſorte anſweared,

but, come hardly, & doo what thou wilte. Me thinkes they coulde not in longe proſes of woordes haue framed him an anſweare more fitte then that. The Embaſſadours of the Samyans pronounced on a time, weary, and longe Orations in their Conſiſtorie: in ſutche ſorte, that they miſlikinge of theire tedious diſcourſes, finally framed them in fewe, this anſweare. Wée haue foregotten the firſte parte of that you haue vttered: and as concerninge the reſte, wée doo not vnderſtand it. Alſo to other Embaſſadours of the Abderites, as well for that they were too curious in vtteringe theire Embaſye, as alſo that they demaunded in greate haſte theire diſpatche, by Agis the Kinge of the Lacedemonians, was in this ſorte anſweared. Yée ſhall ſaie, returned vnto the Abderites from vs, that wée haue geuen you ſo longe audience, as it pleaſed you here to ſpeake. On a certaine time, one talkinge with Ariſtotle, continued his diſcourſe beyonde meaſure, ſo longe, that in the ende, him ſelfe féelinge Ariſtotle. his owne errour, and faulte, concluded abruptly, with his excuſe, ſayinge: Pleaſeth it you to pardon mée, that I haue fayled, in vſinge ſo many woordes before ſo graue a Philoſopher. To whome Ariſtotle framed this ſo courteous an anſweare: Friende, it néeded not, that thou ſhouldeſt haue craued in this eaſe, any pardon, for I neuer thoughte otherwiſe then to pardon thée vndemaunded. Whiche anſweare, as well ſerued, as it was fittinge to that pourpoſe. An other example reade wée Liuicus. of thoſe that robbed, and ſlewe the Poete Liuicus, for as they oppreſte him in wide, and open fieldes farre from companye, and out of all ſighte, he eſpied a companye of Cranes flyinge ouer his heade, to whiche with lowde voice, he ſpake theſe his laſt woordes: O Cranes, yée ſhal be witneſſes of the wronge that is here donne mée. After whoſe deathe, this matter laye yet many dayes vnknowen, till on a certaine time after, it chaunced a ſolemne Conuente of people was made in the ſaide place: emonge

whom, were alſo preſente the twoo Murtherers of Liuicus, whiche hearinge, as before, Cranes cryinge ouer them: the one aduiſed his felowe thereof in laughter merily (ſuppoſinge in the meane time not to haue bene perceiued of any) Hearken companion, beholde here the true witneſſes of the blonde, and deathe of Liuicus. It chaunced, that one nighe them, hearing theſe woordes, and not wel perceiuinge what they mighte ſignifie, ſuſpected foorthewith that whiche in déede was, aduectiſinge the Maieſtrates of that whiche he had hearde. To conclude, theiſe twoo Royſters were incontinentely apprehended, and accordinge to equitie, Iuſtice was donne on them: whiche happened by woordes paſte them without aduiſe, or regarde. For this cauſe a man oughte principally to be ware of that whiche he will ſaye, before it eſcape him, with conſideration alſo before whome, and in what place. Hecates a Greeke Oratoure, was on a time Hecates. reproued, for that ſittinge at a Bankette, he woulde ſa
                     •
                  e nothinge. Whiche vnderſtoode by Archimidas, anſweared in this ſorte for him: Arte thou ignorante, that one, that can ſo well ſpeake as he, knoweth not alſo the time to kéepe ſilence? Infinite examples, out of diuers Hiſtories might be borrowed, of Times, Daungers, Infamations, and Deathe: in whiche, by too mutch talke, menne eftſoones haue bene entrapped. Wherefore wée ſhoulde be circumſpecte, and wiſe, that before wée doo our mouth open to ſpeake, wée well conſider of it, whether it maye be to vs preiudiciall, or not. The greate Cato, ſurnamed Cenſorius, was euen from his Cradle verye ſober in woordes: wherof, at times reproued of many, as one that obſerued to auſtere ſilence, ſaide: I grieue not at all to be argued of Silence, for that no man ſhall haue occaſion to reproue me of my lyuinge: for then, and not before wil I breake into woordes, when I haue learned to ſpeake theſe thinges that maye not be concealed. Iſocrates in his Booke written to Demonichus, ſaith: That there are

twoo times conueniente to ſpeake in: the one, when to ſpeake is in déede very neceſſary: the other, when one ſpeaketh of theſe thinges, he well knoweth. Plutarche 
                  Plutarche. compareth thoſe men that talke, not knowinge wherof, vnto voide, and emptie Veſſells, whiche geue foorthe a greater noyſe, then theſe that are filled. Plainely inſtructeth vs the Philoſopher Zeno, that for other cauſe none hath Nature lente vs twoo eares, & one tongue, but Zeno. only to ſpeake fewe, in bearinge, and receiuinge mutch. Horace aduiſeth vs farre to flye their companies, which Horace. pleaſure mutche in many demaundes, and queſtions, for that they commonly be captious Ianglers. Suetonius recoumpteth in confirmation of that, that was alſo reported Suetonius. by others, that the principall cauſe that moued Octauian ſo mutche to phantaſie, and fauour his Minion Mecaenas, was, that he was very ſecret, and not prodigal of woordes. Cicero affirmeth that Cato the Oratoure, Cicero. neuer woulde commit to Paper, any his Orations, ſaieinge: That if it euer happened him to repent him of that he had ſaide, yet that, that he had written, ſhould not aggrauate his ſorrowes, for that he neuer might denie the thinge, that his Pen ſhould witneſſe againſte him. But to the ende, that arguinge here, the leſſe aduiſed, and runninge tongues of others, I ſéeme not to incurre the ſaid errour my ſelfe. I ende with the Ppiloſopher without any more: concludinge, that it oftentimes repenteth mée to haue ſpoken, but to haue helde my peace, that I remember, neuer.
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſtraunge opinion of the Aegyptians, touchinge the tearme, or ende of Mannes Life: limitinge the ſame by the proportion of his harte. Chap. 5.
               THat whiche I ſhall ſaie here, will ſéeme vnto many very ſtraunge and newe, but vnto moſte men fonde, and ridiculous: for that it is a thinge very

difficill to be proued. Wherefore neither will I binde my ſelfe to the probation thereof, althoughe the authoritie of thoſe that ſéeme to approue it, ſhoulde either yéelde it a trothe, or vnto a truthe ſommethinge ſemblable, and likinge. Pline, and Marcus Varro, writinge of the time Pline, Lib. 11. Cap. 36. M. Varro. of Mannes Life, affirme, that the learned Aegyptians had founde out by experience, that Man according to the order of nature could not lyue aboue an hundred yéeres, and that if any reachte to a further, or elder age, it was by ſomme particulare influence, & force of the Starres: a thinge in the woorkes of Nature verye ſtraunge, and marueilous. Hence grounded they their foundation, vpon the harte of man: in whiche by often, and common Anotomyes, they founde, and perceiued certaine marueilous Secretes. For ſaide they, when Man was of the age of one yéere, then poiſed his harte onely twoo of their Drammes: when be was twoo yéeres olde, then poiſed it foure, and ſo foorthe howe many yéeres ſo euer he liued, by proportion ſtill grewe his harte to be of like number of Drammes. In ſutche ſorte, that beinge ones fiftie yéeres olde, Mannes harte ſhoulde wieghe then an hundred Drammes: and from thence, by like proportion ſtill he looſeth of his weight, eche yéere twoo Drammes, euen as before he increaſed. So that at the ende of an hundred yéeres, the Harte by continuall decreaſe, is becomme nothinge: ſo that conſequently of neceſſitie, Man then muſt die, if before he be not preuented by ſomme accidentall occaſion, whiche bothe can, and dooth commonly in ſuche manner abridge our dayes, that very fewe of vs liue the one halfe to experiment this matter. Though to ſomme this matter ſéeme ſtraunge, yet be wée aſſured, that the Aegyptians helde it for certaine: as plainely haue leafte vs the aboue remembred Authoures. Of our time alſo Ludouicus Celius Rodianus, alleaginge in like manner to that pourpoſe, Dioſcorides, who remembreth thereof ſommethinge, emonge other many matters: to whome

alſo commeth Petrus Crinitus, in his Booke of Honeſt Li. 10. Antiquarum Lectionū. Cor. Ag. Li. 2. de Secretis Philoſophiae. Diſcipline. Galiotus de Nargni, in his Booke of Man, as alſo in like ſorte Cornelius Agrippa. I was deſirous to remember here all theſe Authours, for that the matter mighte otherwiſe hardly be digeſted. Nowe remaineth it to be déemed of, as to the Reader it ſhal be liking. And nowe that wée haue taken on vs to ſpeake of Mans Harte, and of the excellencies of that one little parte, to the intente wée treate not of one pointe alone, it ſhalbe expediente that wée learne, as recoumpteth to vs Ariſtotle, that Mannes Harte lyeth lodged in the leafte ſide Ariſtotle. of his bodye: but in other Creatures is founde euermore in the middle of theire breſte, whiche he recordeth in his firſte Booke of the nature of Beaſtes. Further emonge the Philoſophers Naturall, it is mainteined for an opinion Common, that the firſt parte that commeth in Man to any fourme, or proportion, is the Harte, the roote of al others his partes, the fountaine, and only ſpringe of naturall heate: as alſo the laſt member that looſeth his mouinge, and dyeth in him. It is aſſuredly a moſte delicate, and daintye member, and ſu
                     •
                  che as maie not be touched, but Man foorthewith dyeth. Pline recordeth a ſtraunge Pline. Li. 11. Cap. 37. matter, which he for true affirmeth, ſayinge: That there was one founde, whiche had his Harte roughe and hearye: and further, that who ſo hathe the ſame, is euermore valiante, and curragius. Whiche thinge was founde true (beinge opened) in Ariſtomenes, who with his owne Ariſtomenes. hande in one Battaile, had ſlayne thrée hundred Lacedemonians: who after hauinge eſcaped, by his rare force, ſundrye daungers, and afterwarde dyinge in his Bedde quietly, was opened, and his Harte founde, as is aboueſaide, hearye. Suetonius Tranquillus, in the Life of Caligula, as alſo the ſaide Pline, togeather affirme, that who ſo dieth, donne to deathe with Poyſon, his Harte will at no time conſume, or waſte with fire: whiche was proued in Germanicus, Father of Caligula: whiche alſo happeneth Germanicus.
                  
to them that die of the Fallinge Euill. Further it is euidente, that the force of laughinge, or Laughter it ſelfe, reſteth in the little cheaſtes, or ſeates of the Harte. For proufe whereof, the aunciente Hiſtorians writinge of certaine Swoordeplayers in Rome, auouch, that theſe, by meane of whoſe woūdes, the very thréedes, or vaines of theire hartes fell out, made chaunge of this life, with extreame Laughter. Alſo as this qualitie of Laughter procéedeth from the harte, ſo Melancoly thence ſemblably taketh his beginninge: as in like ſorte, all vertuous, and naughty imaginations. All woordes firſte there ingender, and beginne. Many alſo mainteine, that it is the chiefe ſeate, and principall reſtinge place of the Soule. Whiche ſeemeth to be wel confirmed by our Sauiour him ſelfe, ſayinge: That wicked imaginations, and naughtie thoughtes procéede directly from the hart, and that, that entereth at the mouthe ſayleth not the man, for that theſe be but thinges indifferēt. Further Venerable Beda 
                  Beda. in his Commētaries on S. Marke, remembreth the chiefe ſeate of the Soule, not to be in the Brayne, as mainteineth Plato, but rather in the Harte, as learneth vs our Sauiour.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of the firste beginninge, and ſpringe of Warre: as who were they, that firste inuaded ſtraunge Countries, with the Inuentours of certaine Weapons, and Armes: who alſo first founde the vſe of Artillerie. Chap. 6.
               IT is euident, that Warre, & diſcord emong men, tooke their firſte holde, or ſtaye, on the ſinne of our Forefathers: as appeareth, in that one of ye firſt borne ſonnes of Adam, who leaft not to laie violent, & bloudye handes on his Brother: ſo that looſinge euen here our Originall Iuſtice, malice and diſcorde afterwarde neuer leaft their raigne emongeſt vs. In ſutche ſorte, that Warre, and Enimitie began euen emonge the firſte borne. But the

ſcience of Warre, or the Arte militarie it ſelfe, with the perfect māner to order many in Battaile againſt many, (for that the firſt fountaine thereof is of ſinne, the middle alſo continually, and for the moſte parte the ende is nothinge but crueltie, bloude, and miſerable impietie) is nowe in ſutche woorthy, and Honorable reputation, that the Arte it ſelfe, and the well ſkilled therein, are farre nowe aduaunced aboue the Fautours of all other prudent, and induſtrious exerciſes, as moſte eſtéemed aboue all other vertuous practiſes in the Worlde. Diodorus Siculus, with others, affirme that Mars was the firſt that ordered, and deuiſed, the ſubtile polices of Warre, for which cauſes the Poëtes termed him (but fabulouſly) the God of Battayle. Cicero attributeth the Honour of this Lib. 3. de Natura Deorum. inuention to the Goddeſſe Pallas, by meanes whereof ſhe was named (as he ſaithe) Bellona, vnto whiche opinion accorded diuerſe Poëtes, gayneſayinge the opinion of that firſte, and auncient ſpringe of Warre, whiche Ioſephus in his firſt booke of his Antiquities, euen in the firſt Age, & before the Floudde, attributeth vnto Tubal, the moſte experte therein, in his time, who by his induſtrious, and painefull practiſes, perfected him ſelfe in the guiles, and aduauntages of Warre. Others ſomme ſuppoſe that it firſt began after the floudde, ſo that to learne the truth it ſéemeth very difficill, who was the very firſt beginner, and Father of this matter. Whiche how ſo euer it was, it well appeareth, that in the beginninge, Warres and diſſentions onely grewe amonge Princes, more for Ambition, & deſire of Honour, then any where to impoueriſhe or ſpoyle one the other. Iuſtine, and Trogus Pompeius, reporte that Nynus King of the Aſſyriens, was the firſte that leadde an Hoſte out of his Countrie, for Auarice, & to Conquere the Territories of an other. Fabian the Pretor, affirmeth well the ſame, in the beginninge, of that little parte, that reſteth vnto vs, of his Hiſtorie: to whiche alſo condeſcendeth S. Auguſtine. This

                  Nynus ſo bare him ſelfe in this practiſe of Warre, that he ſubdued in ſhorte time many Citties, and Countries, whiche he lefte in quiet poſſeſſion to his Succeſſours: whiche continued from time to time, vnto his poſteritie, accordinge to the computation of S. Auguſtine, Euſebius, and Diodorus Siculus, thirtene hundred yéeres, deſcendinge euermore from the Father vnto the Sonne, with out defaulte at any time of Heyres in right line, by the number of thirtie and thrée Kinges, and as ſome others reporte, thirtie and ſixe: vntill in the ende it came into the gouernment, of that Monſter Sardonapalus, in whoſe time this ſo longe continued an Empire, came then into the handes and handlinge of the Medes. This Nynus then, as recorde theſe Authours, was the firſte Conquerer, knowen in all the worlde, although wée reade of certaine Warres before him: but it appeareth as wée haue ſaide, that it was not, to poſſeſſe & Conquere the Countries of others, but for pryde onely, and glory of the worlde: as is written of Veſſor Kinge of Egypte, who paſte out of his Countrie againſte Tanais Prince of the Scythians, which mette him, and gaue him Battaile, and remayned victorious, who not withſtandinge neuer depoſed him from his Crowne, or Countrie, as had practiſed the aboue remembred Nynus. Wherefore, he maye be thought the firſt, that euer gaue foorthe any Lawes of Armes, grauntinge to the Conquerer all the poſſeſſions and treaſures of the Conquered. Touchyng their Weapons, wherewith they inuaded, defended, putting in execution their wrouthfull, angry malice, and yre, it is to be ſuppoſed, that in the beginninge they vſed none inequalitie of Armes, but as the Poete Lucretius recoumpteth, they firſt began with the nailes and téeth, and after that to acquainte them with the ſtaffe, & ſtoanes, whiche this daie yet are onely vſed of certaine barbarous Nations, not yet by the malice of man, hauinge drawne out of the earthe yron, to doo force, and oppreſſion on their

Neighbours. Pline writeth that in the firſte Warres of Lib. 7. Cap. 16. the Moores, againſte the Aegyptians, they entered the fielde onely with Pikes, and Iauelins, and after that by litle and litle, it came within fewe dayes to ſutche paſſe, and ende, that menne were prouided of ſutche ſtraunge kindes of Armes and Armoures, that it was rare to beholde, the one ſtill to kill and murther the other. Of the inuentours of theſe thinges, wée finde diuerſe opinions. The Poetes in their Fables, attribute the inuention of theſe Weapons vnto Mars. Pline reporteth that the Etoliens were the firſt that euer bare Launce in fielde, and addeth alſo, that the Lacedemonians firſte founde the Pertiſan, the Sworde, & for defence alſo the Headpéece. But Herodotus ſaith, that the Aegyptians firſte framed the Tergotte and Sallette: As alſo Midas of Miſena, the Lib. 4. Coate of Maale, and the Breaſte plate, and finally one of Etolia, the firſte Darte that was vſed. It is ſaide that Pantaſilia Quéene of the Ammaſones, firſte fought in fielde with Gleaue, or Halbarte: And Scythus Sonne of Iupiter, firſte founde, how to vſe the Darte or Arrowe: but others ſomme thinke the contrarie, attributinge it to Perſea. And Diodorus, not alone, aſſcribeth it to Apollo. The inhabitantes of the Iles, Baleares, (called nowe in our time Maiorque and Minorque) as hath Vigetius, in his Booke of the Arte of Warre, were they that firſte founde to caſte Stoanes with the Slinge. So that men accordinge to the time, their affayres, and varietie of inuention, haue ſearchte, and founde out ſundrie ſortes of Weapons. And this hath it chaunced, in my phantaſie eftſoones, that in one, and the ſame time, in places farre diſtant, the ſame kinde of weapons haue benne framed by diuerſe, not one, at all wetinge of others deuiſe or practiſe. Wherefore the leſſe to annoye the Reader, I leaue to geather more variable opinions, whiche well might ſerue here not impertinent to our pourpoſe: as to recoumpte in like ſorte, who were the inuentours of ſo

many ſtraunge inſtrumentes and deuiſes of Warre, to ſhake, and ouerthrowe greate Walles, and Fortreſſes. Euſebius affirmeth, that Moyſes was inuentour of theſe Lib. 9. de preparatione Euā
                     gelica. huge and ſtraunge Engins. Plutarche addeth, that Archilas Tarentinus, and Eudoxus were the firſte that reduced this Arte to a perfection, and that thei deuiſed ſundrie inſtrumentes, to weaken walles and great houſes. The Beliers, as hathe alſo Pline, founde the vſe of the Swoorde at the ſiege of Troye: but as Vitruuius reporteth, it rather was at the ſiege of Athens. The Scorpion wherewith they vſed to throwe huge, and greate Stoanes, as againe hath Pline, was firſte deuiſed by the inhabitantes of Crete and Syria. The Phoenicians firſte aduantaged them ſelues with the ſharpe, and pearſinge Rebute: but theſe al were trifles of little weight and importaunce, farre ſurpaſſed in crueltie, by the inuention of Shotte, in diuerſe ſortes, and Artillerie. The firſt inuention of whiche, ſomme attribute vnto an Almayne, whoſe name wée finde nowhere, as vnwoorthy of memorye. As reporte Blondus, and R. Volateranus, the firſt that vſed ſhotte to theire behoofe and profite, were the Venetians, againſte the Inhabitantes of Genua, in the yéere of our Lorde a thouſande, thrée hundred, and foure ſcoare. Howbeit, in my iudgement, this inuention was yet more Auncient, for that wée Reade in the Cronicle of Alphonſus, the eleuenth Kinge, by iuſte accompte, of Caſtille, who at the Conqueſte of the Citie Algazare found, while he beſieged the Towne, in the yéere of our redemption, a thouſand thrée hundred fortie and thrée, that the Moores from within, threw out among the enimies certaine thunders through longe Morters, or Troughes of yron: and this was almoſt fortie yéeres before that, that Blondus recordeth. Againe before that, it is reported by the ſaide Alphonſus, whiche ſemblably conquered Toletum in Spayne, that one Petrus Biſhop of Logio, writeth that in a certaine Battayle donne on the Sea, betwixt

the Kinge of Tunnye, and Morus Kinge of Sibilia, whoſe faction Alphonſus fauoured, that ye 
                  Tunnigeniens threwe on their enemies, certaine Bōbardes or Tunnes of fire: whiche by all likelihoode might be déemed Artillerie, although it were not in ſutche perfection, as now, and that was foure hundred yéeres before and more.
            
            
               ¶ For what cauſe Man goeth vpright: as alſo why fastinge, then when he hath Eaten, he euermore is founde more weighty, and poyſant: and why in concluſion he poyſeth more dead then liuinge, with others, ſutche not impleaſant Accidents. Chap. 7.
               OF the Compoſition of man ſundry are the conſiderations, of whiche Lactantius Firmianus a parte, as alſo ſomme others, haue written, large, & wery volumes: in whiche one thinge, amonge others many, requireth ſomme exact & particuler examination. Which is, that it hath pleaſed God to frame al Creatures, Man onely excepted, with the heade hanginge, and ſtoupinge forewarde, their eies ſtill fixte, or for the moſte parte, on the Earthe: and not only brute Beaſtes, but al Plantes and Bodyes vegetable. As is ſéene in trées, whiche haue their heades, or rootes faſte lockte, or hidde in the earthe, the bowes, or braunches mounting into ye ayre on highe. But Man he hathe created with eies bente towardes Heauen, his body ſtraighte and righte, his face aduaunſt on highe, Goddes woorkes ſtill to contēplate, & conſider. And althoughe for this matter, it mighte ſuffice to alleage the onely prouidence of God, yet ſéemeth it to ſauour of ſomme Myſterie, or Secrete, and therefore woorthy of ſomme further conſideration. Our Diſpoſition then moſte aſſuredly learneth vs, yea by moſte plaine, and euidente ſigne, that wée are not created, and framed for the Earthe, to haue in admyration thinges baſe, and tranſitorie: but to be buſied in things on highe & heauenly.

Of whiche with Man, no other Creature maye communicate: vnwoorthy, and incapable of ſutche, and ſo great benefites: Man only for them, euen from the firſte ordeined. God hathe created all creatures with heade hanginge, and bente ſtill to the grounde, to ſhewe, that he to Man hathe geuen ouer them, all kinde of Rule, and Authoritie to order them. Whiche thinge is well noted of Lactantius Firmianus, who ſaithe: That God hauinge determined to create Man for Heauen, al other Creatures vnreaſonable, onely for the Earthe: he made Man a creature capable of aduice, righte, and ſtraighte, naturally ordeined, and inſtituted to Celeſtial Contemplation: to the intente he onely mighte reuerence him, that he mighte honour the place of his firſte ſpringe, and beginninge, that he mighte acknowledge the Countrie that he is borne to: ſhapinge other Creatures bowinge and ſtoopinge, as hauinge no parte, or participation of Heauen. Ariſtotle, who had of the true faithe no féelinge, Ariſt. Lib. 2. de Natura Animalium. ſaithe: That onely Man, emonge other Creatures marcheth vprighte: for that him ſelfe, and his Countrye are not Terreane, but Celeſtiall. And further, That the office of Diuine mindes, is to vnderſtande, and perceiue, in which function, neither ſhoulde Man haue knowen how ſkilfully to haue ordered him ſelfe, had he bene of a lumpiſhe, heauye, or vnfittinge ſhape: for that the weightie maſſe, and huge lumpe of the bodye, yéeldeth the memorie, and recordation with other partes of the Soule, inſenſible. S. Thomas, who leafte no matter vntouched, or vnexamined, in his Expoſition of Youtke, and Age, hathe to this pourpoſe, ſutche woordes as folowe. For twoo cauſes was Man formed righte, beholdinge Heauen: The one, for that he ſhoulde be the perfecteſt of other Creatures, and ſutche as ſhoulde taſte, or ſauer of all Celeſtial qualities. The other, for that in the proportion, and temperature of his bodye, he is more hoate then any other Creature, and that the nature of

heate is euermore to mounte, and aſcende vpwardes. Other Creatures, as far inferiour, as alſo leſſe perfecte, leſſe participate in theſe Celeſtiall qualities, and leſſe naturall heate haue they in any ſorte to aduaunce them. For whiche cauſe, neither are they of the ſame frame, or proportion with Man. It ſéemeth, that in this place S. Thomas folowed the opinion of the Platoniſtes, who affirmed that naturall heate, with ſundrie the Vitall Spirites in Man (in whiche he more aboundeth then any other liuinge Creature) are the onely cauſes that he marcheth vprightly, aduaunced in manner ſo perfect, and ſo ſéemely, for that by the force, and vigor of the foreſaide powres and bloudde, he addreſſeth him ſelfe vpwardes. That which his indeuour more perfectly to accompliſhe, he further againe is ayded by the true proportion, and mixture of the Elementes: of whiche he borroweth his firſte ſpringe, and beginninge with ſutche equalitie, and conueniente weighte, that he fitly, and commodiouſly walketh, addreſſing him ſelfe to looke on the marueilous frame of Heauen. Nowe then ſith Man, of parte, by the perfection of his Soule, as alſo of parte, by the excellent feauture of his Bodye, is beroughte with the loue, and cōtemplation of Heauen, he ſhould only woorke, thinke, and deuiſe thinges Heauenly, & Spirituall, diſdeininge the Earthe, with all thinges thereon tranſitorye. But wée be in ſutch ſorte enamoured with the vile conſideration of worldly pleaſures, that for the moſt part hauing our eies, and countenaunce bente to Heauen, the harte lyeth ſoylde belowe vpon the Earthe. Againe concerning Man, of whom wée haue here ſpoken, Pline remembreth an other thinge, whiche thoughe it be not of ſutche importance, as are the others, yet may it of ſomme parte contente, and pleaſe the Reader, eſpecially to whome experience hathe not reuealed it, founde notwithſtanding daily to be true, of all ſutche as pleaſe carefully to experimente it. He ſaithe, that Man dead, poyſeth more then

when he liued: that whiche he alſo affirmeth in all other kinde of Creatures. Againe he ſaithe, that Man hauing eaten in the morninge, poyſeth leſſe, then when he was before faſtinge. Whiche thinge is by Eraſmus in a certaine Probleame of his confirmed. Who alſo in the ſame remembreth other ſomme things not vnwoorthy of readinge: yéeldinge the ſame reaſons, with Pline, for the confirmation thereof, grounded on the conſideration of the Vitall Spirites, and Ayre, as is aboue rehearſed. Whereas the contrarye ſéemeth to haue ſomme ſhewe of truth, for that who ſo ſhal take at any time his refection, layeth vp within him ſelfe, the poyſe and weight therof. Notwithſtandinge, it is euident, that the refection alwaies increaſeth the vitall Spirites, whiche ſolace, and comforte man, increaſinge, and multiplyinge naturall heate within him. Hence cometh it, that when one man from the grounde aſſayeth to lifte an other, the lifted is then more weighty, when he dothe breathe or conuaye his winde out, not redrawinge it agayne for the ſmall time of that practiſe: the whiche when he retayneth in his body & kéepeth in, is founde by meane thereof, more light then he was before: Againe who ſo faſte runneth, neither maye he for that time either breathe, or blowe mutche, for reſtrayning his breathe, he findeth him ſelfe more agile and quicke, for that the Ayre beinge an Element very lighte, deſireth to riſe vp, and to mounte alofte, where his naturall place is, of reſte or aboade: as experience may learne vs, in a ſkinne or bladder, whiche empty, & not pufte vp, throwne into the water, ſinketh continually, & reſteth on the bottome: but full of winde, or blowne out, ſwimmeth ſtill on highe. Pline in the ſame place againe recordeth, that mans body in the water drowned, and after a time riſinge from the bottome on highe, if it be a man, he euermore hath his face turned from the Earthe vpwardes, but if it be a woman, ſhée continually floteth in manner and ſorte contrary, which

thinge Nature hath onely in ſutche wiſe prouided, to couer the partes of woomen, whiche alwaies ſhould be ſecrete. Againe, alſo an other reaſon maye be geuen, for that wooman before, by meane of her pappes or breaſtes, is founde more weighty, but man behinde, bicauſe of his ſhoulders, more groſſe or greater, then are thoſe of woomen.
            
            
               ¶ Of the excellency of the Heade, aboue all other members of the Body, and that it is not good to haue a little Heade, or ſtrayte Breaste, as alſo whence it is, that wee accompte it courteſie, to take of the Cappe, or Hatte, in ſalutinge an other. Chap. 8.
               
               IF it be an eſpeciall Prerogatiue, amonge all other Creatures, graunted vnto man, that he ſhoulde haue his body, of ſutche perfect, and ſutche deſired ſhape, his face aduaunced of Heauen euermore, & heauenly things to aduice him. Then aſſuredly the Heade, which in man farre ſurpaſſeth, bothe all, and euery parte, which alſo is the higheſt among the others all, ought by reaſons lawe the aduauntage to haue, and preeminence in eche reſpect and caſe. As in déede eche parte imployeth his ſkilfull payne, loyally to garde, & kéepe the Heade from harme, in ſutche ſorte, that when ſo it is in daunger, or any perill els, forthwith the Foote, the Hande, the Arme with the others all, toyle to defende the Heade from all griefe and annoye, for in the Heade conſiſteth the well beinge of them al: and the Heade if it be pained, eche parte complaineth forthwith. S. Ambroſe eſpecially commendyng that parte of the body, ſaythe: That the frame or compoſition of man, repreſenteth of ſomme parte, the face or countenance of the World: and as Heauen thereof is the chiefe portion moſt eminent and bewtiful, the Fyre, the Ayre, with the other Elementes, to it inferiour: ſo the Heade in reſpecte ſurmounteth eche other parte in Man,

as Quéene, Miſtreſſe, or Empreſſe all alone: whiche as a holde or Caſtle, in the middle of a Citie, builte on ſomme Rocke alofte, wherein, bothe Counſell and aduiſe continually doo lodge them, where power and authoritie haue choſen to them their beinge. And Salomon, the eies of the ſage, are in the inner partes of his Heade. Lactantius Firmianus ſaithe, that God hath geuen to man his Head in place aboue, to the intent he ſhoulde haue rule & Empire ouer Beaſtes. Galene to it attributeth principalitie Gal. Lib. 1. de Morbis acutis. ouer all other partes in man: and Plato in Timeo, in conſideration of the prerogatiue thereof, termeth it, the whole body. It beinge then of ſo greate importance, the Fountaine alſo and chiefe ſpringe, of eche the powers in man, it is of neceſſitie that it ſhoulde be of fitte proportion, and forme conuenable. Whence it commeth that Paulus Eginetus, in his firſt Booke, De Medicina, ſaithe: that a very little Heade is a ſigne certaine of a weake iudgement, and that who ſo hathe a very ſmall Heade, wanteth withall iuſte quantitie of brayne. The ſame reaſon alleageth Iohannes Alexandrinus, ſayinge: the little Heade is as noyſome and incommodious, as is the leſſe compaſſed, or ouer ſtraight Breaſt, for as (ſaithe he) the breaſt, is the harber of the Harte, & Lounges, whiche without many diſcommodities, maye not tolerate or indure to be too ſtraightly impriſoned, eſpecially for that ye harte beinge too cloſely ſhutte vp, cannot commodiouſly without annoye at any time moue it. By meanes wherof, naturall heate throughout al the whole body faileth, digeſtion alſo waxeth fainte and féebleth: in ſemblable ſorte muſte it by like conſequent followe, that the head, in whiche nature hathe ſo artificially couched, the Orgaines of ſo many puiſſances, or powers of importance, ſhould be of proportion and quantitie conuenient. Galene in like ſorte vnto theſe accordeth, ſayinge: that the little Heade is ſigne of little witte, and of a brayne leſſe firme or ſtable: but if it be of quantitie, conuenable and

decent, it then argueth a good witte, as alſo a ſure & faſte memory. The Philoſophers affirme, yt Man hauing his Head once ſtriken of, incontinently becometh vnable to moue or ſtirre, although ye force of reſpiration ſhould not thereby be extinguiſhed, but for that the Vaines are ſundred, the onely meanes, & ſole inſtruments of Motion in al Creatures liuing. How be it, Auerrois reporteth, yt he ſometime beheld a poore infortunate patient, who beyng beheaded, walked hither, and thither afterward, in ſight of al the people. It is alſo written of Dionyſius Areopagita, that he, his heade beinge ſtriken of, wente notwithſtandinge from the place of execution, one full Leage or more. But this no doubte, was more myraculous, then naturall. Emong al other Creatures liuinge, Man only and Horſe, as affirmeth Pline, waxe white, or heare towardes theire later daies or ende. And Man, for that he Pline, Lib. 2. hath his heade more rounde, higher aduaunced, and voideſt of putrifaction, is therefore knowen more ſure, and able, as on the contrarye, who ſo ſauereth moſte of this vnperfite moyſture, is found moſt commonly, of weake, and ſimple iudgemente. Somme valiaunt perſonages haue had their heade, and partes thereof ſo well affected, and harde, that they continually, and in all places indured to be diſcouered. As emong others, Iulius Caeſar, Hanibal of Carthage, and Maſsiniſſa Kinge of Numidia, who neuer woulde, no not in his extreame age, either to auoide the force of Rayne, Winde, Snowe, or Heate, weare Cappe, Hatte, or any other kinde of couerture, or lighte, or leſſe fittinge. The ſemblable reade wée of the Emperours Adrian, & Seuerus, as alſo of ſundrye others. But for as mutch as wée haue of the Heade ſommething nowe here intreated, it ſhal not be impertinent, in fewe alſo to ſpeake, for what cauſe, or whence it is, that wée accoumpte it courteſie, when one man dooeth of his Cappe before an other, in token (as wée ſée) of duetie, or of reuerence. Whiche thinge, though it be of leſſe force,

or importance, yet neither maie wée with 
                     ••
                  lence in this place well paſſe it. Plutarche in his Probleames ſuppoſeth, Plutarche▪
                   that it hence commeth, for that they, who in the ancient time did Sacrifice vnto the Goddes, helde, during the ſaide time of Sacrifice, theire Cappes vpon theire heades: and that Princes, and greate Perſonages, to doo fitte honour, or reuerence to the Sacrificatour, in moſte humble, & lowly manner diſcouered them ſelues before him, to the intente it ſhoulde appeare, that in conſideration of his function, they reckened them ſelues continually his inferiours, as inferiours alſo to the Goddes, by dooinge this duetie to theire appointed Miniſter. Further he ſaithe, That it was the manner, that when any man mette anywhere his enimy, or any one other whom he in harte did malice, he foorthewith, and incontinently woulde couer then his heade, ſo that it ſéemeth on the other ſide conuenable, that before his Prince, or other friendes, he ſhould diſcouer the ſame againe. M. Varro, as is readde in Pline, ſaithe, That this in the beginning was not donne for any reuerence, that in the preſence of Pline, Lib. 28, any Maieſtrate, or any other, men diſcouered them ſelues, but onely by the lacke, and not wearinge thereof to harden them ſelues: for whiche cauſe onely, and to ſhewe them ſelues ſutch, and not for any duetie, as ſomme ſuppoſe did they it. Galiot of Nargni is of this opinion, that Galiot, Libro ſuo de Homine. who ſo, in dooinge reuerence to an other, diſcouereth his Heade, geueth him alſo with the ſame to vnderſtande, that in vncoueringe the heade, the chiefe, and principall parte in Man, he alſo becommeth his loyall Vaſaule, at the onely will, or commaundemente of the other, with the ſame acknowledginge to the other, his inferioritie. L. Celius, in manner alleaginge the ſame reaſon, ſaithe: L. Cel. Lib. 2, As the Heade in mannes bodye is the moſte chiefe, and principall member: in defence of whiche, all the others imploye their buſie paine. So is it a great ſigne of courteſie, or reuerence, when the ſame is diſcouered, or

bowed vnto any man. To conclude then, whiche ſo euer of theſe opinions be trueſt, it is notwithſtandinge bothe noyſome, and diſcommodious to doo this reuerence continually to moſte men, or to all: and better were it, with courteous woordes, then otherwiſe, to diſcharge that duetie.
            
            
               ¶ That Mannes deathe is to be accoumpted Fortunate, or leſſe Fortunate, according to the eſtate that him ſelfe ſhall die in: with certaine examples ſeruing to that pourpoſe. Chap. 9.
               TO die ones, is a thinge to all menne common, but to knowe howe, when, or in what ſorte, that yet hitherto hathe neuer bene reuealed to any fleaſhe: The whole onely conſiſteth at our departure hence, in the ſtate that wée be founde in, or perfecte, or leſſe perfecte. In ſutche ſorte, that no deathe maie be iudged infortunate, but ſutch as findeth man in ſtate leſſe perfect. For Deathe, as it commeth to many men, a geaſte vnthought on: ſo commonly lyeth he hidde in the corners of our houſes, where wée leaſte ſuppoſe to finde a ſtranger, ſutche as is he, ſo harde, and ſo inexorable. Wherefore Man ſhoulde be continually vigilante, and circumſpect, well armed in Chriſte, againſte his vnknowen comminge. To this pourpoſe, of the ſtraunge deathe of many, wée finde euery where infinite examples. Of whiche wée onely will here remember ſomme, conſideringe it to be a thinge not altogeather ſo rare, and marueilous, hauinge thereof eche where continual experience. A. Gellius reporteth, whiche alſo Valerius Maximus out of him A. Gellius. V. Maximus. auoucheth, That there is in Italie a certaine Towne called Crotonna, in whiche there was an inhabitante, who highte Milo, in all kinde of Playes, or practiſes of manhoode, or dexteritie, the moſte valiantſte, and moſte happieſt that in his time lyued. This man (ſutche was his happe) in trauelinge on a time, as he paſſed vnder the

ſide of an highe, and greate Mountaine, whiche drewe him ſelfe aſide out of the common path, into the ſhadow, perhaps, with minde ſommewhat to haue areſted him: where, emonge other trées, he founde an Oke halfe cliuen, or ſundred by force of Wedge, and Bitle: in whiche ſomme Wedge alſo was leaft then déepely faſtened, who incontinently deſirous to perfecte the ſaide woorke, laide handes on the trée righte againſte the ſaide Wedge, and with ſutche force aſſayed to ſunder it, that it to him a little yéelded: by meanes whereof, the ſaide Wedge ſlipte out. But immediately, were it (for ſo mighte it be) that his force fayled him, or that he leſſe ſuppoſed any daunger in the matter, he yéelded a little, as though he would haue areſted him: by meanes whereof, the Oke incontinently reioyned agayne, bothe his handes faſte lockte within the trée: in ſutch ſorte, that not being able thence to eſcape, nor any man there paſſinge to healpe him in that daunger, with payne and hunger, died a priſoner miſerable: a fitte, or fatte praye to the Wilde, and Sauage beaſte. If the deathe of this Milo maie ſéeme to any man ſtraunge, no leſſe ſtraunge alſo was the Deathe of the Poete Eſchilus: for on a time goinge foorthe out of a certaine Towne in Sicile, of pourpoſe onely to take the ayre, and ſunne him, the weather then hauinge benne ſommethinge ſharpe, and colde. This poore vnfortunate man, whoſe heade was eche where, either balde, or hearleſſe, after hauinge made ſomme litle ſhorte walke, areſted him on a Hil, for his moſt aduantage in the Sunne, where pruninge him ſelfe, with open heade, ſhininge, an Egle by happe flewe ouer him in the ayre, which hauing in her pawes a greate, and heauie Tortois, eſpyinge the glitteringe balde heade of the poore Poete Eſchilus, ſuppoſed it to haue ben
                     •
                  e ſomme harde Stoane, or Rocke: wherefore, lettinge fall her Tortois, with minde theron to haue broken it, for her preſent néede, or dinner, threw it ſo right, that ſhée nothing failed of her deſired marke,

but ſtrake the ſely Poete, and ſundred therewith his heade, whence he fell downe ſuddainely deade: a thinge right ſtraunge, and marueilous, conſiderings he was then mounted euen to the toppe of the Hill, aſſuringe him ſelfe that from aboue nothinge at all mighte gréeue him. Baptiſta Fulgoſius in a certaine pretye Booke of his, written of examples, remembreth emonge many other thinges, the infortunate Death of Charles. Kinge of Nauarre, who being olde, & very ſickly, féelyng inceſ
                     •
                  ant, & inſupportable paines, créepinge and runninge through all the vaynes of his bodye: to whiche, that his diſeaſe, his learned Phiſitions coulde finde, or frame none, but this ſole, and onely remedie, whiche was to folde him in a Shéete bedewed with Aqua Vitae, which when it was ſowed vp, or ſtichte on euery ſide, in defaulte of a Knife to cutte the thréede of, one tooke in hande the Candle, the flame whereof, as ſoone as it had touched the Shéete, ſette all on fire ſuddainely, in ſutche ſorte, that before they coulde ſhape him any kinde of remedie, the ſicke Kinge was ſcorchte, and burnte almoſte to aſhes. Which was for his Vaynes, and all other maladies, his ſole, and laſte remedie in this worlde. The Deathe againe of Philemon mighte appeare to moſte menne marueilous, whiche beholdinge on a time an Aſſe eatinge Figges of from a Table, brake into ſutch, and ſo extreame a laughter, that he in that ſorte there ended his life. Cōſider wée then, if any where Man maye aſſure him of his beinge, if Laughing, and in iolitie, Death gayne of him the maiſterie. Somme alſo affirme the ſame of Philiſtion, a Poete Comicall, as alſo of ſundrie others, who with extreame ioye, made ſuddaine chaunge of life. Emonge whom, wée reade of Denis, the Tyrante of Sicilia, of Diagoras alſo, and of that famous, & woorthy Romiſhe Matrone, which beholding her Sonne returned, whom ſhée ſuppoſed to haue benne ſlayne in Battaile, with ioye in exceſſe fell ſtraight into an Extaſye, whereof againe ſhée

neuer after warde recouered. The aduenture alſo of the Shéepehearde Cratis, was in manner ſemblable, rare, and marueilons: who beinge aſléepe on a Mountain in the middle of his charge, was ſlayne of a Maale Goate, ielous of his mate, with whiche Cratis moſte abominably had ſubuerted the Lawes of Nature. Whoſe ſtrange happe (deſerued notwithſtandinge). Ludouicus Celius, and Volateranus, alleaginge alſo to that pourpoſe ſundrye Greeke Authours, in many confirme for aſſured truthe, and veritie. Infinite ſutche others I leaue here to remember: as Pope Bonifacius, who throughe hunger onely, miſerably ſterued in fowle, and ſtinkinge Pryſon. The Archebiſhop of Magonce, ſlayne, and deuoured of a troupe of Rattes, that eche where purſued him. The Emperoure Decius, of whome Emilius Victor reporteth, that hauinge vanquiſhed his enemies, was founde deade drowned in a little ſmall lake. In manner ſemblable in our time, died Lewes Kinge of Hungary: and Sforce, Father of that moſt famous Capitaine Duke Fraunces Sforce, who bowynge him ſelfe ſomethinge to haue ayded his Page, was as the other, moſt miſerably, & infortunately drowned. Andrew Kinge of Prouace, was by his owne Wife, ſomme other Dames healpinge her, as not to be boughte with price or Prayer, in cruelleſt manner that thei might, moſt diſpitefully ſtrangled. The Emperoure Tiberius was alſo impoyſoned of his wife Agripina. Whence wée conclude that Kinges, Princes, and greate Perſonages, are as well ſubiecte to theſe ſtraunge deathes, and infortunes, as are any their poore Vaſſaules or ſubiectes: although perhappes they make (propte vp with ſwellinge and pompous pryde) ſmall reckeninge, or accompte of theſe forepaſſed daungers.
            
            
               ¶ What ſpeache was vſed in the beginninge of the Worlde, and how firste began the diuerſitie of Languages. Chap. 10.
               
                  
IN the firſte Age, or beginninge of the Worlde, euen vntill the Fludde, and many yéeres afterwarde, men generally throughout had féelinge but of one Language, al diuerſitie then hidde, and vnknowen manner of ſpeakinge. No man then ſpake with tongue, or ſtraunge, or leſſe familier, no voice was from other in any thinge then different, no newe deuiſe in ſpeakinge was then knowen, or thought on. The diuerſitie then firſte, or confuſion of tongues, the Mother of eche miſchiefe, & cauſe of all annoye, the ſole Nurſe of litigious, and impacable debates, was for mans ſinne and pryde (as a iuſte ſcourge) on him layde. Moyſes in the Hiſtorie of Geneſis recordeth, that Nemrod Nephewe to Noë, by the lyne of Cain, with others more lyke proude, and of like ambitious nature, were then borne, when firſte amonge Geneſis. II. men, preſumption and malice raigned without al reaſon. At that time this Nemrod, with his vnaduiſed companye, determined togeather, to frame or builde a Tower, whiche from the Earth might reache to the face of Heauen it ſelfe. Whiche thinge they onely did, hauing in memory yet the late forepaſſed Fludde, to eſcape the hande of God, if he at any other time ſhoulde waſhe the Earth againe. Ioſephus in the firſt Booke of his Antiquities, Ioſephus. ſaithe: that he from all partes had ſutch ſyéedy healpe, for the erection of his buildinges, that in ſhorte time it grewe bothe marueilous prowde and pompous. And againe he ſaithe, that they layde the Fundations thereof ſo déepe and ſo broade, that though it were of ſo incredible height, as the Scriptures make plaine mention, yet by all coniectures poſſible, the breadth thereof was more. But God who iuſtly chaſtiſed this prowde preſumptuous enterpriſe, though not with payne deſerued, gaue in that preſente inſtante, ſo many diuerſe tongues, ſo ſtraunge, and ſo unknowen, that theſe who all before ſpake one, and the ſame Language, ſpake then thréeſcoare and twelue, ſo farre and differente from the

firſte, that fewe amonge them had féelinge, or meanings of the others minde. By meanes whereof, ſutch enmitie, and preſente diſcorde grewe, that not onely this worke then reſted there vnperfecte, but euery man with thoſe, that vnderſtoode his ſpeache, retyred to poſſeſſe ſomme place aparte, or Countrie to them ſelues. For whiche cauſe it euer afterward was called the Tower of Babell, whiche is to ſay, of confuſion. Iſidorus affirmeth that Iſidorus li. 15. of Etimologes. it was highe fiue thouſand one hundred, thrée ſcoare and foure paſes, all of Bricke, layde with claye, or 
                     •
                  lime in ſtéede of Morter, of whiche in that Countrie great plentie was eche where founde. In the ſaid ſelfe place, wheras this Tower was builte, as hath Ioſephus, Iſidorus, S. 
                  Ioſephus. Iſidorus. S. Auguſt. Oroſus. 
                  Auguſtine, and Oroſus, was builte alſo that moſte auncient, and moſt famous Cittie, of whiche ſo woorthy & ſo great maters are yet reported, called Babylon, ſituate or ſeated on the Riuer of Euphrates, of which the Coūtries, or Territories adiacent, tooke their firſte or principal denominatiō, as Chaldea, & Meſopotamia. The Scriptures Geneſis. 7. alſo recorde, that the beginninge of ye raigne of Nemrod was alſo in Babylon, wherfore it is reaſon that wée be of ye ſaid minde with the aboue remembred Authours, that Nemrod alſo built this famous Cittie of Babylon, which afterwarde was walled, became Riche, and Honorable, by the carefull payne and induſtrie of Semiramis, & Nynus. But to retourne to our pourpoſe of Tongues, or Languages, it might here be a queſtion diſputable, what Tongue it was, that was that firſte, ſo common and generall, whiche onely and alone was knowen, before the diuiſion, and confuſion of the others. S. Auguſtine diſcourſinge in many, vpon this matter concludeth, that it was the Hebrew, the very ſame that the Iewes ſpeake yet at this daie, whiche, as farre as it maye be gathered, by any meane poſſible out of the Scriptures, and as S. Auguſtine alſo déemeth, was conſerued in Heber, of whom deſcended Abraham, and the Hebrewes: for that neither

he, nor any of his kinred, would healpe at all any thinge in erectinge this Tower. By meanes wherof, him ſelfe, and his family, whiche woulde not condeſcende to this ſinfull, and prowde attempte, felte not thereof the due deſerued paine. Wherefore wée maye preſume that in Heber, and his family, the auncient, and firſte Tongue remained perfect, and entire, without any corruption or confuſion of the ſame, in that Linage onely pure, and nowhere els in the Worlde: whence it came to paſſe, that of Heber, it had his denomination Hebrewe. Sundry Hebrewes his Succeſſours affirme, that this Language was that ſame, that was firſte ſpoken by Adam, as alſo of all the others, of that Auncient and firſte Age, conſerued in Heber, and thoſe that followed him, Abraham & Iacob. In this ſame alſo wrote Moyſes his Lawes. This then is the opinion of S. Auguſtine, & Iſidorus, to whome wée ſhould geue more aſſured credite, then to thoſe that affirme, the Chaldean Tongue the firſt, which notwithſtāding may be of parte excuſed, for that theſe twoo Languages haue a marueilous vicinitie, their Characters almoſte vniforme and lyke, as alſo well agreynge in other thinges many. Notwithſtandinge, in this matter, ſome curious haue doubted, if twoo children, or a greater number, foſtred in place ſecrete voyde of all company, where they neuer mighte heare the voyce of any other, what woordes they woulde frame, or Language in the ende. Somme haue thought that they firſte would ſpeake Hebrewe: others ſomme the Chaldean Tongue. But Herodotus ſaithe, that on a time experience in this caſe was Herodotus. made, by meane of a contention, or emulation then growen betwixte the Aegyptians, and Frigians: eche nation pretendinge by antiquitie of their Language, preeminency aboue the other. For determination of which differente in fine they concluded, that twoo Children ſhould be nouriſhed in manner aboue rehearſed, in ſutch ſorte that they ſhoulde neuer heare any woorde ſpoken at

all, and that Language, that theſe children firſte began to profite in, ſhould be reputed the firſte, and moſt Auncient, and they that ſpake that, by conſequent of moſte antiquitie. He addeth againe afterward, that a certaine Kinge of Aegypte, cauſed to be foſtered twoo children in a deſerte, to which no man euer ſpake in any ſorte in the worlde, whiche when they were full foure yéeres olde, he cauſed them without more, to be brought into his preſence, where they eftſoones vttered this onely woorde Ber, whiche dothe in the Frigian tongue ſignifie Breade: for whiche cauſe the Frigians were of all men reputed as moſte Ancient. This writeth Herodotus, whom many herein approue, & alleage for authoritie. Notwithſtandinge were it (as he reporteth it) a truth, yet might it be that theſe Children by happe, ſome where ſhoulde learne it, as by ſomme Beaſte, Birde, or Shéepe in the Fielde, whiche might frame the ſame, or ſome ſutche like voyce, they doinge their paine to frame the ſame after them. But as for my parte, I reſte of this minde, that twoo Children in this ſorte foſtered, would ſpeake none other but the firſte Language, Hebrewe: although I alſo durſt in manner ſemblable to affirme, that to them ſelues they would ſhape ſomme newe, and ſtraunge Tongue, geuinge to all thinges their names vnknowen & vnheard, as wée ſée, that Children of them ſelues naturally: geue names leſſe knowen, to thinges of them deſired, ſo that of parte aſſuredly it appeareth, that nature would learne them a Language all newe, before they ſhould be perfect in any their Fathers. In this caſe experience may ſufficiently ſchoole vs, if any very curious, deſire to knowe the effect hereof. In the meane time eche man may here reſte, of what opinion it beſte liketh him, nothing aboue, ſaide withſtandinge the contrary.
            
            
               ¶ Of the Diuiſion of the Ages of the Worlde, with a briefe diſcourſe of diuerſe Notable matters chaunced alſo in

them, as alſo in fine, of the beginninge of Realmes and Kingdomes. Chap. 11.
               ALthough moſte menne haue ſomme pleaſure, and likinge to talke, and diſcourſe of the Ages of the Worlde, to remember perchaunce thinges donne in this, alſo not to paſſe what hathe chaunced in that: yet are there a greate many that leſſe knowe the true diuiſion of theſe times, ne what yéeres eche Age demaundeth to his accompliſhmente. The Age therefore, or Life of the worlde, euen from the firſte, vntill this daye preſente, is diuided by ye moſte parte of approued Authours into ſixe onely partes, or Ages: although diuers recken, and accoumpte on ſeuen, accordinge to the onely computation of the Hebrewes. But I, herein haue determined to folowe Euſebius, and the common opinion of al Hiſtoriographers, areſtinge them on the aboue remembred number of ſire. In diuiſion of whiche, there is founde emonge many, ſutche greate confuſion, and difference in reckeninge, that hardly a man maie herein aſſure him of a truth. They that deale herein, are diuided into twoo partes: of whiche, the one foloweth the computation of the thréeſcoare and twelue Interpreters, whiche tranſlated the Olde Teſtamente from the Hebrewe, into the Greeke. The other, the Hebrewes, and common texte of the Bible: whoſe opinions I will, for contentation of all partes, hereafter remember. The firſte Age therefore, The firſte Age. or parte of the Worlde, accordinge to the common, and general accoumpt of al, was euen from ye Creation of the ſame, to the Inundation, or Drowninge of it againe. Whiche was the Infancie, or tendereſt Age (as ſomme tearme it) of the Worlde. Whiche Age was longe, and of greate continuauce. Duringe whiche time, it is to be ſuppoſed, that greate, and marueilous matters chanced vnto men, although wee thereof finde no recorde, or Hiſtorie, ſauinge that the Scriptures haue, that after God

had created Adam, and Eue, as alſo before him all other Creatures: ouer whom, he gaue him generall Dominion and Rule, as well ouer the beaſtes on the Lande, as fiſhes in the Sea. Adam then begatte twoo Sonnes, Cain, and Abel, whiche afterwarde alſo begat diuers others: by whome the worlde beganne then to be well peopled. Moyſes writeth, that Cain builte him, in the Eaſte parte The firſte cittie of the world. of the worlde, a Cittie, whiche after his Sonnes name, be called Honoch. In that time Lameth hauinge buried his wife, hardened him ſelfe to chooſe againe the ſeconde, (beinge the firſte Bigamus that euer was in this worlde) on one of the whiche he begat Tubal, who firſte founde the meane to Singe, by Arte, the Violles eke, and alſo the Organs. Cain founde the ſkill to woorke yron, and ingraue thereon. In this Age, the Worlde had alſo Gyantes: of whiche, ſundrye good writers thus mutche reporte, that they were of exceſſiue ſtature, and force, marueilous roughe to intreate, and enimies to Mankinde. Finally, by the inſupportable burthen of Sinne, the general Floudde waſhed the face of the whole Earthe. By means whereof, all mankinde, Noē
                   onely reſerued, and ſuche as were with him in the Arke, was drowned. And The contrarietie of opinions concerning the firſt Age. this firſte Age of the Worlde, according to the accoumpt of the Hebrewes, Filon, Beda, S. Hierome, and the common Texte of the Bible, continued a thouſand ſixe hundred fiftie and ſixe yéeres. But as the thréeſcoare and twelue Interpreters, Euſebius, and other Hiſtoriographers with them ſaye, it had twoo thouſande, twoo hundred, fourty and twoo yéeres. S. Auguſtine, twoo thouſande, twoo hundred, ſeuentie and twoo. And Alphonſus, Kinge of Spayne, twoo thouſande, eightehundred, eightie and twoo. The Seconde Age began in Noē, immediately The ſecond Age. after his comminge out of the Arke, whiche continued vntill the birthe of Abraham, and had accordinge to the opinion of theſe Interpreters, Euſebius, Iſidorus, and moſte parte of all Chronicles, nine hundred

fourtie and twoo yéeres. But the Hebrewes recken many leſſe, as onely twoo hundred, nintie & twoo. With whom Filon, and Ioſephus accorde. S Auguſtine to that Age attributeth a thouſande ſeuentie and twoo yéeres. Little certaintie finde wée of any thinge donne, or chaunced in this time: for no particulare Hiſtorie at all remaineth. In generall, concerninge the beginninge of Realmes, and Kingedomes, ſomewhat is founde, as alſo touching the firſte Inhabitantes of Countries, and Prouinces. Noë iſſuinge out of his Arke, planted to him ſelfe, with buſie paine, a vineyarde: where, what chaunced vnto him, eche man wel knoweth. He, and his children begat many others, ſo that the worlde began well againe to be peopled. Cam, the ſecond ſonne of Noë, begat to him Cus: of whome are deſcended the Aethiopians. He alſo had Cam. 
                  Meſrain, of whom are deſcended in ſorte ſemblable, the Aegyptians. And laſte of all, Canaan, from whom iſſued the Cananites. His other Sonne Iapheth, ingendred Gomer, and Magog, of which other Nations deſcended, too longe here to remember. In this time was the Tower of Babel builte: by meane of which, alſo then chaunced the confuſion of tongues. Whence, as Ioſephus recordeth in the ſecond Booke of his Antiquities: Men ſundred to inhabite Countries, and Iles by them ſelues, ſutch, and ſuch togeather as were ſkilled of a language. Duringe whiche Age, Tubal, Sonne of Iapheth came to inhabite Spayne, framinge there to him ſelfe a Realme, or Kingedome. Other ſomme ſaie, that he indifferently was called either Subal, or Tubal, the Sonne of Falech, and Nephewe to Heber. In this time the Raigne of the Scithians beganne in the Northe, whiche euermore pretended Antiquitie aboue other Countries: as well noteth Trogus Pompeius, and Iuſtin. By meane whereof, greate enmitie ſtill grewe betwixte them, and the Aegyptians. The Arte Magike, and Incantations began then by Cam, ſurnamed otherwiſe, Zoroaſtes. Aboute

the ende of this Age, ſomethinge before the byrth of Abraham, according to the accompte of Euſebius, and Beda, the moſt famous and puiſſant raigne of the Aſsyrians 
                  The beginning of the Aſſyrians. began, hauing for their firſt Prince or King, Belus, which diuers ſuppoſed to be the God Iupiter: ſome the ſeconde Ninus, which (during whoſe time was borne Abraham) conquered and ſubdued ſundry townes and prouinces. Beſides this an other kinde of raigne was there in Aegipte, called Dinaſtia, where the firſte that was of ſupreme, and higheſt authoritie, had to name Vexor, or otherwiſe Vezor, as hath Euſebius: who about the ende of this ſeconde Age, inſtituted the Raigne or Kingdome of the Sicionians, in Peloponeſus, nowe called Morea, where Agis is ſuppoſed to haue bene the firſte King. In this time began now Idolatrie & Gentilitie. This much confuſely haue wee gathered of this Age: in the ende of which alſo the moſte worthie, & moſt renoumed Citie of Niniue, was buylded of marueilous and incredible bigneſſe: which as we finde in holy write, was in compaſſe no leſſe than three dayes iourneyes. Incontinent after this, began the thirde Age, euen in the byrth of Abraham, 
                  The Thirde Age. vntill the Prophete Dauid, which without all contradiction, or gayneſaying of any, continued nine hundred, fortie, and two yeares, vnto which onely Iſidorus addeth two: which Age we may cal ye 
                  Adoleſcencie of the world, for that, in that time all things were maruelouſly augmented, and increaſed. In the beginning of this Age Semiramis the wife of Ninus, not onely attempted, but ended alſo, and perfected, ſundry renoumed, and valiaunt exploites, hauing taken on her mans apparel, and faining her ſelf to be the yong Prince Ninus, after which ſorte ſhe liued and raygned long time, conquering with the ſworde many Landes, and Countryes, ſhe reedified, & walled the famous Citie of Babylon. About this time happened the Peregrination of Abraham by the open and expreſſe commaundement of God. Then alſo obtayned

he his happy victorie agaynſt the foure Kinges, redéeming Loth, whom they caried away pryſoner. Nowe alſo began the firſt Raigne of the Amazones. The Pharaoes, Kings of Egypte now alſo began to floriſh. Sodome 
                  Pharao, in the Aegyptian tongue, ſignifieth Kinge. and Gomorra were deſtroyed in theſe dayes. In the time of Iſaac, began the Empyre of the Argiues in Theſſalie, & while his ſonnes liued, Iacob and Eſau, the Kinges of Coſta began alſo their raigne, of whom the firſte had to name Acre. A litle after this was Ioſeph ſolde to the Egyptians, in ſuche ſorte as hath the Hiſtorie, as alſo how his Father, his brethren, & their children wente alſo into Aegypt, where ſuch Iſraelites as deſcended of them, liued, as accompteth Beda, foure hundred & thirty yéeres: with whom accordeth S. Auguſtine in his booke, De ciuitate Dei. Duringe this Age Hercules of Libya, came into Spayne, where he raigned▪ & after him Iuer, Brigus, Taga, Beto, Gerian, & others, of whom Beroſus, with other good authors remembereth vs. In this time was alſo firſte founded the Cittie of Siuile, which is accompted for one among the others of moſte antiquitie in the worlde, as well recordeth Beroſus, with others. Firſt this Citie had to name Iſpalis of Iſpal ye ſonne, or Nephewe of Hercules, 
                  Iſpalis. who long raigned, or ruled there: who alſo, as ſome ſay, layde the firſt foundations thereof, or buylte it, although Iſidorus affirme that it was named Iſpalis, for that it was ſeated in a place watry, or in a mariſh, where they were compelled for better aſſuraunce of their foundation to beate into the grounde great ſtakes, beames, or trées, which how ſo euer it was, this Cittie of Iſpalis, was after called Spayne, as writeth Trogus Pompeius, Iuſtine, and others. And after this agayne Iulius Caeſar called it Siuile, inriching and amplyfiing it in ſuch large ſort and manner, that it after was the ſeate there, or reſting place of the Romaynes, beyng alſo before that very noble and honorable. But to returne to our purpoſe, after this agayne was Moyſes borne, vnder whoſe conducte

the Hebrewes, came out of Aegypte, in whiche time alſo liued Iob, the iuſte. And after this came that general The Inundatiō of Theſſalye. Inundation on Theſſalie, when great Kingdomes grew then in diuers Landes, & Contryes. In Aethiopia then firſt raigned Ethiopus, in Sicilia, Siculus: in Boecia, Boecius. So that Countryes then receiued their denomination of Princes, as of Sardus, Sardina alſo, the firſt King or Prince there. In theſe dayes flouriſhed the famous Troye: then alſo was Iaſon buſied in conqueringe the Fliece of Goulde, whence in like manner procéedeth the knowen Hiſtorie of Medea. Nowe were the Amazones of greater power, then in any other time, and now began the Kingdome of the Latines in Italie. About this time Paris alſo rauiſhed Helena, the onely cauſe of the longe warre, and deſtruction of Troye, of the comming of Aeneas into Italie, as alſo of other things innumerable, which in few may not bée ſpaken. Then ended this thirde Age, and the fourth began, euen in the beginning The Fourthe Age. of the raigne of Dauid, ſeconde Kinge of the Hebrewes: whiche continued vntill the tranſmigration of the Iewes into Babylon, foure hundred, foure ſcore and fiue yéeres: but Beda rekeneth fewer, foure hundred ſeuentie, and foure onely. This Age might well bée termed the luſtie Mundi Iuuen
                        •…
                     
                   Age of the world: during which, infinite matters happened, whereof all Hiſtories are full. Now that good King Dauid obtayned ſundry victories, as well agaynſt the Philiſtians, as alſo agaynſt the Ammonites, reuenging him ſelf, for the iniurie done to his Ambaſſadours: he did alſo to die the Capitayne of the Aſsyrians. After him, in that place ſuccéeded the wiſe King Salomon, who buylte that ritch, & famous Temple of Hieruſalem, after whoſe death the Kingdome was deuided, Ieroboam ſuccéeding in ten families, & Roboam his ſonne in twoo. After this the Empyre of the Aſsyrians, whiche then had continued twelue hundred yéeres, by the death of Sardonapalus, was vtterly ſubuerted, he was one of the richeſt & greateſt

Monarches in the world, who not withſtanding by Arbactus ſlayne, the Empyre came into the handes or poſſeſſion of the Medes. About this time the Princes of Macedonie began to frame their Empyre, as the Greekes in manner ſemblable now vſed to accompte their yéeres by Olympiades, which were certaine feaſtes and practiſes Olympiades. of agilitie, whiche they continually vſed euery fiue yéeres, with Priſes appointed for ſuch as beſte deſerued them. Dido now builte the renoumed Citie of Carthage, as Rome alſo by Romulus, & Remus then began, where the Romaine Kinges continually aboade & areſted them. In this time the greate Citie of Bizance waxed mightie and honorable, whiche afterwardes loſte her name, and was called Conſtantinople. After this, wearye warres grew in moſt places, and inpacable diſſenſions, with alteration and chaunge of great Segnories and Empires. Whereof the Hiſtories of that Age, are each where full and abundant. In the ende of this Age Nabuchodonoſor, King of the Medes and of Babilon, beſieged Hieruſalem, which he ſackte, and ſubuerted, as alſo the Temple, whence he brought the people of Iudea pryſoners with him: & thence is that, that we now remember, the tranſmigration of Babylon. When, or at whiche time began the fifte Age of the Worlde, which continued vntill the The Fifte Age. Byrth, & Natiuitie of our Sauiour and redéemer Ieſus Chriſte, both God and Man, fiue hundred, foure ſcoare, and nine yéeres, by common accompte of all men. In theſe dayes were many valiaunt and puiſſante Princes riche, and politike common Weales and Contryes, in ſuch ſorte, that it greate maruaile is to reade, & conſider the ſtraunge and miſerable ſubuertions, immutations, and chaunge of eſtates, the rare rayſing and gathering of huge Armies, and troupes of men, ſuch were they, ſo terrible, and ſo common withall, that better it is thereof nothing to ſpeake, then to ſpeake in few. Not long after this, began that famous Monarchie of the Perſians,
                  
(whiche aſwell by meane of other victories that Cyrus echewhere obtained, as alſo that he vanquiſhed and ſubdued Creſus Kinge of Lidia) waxed of all others moſte riche, and renowmed: notwithſtandinge Cyrus, after he had raigned fully thirty yéeres, was him ſelfe diſcomfited, and beheaded by Tameris Quéene of Scithia. Three Tameris. ſcoare and tenne yéeres of this Age accompliſhed, the Hebrewes were deliuered out of bondage and captiuitie, and the Temple was reedified by Salomon at Hieruſalem. The Romaines now altered their ſtate of gouernment, they depoſed their Kinges & choaſe to them Conſuls, of whiche the firſte was L. Brutus, and after him L. Colatinus. In Greece nowe floriſhed good Letters, and Chiualry, ſo that thence iſſued, no leſſe famous Philoſophers, then Capitaynes excellent. Thither came Xerxes to haue Conquered it, with a multitude incredible, but was forced to retire againe with equall ſhame and detriment. After this began Philippe his raigne in Macedonie, whiche ſubdued Greece, the Mother of Learning & Chiualrie, whiche in that time foſtered Demoſthenes, Themiſtocles, Epaminondas, Ageſilaus, Zeno, Plato, Ariſtotle, with many ſutche others. Philippe deade, his Sonne Alexandre dwelte not ſtill in Greece, but wente thence into Aſia, which in ſhorte time he conquered, ſubuertinge the Empire of Perſia, and by meanes of the victorie obtained againſte Darius, he remained euer afterwarde the onely Emperour, and ſole Monarke of all the whole worlde. But after his death, diuiſion was made to his Capitaynes, of all and euery his Segneuries, by meane whereof mutch enmitie, and diſcorde grewe, and thence alſo warres generally throughout all Aſia, as alſo through a greate parte of Europa withall. Nowe beganne the Romaines, and the people of Carthage to grow great & mightie, eche of them labouringe to be the onely Lordes and Princes of the worlde. Longe warres then continued betwixte theſe twoo Citties, in ſutche ſorte,

that eche nourſed for their defence moſte honorable and valiant Capitaines. As Carthage, Aſdrubal, Hannon, Hannibal: Rome, the Fabians, the Scipioes, the Marcels, the Emiles, and ſutche others. But in fine after longe warres, and mutche blouddeſhedde, Rome remained victorious: Carthage ſpoyled and ſackte, and Aphrike became tributorie. This victory obtained, the Romaines prowde, & enuious of the proſperitie of Greece, ſought by all meanes poſſible, warre alſo againſt them, by occaſion whereof Greece alſo became tributorie as the other. Not content with theſe, Auarice yet forſte them to ſtretche their foote farther, and ſo paſſinge into Aſia, vanquiſhed Antiochus, and after him Mithridates, titlinge them ſelues Lordes of all Aſia the leſſe, as alſo of Siria, Paleſtina, and Egypte: and on this ſide, of al Fraunce, Spaine, Englande, with the greater parte of Almayne. In which Conqueſtes their chiefe Capitaines were, Metellus, Sylla, Marius, Lucullus, Pompeius, and Caeſar, with many others. Nowe came it to paſſe, enuious ambition inflaminge their hartes, that ciuile warres, and commotions burſte out emongſt them, eche ſéekinge preeminencye & authoritie ouer other: but in fine the Empire remayned onely to Caeſar: vnto whom, after many good happes in this life, his Nephewe, or Sonne adoptiue, ſuccéeded Octauian, who hauinge once broken the force, and courrage of his enemies, enioyed the Crowne in quiet peace, and tranquilitie, ſo that liuinge in concorde, and amitie with all Princes, he cauſed to be ſhutte vp the gates, or doores of his God Ianus, which in warres were neuer at any time opened. The accompliſhment of time nowe comminge, this fifte Age here ended: at whiche time was borne, the redéemer of mankinde Ieſus Chriſt the iuſte, in the yéere from the Creation of the worlde, accordinge to the Hebrewes, thrée thouſande, niene hundred, fiftie and twoo yéeres, and accordinge to the thrée ſcoare and tenne Interpreters: Euſebius, and the moſte

parte of Hiſtoriographers, fiue thouſande, one hundred, foure ſcoare and ninetiene: but accomptinge after Oroſus, fiue thouſande and twentie yéeres: after Iſidorus one yéere leſſe: but accordinge to Alphonſus, ſixe thouſande, niene hundred, foure ſcoare and foure, whiche are many more then any others accompte of. In the Birthe then The Sixte Age. of our Sauiour beganne the ſixte Age, whiche hath continued vntill this daie, and ſhall doo vntill the laſte, and diſſolution of the Worlde. Duringe whiche time, a great S. Auguſt. in. 15 16. & 17. De Ciuitate Dei. Beda. Euſebius. Filon. parte of Chriſtiantie, hath benne gouerned onely by the Emperours of Rome. Whiche from time to time ſucceſſiuely, by the ſpace of certaine yéeres, liued in greate pompe, wealthe, and proſperitie. But ſhortly after the Gothes, as alſo ſomme others. And laſte, that falſe and accurſed Prophete Mahomet, did in ſutche ſorte ſhake, & weaken this Empire, that it became leſſe, and leſſe able, then in a fewe yéeres before, ſo that in ſundry partes of the ſaide Empire, were inſtituted newe Kingdomes and Segnories: by whiche inſued continuall diſcordes, and ſlidinges from the Faithe. The enimies of Chriſt, and of his Croſſe, takyng now good occaſion to moleſte the poore Chriſtians, robbinge, and ſpoilinge them of their landes and reuenewes. The computation of theſe Ages, which I haue here remēbred, are onely taken of theſe Authours aboue remembred, to wete, of S. Auguſtine, Iſidorus, Beda, Euſebius, Filon, Oroſus, men all of ſinguler authoritie and learninge: Vincentius alſo: and of our time Petrus de Aliaque: and aboue all the others, Iohannes Driodonus, a faithefull commenter on the ſacred Scriptures. The Portes haue reckened of this worlde, foure Ages, and nomore: the firſte of Golde, whiche they called Golden: the ſeconde of Siluer, whiche they termed the Siluer Age: the thirde of Braſſe, or Stéele: the fourthe of Yron, whiche as before they called the Stéely, and Yron Ages, geuinge foorth by the ſame, that as the malice of Man beganne eche where to growe, ſo did the excellency

of theſe mettalles in manner ſemblable diminiſhe: vnto which it pleaſed them to compare theſe aboue ſaid partes of time. And in this manner hathe Ouid in his Metamorphoſes diuided them.
            
            
               ¶ Of the ſtraunge Life of Diogenes, ſurnamed Cinicus, as alſo of his Sentences, Propoſitions, and Anſweares. Chap. 12.
               THere were fiue ye had to name, Diogenes: of which eche one for his Vertue, and excellente Learning, merited well in this place to be commended to the Poſteritie. Wée notwithſtanding will ſpeake but of the one, Diogenes Cinicus, whoſe Life, and Doctrine ſurpaſpaſſed farre the others: his Manners, and Conditions, as they mighte of parte appeare to any, ſtraung, ſo were they nenertheleſſe founded on bountye, and Vertue. He euermore liued in voluntarye Pouertie, expoſinge his bodye to al toyle and trauell. In the Sommer he would lye on the Sandes, in the face of the Sunne, to able him ſelfe the better to indure all force of heate. And in the Winter, he imbraced great lumpes, or heapes of Snow, to acquainte him ſelfe with ſ
                     •…
                  che extremitie of Weather. He fedde on groſſe meates, and ſutche as were of vile price, to the intente he mighte neuer féele wante of Suſtenaunce. He neuer had any place, that he coulde tearme his place of aboade, or his home: euerywhere, where it chaunced him to be, he did eate, drinke, and ſléepe without reſpecte: he neuer ſpake any thinge, but when it was neceſſarye, or behoofull: neither in the daye ware he any other apparell, then his woonted Nighte Gowne, or ragged robe of no price. He had a litle Bagge or Pokette, wherein he keapte his meate, poore and ſimple, ſutche as it was: his ſtaffe alſo to ſtaye on, ſerued him in ſtéede of horſe, when he was ſicke, or weary. A wooden diſhe had he to drinke in as he trauailed through the Countrie, whiche he immediately brake, eſpyinge

on a time a boye drinkinge in his hand, ſayinge: What néedeth me to vſe a veſſell framed by Arte, ſithe nature hathe lente me one, as fitte as any other. In like ſorte vſed he his Trencher, that he vſually carried with him, beholdinge an other man that had framed him one not vnfitly, of Breade. This Philoſopher ſpente the greater parte of his time in Athens, whither he retyred, banniſhed from his Countrie. Longe time for his dwellinge houſe, he had none other, but a Tunne, or Tubbe: of nothinge made he any accoumpte, but of Vertue onely, vtterly deteſtinge to committee any ſinne. Touchinge Honour & Ritches, he ſo litle regarded them, as he alſo did all thoſe that poſſeſte them. Of cuſtome he vſed to ſay, that he neuer ſufficiently could marueile at the vnaduiſed follye of men: whiche contentiouſly woulde quarrell, murtheringe eche the other, oft time for the wall, or inner parte of the waye. But whiche of them moſte ſtudiouſly imbraced Vertue, thereof coulde he neuer ſée any matter betwixte them. He compared the Ritche man, ignorante, to a ſhéepe of Golde: and when he aſked any thinge that was vnto him neceſſarie, he ſaide: that he begde it not, but deſired reſtitution. Geuinge him to vnderſtande, that the goodes of the Ritche were gathered of the poore. An other vſage alſo had he, whiche for the appearance, or ſhewe that it mainteined, of folly, had yet notwithſtandinge a ſecrete, or cloaſe Myſterie. For oftentimes moſte humbly he woulde deſire an Almes of Images of Stoane, Tymber, or ſemblable matter, as thoughe they had benne menne perfecte, hauinge Life: whiche he did, he ſaide, to arme him ſelfe with patience, when any where in his néede, he ſhoulde be of any refuſed. And when he at any time ſoughte an Almes, he vſed theſe woordes: If thou of cuſtome vſe to geue to the poore, then geue thou me ſommethinge, for of all others, I ſtande in greateſt néede: and on the other ſide, if it ſo be, that thou neuer haſte geuen to any, beginne then to

beſtowe now ſome preſent on mée. On a time he entred into the houſe of a certaine man, which before had benne very ritche, & prodigal, but then was very poore, néedie, & indigent: in ſutch ſorte, that he nothing had to Suppe on, but only an vnſauery, & ſower Sallet. By meanes wherof he ſaide: had thy diet heretofore not bene much better, thou ſhouldeſt not now haue Supte ſo ſimply. Geuinge him thence in few to vnderſtand, that the exceſſe, that he ſometime vnmeaſurably had vſed, had caſt him into that gripinge, & pinchyng penury. One demaunded of him an other time, what beaſt it was, that bitte moſt greuouſly: To whom he anſweared, emonge beaſtes, ſauage, & furious, he that ſclaunderouſly, and ill reporteth: but emong tame beaſtes, euermore ye Flatterer. An other demaunded of him, why Golde lookte yalowe, or as it pleaſeth ſome others, more properly pale: Becauſe all men (ſaithe he) aſſault, & lie in waite for it. Againe an other demaunded, If he néeded not a Seruant: To whom he ſaide, no. The other replied, & aſked who then ſhould burie him after his death: he, ſaith Diogenes, yt wil dwel in my houſe. Beinge demaunded againe, at what time a man ſhoulde marry him: The yong man (ſaith he) muſt marry him ſelf very timely: as for the olde, or aged, he now néedeth it no more. By which he would inferre, & conclude, that it was in truthe leſſe expedient to marry: although it be ſuppoſed, that he more ſpake it in mockery, then that he would haue mainteined it for an infallible Veritie. Now as Diogenes was, in Life frée, & in manners: ſo alſo was he in any woorde that paſte him. For on a time as he paſte thorow a ſtreate, vewing there a hawtie, & ſumptuous buildinge, belongyng to a Gentleman, of an infamons, & ſuſpected Life. Ouer the gate, or entraunce of whiche was written, that no man vnhoneſt, mighte enter thereat. Turning him ſelf about to ſutch as therby paſſed, incontinently demaunded, which way entereth the Maiſter of this faire Lodging into it? Trauelling as was his happe

on a time through ye Countrie, he by chaunce drewe nigh to a very litle village, altogeather poore, & ſimply peopled: the Gates of which were large, wide, & very great, whereat, as lowde, as he coulde, in laughinge manner, he ſaide: Yée Inhabitauntes, ſhutte vp theſe your wyde Gates betime, leaſte happily your Towne runne out thereat. Eſpyinge an other time a certaine companye ſhootinge in the Croſſe Bowe: emonge whom there was one leſſe practiſed, or vnſkilfull: by meanes whereof, he ſtill failed very mutche of his marke, whoſe courſe when it came among the others to ſhoote, he immediatly would ſteppe in before the Butte, iuſtly couering or ſhadowing the white or marke, whereat ye aſſiſtantes were ſtraūgly amazed. But Diogenes ſaid: I ſuppoſe I may more ſafely ſtande here, then els where, ſo ill, & ſo farre of ſhooteth he from the marke. Of a yonge boye very fayre and wel fauoured, but of manners lewde and diſhoneſt, he aſked, why carrieſt thou ſo uaughty, & ſo ill fauoured a ſwoorde, in a ſcabberde ſo good, & ſo well fewtered. A certaine cō
                  pany commended one, that had preſented to Diogenes, ſome ſmall gifte or preſent: but Diogenes ſaide, why rather cōmende yée not mée, who well haue merited whatſoeuer is geuen: letting them thence, by his anſweare to vnderſtand, that it far better is to deſerue a good turne, then to perfourme it to him, that well hath merited it. He ones deſired contrarie to his woonte, (for neuer would he aſke Monie in gifte of any man) of a prodigall fellowe, a greate ſumme of monye, where at the other ſomethinge moued, ſaide: why aſkeſt thou of mée onely a matter ſs vnreaſonable? It is ſaithe he, for that of others at ſome other time, I ſtande in hope to receiue ſomethinge, but of thée after this ones, neuer againe: taringe with the ſame, his vnmeaſurable expenſes. Beinge alſo demaunded, whence it came to paſſe, that menne more willingly beſtowed their Almes, on the Lame, ye Blinde, the Diſmembred, the Gout
                     •
                  e, Maungye, and on the Vlcerus,

ſooner then on Philoſophers, and men to them like Learned: He ſayde (an anſweare in mine opinion very prety, and fittinge) for this cauſe onely mooued, doo they it, for that they rather feare they ſhalbe ſutch, then Philoſophers: and therefore more willingly they comforte and aſſiſte thoſe, like to whome they may ſooner be, then to the troupe Learned. The ſentences, & ſage anſweares of this Philoſopher, were infinite, whiche in ſilence I here paſſe, as well knowen to al the worlde. He was very ſobre & diſcrete, well learned in all the Sciences, he was the Scholler, or Diſciple of Antiſthenes, in the time of Plato, and Ariſtotle: he had in contempte all Artes, & Sciences, of whiche grewe no profite or gayne, as alſo thoſe that ſtudied them, more for curioſitie, then for the loue of vertue. He argued Aſtronomers, that onely buſied them ſelues in the contemplation of the Heauens, leſſe regardinge what they had to doo on the Earthe belowe. To Muſitians would he ſaie, that they well knew how to accorde their inſtrumentes, but not their rebellious and diſordered affections. Hearynge a certaine Aſtronomer, ſkilfully diſcourſinge of the Starres, he demaunded when he came laſt out of Heauen. Vnto a Sophiſticall Logician, toylinge to proue, that there was in thinges no motion, no anſweare would he frame, but in deriſion forthwith, walkes vp and downe before him: Séemeth this (ſaithe he) to thée a motion, yea, or not? In this ſorte began to growe now ye renoumed fame of this woorthy Philoſopher throughout the whole worlde, ſo that Alexander the Greate, comminge by chaunce to Athens, woulde néedes ſée, talke, and deuiſe with him of certaine pointes concerninge Vertue. After ſomme conference, at whiche time, his Maieſtie beſpake him in this ſorte: Diogenes, I well ſée that thou arte poore, and ſtandeſt in néede of many thinges, therfore demaunde what ſo thou wouldeſt haue, and I will geue it thée: to whom he ſayde: whiche of vs twoo thinkeſt thou, liueth in greateſt

neceſſitie, I that deſire nothinge but my diſhe here to Drinke in, and a peece of Breade when I hunger: or thou, that beinge Kinge of Macedonye, expoſeſt thy ſelfe to all kinde of daungers, only to inlarge thine Empyre & Dominion, & that alſo in ſutche ſorte & manner, that the whole worlde ſcarce ſuffiſeth to aſſwage thine A
                     •
                  arice? On a time he was alſo taken of certaine light horſemen, Athenians, by meanes whereof, though impriſoned, he neuer yet became either faynte harted, or diſmayed: whence afterwarde remoued, in place common to be ſolde, to any ſutche without reſpecte as ſhould offer moſt for him. Where immediatly a certaine Marchant demaundeth of the Trumpeter, or publique Officer, whither he had authoritie to ſell him, as alſo whither he were a bonde man, or naie. Whereat Diogenes ſayde to the Officer, anſweare him that thou haſte here to ſell a ſeruaunt or bondman, but ſutche an one, as well knoweth how to commaunde and gouerne his Maiſter. Aulus Gellius, and Macrobius reporte, that he in ſutche ſorte beſpake Geniades, who was the aboue remembred Marchant that bought him, who alſo after gaue him Maiſter to his children. The ſame day therefore that he firſte had bought him, comminge with him towardes his Inne or lodginge, Diogenes ſaide to him, as if him ſelf had benne the Marchant: take héede now Geniades, it ſtandeth thée on to obeye mée, in all that I ſhal anywhere, counſell, or commaund thée. To whom Geniades anſweared, it were farre beſides al order or reaſon, that the Seruant ſhould preſcribe lawes, to his Lord or Gouernour: but Diogenes ſaide, ſéemeth it not vnto thée good reaſon, that the ill affected patient, prouidinge to him for his Monie, ſomme good and learned Phiſition, ſhould in al thinges what ſo euer, obeye and followe him? In manner ſemblable, the more warely and ſafely to conducte him, if the good Mariner for wage choſe to him a Pilote, muſte he not doo in all thinges his commaundementes? If then it be true in

this caſe, as alſo in the other, concerninge the infirmitie and weakeneſſe of mans bodie: howe mutche more then ought he, that ſtandeth in néede of counſell, and comfort for the ſoule, to obey the learned & aduiſed Philoſopher? All theſe thinges obſerued well Geniades: and in euery of his affayres vſed the aduice of Diogenes his Seruant, committinge to his charge, for inſtruction, his children, whom he in vertues lore, in ſhorte time mutche profited. In this ſorte, and after this manner this Philoſopher liued ninetie yéeres in this worlde. Somme ſuppoſe that he died beynge bitten of a Dogge. Others ſomme, that ſeinge him ſelfe very olde and féeble: without any force nowe, or farther deſire to liue, with the very ſame courage and conſtancie that he had liued, did him ſelf to die, and made chaunge of life the ſame daie, that Nature to greate Alexander had for his laſte alſo aſſigned. A little before his ende, his auditours ſeinge him ſo olde, and ſo neare his death, demaunded him where he meante, or deſired to be buried: to whom he ſaide, his deſire was to be layde in the wyde and open fielde, whereat they all meruaylinge, replied, he ill aduiſed them, for that in ſutche poore, and ſimple manner beſtowed, the Birdes & beaſtes would deuoure his Carion: then ſaithe he to auoide that inconuenience, cauſe yée that my ſtaffe be ſette there by mée: at which incontinently they brake out into a laughter, arguinge him forthwith of manifeſt folly, for that the deade neither ſeeth nor perceiueth any thinge: to whome, if they lacke (ſaithe he) theſe remembred ſenſes, what mattereth it then, if rather the Byrdes & Beaſtes in their hungrie neceſſitie, praye on mée, then vnder the Earth I ſhould be of the wormes conſumed. Diogenes had none then ſo greate a deſire, to imploye (as dothe many this daie, leſſe aduiſed) their Treaſour or Ritches, on pompuous Funeralles.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of the Excellencye and commendation of Trauayle, as alſo of the damages that growe of Idlenes. Chap. 13.
               IT lyeth vs on, of neceſſitie, bothe by the Lawes, and Commaundementes of God, to ſwincke, and toyle in this worlde continually: For our firſt Father hauing broken the Commaundemente of God, was banniſhed, and chaſed out of Paradis Terreſtriall: the Earthe lotted to him for his portion, or inheritaunce: with charge notwithſtandinge to labour here, in continuall payne, and trauaile. Whiche charge, he neither receiued for any tearme or time, but for euer without ceaſſe, as longe as he liued: whiche neither appertained to the Firſte man onely, but vnto all his Poſteritie, and Succeſſion to the ende. And although this neceſſitie of Trauaile be laide on man, to call him to penance, yet is it a fitte Medicine to aſſwage the wronge paſſed: for that by our labour wée regayne that, whiche was loſte by diſobedience: and ſo mutch the more (although it be vnto vs a preſent ſcourg) for that God hathe condemned nothinge that was of it ſelfe leſſe good, graunting to Man Trauaile, to turne, and laboure the Earthe. Alſo Iob ſaithe: That Man is borne onely to ſweate, and to payne. Conſider againe, howe our Sauiour, and Redéemer Ieſus Chriſte, Mannes onely ſoueraigne Lorde, and Maiſter, to the example of vs all, lyued in continuall payne, and labour, euen vntil the time of his Deathe, and Paſſion. Beſides in his Parables, he ſharpely rebuketh ſuch as any where conſume, and waſte the time idlely, imbraſinge all thoſe that are vertuouſly buſied: vſinge in an other place theſe woordes to this pourpoſe: Comme vnto mee, all yee that are heauily loden, and I will refreaſhe you. If wée will paine our ſelues to reade the Scriptures, wée ſhall finde, that the auncient Sainctes ſpente all their dayes, and Life, in continuall exerciſe of Vertue, and Godlineſſe. Further, trauaile is not onely conducible to the Soule, but alſo preſerueth

the healthe of the Body. For it by daily practiſe, becommeth agile, ſtronge, and well diſpoſed: in it are augmented, and increaſed the Vitall Spirites: the naughty, and ſuperflous humours conſumed. As touching the minde, it thence exileth all impīous, and vnchaſte thoughtes, preuentinge al occaſion of errour, and offence. Certaine is it, that nothinge of weightie importance, reacheth without paine to the deſired effecte or ende, as on the other ſide, that eaſe, that is purchaſed with paine, is euer more then all others, more pleaſaunte, and likinge. He that taketh greate payne, repoſeth him ſelfe in eaſe: for to the weary man all thinges are fittinge, and agréeant: His Meate to him is ſwéete, and ſauery: He ſoundly ſléepeth without dreame or viſion: and all pleaſures whatſoeuer, are to him bothe gratefull, and acceptable. Who ſo trauaileth not, nor neuer becommeth wearye, his repoſe to him lendeth vnperfite contentment. But to returne to the commodities of the Bodye, woonted exerciſe frameth a man diſcrete, vigilante, well aduiſed, and ſage: and what els is profitable, thence iſſueth it, and ſpringeth contintinually vnto man. Trauaile is it that ordinarily prouideth a man of all thinges: the ſame it is, that frameth to him fayre houſes to dwel in: commodious lanes, & pathes to walke in: for the more eaſe of the poore paſſenger, greate ſhippes to croſſe, and ouerrunne the tumblinge Seas: and armour to defende vs from the force of the enimie: briefely, innumerable commodities thence take theire beginninge. By Laboure the ſterill ſoyle becommeth fruitefull, and plentuous: to ſutche as are drie, and withered, it conueigheth ſtreames of Water, opening the bowels of the earthe, whence Springes iſſue abundantly: it aduaunceth the grounde, where ſo it is behouefull, ouerthrowinge Hilles, and Mountaines that any where annoye vs: it altereth the courſe of great Riuers, to moyſte therewith drye Countries: it alſo helpeth, and aydeth Nature, forcinge her to geue foorthe,

that of her ſelfe ſhée woulde not: it tameth, and maketh gentle the Sauage, and Wilde beaſte: it fineth mannes witte, and ſharpeneth his memorie, as alſo the other partes are thence onely quicke, and ready. To conclude, who ſo acquainteth him ſelfe with painefull Labours, reapeth thence pleaſinge fruites, ſutche as him ſelfe deſireth. God wil not that his electe poſſeſſe Heauen by ſléepinge. If the pompous, & ſumptuous buildinges, which thou eche where beholdeſt: if the ritche Caſtles, and Palaices of Princes: if famous Cities well peopled, ſéeme to thée greate matters, knowe it to be the Sweatte, and toyle of thine Aunceſters. If in manner ſemblable the Artes, and Sciences contente thée, knowe that they firſt ſprange of the Diuine Labour of ſutche as here liued in the forepaſſed Ages. When ſo thou beholdeſt the gréene and pleaſaunte Fieldes, daintie Gardens, and well ordered Vineyardes, accoumpte that they be all the ſole fruites of Labour. For the Ideler knoweth not how to frame any thinge, but rather diſordereth what ſo he findeth any where perfected. By buſte induſtry men attaine to immortall renowme. That was it, that commended theſe Sages to the Poſteritie, Plato, Ariſtotle, Pythagoras, with all the Learned crue: whiche neuer ceaſte to payne their bodyes, and mindes, ſtudying, writinge, readinge, and diſputinge, not mindinge at all, when they mighte at their pleaſure eate, or ſléepe, or curiouſly, as moſt doo, couer their carion: to the vſe of theſe thinges notwithſtanding, when neceſſitie forced them, it was a thouſande times to them then more pleaſinge, and ſauery, then to any of theſe idle, and delicious gluttons. Whence commeth it, that Hercules lyueth, to the Poſteritie ſo famous, if not by the meane of his twelue Labours? Whence grewe Alexander ſo renowmed throughe the worlde? Iulius Caeſar alſo, with infinite excellente Kinges, and Capitaines, if not by theire vigilante, and inceſſante Trauaile? And on the other ſide,

                  Sardanapalus, with ſutche others, effeminate, as was he, by their careleſſe ſecuritie, fell into ruine, and deſtruction, and in the ende died infamous, and miſerable wretches. By meanes whereof, it lieth euidente, of al menne to be perceiued, that if Idleneſſe by painefull care, be not donne to exile, then all Offices muſte flide, and comme aſſuredly to nothinge: Mecanicall Artes, the ſtudie of Learninge, and good Letters: all polices, and Ciuill Gouernement: Iuſtice her ſelfe: the Lawes: and in fine, the Nourſes of Wealthe, and Peace, muſte all without Labour and Payne, be ſubuerted. By her eche where Vertue floriſheth, and raigneth: and without her, withereth without grace, or verdure: for who ſo in the Common Weale woulde miniſter Iuſtice, muſte continually be buſied to order thinges rightly. To be ſhorte, no Vertue maie any where be put in execution, without the aſſiſtance of carefull Payne, and Diligence. Thence commeth it, that Heſiodus ſaide, That Vertue was onely by Heſiodus. Sweatte acquired. Aduiſedly, if wée will, and exactly conſider all, what ſo euer God hathe in the worlde created, wée ſhal finde, that thoſe thinges ſurpaſſe the others in perfection, wherein he hathe beſtowed moſte payne, and trauaile. Beholde wée the Heauenly bodyes, voyde of immutation: the Sunne moueth continually: the Moone areſteth neuer: the Heauens them ſelues: the Starres, and Planettes, haue benne, are, and ſhall be in perpetuall motion. The Elemente of Fyre reſteth not voide of ſomme operation: the Ayre without ceaſe turneth it ſelfe from one place to an other. From the partes beneath, the litle ſpringes and fountaines mount vp perpetually: the Riuers ſtill flote, and ſhall doo for euer: the Sea alſo vſeth his times to comme, and goe: the Earthe, althoughe in déede ſhée areſte her immoueable, (for ſo is it requiſite, to the intente man maie paſſe on her to and fro indamaged, repoſinge him ſelfe at times, as nature requireth) yet is ſhée neuertheleſſe either idle,

or vnbuſied, but geueth foorthe to the vſe of vs, Hearbes, Plantes, Trées, and Mettalles, as ſhée that of duetie is bounde to mainteine, and nouriſhe ſutche a number of Men, & Beaſtes, as on her dwelleth. So that if wee now of theſe things with iudgyng eie conſider, wée ſhal finde, that Nature ſo mutche affecteth nothinge, as without ceaſſe continually to buſie her ſelfe in toile, & trauaile, as to forme, frame, make, and vnmake, to produce, to ouerthrowe, to alter, and to chaunge, to perfecte, and organiſe thinges in their kinde: not reaſtinge, or ſurceaſſing by any manner of meanes in the worlde. For confirmation whereof, the Olde, & Aunciente forepaſſed Philoſophers, neuer thought that they had ſpoken enough in cō
                  mendation, & praiſe of vertuous exerciſes. Virgil ſaithe, that inceſſant Labour ſurmounteth all thinges. Horace in his Sermons, that God to man hathe geuen nothing without Payne, and Trauaile. Euripides, Trauaile is the Father of Honour, and Renowme: and that God aſſiſteth him (ſaith he) that liueth in Sweate. And againe, That, that onely is the pathe vnto Vertue: & without it, there is no honour, praiſe, or good aduenture. Menander the Poete writeth, and in my fanſie aduiſedly, that he, who in healthe lyueth at any time idlely, with more ieopardye haſardeth, then the afflicted, of an Ague. Like grace alſo hathe in theſe woordes, Democritus, Voluntary Labour, ſauereth of no Payne. Hermicon, beinge demaunded whence he had learned his Science: Of Labour (ſaide he) and of longe experience. Pythagoras commaundeth, that man lyue honeſtly, and that he neuer leaue, in Vertue, to payne, and weary him ſelfe: for cuſtome (ſaithe he) in the ende, maketh it pleaſaunte, and likinge. Salomon referreth the Ideler, to the example of the Ante. If I ſhoulde here remember all the examples of thoſe, that by Payne haue poſſeſ
                     •
                  e the Chaire of Honour, longer ſhould I dwel hereon, then neceſſity requireth. It ſufficeth then, in fewe to ſaie, that there was

neuer man famous in Martiall affayres, or Chiualrye, in Learninge, or els in chaſte, and Vertuous manners, in no kinde of Science, or Arte Mecanical, but by continuance of Sweatte, and Trauaile. And further, no one in the whole troupe of Loyterers, was euer in any Age renowmed with Vertues Title: or if any ſuch were borne of Honourable Race, or Lineage, certaine is it, that he either came to ruine, and miſerye, or otherwiſe loſte his Honour, and Lyfe: or at the leaſte, he no where coulde with warrante aſſure him ſelfe: Damage, & ſhame the onely and infallible fruites of fooliſhe idleneſſe, and ſecuritie: of whiche alſo ſpringe vices innumerable, as is in Eccleſiaſticus approued in theſe woordes: Idleneſſe ingendereth all kindes of miſchiefe. Ouid remembreth, that Venerye is no where thought on, but onely emong nice, and delicate Idelers: for (ſaithe he) who ſo he be, leſſe buſied in Vertue, imagineth vnchaſte thinges, and inuenteth Treaſons, puttinge in execution all vice, and treachery. Ezechiel accoumpteth Idleneſſe, emonge ye other Sinnes, for whiche Sodome was, in ſutche ſorte as wée reade, deſtroyed. And for my parte, I knowe no thinge, that with the ſlouthefull man proſpereth. The fire, if it be not foſtred, and couered with Woode, it fainteth, and waſteth, and in the ende is extinguiſhed. The Ayre, in obſcure, and darke place, voide of deſired motion, becommeth foorthewith noyſomme, and infectious. The Water depriued of her courſe in runninge, putrifieth without ſtaye, annoyeth, and impoyſeneth. If the Earth be not opened & laboured, ſhée geueth none other fruites but Brembels, Thornes, Thiſtles, or ſutche like. Golde, that deſired mettall, if it be not wrought and poliſhed, looſeth vtterly his bewtie: yron alſo, with others the ſemblable, if not continually laboured and kepte, ruſte & waſte, as experience learneth vs. Whole Prouinces, and Countries, not inhabited or peopled, are euermore barren and very infectious, in ſutch ſorte that it appeareth,

trauaile to be thereof the ſole, & onely Medicine. Houſes and fayre lodgynges not inhabited, fal into ruine. Highe waies, and common pathes, not frequented or vſed, are in ſhorte time cloſed, and ſhutte vp againſte the paſſenger: whence it now is open, and manifeſt, that whatſoeuer lieth vnuſed or vnlaboured, ſhortly conſumeth and waſteth to nothinge. Example in man, whoſe wittes if they be not in continuance of ſtudie exerciſed, waxe cankered, and with paine performe the woonted duetie: the harte and minde alſo languiſhe and fainte, as vnable to doo any thinge: and in fine all their forces quaile and fall as diſmayde. As I then before haue ſayde, that continuall exerciſe frameth man agile, and diſpoſed to all thinges: ſo ſaye I nowe, on the contrary, that idle ſecuritie annoyeth the complexion, and waſteth the good humours, increaſinge the ſuperfluous, in exceſſe in mans body. Galene ſaithe, that it is a thinge vnpoſſible, that a man ſhould liue not labouringe his body. Auicenna to the ſame accordeth, as alſo Cornelius Celſus, with others very famous and excellent Phiſitions. The Horſe him ſelfe, with others ſutche, brute, and dull beaſtes, beinge pampered ſtill in ſtable, looſe their paſe, and other qualities. The ſhippe that ſtill rideth at Anker in the Hauen, geathereth mothes & rotteth, but dothe not ſo in voyage. The Souldier then marreth, when he longe time repoſeth him ſelfe, voyde of feare and careleſſe. Againe it is reported, that the improuident ſecuritie of Hannibal at Capua, was the onely cauſe that the Romaines gaue him there the ouerthrowe. Who ſo in Battaile beſte trauerſeth him grounde, fighteth, as is knowen, in moſte aſſured ſafetie, but to him that loy
                     •
                  ereth, and arreſteth him in his place, many daungers are aſſigned, and ineuitable diſcommodities: the ſunne alſo on him, more then on the others, hath greater aduantage. The Archer neuer ſhooteth to the birde that fleeth, but to her that arreſteth her, or pearcheth any where, bendeth he his Bowe, and fitteth

his boltes. Further wée ſée, that all kinde of inſtrumeutes, not touchte or playde on, immediatly becomme diſcordante, harriſhe, & vnpleaſant: but kepte in hande, & continually plaide on, féedeth the hearer with ſwéete notes and pleaſant Harmonie. Some kindes of Wine are there, which vnleſſe they be continually wrought too and fro in their veſſels, corrupte and putrifie, to be ſerued to no man. The precious & riche ſtoane not wrought and poliſhed, lacketh his naturall commendation and grace, but perfected by the ſkilfull and light hande of the Iueller, maketh ſhew of it ſelf, and commendeth his vertue: yea the yron it ſelfe, the more often that in any your vſes you imploye it, the brighter ſhall his Glaſſe be, and the fayrer ſtill it looketh. Emonge brute beaſtes, theſe are to Man moſte likinge, and acceptable, whiche moſte can ſuſtaine, of weary Payne, & Trauaile. Here might wée auoche, and alleage ſundrye the opinions, as well of Poetes, as alſo Philoſophers, condemninge with one mouthe the vnprofitable Ideler, whoſe onely authorities mighte accompliſhe, and perfecte that, whiche wée preſently labour to proue in many. The Sainctes them ſelues, and Holy Fathers of the time paſt, accurſe them: the louers of Vertue, and the Learned deteſte them: Ouid, Plato, Horace, Claudian, & Virgil, with all the whole heape of learned Poetes write, and 
                     •…
                  gh continually againſte them: eche Hiſtorie beſides is full of the diſcommodities enſuinge Idleneſſe. Plato, and Ariſtotle condemninge this voice, exalte aboue meaſure, the practiſe of Chinalrie: whence, what ſo euer in Warre is neceſſarie, is ſkilfully eche where put in dre, and practiſed. The Emperour Adrian, on a time aduaunced one Turbus, a Turbus. carefull, and truſtie Miniſter in the affayres of his Maiſter: whom on a time as the Emperour beholde, too painfully buſied, as him ſelfe thoughte then preſently, ſaide: I woulde not, Turbus, that then ſhouldeſt kill thy ſelfe, or with too muche perſeuerance, hazarde thine eſtate. To

whom he anſweared: if it pleaſe your ſacred Maieſtie, the man that is fauoured, and aduaunced by an Emperour; muſte on his féete die where he goeth buſied. Q. Curtius 
                  Q. Curtius. ſaithe: that the maladies or infirmities, whiche iſſue or ſpringe of idleneſſe, are perfectly plaiſtered by woon
                     •
                  ed exerciſe. The Olde Romaines accuſtomed to beginne their daie continually at midnight, to the intent that in the morninge, at the firſte ſhewe, or appearinge of the Sunne, eche man in his vocation might followe his affayres: and farther they alſo thought, that euen then the one halfe of the daye was paſte without any profite, or good at all donne. A certaine Romaine on a time perſwaded with the Senate, that they ſhoulde not in any wiſe diſtroye or ſacke Carthage, to the ende, that beinge poſſeſt thereof, they might not liue in continuall quiet, and idle ſecuritie. To this purpoſe Scipio Naſica ſaide: S. Naſica▪
                   conſideringe that ſomme aſſured then, the preſente ſtate of Rome, for that Carthage was then tributorie, and Greece ſubdued, naye rather ſaide he, wée nowe liue in daunger and hazarde, for that wée at this time, dreade or feare no enimie. By whiche his anſweare, he this mutch inferred that ſurceaſinge nowe from Armes, and bathed in delices, this their ſecurity more hazarded their eſtate, then the warres, or any other their Neighbours, enimies to the Empire. And againe, Feare (ſaith he) more aſſuredly warrenteth the eſtate of Rome, then careleſſe to liue, as though no man durſte to touche vs. Vnto the which woordes or aduice of Scipio, the French Prouerbe anſweareth of parte, not vnaptly. Better is it to looſe, then to ceaſe or be idle. Apuleus highly commended the Apulcus▪
                   Maiſters of Defence, or ſwoordeplayers of his time, who in ſutche ſorte deteſted all kinde of Loyterers, that the Maiſters in that Science, neuer woulde permitte their Schollers to eate, before thei had fully accompliſhed and ended ſome commendable exployte, & laudable practiſe. Cicero to this purpoſe remembereth theſe woordes: Man

is borne to be buſied i
                     •…
                   vertuous exerciſes, whereof (ſaith be) our Soule or Minde is a ſufficient argument, whiche no where, or at no time, arreſteth her idly. Emonge all other decrées, of the renowmed Draco, Lawegeuer to the Draco. 
                  Athenians, none was more woorthy of commendation then this, that he puniſſhed with deathe, all thoſe that any where, were founde vnbuſied, or that walkte vp and downe idlely for their paſtime and pleaſure. Howe the Gentiles were affected towardes all thoſe, that perſeuered in any vertuous actions, is euidente, for that to this purpoſe eſpecially and aboue all others, they had in Adoration thrée Idolles, or Goddeſſes: the firſt hight Strenua, whiche is to ſaie, Dexteritie: the ſeconde Agenoria, 
                  Three Idolles of the Gentiles. whiche ſignifieth, Virilitie: the thirde Stimula, whiche ſoundeth as mutche as a Spurre of honour or Vertue: in ſutche ſorte reuerenced they inceſſant trauaile, that they erected theſe thrée Idolles in the name of them, to be reuerenced for euer. But wée will not arreſt our ſelues on the opinion of the Gentiles, but will deſcende to the authoritie of the Scriptures, whiche no leſſe bindeth vs to the aboue remembered, then it chargeth vs to abſtayne from thinges that be prophaned. Salomon in his Prouerbes, emonge many other places where he ſharply argueth idleneſſe, in one, to this ende, vttereth theſe woordes: He that in Winter ceaſeth from labour, ſhal receiue for his portion, indigent beggerie. S. Paule, a Doctour emonge the Gentiles, neuer ioyed ſo mutche for any thinge, as for that he at no time was founde a Treuante, or Loyterer, extollinge aboue al thinges, paineful Laboure. In this ſorte writeth he to the Theſſalonians, admoniſhinge them in al thinges to imitate him, for neuer was he founde idle emonge them, ne at any time did he eate, not hauinge firſte deſerued it: he toyled daie, and nighte, not to annoye, but by al meanes to profite them. And againe, Who ſo laboureth not, neither muste he eate, as is commaunded. To the Corinthians in manner ſemblable,

he writeth, remembringe them, for their better inſtruction, of his reſtleſſe Payne, and inceſſant Trauaile, which the ſame he alſo doothe in many other places. Imploye wée then hereafter, our time in vertuous exerciſes, auoiding, to the vttermoſte of our power, ye contrary: whence neuer iſſueth any thinge that is commendable. Neither geue wée this our commaundement with ſutch extreame vigor, as thoughe wée woulde haue no time exempted to eate, drinke, ſléepe, & honeſtly repoſe vs: for theſe thinges are neceſſarie, as alſo moderate recreation at times is likewiſe commendable. For this cauſe Cicero ſo mutch extolleth Scipio, in that he ſaide, that he neuer was leſſe idle, then when in déede he was idle. And further addeth Cicero, that this ſayinge of his was moſte aſſuredly and doubtleſſe notable, for that thereby he gaue others to vnderſtande, that when he idly, had areſted him from his ſtudies, he then notwithſtanding had in minde the whole courſe of his affayres, and that then, and at ſuche times, of them, he earneſtly, and with aduice conſulted with him ſelfe. Seneca the Morall Poete affirmeth, that Seneca. Idleneſſe without ſomme practiſe of ſtudie, or good Letters, is to man a very perfecte Graue or Sepulchre: and that thoſe that ſtudie Wiſedome, are they, that féele and enioye the true Idleneſſe. Plutarche writeth, that the Wiſe man ſpendeth his time in the onely exerciſe of vertue and Learninge. Let Man then aduiſe him howe he ſpende his time, whiche paſſeth without ſtaye, and is altogeather vncertaine, for that he muſte yéelde a ſtraite accoumpte thereof, yea and of eche woorde that ſhal paſſe him raſhely. Cato, though he were a Panym, yet coulde Cato. he thus muche ſaie, that all greate and hawtie perſonages were as well bounde to yéelde an accoumpte of their time, without profite ſpente, as to receiue iuſte guerdon for that they well had imployed. For concluſion, in ſuche honeſt exerciſes, ſhoulde wée paſſe our fewe dayes, that wée mighte reape the fruite thereof in the Kingedome of

God, whiche is prouided for thoſe that are called into the Vineyarde, to Laboure it, where they ſhall receiue the dette to them belonginge. To this pourpoſe ſutche fittinge woordes vſeth S. Iohn: Bleſſed are thoſe that die in the Lorde, for that their Spirites repoſe them nowe in quiet from all Labour: but theire Woorkes, and theire trauailes, ſutche as they were, ſhall folowe them. Whiche authoritie well proueth, that paine onely and trauaile, is the Marchandice of this worlde, whiche is bought, ſolde, and deliuered into Heauen, as S. Paule him ſelfe not vnfitly remembreth, wheras he ſaith, that eche man ſhal receiue his Salery or payment, according to that he hath trauailed in this worlde.
            
            
               ¶ Howe detestable a matter Crueltie is, with ſomme examples ſeruinge to that pourpoſe. Chap. 14.
               AMonge all other vices repugnant to mans Nature, whiche alſo yéelde men moſte abominable, & Monſterous, Crueltie is aſſuredly the chiefe and principall: for as mutche as Man, a Creature moſte Honorable, framed to the Image and ſimilitude of God, borne to vſe courteſie & compaſſion, by Crueltie is tranſformed into a brute beaſte, terrible, furious, of nature accurſed, and enimie to God, who is the ſole & ſoueraigne Clemencie. Ariſtotle ſaithe, that Crueltie, fierceneſſe & inhumanitie, are vices incident to ſome ſauage & wilde beaſte. Seneca in his ſeconde Booke of Clemencie, termeth it the execrable felony of the Soule, whence he concludeth it oppoſite and contrary to the vertue of compaſſion and humilitie. Crueltie is capitall enimie of Iuſtice, and of reaſon: and mutche worſe is this vice then eyther pryde or malice: for that wrothe or malice, ſéemeth to procéede of ſomme certaine diſpleaſure, as when wée beholde any one, that either annoyeth or wrongeth an other: but emonge ſutche as in their Crueltie, outrage, wée finde many that euen laughinge, and withoute any

ſuſpition of crime, onely of pure malice and diſdaine, miſerably doo to die, & murther the innocent. So is it then a capitall enimie to Iuſtice, whiche permitteth not any, fautleſſe, to ſmarte of vndeſerued paine: as it on the other ſide alſo chargeth with moderate, and meaſurable correction the fautie or culpable, without reſpecte of perſon. Seneca in his Booke of manners, ſaithe: That commonly wée terme thoſe, mercileſſe tormentors, that in correction of vices holde no kinde of meaſure: what title then to thoſe menne ſhall wée iuſtly attribute, that by ſtraunge deuiſed meanes, ſoyle them in Innocent and harmeleſſe bloudde? Examples of ſutche Monſters wée reade infinite, emonge whome, wée finde Herode Kinge of the Iewes, which raigned in the birthe of our Sauiour Chriſte. Who after the deathe of ſo many innocentes, thinkinge emong them alſo to haue ſlaine him, who then was newly for mans redemption borne, would yet make more ample, and more ful ſhew of his tyrannie, not onely in the time of his wretched life, but alſo in the inſtant and moment of his death: ſo that him ſelfe perceiuinge his death to approche, cauſed to be aſſembled al the chiefe of Hieruſalem: whom, as ſoone as they at his commaundment appeared, he cauſed without ſtaye to be ſafely impryſoned: geuinge charge to his Siſter, that in the ſame pointe of time that he ſhoulde make chaunge of life, ſhée alſo ſhould doo to die all the foreſaide Elders, whiche to doo, ſhée fayled, God workinge to the contrary. Whiche thinges he did (as him ſelfe ſomewhat before his deathe confeſſed) for that he knew the inhabitantes of Hieruſalem woulde reioyce of his chaunge, and to the intente it otherwiſe might ſuccéede to the people, then they at that time aſſuredly ſuppoſed, he of accurſed and deteſtable pretence, to the intent they al in that day ſhould mourne and lamente, determined to cauſe to be donne that horrible murther. The tyrannie alſo of Abimelech, Sonne of Gedeon the Greate, was no leſſe ſtraunge and marueilous,

for the intente he onely might raigne alone, he trayterouſly ſlewe thrée ſcoare of his Brethren, whoſe mercileſſe hande none eſcaped but onely Ionathas, which by the onely permiſſion of God, fledde, to the intent the Ionathas. Traytour might neuer liue without ſuſpition, or feare of reuenge. And yet here againe is it doubtfull to ſaye, whether the treachery that he vſed towardes the Sichimites, were more tollerable then this or not: on whom, for that they had chaſte him out of their Citie, into which afterwardes reentering by force in the night, reuenged him ſelfe by the vniuerſall ſlaughter of them all, for he committed to the ſwoorde all them that he there founde, Man, Wooman, yonge and olde, and certaine ſuche as for there ſafetie ranne into the Churches, he foorthwith inuironned with greate heapes of woode, whiche as ſoone as it had taken fire, the heate and ſmooke thereof was ſutche, & ſo intollerable, that the pryſoners that thought to haue liued in aſſured Sanctuarye, were ſcortcht eche one, and waſted there miſerably to powder, this after he had then diſtroyed the whole Towne, with ploughe he turned in deſpite the ſoyle, coueringe it with Salte in ſtéede of other grayne. A. Regulus, by the people of Carthage, was in manner ſemblable intreated, who beynge A. Regulus. there pryſoner, vpon his promiſſe of gainecome, was ſente vnto the Romaines, to conclude a peace, or at the leaſt to practiſe the permutation of Captiues, but beinge returned, leſſe anſwearing their expectation (not by conſtrainte, but for performance of his promiſſe) was ſhutte vp, into a greate pype or tunne, thicke ſette with ſharpe nayles pearſinge on euery ſide, ſo that he coulde on no ſide, either leane or arreſt him ſelfe, in whiche ſorte they did him cruelly to die. All Tirannes are ordinarily of nature cruell, but who ſo of them is blouddy, is more execrable then the others. Phalaris Kinge of Sicilia, a moſt wretched tyranne, who although he executed ſundrie without cauſe or reaſon, yet, in truthe and iuſtly to conſider

of him, he was in harte and affection then in déede more cruell. This manquayler had a Bull of Braſſe, whiche one Perillus had ſkilfully wrought him, in which A Bull of Braſſe. when he had incloſed, whom he minded to torment, hauinge vnder the ſayde Bull a greate and hoate fire, the poore patient gaue foorth thence his ſorowfull Notes, as though it had benne the bellowinge of an Oxe: whiche he did to this intente onely: that by the lamentable ſhrikes vnder a Bulles voyce vttered, he mighte in no wiſe be moued to pitie or compaſſion. One thinge did he while he liued honeſtly, for the firſt that euer he tormented in this his Braſſy Bull, was Perillus him ſelfe, the authour thereof. Straunge was the vnnaturall and vnreuerent Crueltie, practiſed by Tullia, doughter to Tarquine Kinge of ye 
                  Romaines, which to inioye the Crowne, cauſed her Father before his time to be murthered, which him ſelfe would haue geuen her, had ſhée neuer ſo litle tarried: and that whiche is more agayne in her to be noted, her Fathers bodye layde forthe deade on the grounde, ſhée aduaunced her ſelfe in her coche, incontinently, paſte foorth ouer it, at al not appalled, & although the Horſes that drewe her, trembled at that ſighte, and would haue choſen ſome other waie to haue paſte it, the Cocheman alſo that draue them, féeling ſomme pricke of conſcience, would in like manner haue choſen ſome other pathe, to the intent the Kinge beinge dead, might not be ſo ſhamefully diſmembred & bruſed: but ſo much ſtil pleaſed ſhée in her cruell affection, that euen that whiche the inſenſible beaſtes of pitie would haue refuſed, in deſpite ſhée brake them of that their choyſe & will, forcinge them to paſſe ouer the martyred body of her Father. The Scithians, a people in warre very furious and valiante, are in ſundrie Hiſtories taxed of Crueltie. But emonge other ſortes, this one geueth ful cauſe of marueile: They would kill greate beaſtes, as Oxen, or Horſes, in whoſe bellies they incloſed ſutche as they meante to execute,

whom they cauſed in ſutch ſorte, & ſo faſte to be bounde, that they neuer coulde moue, or by any meanes comme thence: where continually they gaue them (as nature aſketh) ſomme thinge to eate, to the intents that they lyuinge thus, might rotte, and corrupte with the ſtinking carrion of the beaſte, theire Graue or Sepulchre: and to aggrauate the matter, that they might be alſo conſumed lyuinge, by the wormes that of cuſtome growe ſtill in ſutche lotheſome, as were theſe, and putrified carrions. Wée reade agayne of Maximianus, Emperour of Rome, who alſo practiſed ſo horrible a Cruelty, as hardly might enter into the harte of man: He bounde men lyuinge, to ſutche as were deade, which he cauſed to be leaft ſtraitly in this ſorte coupled, vntill the deade had infected, and impoyſoned the liuinge. The very ſemblable to this, recordeth Virgil of Maxentius. Agayne wée finde of the ſtraunge tyrannies practiſed by Alexander Fereas, who buried men quicke, linckte face to face, and grapled faſt, as before, togeather. Others ſomme he woulde apparell in the ſkinne of a Woulfe, or other Sauage and Wilde beaſte: whom, after he had in beſte manner ſo attyred, cauſed to be carried out into the middle of ſomme fielde, where he bayted them with Maſtyues, vntill they were miſerably diſmembred and eaten. I knowe not whether any man maie heare to ſpeake of the accurſed bouchery practiſed by Aſtiages, Kinge of the Medes, againſte Arpalus, one of his greateſt States, and approued friende in Somme others haue Harpagus neceſſitie. This Aſtiages, by occaſion of a Dreame, which here to recoumpte ſhoulde be longe and tedious, gaue to Arpalus in ſecrete, commiſſion, ſpéedely to diſpatche and murther a yonge Sonne of his: who moued with compaſſion, beholdinge the poore infante (whiche afterwarde had to name, Cyrus the Greate) as alſo that he feared the Moother of the yonge Prince woulde in no wiſe accompliſh that commaundement of Aſtiages, but on the other ſide diſſemblinge it, did his carefull paine ſafely to foſter

him. Longe after, the Tyrante aduertiſed that his childe yet then lyued, without ſemblant of diſpleaſure, called vnto him, Arpalus, whom in conſideration of his clemencie vſed towardes the little Cyrus, priuily did to be ſlaine a yonge Sonne of his: callinge the daye folowinge the Father to him to dinner, whome emonge other meates he fedde with the bodye of his owne childe: of whiche Feaſte, the vnhappy Father had no kinde of miſliking, as one that knewe nothinge whereof he had eaten. Aſtiages not yet contente with this inſupportable Tyranny, procéedeth yet further with an vnhearde crueltie: for in ſtéede of the laſte Seruis, or Diſhes of pleaſance, he cauſed in large Chargers ſolemnely to be ſerued in, the heade, féete, and handes of the yonge Martyred childe, vnto the good Father, to the onely intente he ſhould not be vnwéetinge that he then had banqueted, and eaten of his owne Sonne. Marius and Silla, twoo capitall enimies, on bothe ſides ſo raged in execrable Tyrannye, that thei contended, as appeareth, who might ſurmount and ſurpaſſe the other in villanye. Silla bouchered in one daye foure Legions of Souldiers. The Preneſtines alſo, a people of Italye, crauinge with teares his fauoure and grace, for that they had receiued the Capitaine Marius, coulde notwithſtandinge by no meanes eſcape his cruell hande. For generally without excertion he murthered them all, and gaue their bodyes for a praye to the Crowes, and Rauens to féede on. The ſemblable did alſo Marius his Companion in bouchery. The Emperour Tiberius, Succeſſour to Octauian, ſurpaſſed, I trowe, all others in his time: who after his fainte clemencie in the entraunce of his Raygne, paſſed no daye, in whiche he ſpilte not the bloude of ſomme Innocentes. Beſides, he diuiſed ſutche a mercileſſe policie, as tofore hadde neuer benne in any place hearde of: he inhibited, that vnder payne of deathe, none ſhoulde be ſo hardye, to deplore, lamente, or make any ſhewe of mournefull ſemblant at

the deathe of thoſe, that it ſhoulde pleaſe him any waye, for any cauſe to execute. A Crueltie ſtraunge, and ſuche as hathe not benne knowen: for I déeme there can be no greater paine, then to inhibite the poore harte, that it vnloade and diſcharge not it ſelf of his dolours, by alarmes & teares. Alſo when he did to die any yonge maydens, he firſte committed them to his Tormentours to be deflowred of them, to the intent that with their death, they togeather ſhoulde loſe their honour, and Chaſtitie. He ſo much was pleaſed in ſpillinge of bloude, that vnderſtandinge one had ſtaine him ſelfe, whom he before had Sentenced to death, of pourpoſe to eſcape his mercileſſe, and cruell hande, ſighed with hawtie voice in lamentable manner, ſayinge: Oh howe vnhappely hathe this Crows eſcaped mée (by whiche name it pleaſed him to note the Condemned). For you muſte vnderſtande, that he in ſutch ſorte tormented the poore patient, before he would ſuffer him by any meanes to die: that they ſuppoſed preſente deathe to be to them bothe a gaine, and a grace. Straunge were it to write, what inuentions he vſed, & newe tormentes in Execution. Sommetime he forced the Condemned exceſſiuely to drinke, and immediately woulde cauſe the Cundittes of their Vrine ſo ſtraitly to be bounde, that they by no meanes poſſible mighte eaſe them ſelues that waye: and ſo woulde he ſuffer them, in exceſſiue paine to languiſhe, till deathe ſhoulde take order, for chaunge of theire life. And further, for his ſale and onely pleaſure, he cauſed other ſomme to be throwne into the Sea, from an excéedinge highe Cliffe, or Rockys banke in the Ile of Capraire, adioyninge vnto Naples: and for becauſe that after that ſorte to die in the Sea, was, as he thoughte, a deathe too gentle, he cauſed certaine Marriners, and others, with Pikes and ſharpe weapons in Boates to ſtande directly vnderneathe the ſaide Rocke, whiche receiued, and bloudely martyred the miſerable patientes, before they might enioye the benefite

of the Water. Nowe after the ſhameful deathe of this incarnate Deuill, ſuch in déede as him ſelfe had wel deſerued, Caius Caligula ſuccéeded in the Empire: who either was equall, or rather ſurpaſſed his Predeceſſours in all kinde of monſterous, & accurſed tyrannies. He on a time, with greate affection wiſhed, that all the Inhabitauntes of Rome had togeather but one heade, to the intent that at one blowe he might ſtrike it of. He ſtrangly complained of the infelicitie of his time, for that there chaunced not, during his Raigne, any Famine, Plague, Generall Inundations, Subuerſions, and Diuaſtations of Countries, with many ſutche other dreadfull, and miſerable calamities. Of a certaine man he demaunded, banniſhed by Tiberius, howe he liued, or what he did duringe his Exile: who in perfecte flattery anſweared, that he inceſſantly had praied to God, to call hence Tiberius, to the ende that he mighte ſuccéede him without ſtaye in the Empyre. Whiche thinge conſidered of by this monſterous Traytour, and doubtinge leaſte ſo many thouſandes whiche he had exiled, ſhoulde in like manner pray to God for his deathe, ſente foorthewith into all partes to call them home againe: whom immediately after their ſpéedie returne, he commaunded to be executed without reſpect of any. He ſtraitly charged all his Tormentours that they by litle and litle ſhoulde tormente the afflicted Innocentes, ſo that by ſmall paines they might beginne to die, protractinge their death as longe as was poſſible: for he would (he ſaide) that they felte howe their life failed in them. He alſo ſaide, that others eftſoones, of his complexion ſaide, The people wiſhe me ill, for that they feare mée. After this, Caligula ſuccéeded Nero in execrable malice, not at all his inferiour. For proufe whereof, he practiſed ſutch a mercileſſe tyrannie, as wel in it compriſed all other petie Treacheries. For without any regarde to thinges holy or prophane, to the Maieſtrate, what ſo euer he were, or priuate Subiecte, he cauſed the

Citie of Rome to be ſette on fire, inhibitinge all men vnder paine of deathe, by any meanes what ſo euer, to quenche or aſſwage it: neuer woulde he that any man ſhoulde ſaue any parte of his goodes. So continued this fire, waſtinge and conſuminge the Cittie, ſeuen dayes fully & ſeuen nightes, to the ende him ſelfe out of a highe Tower, not farre of, beholdinge it, reioyſinge at this dolorous, and mournefull ſpectacle. He with villanous hande murthered his owne proper Moother. He alſo did to die the Huſbandes of Octauiana, and Sabina, bothe Octaniana, and Sabina. whiche he marryed, but ſoone after beraughte them in manner ſemblable of theire liues. Aſſuredly this was he, that beyonde all others raged moſte in crueltie: for he was the firſte that perſecuted the Chriſtians, and in his time was the firſt, & greateſt Perſecution of the Church. He made open ſhe we of his ſurpaſſinge crueltie, of his vnmeaſurable, and furious brutalitie: for hearinge on a time a Greeke verſe, in effecte thus mutche ſignifiynge:
               
                  Woulde God the Heauen and Earthe,
                  the Sea, and what ſo is:
                  After my deathe mighte ceaſe and ende,
                  as eke all hope of bliſſe.
               
               But I farre otherwiſe would, that it chaunced by my life time (ſaide he). I coulde well be contented to take mine examples from barbarous Princes, not touchinge any more the Emperours of Rome, but the Succeſſours againe of the aboue remembred, in life and manners ſo outragious and execrable, force mée to dwell ſtil emonge them, rippinge and vnfoldinge their tragicall inſolencie of Domitianus, Vitellius, Commodus, Maximianus, and others theire ſemblables, I ſpeake at all nothinge. But of Diocletian (whoſe manners ſo vnſauerye, and beſtiall furie, Euſebius in his Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtories reciteth) Sommething muſte I ſpeake, before I paſſe him vtterly, to the intente that all blaſphemers, and féeble Chriſtians of our time, maie ſée what they ſuffered in the Primitiue

Churche, for that they neuer leaft to acknowledg theire Lorde and Sauiour Chriſte. This wretche trayned many at the tayles of Horſes throughe the ſtreates, whom, after he had in moſte deſpitefull manner broken and bruſed, ordeined that they immediately ſhoulde be broughte backe againe to priſon, where he lodged them not able to moue, on prickinge ſheardes, and ſharpe péeces of earthen pottes broken, to the ende that lyinge on ſo reſtleſſe a couche, theire paine mighte be double to the other aboue remembred. Sommetimes by Ingins, and policies he cauſed to be bowed downe, the armes and braunches of greate and highe trées, to whiche he would binde the legges of the Condemned, and then ſuddainely letting againe the braunches to ſlippe, tent them moſt lamentably in pieces, and quarters. In the Citie of Alexandria he cauſed to be cutte of, the eares, the noſes, the lippes, the handes, and the toes of infinite innocent, and harmeleſſe Subiectes, onely leauinge to them their e
                     •
                  es, the longer to liue and dwell in that payne. He made to be ſharpened many ſplinters of woode, whiche, as farre as was poſſible, he cauſed to be thruſte in betwixte the nayles and the fleaſhe. Into boylinge Tinne or Leade, other ſomme he did aliue to be throwen: & wéemen faſte bounde to Scaffoldes or Fourmes, he commaunded to be ſcortcht with hotte yrons on the backe. So that by theſe meanes, ſpilling ſtill innocent bloud, without any féelinge what he thereby did, ſente vnto Heauen greate numbers of Soules, holy, pleaſinge, and acceptable to God: whiche oft times vſeth the mercileſſe Tyrante for an inſtrumente, whereby he glorifieth the iuſte, and choſen. Theſe ſtrange Cruelties, and news diuiſed tormentes, are written in approued and faithful Authours: of whiche, the greateſt parte wée haue taken out of the Scriptures: the reſte are readde in Ioſephus, in his Antiquities, and Warre Iudaicall, in Suetonius Tranquillus, Plutarchus, T. Liuius, Iuſtinus, Valerius Maximus, Euſebius,

P. Oroſus, Iulius Capitolinus, with others of no leſſe credite, and authoritie.
            
            
               ¶ How for the most parte, cruell Kinges, and Blouddy tyrannes are the Ministers of God: and howe notwithſtandinge they continually ende in ſtate moste wretched, and extreame miſerie. Chap. 15.
               WHho ſo hath, or liueth ſubiecte vnder any of theſe accurſed Monſters, muſte for his conſolation or comforte conſider, that for the moſt parte though they be terrible and cruell, yet be they notwithſtanding the Miniſters of God. The Scriptures in many places, as wée finde ſtill, termeth them by no woorſe title, then the ſeruantes of God, for that by them, it hath pleaſed him to chaſtice the wicked, perfectinge and confirminge to him ſelfe, ſutche as loue and feare him. The Hebrewes were longe time gouerned by Iudges and Prieſtes, amonge whom, when Samuel waxed féeble and olde, the malice of the people, and contempte of God eche where growyng, Kinges then from God, at theire requeſte were geuen them, whiche chaſtiſement (for greater then that mighte neuer any haue chaunced them) they receiued as hauinge before bothe deſerued and deſired it: Samuel therefore was geuen them for Kinge, who in the beginninge was méeke and mercifull, but ſhortly after became tyrannous and cruell, ſpoilinge them of whatſoeuer they had, without reſpecte in theire poſſeſſion, as alſo of theire deſired fréedome and libertie. Who although he were voyde of no kinde of vice, yet in Holy write is he called the anointed of God, by meane whereof the people were amazed and trembled. But leaue wée here him, as alſo al others, whiche bothe knewe the Lawe, and liued vnder it: and turne wée our penne, to write of Idolaters, whiche alſo are called the Miniſters of God in the Scriptures, for this ſaithe our Sauiour by the mouthe of Eſaie: I will, that

my Capitaines enter at the gates of Babylon, I haue commaunded my Holy ones, and haue called togeather my menne valiant, and dispoſed in my wrothe, to the intente they glorifie themſelues togeather in my Glory. The Prophete ſpake theſe woordes, of the twoo Kinges, Cyrus and Darius. Behold then how he calleth the Medes, & the Perſians ſanctified, which notwithſtanding neither were, either iuſte or ſanctified, but onely executours of Gods iuſte will, for the puniſhment of Babylon. And in an other place by the Prophete Ezechiel: I will bringe forthe my Seruant Nabuchodonoſor, and becauſe he hath well ſerued me nighe vnto Tyre, Aegypte will I alſo geue him in poſſeſſion. Yet was he not the Seruant of God, for as mutche as he neither ſerued him, knew him, or any waie beleued in him: onely he executed his Iuſtice on the rebellious, and in this reſpect was called his Seruante. The accurſed Totila Kinge of the Gothes, was named the Scourge of God, and reputed for the ſame. The greate Tamburlayne, that raygned not ſo many yéeres hence, a Capitayne no leſſe blouddy then valiant, which alſo ſubdued ſo many Countries, and Prouinces: beinge demaunded, why he ſo more then tyrannouſly vſed his Captiues, whereunto he anſweared: forewrapped in coller. Suppoſeſt thou me to be any other, then the yre of God? whence wée haue in fine to conclude, that all ſutche cruell and incarnate Deuils, are inſtruments wherewith God chaſtiſeth ſinne, as alſo, with the ſame approueth, and trieth the iuſte: and yet they notwithſtandinge are not hence helde for iuſte, ne ſhall they eſcape the heauy iudgement of God. For neceſſarie is it, that example of ill happen, but woe be vnto him, by whom it happeneth. Further in this life, God aſſuredly at ſometime dothe puniſh them, beſides that in an other worlde, Hell & damnation is certainely allo
                     •
                  ted them. Neither at any time hath it almoſte benne ſéene, as wée haue remembered in the forepaſſed Chapiter, but that ſutche Mercileſſe, and Tranſubſtantiate Monſters, haue

died of ſomme violent, and ignominious deathe. Phalaris was miſerably conſumed in the ſame Bull, in which he had tormented many an innocent, roringe the ſame Notes, whiche he to heare of others, had to fore, ſo great likinge. Plutarche recordeth, that Silla was filthely deuoured of Lyſe, & that he neuer coulde finde any playſter for that payne: And Pline farther ſaithe, that he died in ſutche ſorte tormented, that with extreame and miſerable anguiſhe, he gnewe, teare, and with his téeth horribly diſmembred his owne lothſome body and deformed carrion. Marius alſo his Capitall enimie a perfecte paterne of beſtiall feritie, fell in the ende into ſutche extreame miſerie, that flyinge and ſéekinge a place to hide him in, was gladde to laye his Heade in the handes of Poncius Teſelinus, to the intent that he ſhoulde ſtrike it of. The Emperoure Tiberius was ſtifled betwixte twoo pillowes, or bolſters, and ſo ended in the handes of his owne Seruantes: How be it Suetonius ſaith that he was impoyſoned. Caligula that infernall furie, after he had receiued thirtie great woundes, by Chereus, as well, and Cornelius Sabinus, as alſo by the others of that coniuration, made chaunge of life, to the contentation of many. Cruell Nero before he died, was depriued of his Honour and Empyre, iudged and pronounced an enimie Capitall to Rome, and hidinge him ſelfe in an infectious ſinke of mans ordure, woulde there haue ſlayne him ſelfe, but his forces fayled him, in the execution of that ſo meritorious a déede, whence he vſed in that exployte the healpinge hande of an other, & ſo in wreſtinge and mowinge with his euill fauoured mouthe, gaue foorthe his Spirite to the whole Senate of Diuels. Diocletian in manner ſemblable depriued of the Empyre, died of poyſon, by his owne handes miniſtred. Domician, beinge by Stephanus, Saturnus, Maximus & others, in ſeuen ſundry places déepely wounded, departed hence to Nero, to raygne with him for euer. Tullia, of whom wée haue ſomethinge

aboue remembered, baniſhed from Rome, died no leſſe a begger, then a wretche moſt miſerable. Aſtiages, graundfather to Cyrus, whom, he commaunded Arpalus priuely to murther, (to whome for that he had not executed his commaundement, he gaue to be eaten in banquette his owne Sonne) was depoſed by Gods iuſte iudgement, by the very ſame Cyrus. Herode alſo, with others infinite, whom all to remember here, woulde be longe and tedious, died a death to the others not diſſemblable. Lette thoſe therefore, that rule and gouerne the world, in any wiſe leaue to be blouddy & cruell, leaninge on the ſtaffe of compaſſion and clemencie, to the intent they maye liue aſſured of the hartes of their vaſſaules: for the beſte aſſurance of his ſtate that the Prince may haue, is to be beloued of his people and Subiectes.
            
            
               ¶ Of a ſtraunge caſe, whiche at twoo diuerſe times chaunced, after one and the ſame ſorte, vnto twoo Romayne Knightes of Honorable Families. Chap. 16.
               THe chiefe and principall that conſpired the death of Iulius Caeſar, (as Plutarche at large with others recordeth) were Brutus and Caſsius, whiche bothe with all their adherentes were after exiled, declared for open enimies to the Romaines, by Octauian, Lepidus, & Marcus Antonius, who commaunded as they pleaſed throughout the whole Citie. Of the faction of Brutus and Caſsius, was Marcus Varro, one emonge all the others of moſte fame & honour, who beinge in the fielde with the other coniurates, were diſcomfited by Octauian and Marcus Antonius, who the better to ſaue, if he might his life, and to be reputed for none other then a common Souldier, chaunged foorthwith & incontinently his apparell, thruſtinge him ſelfe into the heape or company of Captiues, and ſo without more adoo was ſolde for vile price emonge the others, vnto a certaine Romayne who

hight Barbulas: who within very fewe dayes, perceiuinge well his honeſt demeanoure & dealinge, ſuppoſed him to be (as truthe was) a Romayne, although in very déede he knew him not for ſutche a one. On a time therefore, he with drewe him aparte, earneſtly intreatings him, to learne him what he was, promiſinge that if he would diſcloſe vnto him what he hight, & of what Houſe or Familie, he would aſſuredly purchaſe him grace, with M. Antonius, and Octauian: but M. Varro would for nothing vtter him ſelf, ſo that in fine Barbulas, farre otherwiſe then he firſte déemed, concluded with him ſelfe that he was no Romayne. Within fewe daies, nowe Octauian, and M. Antonius returned them to Rome, as alſo Barbulas with his late bought Seruant, who perchance notwithſtandinge was better Gentleman then his Maiſter. It chaunced him there ſhortly after his arriuall (wayting at the Senate doore, Barbulas his Lorde about his affayres within) to be knowen of a certaine Romaine, who incontinently aduertiſed Barbulas thereof, whiche without any ſemblant that he knew any thinge, or without any woorde paſte thereof vnto him, wrought ſo with Octauian, whiche then ruled in Rome, that he eaſily obtained him grace and pardon, by meane whereof foorthwith, he frankly infranchiſed him, and brought him to Octauian, who courteouſly receiued him, & from that time foorth helde him in the number of his friendes. After this nowe Octauian, and M. Antonius fell out, in ſutche ſorte that Barbulas leaned to Antonius, whome Octauian in fielde ouerranne and diſcomfited. Barbulas then dreadinge the wrothe of Octauian, vſed for his ſafetie, the aboue remembred policie practiſed by Varro, that is to wéete, he did on him the coate of a poore Souldier. M. Varro, then for that he longe before had not ſéene him, as alſo for that he had chaunged his apparel, emong other Captiues unknowen, bought him for a bondeman. But after ſhorte time, remembringe him againe, he ſo

practiſed with Octauian, that he obtained him pardon, doinge him to be frée, poſſeſt of woonted libertie. So that eche of them, repayinge the dutie of courteſie to other, leaue vs example ſufficient of the leſſe ſtaide aſſurance of greate ſtates in this life: with admonition to all, of what degrée they ſo be, that they neuer leaue to feare the fall, no not then, when they higheſt ſhall ſitte in Fortunes Chayre, as alſo on the other ſide, neuer to diſpaire when the ſame Fortune ſhall laye them vnder her angry, and diſdainefull foote.
            
            
               ¶ Of the diſtinction of the Age of Man, accordinge to the opinion of moſte Aſtrologians. Chap. 17.
               BY the common diuiſion of Aſtrologians, as well Arabies, Caldees, Greekes, and Latines: as alſo by the particuler opinion of Proclus, Ptolomie, and Al. Raſellus, the life of Man is deuided in ſeuen Ages, ouer euery one of which ruleth and gouerneth one of the ſeuen Planetes. The firſte therefore is called Infancie, which continueth the ſpace of foure yéeres onely, during which time the Moone hath principal maſterie on Man, for that the qualities of this Age fitly anſweare to the influence of that Planete, for our bodies then are moyſte, delicate, tender, féeble, and flexible, rightly agreing with the qualities of the Moone. For in this time, for ſmal cauſe man eaſily is altered, with none, or very litle toile, he waxeth ſtreight werie, his body groweth and increaſeth, almoſt ſenſibly to be perceyued. And this generally nowe chaunceth to all of this Age principally, and chiefly by the influence of the Moone, yet notwithſtandinge, not equally, but more to ſomme, then vnto ſome others, for as mutche as ſome other diſſidente qualities, by the influence of the Heauens, and aſpecte of the Planetes in mans Natiuitie, or time of Birthe, cauſe ſome ſecrete, and priuie alteration in all menne, as they fauourably

or with leſſe fauour beholde eche the other.
               The ſeconde Age continueth fully tenne yéeres, and endeth in the fourtenth of our life: whiche Age the Latines call Pueritia, the ende of Infancie, and beginninge of Adoleſcencie. In this parte chiefly ruleth an other Planete, Mercurie, whoſe place of arreſt is in the ſecond Spheare. He eaſily altereth and chaungeth his countenaunce: for in aſpecte with the good, he alſo is good, as with the naughty he turneth and becometh nought. Duringe this Age, nature compoſeth her ſelfe to the qualities of this Planete: for now yonge children make their firſte ſhewe of their inclination and witte, be it either in readinge, writinge, ſinginge, or the like: they are alſo then very tractable and docill, in their deuiſes notwithſtandinge, light, vnſtayde, inconſtante, and vnſtable.
               The thirde Age containeth eight yéeres, and of auncient writers, is called Adoleſcencie, and beginneth at the ende of the fourtenth yéere of our Age, and continueth vntill the laſte daye of the twoo and twentie: during whiche time, ruleth principally the thirde Planete Venus. For then Man beginneth firſte to be prone vnto Venerie, apte, and able in the acte of generation, buſied in Loue, and pleaſinge in the company of Woomen, geuen to Playe, Pleaſure, Muſicke and Bankettes, with ſutche other wanton and vnprofitable trifles. And thus liueth he, for the moſte parte of Nature bente to this folie: yet notwithſtandinge Man hath continually without lefte or impeachment, his frée choyſe, no neceſſitie bindinge him to this or that inconuenience, of ſufficient puiſance to follow, or to withſtande theſe inclinations, for that no force of Planetes, or influence of Starres, bindeth Man againſt his will to any neceſſitie, although it incline the apetite ſenſitiue, as alſo other partes or members of the body, in ſutche ſorte that man in caſes, hath either likinge or diſlikinge, frée notwithſtandinge from ineuitable neceſſitie.
               
                  
The Fourth Age continueth, till Man haue fully fortye and twoo yéeres, whiche Age men commonly terme, and call Youthe, it abideth with him twentie yéeres to the ende. Of this Age the Sunne is chiefe Lorde and Gouernour, and poſſeſſeth as his Kingdome, the middle or fourth Spheare, called of auncient Aſtrologians, the fountaine of all Light, the eye of the Earth, Kinge of the Planetes, and harte of the Worlde. This Age is the moſte perfectſt, and moſt excellent of the others, it is the bewtie and flowre of mans life. Duringe this Age, the forces and powres, bothe of the vnderſtandinge, and bodie, acquire, and retaine their vertue, and vigor. Man therefore in this time, well aduiſed and hardy, becometh ſkilfull to knowe and chooſe, that is good for him, he ſéeketh and ſearcheth Honour and Ritches, he laboreth to be accompted greate and renowmed, he buſieth him ſelfe in laudable and vertuous Actions: Briefe, generally in all thinges, he euidently declareth that the Sunne ouer him, hath rule and dominion.
               The Fifte Age in Latine, is called Aetas virilis, and hath fiftiene yéeres for his continuance, ſubiecte vnto Mars, who of him ſelfe is euill and daungerous, fierce & hoate, inclining men to Auarice, he cauſeth diſeaſes, and increaſeth Coller in more then iuſte quantitie. In this Age man liueth temperate in diette, conſtant and firme in all his déedes, woordes, and couenantes.
               Then ioyne twelue to fiftie ſixe, and there arriſeth ſixtie and eight, whiche fully ſhall terme, and ende this our ſixte Age, in Latine called not vnproperly Senectus, of whiche Age is Iupiter the very Lorde and Maiſter, a Planete very Noble, and ſignificatour of Equitie, Religion, Pietie, Temperance, and Chaſtitie: prouokinge men to leaue all toyle and trauayle, ſéekinge a quiet life from ſweate and payne. In this Age man followeth and purſueth Holy woorkes, louinge temperancie, vertue, & Charitie, nowe ſéeketh he Honour by his honeſt demerites,

accompanyed cōtinually with prayſe and commendation, nowe is he iuſte, perfecte and honeſte, fearinge ſhame, obloquie, and diſhonour.
               The Seuenth and laſte, by order of theſe Ages continueth fully twentie yéeres, ending at the ende of eighty and eighte, whiche very fewe in our Age, either reache or attaine to. This Age, by the meane of Saturne, which ordereth it wholy (the moſte ſlowe, and moſte highe of al the other Planettes, whiche alſo enuironeth, and compaſſeth in all the others) is ſtoopinge, and decrepite. Wée in this Age are colde and drie, of complexion none other or better, then Melancoly, angrye, weamiſhe, harde to pleaſe, and enuious. By this meane wée lyue alone and ſolitarye: nowe alſo growe on vs, payne, griefe, ſorowe, thoughte, ſickneſſe, vnreaſte, diſdeigne, and anguiſhe. This Age weakeneth our force, and harmeth our memorye, it lodeth and chargeth vs with perpetual annoy, with longe ſorrowes, and languiſhinge diſeaſes: with déepe thoughtes, chiefly deſiringe to attempte cloſe and hidden Secretes: and in fine wée deſire principally to be Maiſters and Gouernours. And if any emonge vs paſſe nowe this Laſte Age (whiche aſſuredly happeneth very ſeldome in theſe dayes) the ſame then returneth to the ſtate, in manner of Infancie, and ones againe ſhall haue the Moone for his Ladye and Miſtreſſe, whiche ordered, as is aboue ſaide, the whole matter in the foure firſte yéeres: by reaſon whereof, theſe Aunciente and white headed Fathers ſhewe them ſelues none other, then little Babes or Suclinges, wholy reſemblinge their conditions and qualities. I haue ſaide in the beginning, that this diuiſion of Ages, was leaft vs of the Old, and Learned Aſtrologians: eche man notwithſtandinge maye diuide them as it pleaſeth him. Returne wée therfore now to theſe partitions alſo, whiche wée finde geuen vs of renowmed Philoſophers, Phiſitions, and Poetes, whiche were emonge them ſelues of diuers and differente opinions.

And for that in this diſcourſe, wée finde many thinges likinge vs, ſomethinge wil wée touche, to pleaſe therewith the Reader. The greate and Learned Philoſopher Pythagoras, howe longe ſo euer the Life of man ſéeme, leafte thereof to vs but foure partes onely, which he compared to the foure partes of the yéere. Infancie (he ſaide) reſembled the Springe, in whiche all thinges beganne to budde and flower, to growe, to waxe greate, and to comme to perfection. The youthfull Age of man, be compared to the Sommer, for the heate, force, and valiant courage that man hathe in that Age. The Age Virill, or Mans ſtate, he compared to Autumne, for in that time hauinge experience of the worlde, he becommeth ripe, and ſounde of aduice & counſel, with aſſured knowledge in all kinde of differentes. Olde Age reſembleth perfectly Winter, a time ſadde and enuious, and ſutche as reapeth no kinde of fruite or commoditie, onely enioyinge that, that wée receiue at other times. M. Varro, a Romaine, for his Vertue and Learninge, famous in his time: he parted the Life of Man into fiue ſundry & equall partes, attributing to eche one, the whole & full ſpace of fiftiene yéeres: in ſutche ſorte, that he called the firſte fiftiene, Puerilitie: the Seconde, Adoleſcencie: to wéete, the time of growinge, for that man then ſpringeth vp to his full, and ſtayde ſtature. The Thirde Age reacheth to the fiue and fourtie yéere, whiche not vnaptly maie be tearmed Youthe: in Latin, Iuuentus, comming; or deſcending of the Verbe Iuuo, ſignifiyng a fitte time to helpe or ayde in: for in this Age man beareth Armes in the fielde: he ſerueth, and defendeth with force his Countrie, and then only is he moſt hable in all exploytes of manhoode. From thence vntill the ſixtie yéere continueth the Age of perfecte Man. For that in Latin theſe men are called, Seniores: that is to ſaie, beginninge to war alde, in reſpecte of the former Ages, for that in this time men firſte beginne to decline, lookinge towardes Olde Age, whiche

haſteneth him onwardes, accompliſhinge the reſidue of Mannes Life, theſe firſte thrée ſcoare yéeres ended. This nowe then is Varro his diuiſion of Mannes Life, as wel collecteth, and reciteth Cenſorinus. The Philoſopher Hiporas into ſeauen: geuing ſeauen yéeres to the Firſt, and as many agayne to the Seconde, whiche both togeather mounte to fourtiene. The Thirde from thence reacheth to the eighte and twentie yéere. The twoo nexte Ages folowinge haue eche againe ſeuen, whiche with the others by computation geue fourtie and twoo. The Sixte hathe fourtiene, and endeth with fiftie and ſixe: and that remaineth, what ſo euer it be, he referreth it to the Seuenth Age. Solon alſo, as the aboueſaide Cenſorinus recordeth, diuideth theſe Seuen into Tenne, iuſtly ſunderinge the Thirde, the Sixte, and the Seuenth in the middle: in ſutche ſorte, that euery of theſe tenne partes conteine onely ſeuen yéeres, and no more. Theſe are the Diſtinctions of Ages then that wée finde emonge Philoſophers: ſauinge that Iſidorus, as alſo ſomme of the aboueſaide, diuide them onely into Sixe. Of whiche vnto the Firſte he geueth ſeuen yéeres, & calleth that Age ſo, yonge and tender Infancie. The Seconde, to this in time, equall Puerilitie: from thence vntill the ende of the eighte and twentie yéere, he accoumpteth on the Thirde Age, and calleth it Adoleſcencye, a time wherein wée growe beſte, and reatche to perfection. The Fourthe is from thence vntill the ende of the fourtie yéere, whiche Age in Latin he calleth Iuuentus. The Fifte, to which he geueth the full ſpace of twentie yéeres, whiche with the others mounte vnto ſixtie. He noteth for the declininge Age, or if you rather will, the firſte entrie into Olde Age. The remanent of Mannes life, he attributeth to ſtoopinge Age, whiche howe mutche ſo euer it be, endeth only the laſte parte. Horace, a moſte excellent, and moſt renowmed Poete, diuideth this whole matter but into foure partes, as alſo did, as wée read, Pythagoras: In Pueritiam,

Iuuentutem, Aetatem Virilem, & Senectutem: whiche he artificially deſcribeth in Arte Poetica, with all the conditions proper and incidente to theſe Ages. And yet according to the rules of natural Philoſophie, mans life is onely to be parted in thrée partes: The firſt is that time, that he hath to growe in: The ſecond while he arreſteth and dwelleth at one ſtaie: The laſte when he declineth, and beginneth to ſtoope forewardes. For as ſaith Ariſtotle, what ſo is ingendred, in the beginninge augmenteth Lib. 3. De Anima. and increaſeth, and afterwarde ſtayeth for a time, arreſtinge in his perfection, but in the ende declineth and ſauereth of diminution. So that hence to conclude, a tripartite diuiſion is not of the others all, leaſte proper or fittinge. Of this opinion alſo were the moſte parte of the Arabian Phiſitions, although Auicenna, a man of rare learninge, and of an excellent iudgement, hath lotted out mans time by foure diſtincte Ages. The firſt he calleth Adoleſcencie, the ful ſpace of thirty yéeres, for that, duringe that time man yet ſtill is growinge. To the ſeconde be geueth name, of a well ſtayde Age, or of an Age, wherein bewtie in all menne perfecteth: this parte continueth vntil the fiue and fortie yéere, in which wée liue ſeaſed of abſolute perfection. Nexte followeth the thirde, a ſecrete diminution, and priuie pathe vnto olde Age, whiche holdeth on fully the ſpace of fiftiene yéeres. Nowe order giueth vs in his place the laſte, a wery, a féeble, and an vnable Age, ſutche as men terme a Decrepite, or Caduke Age. Here muſte wée notwithſtandyng note and conſider, that although it pleaſed him to geue vs this his quadripartite diuiſion, yet no where forbiddeth he vs to ſubdeuide agayne the firſte parte, which cōtaineth, as wée ſaide, the ſpace of thirtie yéeres, lottinge the ſayde parte into thrée diſtincte partes, or ſeuerall Ages: by this meanes accordinge him with thoſe that before parte (as is remembered) the whole courſe of 
                     •…
                  ans life, into ſixe ſundry portions. But here conſideringe

theſe variable opinions, I know not where, moſte ſafely to arreſt my ſelfe, neither may any man geue aſſured determination, as wel for diuerſitie of complexions, and diſpoſitions of menne, as alſo that wée inhabite diuers Landes and Countries, the conſideration of our distte mattereth alſo ſomewhat, as whether wée féede on meates ſauery, of light and eaſie digeſtion, or of groſſe and leſſe pleaſant, hardly concocted: by meanes whereof and of the ſemblable, man either ſooner or later altering, becommeth at times differente, olde and decrepite. For this cauſe ſaith Galen, hardly may man limite any times Lib. 6. De Regimine ſanitaus. vnto Ages: whiche well conſidered, cauſe that theſe ſo diſſonante and ſo ſundry opinions, ſéeme not all thinge ſo ſtraunge, and ſo exiled from reaſon. Seruius Tullius Kinge of the Romaynes, who (as of him recordeth A. Gellius) was onely ſtill buſied in betteringe the ſtate Publike, as then eſpecially, when he firſte diſtinguiſhed fiue ſundrie or ſeuerall eſtates emonge the Romaynes: of the life of man remembringe but thrée partes onely, naminge the firſte Puerilitie, the ſpace of ſeuentiene yéeres: the ſeconde by his accompte reachte vnto the ſixe and fortie yéere, in whiche Age he inrolled his Soldiers, as moſte able and fitte then to all exploites of Chiualrie: but who ſo longer liued, thoſe called he wiſe, mature, & men of aduiſed Counſell. This diuiſion, for that it is vninerſall, is of no parte contrary or repugnant to the others, includinge the leſſe and perticular members, makinge ſome ſhewe and certaine ſemblante of the woonted diuiſions, whiche of cuſtome ordinarily ſunder and ſeioyne the gréene Age from the riper, and that againe from olde Age. This gréene Age I ſaye, from the daie of our birth, vntill the laſte of our youthe, by ſome computation contayneth fortie fiue yéeres, not mutche more or leſſe, as by accompte appeareth. Virgil alſo vſeth the very ſame Epitheton, Viridiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iuuentus, whiche is to ſaye, gréene youthe: ripe and mature Age thence continueth

vntill the ſixtie yéere, in which time who ſo liueth, Seruius calleth them men of aſſured ſtaie and aduice: the reſidue of our life, is olde and féeble Age. Theſe thrée partes maie againe be well ſubdeuided, to accorde, and conforme the forepaſſed varieties, whiche ſéeme to be ſo diſſidente, and contrary in appearance.
            
            
               ¶ Of certaine yeeres in mans life, whiche the Learned in times paste iudged aboue the others to be marueilous daungerous, as alſo for what cauſe they eſteemed it to be ſo. Chap. 18.
               THe auncient Philoſophers and Aſtrologians, by diligent obſeruation, haue curiouſly noted certaine yéeres in mans life to be aſſuredly perilous, which in Latine they call Annos clymactericos, alludinge vnto the Gréeke woorde Clima, ſignifiynge as ſomme will, the ſtaffe of a Ladder, or a degrée in any thinge. Whence they note that theſe yéeres are in ſutche ſorte, and manner limited, as are ſteares or ſteppes, that aunſweare by iuſte proportion in any thinge, very daungerous in the whole courſe and tracte of mans life. For as they maintained for an approued veritie, the ſeuenth, the nienth, and the fouretienth daie in all kinde of ſickneſſe, and infirmities, to be then the reſte continually more daungerous: in caſe ſemblable alſo eaſily perceiued they, that this accompte alſo by force of the numbers, had in like ſorte place in theſe odde yéeres, throughout the whole courſe alſo and time of our life. Pythagoras, Themiſtius, Boecius, and Auerrois, with others many, learne vs, that the influences of naughtie Planetes, as if I woulde ſaie of Saturne, whiche at ſeuerall times ruleth, and in ſeuerall Ages, cauſinge greate chaunges and alterations euery ſeuenth yéere, in ſutche ſorte, that themſelues felte the force thereof: as well remember Marſilius Ficinus, Cenſorinus, and A Gellius, ſuppoſinge it to be a thinge aſſuredly vnpoſſible, to paſſe thoſe yéeres without greate

hazarde or alteration of our life, eſtate, healthe, or complexion. So that by this occaſion, the ſeuenth yéere, the fourtiene, the one and twentie, the eight and twentie, the fiue and thirty, the twoo and fortie, the niene and fortie, and ſo foorth by order euery ſeuenth yéere was aboue the others mutche to be feared. And farther for that they helde the number of thrée to be of greate importance or efficacie, they ſayde that thrée times ſeuen, whiche mounte to twentie one, was a number aboue all the reſte marueilouſly to be ſuſpected. As mutche againe is ſaide of the niene and fortie yéere, for that the number riſeth of ſeuen times ſeuen: But the moſte daungerous yéere of all others, is the thrée and ſixtie: for as twenty one riſeth of thrée times ſeuen, ſo ſixtie thrée mounte againe of twentie one thrée times, or of niene times ſeuen, or ſeuen times niene: whiche numbers be famous, and as well knowen, ſo feared of the wiſe and learned. So that when they firſte entred the firſte daie of the ſaide yéere, they became (beyonde the woonted manner) very diligent, circumſpect and curious, to preſerue their healthe and life, by all practiſed polices taught vs, either by experience, nature, or Phiſicke, attendinge from daie to daie ſome daungerous mutation, or ſudden chaunge of ſtate, whiche in déede oftentimes hapneth, as well remembereth Iulius Firmicus in his bookes of Aſtrologie. To this pourpoſe A. Gellius maketh mention of a certaine letter, ſente by the Emperoure Octauian, vnto his Nephew Caſsius, letting him to wete, what ioye he then liued in, for that he had eſcaped the thrée and ſixtie yéere, and now was entered into the ſixtie foure. In ſutch ſorte that he then intended to celebrate his ſecond Natiuitie. For theſe cauſes thenour Learned Predeceſſours marueilouſly feared this aboue rehearſed yéere, conſideringe that it was the fatall terme aſſigned by nature vnto many: duringe whiche time, Ariſtotle with others renowmed, and famous perſonages, died. And as I alſo aboue Ariſtotle.
                  
remembered the number of niene to be perilous, ſo ſaide they, that who ſo paſte the ſixtie and thirde yéere, ſhould not at all eſcape the eightie and one yéere, for that, that yéere riſeth of nine times niene. At this Age died the diuine Plato, the greate and Lcarned Geographer Eraſtothenes, 
                  Plato. Eraſtothenes. Zenocrates. Diogenes. 
                  Zenocrates, a Platoniſte, and Prince of the auncient Schooles, Diogenes Cinicus, with others many, the onely honour and bewtie of their time. But theſe things more for experience ſake, and for that it ſéemeth vnto many a noueltie, haue I writen, then that any man ſhould hereon dwell ſo mutche, that he ſhoulde thinke it of neceſſitie, and a thinge ineuitable, although it otherwiſe be not a matter impertinent, ne yet exiled from the lore of reaſon. For as wée ſée that diſeaſes, & complexiōs, leaue, and ende at times in men: and as in moſt kinde of Creatures téeth growe, chaunge & fall, the voice altereth into a ſounde more baſe or ſhrill, the graſſe alſo or Corne ſpringeth at their tearmes appointed, beſides infinite other aſſured effectes & operatiōs of nature, which obſerue their courſe & times without alteration or chaunge: ſo why ſhoulde wée not in manner ſemblable beleue, that theſe aboueſayde termes of time, & clymactericall yéeres ſhould haue their proper force in ye alteratiō of mans fortune or ſtate of his bodie. Why alſo thinke wée not, that mans body is ordered as well by celeſtiall influence, as by any predominant qualitie or humour, & that by ſome ſecrete and hidden operation, though man be yet ſubiecte to the pleaſure and will of God: who as he hath framed all thinges ſupernaturally and miraculouſly, yet will he notwithſtandinge that his woorkes be naturall, theſe onely excepted, whiche by him were wrought contrary to the lawes of Nature by ſecrete meane, inſcrutable procéedinges and iudgement.
            
            ¶ Here endeth the Firſte parte of the Collection of Histories.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The Seconde parte of the Collection of Hiſtories.
            
            
               ¶ What daunger it is to murmer againste Princes, as alſo what commendation they gayne by Clemencie. Chap. 1.
               
                  
                     A Woonted ſayinge it is, and founde emonge the moſt auncient Prouerbes, Princes haue handes broade, and longe cares, hence none other thinge at al inferringe, but that Kinges and greate ſtates, can a farre of reuenge themſelues on theſe that offend them, as that they alſo vnderſtande what ſo of them is ſpoken in place couerte or ſecrete. For ſo many are there that ſéeke to liue in his grace and fauour, that on the multitude hath rule and dominion, that nothing may be kepte from him either vnknowen or hidden. Whence to all men is geuen by the Learned in counſell, that of the Prince wée ſpeake in ſecrete nothinge, for that in ſutche caſe the Walles bothe heare and diſcloſe againe our Treaſons: and Plutarche, that the Birdes carry theſe woordes in the Ayre. And farther if it be daungerous, to vtter vnto Princes a truthe frankely and boldely, what ſhall wée iudge of them that mutter againſte them priuely? The examples, that a man might to this pourpoſe alleage, are infinite: emonge whiche, bothe in the Gréeke and Latine Hiſtories wée reade, that Antigonus one of the Capitaines and ſucceſſours of Alexander the greate, his Campe not marchinge, but arreſtinge in open fielde, beinge on a night a bedde in his Tente, hearde certaine of his Souldiers without, paſſe in traiterous talke againſt

him, ſuppoſinge not to haue benne vnderſtoode of any, but he without any farther ſemblante of wrothe, in chaunge of voyce, as if he had benne ſome other, beſpake them this ſoftely, without greate brute or noyſe: when yée ſpeake any ſutche woordes of the Kinge, ſée that yée goe farther from his Tente, leaſt he heare you. An other time the ſaide Antigonus, marchinge with his Armye in the deade of the night, paſte through a place very fowle and mirie, his Souldiers almoſt forweried and tyred, by meanes whereof, they vttered ſomme diſtoyall woordes againſte him, thinkinge that he had benne farre of and behinde him, but he beinge preſente and vnderſtandinge their treachery, not knowen from an other by meanes of the darkeneſſe, after hauinge donne his paine to helpe diuers of them out of the myre, that had ſo liberally talkte againſt him, ſaide with voice as before well counterfeited, ſpeake of the Kinge hardly what ſo euer you pleaſe, for that he hath brought you into ſo watrie a ſoile, but of me you haue good cauſe to thinke and ſaye well, for that by my helpe you are nowe paſte the daunger. The patiencie of Phyrrus Kinge of the Epirotes, meriteth no leſſe to be remembered of the poſteritie: who when he laye in Italie in Armes againſte the Romaynes, bothe he and his whole troupe in the Citie of Taranta, he hearde after ſupper certaine of his yonge Souldiers ſittinge at their table, to outrage againſte him, whome when he had cauſed to be brought before him: demaunded, whether thei had paſte againſt him in ſuch woordes, or not, to whom, one of them with countenance leſſe altered, ſaide: Kinge what ſo euer thou haſte charged vs with, that all haue wée ſpoken: and farther be thou aſſured, that if the wine had not failed vs, wée had yet againe ſpoken many worſe then are theſe: lettinge him thereby, for their excuſe to vnderſtand, that the wine in this ſorte had forſte them to exile from duety and reaſon. At which his woordes, Phyrrus waxte not onely angry, but rather

on the contrary ſide, brake out into a greate laughter, ſendinge them backe to their lodgynge without any annoye or hurte what ſo euer. The Emperour Tyberius, though otherwiſe a tyranne moſte cruell and execrable, hath lefte vs alſo to this pourpoſe ſomethinges woorthy memorie: for perceiuinge on a time that one had compoſed an infamous Libel againſt him, and farther that the people with woordes diſloyall, complained eche where of his exceſſiue crueltie, wherefore perſwaded by ſomme to doe ſharpe animaduerſion and ſtreight Iuſtice on them, ſayde: that all Tongues ought to be frée in a Citie: then ſtreight againe moued by ſome of his Councell, to make diligent ſearche and buſie inquirie, to finde out the Authour of the fore ſaide Libell, whiche he alſo refuſed as afore, ſayinge: that he was not yet ſo voyde of affayres, that he would trouble him ſelfe with ſo ſimple a matter. Greate alſo was the Clemencie of Denis tyranne of Sicilia, vſed towardes an olde wooman of poore and meane condition: for beinge aduertiſed, that ſhée dayly prayed for the continuance of his Health and Honour, ſente for her to know the cauſe why ſhée ſo mutche affected his aſſured ſtate and maintenance, conſideringe all other his Subiectes deſired his deathe generally, whereunto ſhée anſweared: knowe right mightie Prince, that when I was a yonge Mayde, there raygned in this Countrie a moſte fell and wicked tyranne, wherefore I prayed continually to the Gods for his ſuddaine death & deſtruction, by meane whereof in ſhorte time my requeſte was fully accompliſhed. But after him ſuccéeded then an other, farre yet more cruell, and more blouddy then the firſte, for whoſe deathe, I neuer lefte on the Gods inceſſantly to call, till it had chaunſt to him, as to the other aboue ſaide. After bothe theſe nowe comeſt thou, the woorſte of the thrée, a Monſter in faithe moſt malicious and lothſome: and yet becauſe an other might followe moſte deteſtable of all, I neuer leaue to praye for thy health and,

preſeruation, wiſhinge thée many yéeres in healthe, to thy contentmente. This bolde, and hardye anſweare naughte gréeued at all this Tyrante, nor therefore diſdeigned he her, that of cuſtome diſdeigned al others: but pardoned her to goe without annoye or offence. When Plato, the Father, and Prince of all Philoſophers had made his longe aboade with this foreſaide Denis, in the ende required his fauour to paſſe home againe into his Countrie: which obtained, the tyranne him ſelfe in conductinge him of parte out of Sicilia, demaunded what he woulde reporte of him at Athens emonge the Philoſophers. To whom Plato, without ſtaie freely and boldely anſweared: theſe that liue in Athens, are not ſo idle nor haue they (know thou) to looſe ſo mutche good time or leaſure, that they once will inquire, either of thée, or of thy behauiour. Whence although in deede he well perceiued, that for his naughtie life he that had onely ſpoken, yet patiently he tooke it, not malicinge the partie. I remember againe other twoo olde wéemen, whiche with like fréedome beſpake their Kinges or Princes, the one a Macedonian to the King Demetrius, Sonne of the aboue remembered Antigonus, the other a Romaine to the Emperour Adrian, to whom bothe they framed bothe one, & the ſame anſweare: for eche of them crauinge iuſtice at the Kinges handes, receiued for anſweare, that thei preſently coulde not attende on them: then ſayde they, if you maie not vnderſtande of our complainte, geue ouer then your Crownes to them that will do Iuſtice: which woordes the twoo Princes tooke bothe in better parte, acquaintinge themſelues with theire caſes, and did them forth with right. Phillippe Kinge of Macedonie, taking his leaue of the Embaſſadours of Athens, and offeringe them ſutche courteſie as is vſuall in like caſes, demaunded in the ende, whether they would that he ſhould doo any thinge yet for them: to whom, one of them that had to name Democrates, knowinge that he in harte hated

the Athenians, leſſe able to hide that whiche in harte he thought, ſaide: wée woulde that thou ſhouldeſt goe and hange thy ſelfe, and beſides that, nothinge. At whiche anſweare, as well al his companions, as the others then there preſente, fearinge the Kinges indignation, were not a litle troubled: but the Kinge, as was his woonted Clemencie (or it maie be diſſemblinge) not alteringe to wrothe in any other manner, turned him to the other Embaſſadours, and ſaide: you ſhall ſaie to the Athenians from me, that he that can ſupporte theſe ſutche opprobrious woordes, hathe mutche more modeſtie then the ſageſt of Athens, whiche are ſo litle wiſe, that they know not when nor where to holde their peace. Domaratus cō
                  ming to ſée King Phillip, on a time when he was freaſhly fallen out as well with his wife, as with the yonge Prince Alexander, of whom amonge other thinges the Kinge at the firſt demaunded, if all the Cities in Greece were in peace and well acquieted. But Domaratus that well knewe, nothinge was to him more likinge; then to heare of perpetuall diſcorde amonge his Subiectes: anſweared him right boldely, but reuerently withall, as well became a ſubiecte. Aſſuredly Kinge, for that you liue diſquieted ſtill at home, you aſke me what diſſentions may be in theſe your Cities abroade: but if you were in peace with theſe your people here, it ſhoulde ſtande more with your Honour, then thus to inquire of the aduerſities of others. Whereat the Kinge founde not him ſelfe at all aggreued, & conſideringe that for iuſte cauſe he honeſtly had reproued him, immediately grewe to a perfecte attonement with the Quéene, as well as with his Sonne and others. In what bolde fréedome and libertie of woordes, Diogenes beſpake that famous Prince Alexander, as alſo with what modeſtie, and howe he accepted it, is euident in the firſte parte, where ſomething is ſaide of the life of Diogenes. Farther if wée affecte examples of Chriſtians, Pope Sixtus the fourth of the order

of the orde of ſainct Frances, maie ſerue in this place, as fittyng to our purpoſe. To whom on a tyme elected, and choſen Pope, came one of his brethren, an olde religious Frier, whiche, after ſalutations paſt to and fro, on bothe ſides, withdrewe hym ſelf with the Biſhoppe, into his ſecrete rreaſurie, where as he ſhewed his poore brother greate heapes of coſtlie ſtones and iuels, and ſaied: fratermi, now can I not ſaie, as ſome tyme ſaied S. Peter, gold or ſiluer haue I none. It is true 
                     
                        
                     
                     quam
                   the other, neither can you ſaie to the impotent and diſeaſed, as ſaied he, riſe vp, and go, lettyng him there by priuely to vnderſtand, that the Popes in theſe ages, wer now more vowed to riches then vnto vertue, or holines: who perceiuyng, that he nothyng ſtraied from reaſon, yelded there to, without contradiction, quietly. The ſemblable happened to an Archbiſhoppe of Colonne, who as he paſte the countrie, with a houge troope of horſe men, curiouſlie all armed, according to the cuſtome, and maner of Almaignie, founde by happe a poore workeman, toilyng hardly for his liuyng, whiche at the firſt ſight of this prelate, brake out, into a great laughter, the cauſe of whiche demaūded, the poore man for the with ſaied: I laugh at the follie of that good prieſte ſainct Peter, prince, and maiſter of all other prelates, whiche liued, and died here in extreme pouertie, to leaue his ſucceſſours, in ſuche pompe, and iolitie. But this Archbiſhoppe againe the better to acquite hym: fellowe I ride thus as thou ſeeſt, for that I am a Duke, as well as alſo a biſhoppe: where at he laught againe more hartely then before, and beyng demaunded the ſeconde tyme, of that his vehemente paſſion, aunſwered righte boldlie, with a ſure, and ſtaied countenance. I demaunde of thée, right honourable, that if the Duke of which thou ſpeakeſt, were hence fallen into helle, where ſuppoſeſte thou this good Archbiſhop ſhould finde his quiet harbour. Where by he well inferred twoo contrary profeſſions, agréed not well in one perſone, and that offendyng in the

one, he could not acquite himſelf, by any gilful pretext or ſhadow of thother. At whiche this gentleman, then preſently graueled, not hauyng what to ſaie, departed with ſhame to muche, and paſte forthe on his waie. To ſpeake alſo of Gentiles, Artaxerxes kyng of Perſia, vnderſtandyng that a certaine capitaine of his, whiche he at his coſte, from his cradle, and infancie, had nouriſhed, had muttered againſt hym in maner, no leſſe traiterous, thā in truthe diſloiall, whom he would other waie none puniſhe, but ſent to hym by an other, that he might at his pleaſure talke of his prince and maiſter, for that he again of hym might ſpeake, and do the ſemblable. Philippe father of Alexander, aduertiſed that Nicanor had abuſed hym in woordes, was aduiſed by certaine his frendes, by proces (as the maner is) to call hym to his triall: to whō he aunſwered, that Nicanor was not the worſt man in Macedonie, and therefore firſte would knowe, whether he had nede of any thing, for that he felt hymfelf bounde in conſcience to aide hym: ſo findyng hym verie poore, in ſteede of deſerued correction, in preſence of many gaue him, a great, and riche preſent incontinently. This doen the ſame that before had accuſed him, ſaied, that Nicanor now ſpake greate good of his maieſtie, to whō the kyng ſaied: now ſée I well Sinicus (for ſo hight this foreſaied accuſer) that to bee well or euill ſpoken of, it lieth onely in myne owne handes. This ſaied prince, by his frendes an other tyme was aduiſed, to exile a certaine ſubiect of his, leſſe circumſpecte in his talke, and intemperate of tongue, whiche to doe he vtterly refuced, and ſaied, for as muche as he hath ſpoken of me his pleaſure here, I will not that he doe the ſemblable, in other ſtraunge lā
                  des, and countries, lettyng others vnderſtande, that whiche he had dooen of magnanimitie, and clemencie, proceded of ſadde aduice, and aſſured counſaile. In theſe and ſuche like matters, this prince excelled all others of his tyme. He ſaied he was muche bounde to the gouernours

and princes of Athens, for that it pleaſed them iniuriouſly to talke ſtill as well of hym, as alſo of the order and maner of his gouernment: for by his daiely induſtrie and chaunge in thynges, from better to beter, he proued them to be but ſlaunderous liers. He neuer chaſtiſed any that outraged againſt him, onely he would cut of th'occaſion, that moued them. Whiche his vſages, if thei were of all menne well obſerued, twoo notable commodities ſhould thēce be gathered: the firſt, th'amendment of our owne liues, and maners, the ſecond, the perpetuall exile and baniſhemente of all detractours, and ſlaunderers. A rare vertue is it aſſuredly, for a man not to accompte of that euil, that he well knoweth to haue been ſpoken behinde hym: but a greate note of temperancie is it, not to waxe or bilius, or angrie, for the iniurie that is dooen vs in our preſence, and openly.
            
            
               Of what countrie Pilate was, and how he died, as alſo of a riuer ſo called, and of the propertie of theſame, and finally, of a certain caue, or denne in Dalmacia. Chap. 2.
               
                  PIlate of all the iudges that euer wer, or ſhall be, the moſte deteſtable and accurſt, was a Frēche manne borne, and of the Citie of Lions, how bee it diuers of the ſaied countrie deny it, ſaiyng: that this name Poncius, deſcended Poncius Freneus. out of a certain familie in Italie, from Poncius Freneus, I meane, capitain of the Samnites, which alſo did to ſlight, and vanqniſhed the Romaines. Whiche howe ſo euer it was, this Pilate (either for the onely reſpecte of his perſonage, either in conſideration of the familie, whence he iſſued) aſpired to moſte honorable eſtate emong the Romaines, and being familiarly acquainted with Tyberius
                  
ſucceſſour vnto Octauian, as of hym recorde bothe Ioſephus, and Euſebius, was ſente by hym, in the twelueth yere of his Empire, as lieutenaunt generall, to the citie of Hieruſalem, whiche titled there hymſelf, proctour of the Empire. So gouerned Pilate then this holie citie, as alſo all the Prouince of Iudea, called Paleſtina. He continued, in this office .x. full yeres, in the ſeuenth of whiche, whiche was the .xviij. of the Emperours raigne, as accompte Beda, and Euſeblus, he gaue ſentence of death, againſt Beda in his booke of time. Euſebius in his firſt booke of time. the ſauiour, and redemer of mankinde, our Lorde and maker Ieſus Chriſte, bothe God and manne, when came to paſſe theſe thynges, whiche the holie Euangeliſtes remember vs of, in his death and paſſion: whoſe reſurrection was ſuche, and ſo manifeſt in Hieruſalem, although thei laboured, what in them was to obſcure it, that it was well perceiued of Pilate (were he though a wretche, of all others moſte impious) that this reſurrection, and other miracles wrought by Chriſt, were not by man doen, but by God onely. For whiche cauſe, as recordeth Paulus Oroſius, Euſebius, and Tertulian in his Apologies, he aduertiſed the Emperour at length of the matter: for it was the maner that the Conſuls, and Proconſuls, ſhould continually write, to the Senate, at leaſte, or to the Emperour, of all matters, whatſoeuer, with in the compaſſe of their Prouince, or territorie. Theſe nouelties then muche troubled Tiberius, whiche without ſtaie, communicated them to his Lordes of the Senate, aduiſyng hym with them, whether it were expediente, to honour, and adore, this Prophete for a GOD. Whiche he for this cauſe onely did, for that without the aucthoritie of the Senate, he could admitte no new God in Rome, beſides, or beyonde their ſuperſticious Idoles. But as the diuinitie nedeth not, nor yet can confirme it ſelf, by the ſole, and onely approbation of manne, ſo God here in permitted, that the Senate ſhould then dooe nothyng. Yea, on the contrary rather (as ſondrie good writers

haue) thei helde them ill contented, for that Pilate had not to them hereof writen alſo, as he then did to the Emperour. This notwithſtanding Tiberius ordained by Proclamation, that no man ſhould be ſo hardy, to touche or laie hande, on any profeſſed chriſtian. Now after this Pilate arreſted hym in Rome, confirmed by the deuell, as his aſſured ſeruaunt, did neuer any thyng iuſtly, in any his charge or office. Of whiche, accuſed before Caius Caligula, ſucceſſour to Tiberius, as alſo to haue prophaned the temples, and churches, erecting vnlawfull Images and Idolles, and farther that he had robbed the common coafers, and threaſories, with other greate crimes, and intollerable treacheries, was baniſhed in fine, and ſent home againe to Lions. Others ſaie to Vienna, and that he was there borne, where his intertainment was ſuche, and ſo muche pleaſing, that he incontinently murthered hym ſelf: whiche thyng aſſuredly chaunced hym, by diuine, & heauenly permiſſion, to the intent he ſhamfully might dye, by the handes of hym ſelf, the moſte vileſte and vniuſte wretche in the whole worlde. Theſe that hereof haue written, are the aboue remembred authours, Beda in his booke De temporibus, and in his Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, on thactes of the Apoſtles Euſebius reporteth that he thus ſlue hymſelf, the eighth yere after the death of the innocente lambe, Ieſus, iudged to death, and deliuered to the bloodie Iewes, by hym. Of whoſe death, and paſſion, this accurſed deuill, neuer ſoughte by any meanes his remiſſion, or pardon, but paſte hence in diſpaire, to Sathan his patron: for the bountie of God is ſuche, and ſo greate, that though in deede he had ſentenſed his onely ſoonne to death, yet if he had repented hym of that his ſynfull crime, the verie ſame whom he had condemned to the croſſe, had not withſtandyng yet graū
                  ted hym his portion in ioye with Chriſte. Farther a lake there is, or riuer, whiche alſo menne call Pilate, within the territories of Sueuia, adioynyng to Lucerna, in a certaine

plaine, inuironed on all ſides with high, and greate mountaines, from the higheſt of which (as ſome affirme for truth) he threwe hymſelf doune, and was drouned in that water. The cōmon opinion is, that euery yere ones he maketh there ſhewe of hym ſelfe, in the habite of a iudge: but who ſo euer he be, manne, or woman, that by happe then ſhall ſee hym, dieth aſſuredly, or the yere bee fully expired. For proofe whereof, I referre you to Ioachimus Vadianus, a man ſingulerly learned, whoſe commentaries writen on Pomponius Mela are extant: who alſo of this lake reporteth yet, an other thyng, no leſſe knowen for true, then verie ſtraunge and meruailous. He ſaieth that this water, is of this nature or propertie, that who ſo caſteth into it, either a ſtone, clotte of yearth a pece of woode, or any other the ſemblable, this water forthwith ſo rageth, and rolleth with ſuche violente, and tēpeſtious impetuoſitie, that it paſſeth his bandes, drouneth and annoieth the whole countrie aboute it: whence the inhabitauntes are often tymes indomaged, in their corne, fruites, trees, and cattell. And againe that whiche moſte ſtraunge is, if theſe thynges bee not throwen in willingly, and of pretenſed purpoſe, but by happe, or fortune, as leaſt though one do ſlide in, it then neither altereth, nor rageth in any kinde of maner. Further alſo ſaieth this foreſaied Ioachiamus, a Swiſer borne, that there are lawes, and conſtitutions, forbiddyng all men, vnder paine of death, to caſte, or conueigh any thyng, into the ſaied lake: and that diuers haue been executed, for infringyng this ordinaunce. Whiche whither it bee naturall, or miraculous, I durſt not affirme, although waters haue ſtraunge, & meruailous proprieties. For ſome of whiche it ſhould not, be harde to yelde good reaſon, but for others difficill, or rather I iudge, impoſſible. The ſemblable vnto this, reciteth Plinie, ſaiyng that there is in Dalmacia, a verie deepe darke dungion, or denne, into whiche if any throwe, any ſtone, or weightie matter,

there iſſueth thence immediatly ſuche a violente, or bluſteryng aire, or rather if I ſo mighte ſaie, a whirlyng winde, that it tourneth into a daungerous tempeſt, greuyng, and annoiyng all the inhabitauntes of that countrie. It maie bee, whiche I dare not to affirme, that the bodie of Pilate was throwen into that hole, and that the deuill there, by diuine permiſſion, to his euerlaſtyng ſhame and ignomine, executeth theſe ſtraunge, and incredible effectes.
            
            
               In what degrees, and at what age a man and woman ſhould marrie. Chap. 3.
               
                  THe auncient Philoſophers morall, were of ſondrie opinions, touching thage in whiche man, ſhould marrie hym ſelf to a woman, to the intent that the yeres of the one, might aunſwere in proportion vnto the others, Ariſtotle, groundyng here on, ſo maie it be, that women both naturally conceiue, and beare children, euen vntil the ſi
                     •
                  
                  tieth yere ended of their age, and that man is alſo able in his kinde, vntill the ſeuenteth expleate, ſaied that thei orderly ſhould marrie at ſuche tyme, as bothe parties might leaue together, vnprofitable, and vnable in thacte of generation, in ſuche ſorte that by the rule, or preſcription of the Philoſopher, man ſhould haue aboute twentie yeres more then his wife. Heſiodus an Xenophon, graunt hym yet ſome thing leſſe, ſuppoſyng it ſufficient, that a manne of thirtie yeres, take a wife at fowertene. Licurgus lawe geuer to the Lacedemoniens, conformeth hymfelf to the opinion, and cenſure of Ariſtotle: for generally he forbadde marriage vnto all men, before thei had paſt the ſeuen and thirtie yere, but vnto women the

ſeuententh onely. This Lycurgns his lawe was approued of many, for that in her more perfecte, and more ripe age, ſhe more eaſily acquainteth her ſelf, with ye maners and behauiour of hym, that is giuen her for houſebande. For as writeth Ariſtotle in his Economiques, the diſparitie of maners, and difference in conditions, let perfecte loue betwixte the parties coupled: & yet neither approue I this ordinaunce of Ariſtotle, whiche willeth that man ſhould haue twentie yeres more then woman (without offence, or preiudice be it ment, vnto ſo worthie a perſonage) my reaſon is this, that man beyng fullie ſixtie yeres olde, although he yet then can doe ſome thyng, in the acte of generation, moſte commonly if he liue longer, in the reſidue of his life, he is charged with infinite, and daily increaſe of maladies, ſo that before his wife aſpire to the age of fortie, he to her ſhall bee a greate charge, and wearie paine, in place of a frende, a patrone, and a houſbande. Wherefore when there is leſſe difference in their ages, thei are in like maner mortified as it were at one tyme, their mindes and intentes are alſo more conformable, then when there is ſo greate inequalitie of yeres Neither doe I here ſaie that man, ſhould not at all be elder, but rather that the ſpace of eight, or ten yeres might ſuffice, ſo that the man at the age of twentie fiue, might chuſe to hym a wife, at ſixtene, or ſeuentene yeres, hauyng ſome reſpecte to the courſe, or order of mannes life. Alſo let man take to wife, a woman yonge, a maide, of perfecte, and good complexion, not olde, no widowe, framed to the maners, and humour of an other: for aſſuredly in their tender youth, thei are flexible, and bendyng, to what ſo man would haue them▪ obedient, and ſubiect ſtill to his will, and pleaſure. To whiche purpoſe we maie remember here, thexample of Timotheus, on the Flut, of all others, moſte excellente and cunnyng, whiche for honeſte ſtipende, imperted of his ſkill, to ſuche as would learne of hym. This Timotheus, before he would begin

with any (whatſoeuer) his ſcholer, he vſually demaūded if that he could plaie any thing, for of thoſe, yt had ſome maner of beginnyng, he euermore receiued double wage or ſalerie: his reaſon was, for that his pain was alſo double, firſt to make them forget, and forgoe, their firſt corrupt, and diſordered vſe in plaie, and then a freſhe to inſtructe them, accordyng to his ſkilfull loare. Whiche obſeruation of his, well ſerueth vs for widowes, which are all readie trained to the peruerſe appetite ſome tyme, and fonde phantaſie of others, and therefore harde to bée drawen backe, from the wonted, and ſtraunge deuiſes, of their firſte friende, or houſebande. For whiche cauſe I preferre, the mariage of a maide, before that of a widow beſides the ſinguler affection, and aſſured remembrance, whiche commonly lieth rooted in the hartes of women, towardes theſe, with whō thei firſt of all were acquainted. Concernyng the parentaige, or riches of the wife, a certaine yonge man, a Greke borne, came on a tyme to Pitacus, one of the ſeuen ſages of Grece, requeſtyng his aduiſe, in his affaires of marriage. One offered me ſaith he, my choiſe of twoo yonge maides, the one throughout myne equall, in ſubſtance, and in birthe, the other farre ſurpaſſeth me in worſhippe, and in gooddes, what ſhall I doe here in, whiche ſhall I chuſe to wife? To whom Pitacus aunſwered, ſeeſt thou yonder children, that practiſe them ſelues at waſtreles, go offer thy ſelf to plaie emō
                  geſt them, and thei ſhall giue thee good counſaile, whiche he did, and as he approched, and offered hymſelf for one, thei perceiuyng that bothe in force, and in ſtature of bodie, he paſte them, refuſed his companie, ſaiyng: that euery man ſhould betake hym to his fellowe, and equall. Whence he well, knewe for wife, whō he ſhould take in marriage. Plutarche in his treatiſe, of thinſtructiō, or brin gyng vp of children, willeth that manne marrie not his ſōne, to a wife either more riche, or of better familie then he, ſaiyng, that who ſo alieth hymſelf, to his ſuperiours,

and betters, in place of friēdes and alies, he findeth none but maiſters. And farther if a riche woman, ſhall chuſe a houſebande poore, pride immediatly poſſeſſeth her, and miſtres muſte ſhe be, and ſowryng a lought continuallie with proude checkes will ſhe ſerue hym. And farther, Menander ſaieth, that who ſo beyng poore, and taketh to wife a woman riche, maketh a plaine gifte of hymſelf to the woman, whiche he eſpouſeth, and not ſhe vnto hym. Licurgus emong the Lacedemonians ordained a Lawe, that no man with his doughter, ſhould giue any kinde of dowrie, to th'intent thei trauailed, t'indowe themſelues with vertue, for that cauſe and none other, to be deſired in marriage. Although this lawe might ſeme now rigorous to ſome, yet aſſuredly was it bothe honourable, and neceſſarie, for beyng ones well obſerued in one, it likely alſo was, thai it ſhould bee in an other: as for example, if the father in marriage of his wife, was of no parte inrichte, neither in gooddes, nor in money, he then the leſſe to his doughter, was bounde to impart with any thyng. Whence it lieth euident, that who ſo at any tyme, entereth into the ſacred lawes of wedlocke, ſhould haue if he well dooe, no conſideration at all of riches. But what? muche tyme ſhould I loſe, if I attempted to perſwade here, for that all men are ſoiled in this lothſome abuſe, wiueuyng for none other cauſe, but for pelfe onely. Yet ſaie I, notwithſtandyng, that when a riche man marrieth, he ſhould not conſider of the wealthe, or ſubſtance of the wife, but of her aſſured vertue, and modeſtie, borowing fit example of Alexander the great (who though he were ſo famous, that all the worlde ſpake of hym) tooke yet to wife Berſina, the doughter of Arbaſus, not riche, or glitteryng, but vertuous onely, and deſcended of noble parentage: and yet in theſe daies, who ſo moſte hath, moſte buſily hunteth, and hungereth this droſſe. Hence cometh this often miſlikyng in marriage, for hauyng withdrawē the money, that couereth, for the moſt

part, all kinde of vices, thei incontinently lye open, more then manifeſte vnto all men, whiche firſt we would not ſee blinded, with deteſtable auarice, or at leaſt ſeyng thē would diſſemble it, as guilefull doublers. Neither here miſlike I, that man in race like, or in like familie, ſeke to hym the beſt, or moſte fittyng to his apetite: as on the other ſide, I thinke it bothe ignominious, and diſhonorable, to matche in baſer ſtate, for the onely loue, and deſire of money. It nedeth not that I herein long dwell, for the yearth it ſelf in this caſe, ſcholeth vs ſufficiently: beſtowe who ſo pleaſe, ſeede fine and delicate, in a roughe ſoile, leſſe pleaſaunte, and vnlaboured, and he ſhall reape there of fruite, little daintie, and vnſauerie, yea, though it ſpring of a ſéede, as is afore ſaied, verie delicate: and on the other ſide, who ſo beſtoweth his ſeede leſſe ſauerie, in a ſoile fatte, and fertile, that whiche he thence repeth ſhall be ſwete, and delicate. Beſides, if we doe our carefull paine, for the better prouition, of a good breede, or race of horſes, how muche the more ſhould we then bee circumſpecte, concernyng our children, our ſucceſſours, and poſteritie? In my phantaſie, that man maketh ſmall accompte of hymſelf, and euill ſatiſfieth that obligation, where vnto he is borne, if he leaue not his child, of as honourable a linage, as hymſelfe receiued, by diſſente from his father, whiche is impoſſible, if he take wife, of wourſe eſtate, or meaner condition, then hymſelf. Farther, if he accompte of honour, or haue it in reputation, he thence heapeth to his children more ample poſſeſſiōs, and greater dignitie, then hymſelf at the firſte, receiued from his father. How greate is mannes debte then, and what ſhould his care be, to leaue his children of no imbaſed race, but rather to better it, if it be poſſible, to the intent his poſteritie, finde no cauſe to complaine them of. Paulus Emilius recordeth, that Maneſtias an Athenian, ſoonne of Iphicrates, a moſte renoumed, and famous capitaine, whoſe mother was of baſe, and vile condition,

whiche notwithſtandyng Iphicrates had eſpouſed, was demaunded, whom he beſte loued his father, or his mother, who aunſwered, his mother, where at thei meruailyng, demaunded againe why: for that my father, ſaid he, with ſmall regarde begatte me, of parte a Thracian, and ſoonne of á poore mother: but ſhe on the other ſide, hath borne me, of part an Athenian, the ſonne, and heire of an excellent capitaine. Concerning the beautie of women, leauyng to ſpeake of thoſe, that counſaile vs to refuſe, bothe the faire, & the foule, prefarryng onely thoſe, whom mediocritie commendeth: my aduiſe is, that man chuſe euermore the beſte, that he poſſible maie finde, the faireſt I meane, and of cleareſte complexion, ſo that ſhe bee vertuous, as we before haue ſaied: otherwiſe, wiſhe I, that he chuſe the hardeſte fauoured, chaſte with all, and honeſte, rather then the faireſte, of leude, and lighte demainure. My reaſon is, that wee ſhould alwaies preferre the faireſte, if for none other, yet for generation, and cauſe of the poſteritie onely, to the intente our children, bee ſuche as we would wiſhe, of moſte perfecte, I meane, and amiable complexion. Virgil remembreth, that the goddes Iuno, deſirous to gratifie her beloued Eodus, promiſed to giue hym one of her faireſte Nimphes, to the ende ſhe ſhould beare hym, children in beautie, reſemblyng her ſelf. We reade againe, that Archiadamus kyng of the Athenians, was condemned in a pecuniall paine, for that he had married a wife of ſmall ſtature, his counſaille hardly chargyng hym, that he mente to leaue the race roiall, of little, thinne, wretched, and impotente bodies, as if thei were but halfe men. To conclude, therfore, what ſo is, in any place aboue remembred, mine aduiſe is, that it bee taken, as counſaile, and no commaundemēt, which you maie execute at your pleaſures, without daunger, or difficultie, as alſo without all exception of perſones. For Matrimonie contracted, with the harder fauoured, is as holie as that other, with the moſte

faireſte, as good with the pooreſt, as alſo with the riche, with the widdowe alſo, as with the maide, or virgin, for that euery of them is lawfull, verteous, and honeſte, groundyng on loue, whiche in greateſte differentes, and caſes of inequalitie, woorketh euer more a perfecte conformitie, and vnion.
            
            
               Of the cordiall and hartie loue, that ſhould be in maerriage, with diuers examples ſeruyng to that purpoſe. Chap. 4.
               
                  THE mutuall loue, and affection, betwixt man and his wife, bothe is, and ought to bee, for iuſte cauſe commended, for that marriage of it ſelf, is a thyng ſo excellent, as well for reſpect of hym, whiche firſte did inſtitute it, God, with the place alſo, of that inſtitution, Paradis, as alſo that thence procedeth, th'onely propagation, and continuance of mankinde, with remedie ſufficient againſt all ſenſuall appetites, and concupiſcencie of the fleſhe. All other amities incident in mannes life, with whom, or in what ſorte, ſo euer thei happen, are loues improper, and affections leſſe perfect▪ in reſpect of this ſo holy▪ and diuine. This is that ſame, that ioineth bothe bodie and ſoule together, this is that, that is confirmed, and ſealed vnto vs, by a ſacred miracle, neither is there any thing betwixt the married, in particularitie proper, for that betwixt the honeſt couple, the body, and will is one, that whiche neuer happeneth in any other kinde of amitie, whiche for ſmall cauſe oftentymes is diſſolued and broken: and that alſo whiche worſte is, the moſte aſſuredſte of theſe affections, continueth but for a tyme, for gaine, or aduauntage: for proofe whereof, wee rarely haue heard of any, that without chaūge, haue ſtill helde on, and neuer broken vntill death. For ſo daintie, and obnoxious, to all chaunges is mannes minde, that commonly we ſee newe friendes, to remoue, and diſpoſſeſſe,

for little cauſe, the olde: but that loue holdeth ſtill, whiche is betwixte man, and his wife, neither maie it be ſundred by any aduerſe fortune, by infirmitie, pouertie, miſhappe, or chaunge of beautie, onely death hath power, to cutte this knotte in ſunder. Some tymes it alſo liueth, and continueth after death, as we haue ſeen in certaine widdowes, of whiche wee could remember infinite examples, emongeſt whom aboue all others, we maie conſider of the mutuall loue, or affection, betwixte our firſt parentes Eue, and Adam, vnto whom the fruite of life, vnder paine of death was prohibited. Adam notwithſtādyng, to gratifie his wife, refuſed not to haſſarde hymſelf by breache of that commaundemente. When Paulina the wife of the ſage and learned Seneca of Cordoua, vnderſtode that cruell Nero had doen to death her huſband, who by openyng all his vaines in a bathe, gaue vp his ſpirite, would not onely dye, to accompanie hym by death, but alſo did chuſe to ende her ſmart, by the ſaid maner of tormente, for more better accompliſhemente whereof, the did her ſelf to bee prickte, as did before her, Seneca. Whereof Nero, with ſpede aduertiſed, and knowyng that it proceded of aſſured loue onely, cauſed her with greate diligence, to bee ſaued from the daunger of death: for beyng euen then on the poincte of paſſage, he cauſed her vaines ſkilfully to be bounde, carefully attendyng on her, that ſhe to her ſelf, did none other kinde of violence: by meanes whereof, this chaſte and verteous matrone, paſte the reſte of her life in greate paine, and miſerie, paie, & coulerleſſe, in ſigne of loiall loue, that ſhe beare to her huſbande. In the life of the Emperours, we alſo reade, that Lucius Vitellius, brother to the Emperor Vitellius, beyng on a nighte, in a perillous battaile, his wife, whiche hight Triata, by the greate, and inſpeakable force of loue onely, came thruſtyng in emong the ſouldiars, to aide, and aſſiſte Vitellius, mindyng in that ſtraite, to liue, or dye with hym, where ſhe then ſo did her painfull

indeuour, that ſhe vtterly forgatte all feminine debilitie, with ſmall accompte of her life, or ſafetie, without her huſbande. Q. Curtius reciteth, that the kyng of Aira, vanquiſhed by Alexander, ſpoiled, and depriued of a greate parte of his realme, paciently bare it, with a valiaunt, and manly courage, without any ſhewe of pain, or anguiſhe, but when newes was broughte hym, that his wife was dedde, in token that he more loued her, then he did his kyngdome, brake out into teares, and wepte verie bitterly. Ouide, Iuuenal, and Marcial with others, affirme that the wife of kyng Ad
                        •…
                     etus, choſe willyngly to dye, to ſaue her ſicke and diſeaſed huſbande, for hauing receiued aunſwere from thoracle, that the kyng ſhould liue, if any of his deareſt frendes, would vouchſafe to dye for hym. Notwithſtandyng, for the little credite, that menne commonly giue to Poetes, I had hereof ſaied no thyng, had not ſaincte Hierome hymſelf recoumpted it. Plinie the younger, in a letter of his writeth, that a certaine Fiſher, beyng ſicke of an incurable diſeaſe, or maladie, by meanes whereof, he daiely indured ſuche tormentes, and paines, as was almoſte impoſſible, for man to ſuſtaine, where at his wife moued with meruailous compaſſion, as ſhe, that intierly, and hartely loued hym, ſeyng no hope of healthe, or recouerie, nor any where could finde any kinde of remedie, hauyng ſought it euery where, to the vttermoſte of her power, perſwaded with her huſbande, by death to make an ende of theſe gripyng paines ſaiyng: ſithe that to death at ſome other tyme, of neceſſitie you 
                     •…
                  ſte yelde, preuente her commyng, to ende there by, this inſupportable anguiſhe. To whiche her aduiſe, this poore wretche accorded: wherefore, paſſyng forthe bothe to the toppe of an high rocke, this woman there bounde her ſelf verie faſte to her houſebande, whence caſtyng them ſelues doune, where diſmembered together. Baptiſta Fulgoſius the like hiſtorie remēbreth, of a poore labourer, or houſebande man of Naples, which

walkyng with his wife, vpon the ſandes, or ſea coaſt, but ſhe, for ſome her affaires, for ſlowyng her pace, was immediatly apprehēded, by a ſmall ſkiffe of Moores, whiche thyng her houſebande, when he ones had perceiued, beganne to ſcreche, and torment hymſelf lamentablie, and in fine tooke the water, ſwimmyng after the bote, with moſte dolefull teares, criyng ſtill on the Marriners, to take hym alſo, ſithe thei had his wife awaie with them, for priſoner, ſo was he in th'ende, to them alſo receiued, not without leſſe meruaile of the Moores, then teares of his wife. Shortly after this, within few daies landed, thei bothe were preſēted vnto the kyng of Thunnis, who vnderſtandyng of all thynges, as thei truely had happened, was moued to compaſſion, and graunted them perdon. To witnes of the good minde, that Artemiſia bare to Mauſolus, we onely muſt not conſider, of that famous Sepulchre, whiche ſhe to hym builte, and called Mauſoleum, whiche alſo this daie, for the ſumpteous, and curious woorke thereof, is accompted, not the leaſte of the ſeuen wounders of the worlde, but alſo of others, her honeſte deſertes towardes hym. The ſinguler affection alſo, of Tiberius Gracchus, towardes his wife, is then the others, no leſſe ſtraunge, or meruailous, whoſe hiſtorie, though it be common, redde in Valerius Maximus, yet in fewe to touche it, ſhall not bee ſuperfluous: he therefore, on a tyme findyng, twoo Serpentes in his bedde chamber, ſtraungely amaſed at ſo l
                     •
                  theſome a ſight, demaunded of the augurers, or ſothſaiers, what it mighte portende, to whom was aunſwered, that of neceſſitie he muſte kill one, but if the male, then hymſelf ſhould firſte dye moſte aſſuredly before his wife, but if the female, then contrary wiſe, his wife before hym: he then that better loued his wife, then himſelf, made perfect demonſtration, of his loiall affection, for he rather did chuſe to dye firſt hymſelf, then to ſee his wife to dye before hym, and ſo in killyng the male ſerpent, made chaunge of life

forthwith, as is aboue remembred, leauyng his wife after hym a widdowe, for ſome other. But here a manne maie for iuſte cauſe doubt, whether ſhe were more happie, that had ſuche a houſebande, or more vnhappie in deede, that ſo infortunately loſte hym. Harde were it to ſaie, whiche of theſe twoo followyng, ſhould be argumēt of greateſt loue: to wete, whether that woman, whiche willyngly, would haue dooen her ſelf moſte painfully to dye, onely for the griefe, conceiued of her houſebandes death: on the other ſide or ſhe, that continually ſo mourned, that by languiſhyng paine, and teares, with ſorowe to death conſumed. Concernyng the firſt, for that parte, alreadie ſome thyng aboue is ſaied: as touchyng the ſeconde, a notable example finde wée, of a famous gentlewoman, of Iulia to wete, the doughter of Iulius Caeſar, wife alſo to that valiant, and renoumed capitaine Pompie, to whom one preſentyng a certaine robe of her houſbandes, all ſtained, & ſoiled, with the blood of one freaſhely wounded, ſuppoſyng incontinentely her houſebande, traiterouſly to haue been murthered, before ſhe could haue tyme, there of more to vnderſtande, ſhe ſodainly ſo altered, with ſorrowe, and diſpleaſure, that ſhe became ſtraight ſenſeleſſe, depriued of her feelyng, deliuered alſo (wherewith ſhe then wente quicke) of an abortiue, and ſo foorthwith made chaunge, of this vncertaine life. By whoſe death, that generall peace. whiche by her meanes onely, was then cōtinued, almoſt throughout the whole worlde, was chaunged into warre, and bloodie hoſtilitie, principally, and firſt, bet wixte Caeſar, and Pompie. The chaſte loialtie of Lucretia, was ſuche towardes her houſbande, ſo well knowen, and ſo notorious, that ſuper
                     •
                  luous were it to ſpeake of it, for vnkindely abuſed by force of an vnchaſte lecherer, ſ
                     •
                  ue her ſelf in the preſence of diuers worthie perſonages. The meruailous loue alſo, of the wife of Fernandus Goncales, an Earle or Counte, is no leſſe in my iudgemente commendable, then was alſo

her policie, by whiche ſhe deceiued the king, and well deliuered the countrie: for ſhe in ſtature, not muche vnlike to her houſebande, did on her his apparell, arreſtyng ſtill in priſon, and he attired as woman, paſte for the by her aduice, fledde thence, and eſcaped the angrie wrathe of the prince. Here might I longer dwell, with infinite examples, whiche I leaue to remember, not mindyng to bée tedious, whiche although the lawes of God forbidde, that we doe no murther, are notwithſtandyng, worthie of perpetuall memorie, eſpecially beyng executed, of Panimes, and Gentiles, whiche had no kinde of féelyng in Godslawes, and ordinaunces.
            
            
               Of the ſtraunge cuſtomes obſerued by our elders in mariage. Chap. 5.
               
                  MAriage is contracted by the ſole and onelie conſent of man, and woman: but to the ende this conſente may the better bée authoriſed, it is farther requiſite, that it bée manifeſted by certaine exteriour ſignes, and words, for that GOD onlye knoweth, and ſearcheth mans harte. Whence it cometh, that men, in this caſe, haue inſtituted ſundrie ceremonious, and ſolemne ordenances. Concernyng theſe, this day in vre among the Chriſtians, thei are euident, and knowen ſufficientlye vnto all men: Wherfore I will payne my ſelfe preſentlie to ſpeake, of certaine auncient cuſtomes, practiſed as well in ſundrie barbarous countries, as alſo amōg the olde Romaines theim ſelues, eſpeciallie in their Eſponſalles and Mariages, of whiche (ſo maie it be) the diuerſitie maye lende ſome contentment to the reader. The aūcient Romaines as writeth Cicero maried them ſelues in two ſortes, lottyng vnto theym twoo diuers kindes of wiues, accordyng to the diuerſitie of their matrimoniall

ceremonies. The one was more common, and called her ſelfe matrone, the other more proper, and was named mother of the familie. As touchyng the latter ſorte, it maye eaſelie be thought that they ſo maried theym ſelues, as dooe in manner all Chriſtians in oure daies. For the huſbande would demaunde of his wife, whether ſhe would be mother, and ruler of his familie, and ſhe aunſweryng yea, would in caſe ſemblable alſo aſke hym whether hee mente to be father of her familie againe, to whom if he gaue affirmatiue aunſwere, then ſhould they take eche other by the hande immediatly, in token of aſſured faith, and amitie, and this contract was reputed for moſt perfect and excellent. By whiche meanes the wife ſo gained ſuch place in the huſbandes houſe, as otherwiſe ſhe ſhould haue hadde, hadde ſhe been hys owne ſiſter, for that ſhe nowe came as by adoption, to be of the ſaide line, and as true doughter to her father in lawe, came to the inheritaunce at that inſtante with her huſbande. This gathereth Boecius at large, writyng on the ſeconde of the Topiques of Cicero. The other ceremonie was muche more common, and therfore they were not reputed for mothers of the familie, thoughe they otherwiſe weere honoured by the name of matrones. Farther the Romaines hadde againe this cuſtome, that when they firſte brought the yonge wife to her huſbandes houſe, ſhe arreſted her with out at the doore or gates, as one that might not enter before ſhee weere drawen in, there at by force, geuyng the world thereby to vnderſtande, that thei by conſtraint, and not willynglie came thether, where they ſhoulde looſe their maidenhoode, or virginitie, and afterwarde when they woulde geue the maid, to her huſbande ſhe ſate her downe (ſuche was the vſage) in her mothers lappe, whence the huſbande againe drewe her, the ſeconde tyme by force, the maide imbraſing her mother, as harde as ſhe might poſſiblie: whiche they chifely did in memorie of that, that

ſome tymes the Romaines hadde in manner ſembleable taken, the Sabine maides out of the armes of their mothers, by meanes where of Rome came in ſhort tyme to be well peopled. Yet againe after theſe, before he might bedde her, the maide preſented at one tyme bothe fire and water vnto hym, whiche they did to ſignifie as hath Plutarche and Lactantius, by theſe twoo elementes the ſecrete of generation, for that thei be the principall cauſes generatiue, in all kinde of thinges naturall. Others affirme for this cauſe, that the maide thereby ſhoulde promiſe ſinceritie in harte, and loyaltie in behauiour, for the water naturally purgeth all ordure and immundicitie, and fire fineth and trieth all maner of metalles, ſunderyng and partyng the purer from the groſſe. Farther they ſuppoſed all mariages infortunate contracted in the moneth of Maie, and that for certaine fonde vanities, and ſuperſtitious imaginations, without grounde or reaſon, and therfore remenbred of no man. Of theſe thinges we reade more largelie in Ouide and Plutarche. 
                  Ouid. in faſtis. Plaut. in problematis. An other cuſtome was this, that when the wife firſt entered into her huſbandes houſe, the huſbande ſhould vtter with a hawte voice theſe two wordes, Caia Cecilia, and ſhée in maner ſemblable muſte aunſwere hym, Caio Cecilio, whiche they vſed, for that in the tyme of Tarquinius Priſcus Kyng of the Romaines, there was a damſell in Rome chaſte, diſcréete, ſober, gentle and wiſe, adorned beſides with all other vertues, rare in the feminine kinde, which had to name Caia Cecilia, but before ſhe came to Rome called her felfe Tanaquila: for Caia Cecilia. Tanaquila. which cauſe the yong man pronounced theſe wordes, to minde his wife to immitate the other. There was alſo carried vſuallie before the maide, the firſte daie that ſhe came to dwell in her huſbandes houſe, a Diſtaffe charged with Flaxe, and a Spindle hangyng at it, to the intente ſhe might be mindfull to leue by her labour. Hereof writeth Plinie, to whom I referre hym that more Plinie lib. 8. Cap. 40.
                  
herein deſireth. Beſides all theſe an other thynge was yet practiſed by the Romaines, whiche was, when anie eſpouſed, or tooke to wife a Widowe, the mariage was ſolemnized euermore in a holie day, but if a maide, then contrariwiſe continuallie on a woorke daie. And this Macrobius and Plutarche recorde at large, and againe ſaithe Plutarche all ſuche ſolemnizations finiſhed on feſtiuall daies, were of purpoſe onlie don in ſuche tymes, to the intent that all the people then occupied in plaies, and pleaſures, might not vnderſtande of theſe ſeconde mariages of Widowes: but maides contrariwiſe were maried ordinarilie on labourynge daies, to ſuche effecte that the whole worlde might witnes of ſuche matches. Macrobius alſo ſaieth, that therefore vnto maides on theſe daies ſuche ſolemnities weere prohibited for that, as is aboue ſaide, they vſed a certaine ceremonie to take the bride by force out from the mothers lappe, which to do on the ſaboth, or holie daie, was a thing vnlawfull. I leaue heere to ſpeake of other ceremoniall ſolemnities, ordinarily practiſed among the olde auncient Romaines, ſome thynge to ſpeake nowe in this place of the Babilonians, whiche in this ſorte folowyng, gaue in mariage their doughters. In one appointed daie continuallie in the yere, they ordered in publike place all the yong maidens marigeable in eache Citie, where the faireſt and moſte beautifull, were not married with anie monie, that their fathers, or other frendes, ſhould at that time beſtow on theim, but vnto ſuche, as woulde moſt largelie and moſte frankelie diſburſe for them, whiche ordre they healde in theim that were nexte faire, without reſpecte of degree, or linage orderlie deſcending from degre vnto degrée, vntill they alſo came to the leſſe faire or harde fauoured, which they alſo beſtowed on thoſe, that were contented to take leaſte ſummes of monie with them, whiche euermore was taken of that, which was geuen for the faireſt, ſo that in fine the latter ſorte, was

as well maried as the firſt, without anie kinde of charge or coſte to their parētes, theſe onely enricht, or domaged that pleaſed to take them. Marcus Antonius Sabellicus writeth, that the Venetians in olde tyme vſed alſo thys order: here muſte you notwithſtandyng, in this place conſider, that all thoſe that were of indifferent beautie, neither to be eſtemed faire, or ill feutered, were neither bought, nor ſolde, but at euen hande deliuered. Longe ſith in Fraunce, to the intent their doughters ſhould neuer iuſtlie complaine theim, that they againſt their will or likyng were maried, they accuſtomed, when the father ment to marie his doughter, to make a ſolemne or daintie bankette, vnto whiche the father woulde inuite a greate many of yonge menne of ſemblable parentage, and degree vnto hymſelf, of whiche all placed there at table together, the father graunteth frée libertie of choiſe to his doughter, who to make ſhewe of hym, that in that companie beſte pleaſed her, preſented vnto hym in preſence of thothers, a baſin of water to waſhe after his diner. In a certaine toune of Africa called Leptina, the Leptina. maner was, that the firſt day that the bride ſhould come to her huſebandes houſe, before ſhe came, ſhe ſhoulde ſende vnto her mother in law, deſiryng her to lende her, as hauyng néede therof, an earthen potte, whiche ſhould refuce, with ſharpe words, to doo her that little courtiſie, to the intente onlie that from the firſte daie, ſhe might beginne to acquainte her ſelfe with the importunities of her mother, and by this hard, and vnkind refuſall, learne to ſupporte what ſo after might followe. Amonge the Meſl
                        •
                     gites, they ordeined that eache man ſhoulde haue Meſſagites. his wife, and yet euerie woman beſides, was common to theim all, and all their wiues againe in maner ſembleable were not denied to anie man. Euſebius writeth, that the auncient Brytons, liued in like ſorte ſcarſe different in anie thing. The Arabians, thoſe onlie I meane Britous. Arabians. of Arabia foelix, hadde a law, or rather an vſage, that the

woman that maried her ſelf, ſhould forthwith be as frée, to all her huſebandes kinſemen, as to her huſeband, whō ſhe onely hadde eſpouſed: and as Strabo recoumpteth, when anie of theim wente to vſe, or haue her companie, he ſhould hange vppe at the doore or gate a certaine ring, to the intent that if any other in the meane tyme ſhould come, he by the ſaide Ring ſhould knowe, that the place was poſſeſſed, and therfore was vnlawfull at that time to enter: and farther againe thei hadde this reſpect alſo, that who ſo hardened hymſelf to ſéeke thacquaintaunce of anie woman, were he not of the ſaide race or alied vnto the others, he ſhoulde furthwith be dooen to die for it, without longer lette or ſtaie. But it chaunced on a time, a woman verie faire, and of perfecte complexion, was aboue the reſte verie buſelie ſought on, onlie by the alies, I meane of her huſebande, by meane whereof, and of ſuche buſie importunitie, ſhe faſtneth a Ring at her gate her ſelfe to the intente that who ſo among theim at anie tyme came thether, ſhould ſuppoſe that there was ſome other with in with her, whiche her honeſt gyle ſtoode her in good ſtede certain daies, the ryng ſtill hangyng at the gate without, till on a tyme all the kinſemen of the huſbande méetyng together, one among the reſte determined to viſite her, who findyng the ſigne vppe, as though there had been ſome mau there, and rememebryng that he had left them all before together, immagined that ſhe had gotten ſome newe and ſtraunge adulterer, wherfore he goeth, and immediatlie therof aduertiſed the others, whiche all together with the huſebande approachyng, founde her contrarie to their expectation voyde of companie and alone, whiche in their preſence confeſſed the cauſe why ſhe had doen it. Whiche her intention conſidered of, and founde grounded on vertue, eſchuyng the leſſe chaſt acquaintance of ſo greate a number of riuals, and further deſirous to liue a more cōtinent life, though contrary to the brutal vſage, and maner of the countrie,

hauyng by their aſſent here in ſome reaſon, was rather well thought of, then of anie parte diſcommended.
            
            
               ¶ Of the excellencie of paintyng. Chapt. 6.
               
                  THere hath been, bothe emong the Romaines, and Grekes, moſte excellent men, in the ſkill of Paintyng. And although alſo in our age, there haue béen deuers, ſingulerly well practiſed, and learned in this arte: yet ſuppoſe I thē farre to bee inferiours, to theſe of the olde tyme, and fore paſſed ages, conſideryng what wee reade of their fined labours. As for example, of the twoo tables finiſhed by Ariſtides, a painter of his tyme renoumed, and famous, whiche as recordeth Plinie, were boughte by Iulius Caeſar, for no leſſe price then fower ſcore talentes, onelie to dedicate theim to the goddeſſe Venus. And aſſuredlie though Caeſar were a verie riche prince, yet was this price exceſſiue, and greate, conſideryng that the talent, as well by the accompte of Budeus, as alſo of ſome others, curious in this matter, counterpoyſeth ſixe hundred Frenche crounes, now currant: ſo that Caeſar, by this valuation, paide for theſe two tables 48000. Crounes of good and lawfull monie. It alſo is written by the ſaide Plinie, that Attalus king of the leſſe Aſia, diſburſed fullie an hundred talentes, whiche value, by the firſt accompte. 60000. Crounes, for one onely table painted by the aboue ſaide Ariſtides. We maie in this place then ſafelie preſume, that accordyng to the increaſe, or decreaſe, of Prices, the excellencie of theſe ſciences grewe alſo, or deminiſhed. Brife in thoſe daies paintyng was ſo muche honoured, that it was reputed in number of the liberall ſciences. Plinie 
                  
                     •
                  aieth that the Gréekes in ſuche ſorte accompted of it, that it was not lawfull for anie their ſeruauntes to learne it: onely the Noble menne onely admitted to painting ſoonnes of greate eſtates, and honourable perſonages

were permitted to exerciſe theimſelues, in this practiſe. So grewe this ſkill then to be famous, and worthie, and not altogether aſſuredlie without cauſe, for that who ſo therein affecteth to be excellente, of neceſſitie muſte bee learned in manie other matters. Geometrie to hym is requiſite to vnderſtande his perſpectiues: alſo he ſhoulde bee learned in the other artes and ſcieuces, with an abſolute knowledge in infinite other thinges, the more perfectlie to order and obſerue his proportions, with an aſſured conſideration of the nature of al thinges, as ſhal bee to the beautie of his woorke, decent and neceſſarie, throughout to bee ſkilled as a Poete in all thinges, for that paintyng is nothing els, but a deade or dumme poeſte. Beſides this, his lineamentes, and proportions muſt be ſuche, that the eye it ſelfe miſſe and faile therein, in iudgemente, as wee reade it ſome tymes happened to Zeuxis and Parraſus, both excellent painters, concerning the outwarde ſhewe, or appearaunce of their woorke. By Zeuxis and Parraſus. meane whereof they accorded willingly together, that euery of theym ſhould frame the fineſt peece he could, to thentent that who ſo wonde then the price, by common iudgement, ſhould be reputed of the other, for moſt perfect and abſolute. Zeuxis then preſenteth a perfect péece, a table, in whiche he had with ſuche ſkill, and ſo artificially depainted certaine bounches, or cluſters of Grapes to the quicke, that certaine Sparrowes eſpiyng it, and ſuppoſing they had been grapes, arreſted theim to beake thereon, or preie, as is their vſage, which thing appeared merueilous and ſtraunge in all mens iudgmente. Parraſus on the other ſide preſented eake a table, on whiche, with ſuche perfection he wrought had then a Curtaine, that beyng brought to Zeuxis, to iudge or to conſider of, (nowe drouned almoſt in pride, for that he had the poore and ſenlis birdes deceiued) demed it to bee, that which in déede it was not, ſtretchyng forth his hand to haue withdrawen the Curtaine, as though ſome thynge had been

cloſe hid, or wrought there vnder, ſaide with loude voice that ſome man ſhould take awaie the Curtaine. But afterward perueiuyng that foulie he had failed, gaue ſentence without more that Parraſus was his better, conſideryng he had deceiued hym that was maiſter of his ſcience, which was in déede much more, then by ſome gylefull ſhewe, to drawe or to delude the poore and fooliſhe birdde. An other tyme this Zeuxis, in like table alſo depainted a yong boye or child, hauyng in his handes a diſh well charged with Grapes, with ſo much art in deede, ſo well and finely faſhioned, that the birddes againe as before, came fléeyng to beake thereon, whereat Zeuxis as all foreraged, greuing and miſliking with that his owne worke ſaide, if that with equal ſkill I had depainted alſo the boye, the birddes with feare would then haue helde thē all a loofe, neither would thei haue been ſo bold to approche ſo nigh the boy. Plinie which recordeth theſe thinges affirmeth, that Zeuxis was a man of greate wealth in his tyme, for what ſoeuer he wrought, he neuer ſolde it, but for price exceſſiue, reputyng his deuiſes to bee of ſuche excellencie, that if he ſolde theym not at his owne pleaſure, he rather would giue theim, then take but little for theim, and farther would ſaie that no money (if he ſhould in deede eſteme of his doynges, accordyng to their perfection) were able, in what quantitie ſo euer, iuſtlie to value theim. This Zeuxis with ſuche perfection depainted Penelope, that hymſelf therein, beſides others, had moſt perfect likyng, by meanes whereof, he ſubſcribed theſe fewe wordes, commended of all menne: more eaſie ſhal it be, to all ſuche as ſhall beholde this, vnkindlie to enuie it, then with filed hande learnedlie to follow it. He beſides theſe did manie other thinges, ſo perfecte, ſo abſolute, and in ſuche ſort eſtimed, that Plinie reporteth, that euen vntill his tyme, there was reſerued of his doyng, a draught of Helena in Rome, as alſo ſome other thinges moſte curiouſly depainted: and yet was

there, as hath Euſebius, from the tyme of his death, till Plinie afterward was, and did theſe thinges to wryting, by iuſte accompte, fiue hundred and eight yeres. The Agrigentines became ſuters vnto hym, to frame thē ſome ſkilfull purtratie, whiche they might offer vnto their Goddeſſe Iuno, but he to theim accorded nothing, before (by his commaundemente) thei had preſented vnto hym a greate number of naked maides, of rare and comelie beautie, out of whiche he choſe fiue, whiche among the reſte he déemed to be faireſt, and beſt feutered: who takyng from euerie of theſe, that whiche in theim beſt liked hym, he finiſhed this excellent, and this fore deſired peece. Of Parraſus his competitor, ſtraunge matters alſo finde we: Strabo writeth, that among ſundry other thinges, Strabo in his 14. booke. he faſhioned in the I
                     •
                  le of Rhodes, a Satyre ſtanding faſt by a certaine Columne or Piller, on the higheſt part of whiche, he had depainted a Partridge: but although this Columne, and Satyre were abſolutely doen, yet this Partridge ſo farre ſurpaſte theim in perfection, that in the iudgement of all men ſhe ſéemed to haue life, ſo that without regarde of thother parte of the table, eche man was amaſed at the excellencie of the birde, whoſe perfection in déede was ſuche and ſo abſolute, that thei placing before the ſaied table certeine tame Partridges (as preſentlie we may in cages verie eaſelie kepe theim) began to call, and offered to flie to hym, being as is aboue ſaied, onely painted. By meane whereof Parraſus beſought the Magiſtrates of Rhodes, that he might with their licence deface and remoue hym, conſidering it ſtained the beautie of the other partes of the table, whiche were aſſuredlie moſt famous and excellent. Plinie alſo writeth of him matters ſtraunge, and merueilous, affirming that ſome of his woorkes were alſo fonnde in Rome. And farther addeth that amonge others, ſundrie his perfections, he had a ſubtill or ſecrete kinde of practiſe, beſides his open and ſéemely proportions, whereby he gaue men, plainlie

to vnderſtande the nature or conditions, of what ſoeuer he depainted, as is written, he did in the Idoll of the Atheniens: which in ſuch order and maner he handled, that beſides the rare beautie, and excellencie of the ſubiecte, eche man might ſée the ordenaunces, maners, and cuſtomes of the Atheniens: who as he was aſſuredly a prince in that his arte, ſo was he in all other thinges of a moſte ſharpe and fined witte, neither in drawyng his lines, or proportions was he bolder, then he was pleaſaunt, with all men, merie and well diſpoſed. Whence he ofte tymes would ſaie that paintyng had well ſchooled hym, in the perfecte loare and vſage of wiſedome, and knowledge But beyng entered, into the conſideration of this matter, it ſhall not bee beſides the purpoſe, ſome thyng to ſpeake in fewe of Apelles, Prince and maiſter of all other Painters, as alſo ſom what of Protogines, ſinguler Apelles. Protogines. alſo, and excellent in this arte.
            
            
               Of that excellent Painter Apelles, as alſo of Protogenes an other in his tyme. Chap. 7.
               
                  THat of one, and of the ſaied ſubiecte, we haue here preſently written twoo chapiters, is though for ſome others, yet chiefly for twoo cauſes: the one, for that the lengthe, and continued prorſis, wearieth commonlie, whatſoeuer the reader, whiche ſome times before thei come to the ende, forgette what thei redde at the firſt, or beginnyng: the other, for the dignitie of hym, of whom our penne ſhall ſpeake here preſently, well deſerueth, or meriteth his chapiter a parte, to the intent, it maie the better bee conſidered of the readers. This then is Apelles in the ſkill of Paintyng, the onely Phenix, and mercour of all others. He had to maiſter one Panphilus, 
                  Pamphilus Apelles his maiſter. verie excellent in his ſcience, who neuer tooke ſcholer

by the yere, for leſſe price, then for one whole talente Attique, valuyng by our accompte, ſixe hundred cro
                     •
                  nes ſterlyng. In the tyme of this Apelles, Protogines alſo liued, in this arte moſte famous, ſuche bothe, and ſo perfecte in their profeſſion, that hardly men knewe, whiche merited higheſte commendation. By meane whereof, Apelles aduertiſed of his excellencie, determined on a time, to go, to viſite him, and happely in fewe daies arriuyng at Rhodes, where at that tyme Protogines dwelt, diſſimulyng, that he was driuē thither, by aduerſe winde and weather, and entering at the gates, or houſe of Protogines, founde hym not, whom he ſought, then preſently at home, and hauyng demaunded, where he might be, of an olde woman that kept the houſe, tooke leaue to depart about other his affaires, but this olde woman ſaied, whom ſhall I ſaie you are, that haue ſought here Protogines? Apelles ſtraight takyng in hand a pinſelle, whiche he there founde, tournyng to her, ſaied, thou ſhalt ſaie to Protogines, that he, that drewe this line here, would gladly haue ſpoken with hym, and in vttryng theſe wordes, framed there ſo curious a line, ſo ſtraighte, & ſo well proportioned that it wel argued what he was, that with learned hande had drawen it. Now after this, Protogines immediatly retournyng, aduertiſed of all thinges, as is afore ſaied, who after he had aduiſed hym ſelfe, of this ſkilfull line, ſaid, that beſides Apelles, no man that liued, could dooe it: and ſo incontinently taketh in hande an other pinſelle, and with a contrary coloure, vpon Apelles his line, draweth then the ſeconde, ſo fine and ſo well faſhioned, that beſides hym ſelf, none could, by common iudgement doe it, commaunding forthwith his woman, that if he by happe retourned, that ſhe ſhould ſhewe him that line, as alſo farther learne hym, that Protogines had doen it, whom he ſo muche deſired. Apelles then retournyng, the other beyng for the, the old woman, as ſhe receiued in commaundement of her maiſter, preſenteth

forthwith to him, this ſecond line, to conſider of. Where at, as all amaſed, at the greate aduantage, that Protogines had gained, tooke in hande againe, the ſecond time the pinſelle, and ſondereth in the middle Protogines his line againe, whiche hardly might be ſeen, ſo ſmall it was & ſubtile, but with the third colour, Apelles notwithſtandyng, in ſuche extreme perfection, parteth bothe the others, that for the fowerth he leaueth, no kinde of place in the worlde. Protogines then retournyng, and ſeyng what had chaunced, confeſte the truthe, Apelles to bee in deede his better, and runneth all aboute, with painfull care to ſeke hym, to the onely intente, he might doe hym conuenient honour, lodgyng hym in his houſe with hym, and with none other. After this, this table with theſe three lines onely, was broughte vnto Rome, where it longe was kepte, reputed for a miracle, vntill the raigne of Caeſar, when as by ſodaine fire, with greate ſorowe, it was emong other thynges conſumed. Apelles when he had nigh perfected any woorke, he vſually would ſette it in open ſtréete to the vien, hymſelf cloſe hid behinde it, to liſten, and to eſpie, if any man with reaſon, therein reproued any thyng, acquaintyng hym ſelf with the iudgement, and cenſure of the people. Now on a tyme it chaū
                  ced, that a Shoe maker ſhould paſſe that waie, who highly commendyng the reſude of the woorke, founde ſome little faulte in the latchette of a ſhoe: by meane whereof Apelles vpon the ſaied table, writeth foorthwith theſe fewe woordes, or ſentence, Apelles hath dooen this, but yet hath not doen it, giuyng all others thereby to vnderſtande, that he not yet accompted it, or perfecte, or abſolute. He liued in the tyme of Alexander the greate, of whoſe grace, and fauour, in ſuche ſorte he was aſſured, that Alexander commaunded by edicte, or proclamation, that none ſhould bee ſo hardie to drawe, or depainte his purtraite, but onely Apelles, emong ſo many others. Farther he eftſones would goe viſite him, when he was

workyng in his ſhoppe alone, whiche argueth the great reuerence, and eſtimation of that ſcience, as alſo that Apelles ſurpaſſed euery other. Beſides this, loe an other, a rare ſhewe of his friendſhip, for Apelles at his commaū
                  demente, hauyng drawen to the quicke, and curiouſly proportioned, one of his faireſt, and beſte boloued concubines, whiche had to name Campaſpa, who was in deede Campaſpa a concubine of Alexanders. ſo faire, ſo perfecte, and ſo well feautered, that this poore Painter, now became of her enamoureb: whiche thyng, as ſone as Alexander ones perfectly vnderſtoode, determined to leaue her, as in deede he did, giuing her for wife now, to his ſure afflicted, and tormented friende Apelles. Whiche thyng might well be regeſtred, emong his moſt famous victories, for that ſubduyng his owne proper affections (whiche is of all others the beſte, and happieſte conqueſte) he contented hymſelf to forgoe her, beſtoweyng her on an other. Some report that afterward, vpon the ſaied purtraite of Campaſpa, he with excellente ſkill depainted ye figure alſo of Venus. He could ſo artificially counterfaicte to the quicke, that on a tyme Ptolomie, as well one of Alexanders ſucceſſours, as alſo kyng of Egipte (after whoſe death, he liued ſtill in Ptolomies indignation) ordained a greate, a riche, and a ſolemne banket vnto the whiche, in plain deriſion, and mockerie, Apelles was inuited a geaſt in the kynges name, whom, whē the kyng eſpied, in greate ire, and diſdain, demaunded whoſe geaſte he was, and who had called hym thither: whiche when he vnderſtoode, he tooke in hande a cole, and without any aunſwere, ſodainly proportioned a certain face, or viſage, whiche as it was knowen his, that vnhoneſtly brought hym thither, ſo was it there by euidente, that he to name had Planus. Many other thynges right mernailous, were alſo dooen by hym, whiche in this place would bee longe, and tedious to remember. In hiſtories, notwithſtandyng, we reade of thynges almoſte impoſſible, as that he ſhould depainte the ſcorchyng beames of

the Sunne, the lightnynges alſo, and thunders, with others the like, and ſemblable. His woorkes to conclude, were ſuche, and ſo excellent, that a certaine table of his, of parte by miſhappe ſtained (in whiche Venus was purtraied, as iſſuyng out of the ſea, whiche alſo Octauian, as an eſpeciall ornamēt, did to be placed in the temple of Iulius Caeſar) could neuer after bée mended, for none durſte bee ſo bolde, to take the thyng in hande, not able to conforme it to the firſt, and auncient paterne. Not long before his death (the laſte thing that he did) he yet beganne an other, or draughte, or pourtraite, of the ſaied Venus, ſo perfecte, and ſo abſolute, in all reſpectes, and partes, that diyng before he ended it, none after might be found, ye durſt, or could wel ende it. He depainted alſo a horſe, in ſuche extreame perfection, that other Painters tooke it for a patrone, and example, whence hauyng in the ende pourtraied many a curious ſteede, and prickt with emulation, eche huntyng after fame, would make ſome final proofe, whiche nigheſt touchte the marke, and ſo doyng to be brought, certaine horſes out of a ſtable, leadyng thē before theſe others now depainted, which paſt, and paſt againe, as nothyng there at moued: but when Apelles his horſe was brought into the place, the other began to braie, & ſtirre, as is their common vſage, whiche thing to do, thei refuſed at the preſence of th' others: whence how farre he ſurpaſte thē in th' excellencie of this worke, was euidente without more, and plaine to be ſéen of all men. Beſides this, his happie witte was not onely ſéen, in his paſſyng ſkill of painting, but further, by his learned, and philoſophicall ſentences: for beyng commended of Protogines, as one that farre excelled all others, in that his arte, aunſwered, you are quoth he Protogines, myne equall, and my fellowe, onely one faulte you haue, that you neuer ſolace your ſelfe, foredulled with inceſſaunte with wearie toile, & practiſe. Learnyng him therby, that continuall paine, and labours, without conuenient ceſſe,

or moderate recreation hurteth, and annoieth the ſpirites, and vnderſtandyng, as on the other ſide ſome pretie pleaſaunte exerciſe, comforteth the weried man▪ and hardneth hym a freſhe, the better now to tolerate what ſoeuer his firſt, and principall indeuour. An other ſhewyng hym a certaine table of his doynge, vaunted that he had doen it, in ſhorte time, and in haſt to whom he ſaied, I ſée it in the woorke, though thou haddeſt tolde me nothyng. Now might we in this place ſpeake alſo of Protogines, of his fined woorkes, his graue and worthy ſaiynges: although in this reſpect for his honour & renoume at the ſeige of Rhodes, the ſole and onely practiſe of Demetrius might ſuffice. Who if he once would haue geuen fire to a certain parte of the toune, had entred at his pleaſure, and conquired the whole, but beyng aſſured that in the ſaied place, there was reſerued a table depainted by Protogines, would by no intreatie attempte the thinge that waie, but rather would faile to ſacke, and ſpoile the citie, then to burne this table of ſuch price he eſtemed it. The firſt day therfore that he by happe beſeiged it. Protogines was founde without the Citie in a ſmall or litle gardine, buſied at his worke as if there had been nothing, who although in déede, he knewe the preſence of the ennimie, yet woulde he not leaue to followe, therefore his wonted practiſe. So being brought forthwith, vnto Demetrius, was demaunded how he durſt in ſuche ſorte to tarie, and arreſt hym without the citie. I aſſured my ſelf ſaied he, that thou waſt here in armes, againſt the Rhodians only, and not againſt good ſciences. This doen, this prince committed hym to certaine of his ſouldears, to the intente that while he was buſied in his paintyng no man might diſturbe, diſquiet, or moleſt hym, whom alſo while he wrought, Demetrius in perſon came ofte times to be holde hym. Beſides theſe, harde were it to remember how manie haue excelled in this ſkill, or ſcience, as Ariſtides, Aſclepiodorus, Nichomachus, Paneus the

brother of Fidias, with a multitude of others, which Plinie in his fiue and thirtie booke remembreth. And to the intente that men herein, chalenge not to theim ſelues, all honour or praiſe, as to theim belongyng onely, wee may remember women their felowes, and their equalles, whiche haue doen ſtraunge thinges, as anie aboue remembred: as for example, Timerata the doughter of Miconis, whiche in ſuche paſſing excellencie depainted for the Diana, that it long times afterwarde was moſte carefully kepte, and honoured ſtill in Epheſus, Irena, Calipſa, Olimpia, Lala Cizicena, with others alſo many, like famous for their ſkill in all ages to be honoured. In thys our tyme alſo many a good worke man leueth, of whom I will write nothing, leſte remembryng one or twoo. I ſhould wrong a greatar number.
            
            
               Of a ſtraunge maner of exile vſed in Athens, by meanes of which the moſt honourable and worthieſt perſonages were oftentymes baniſhed, without any offence, or faulte at all committed. Chap. 8.
               
                  THE ſeigneurie or common weale of Athens (as is to all menne well knowen) was one of the moſt honorableſt and richeſte in the world: for after it leaft to be gouerned by kinges, reſtored againe vnto deſired libertie, it foſtered and gaue forthe, greate numbers of worthie men, in armes no leſſe excellent, then in all kinde of good letters, of whiche all hiſtories are euerie where well furniſhed. But among all other profitable lawes and cuſtomes, which thei carefullie obſerued, for the onely conſeruation of their gouernement, and libertie, there was one amonge the reſte as well verie ſtraunge, as to theim onely proper, which thei notwithſtandyng

déemed verie fitte and neceſſarie, as well to repreſſe and chaſtice, the proude ambition, and intollerable audacitie, of certaine their nobles, whiche waxed in oppreſſion, and tyrannie ſo cruell, that the poore colde no where liue exempte from their malice, whiche was ſuche as here after followeth. At one certen and determinate time, all the inhabitantes, of what eſtate or conditiō ſoeuer, had full aucthoritie to exile and baniſhe (yea were it though without cauſe or reaſon) any one of their péeres, without reſpect, for the full ſpace of tenne whole yeres, as if they hated hym, or feared leſt he ſhoulde by tyrannie vſurpe, or ambitiouſly chuſe to him, the whole gouernement or ſtate, or if for any other cauſe in common, they either did malice, or diſdaine his perſon, they proceded once aſſembled, in this ſorte and maner. The magiſtrates firſt of all, to whom onely this charge was committed, hauyng (as is ſaied) aſſembled the multitude together, gaue to euery one of theim a little white ſtone or tile, in which eche man ſhould write the name of him whom he deſired at that tyme aboue all others to be baniſhed, which after their inſcription they reſtored again immediatly to the 'officers, whiche ſtones or tiles, the Greekes called (Oſtraci) whence this maner of exile was alſo termed Oſtraciſmus. Theſe ſtones with their inſcriptions Oſtraciſmus. this brought in againe together, thei began forth with orderly to number, and if at leaſte there were not founde with one inſcription ſix thouſande (for in theſe aſſembles, no man was againſt his will forced, to write anie mans name in his ſtone, vnleſſe he founde hymſelfe greued, or otherwiſe for his pleaſure woulde vnkindlie do it) they exiled for that yere no man at al. But if there were founde ſix thouſande or more altogether agréeyng on one, and the like number againe perhappes on ſome other, then would they carefully accompte, and number their ſtones, and he that was of moſte in this ſorte remembred, were he though ſome times the moſt vertuous,

and moſte riche within the citie, yet was he incontinently baniſhed for the ſpace of tenne whole yeres, without any kinde of pardon, mitigation, or remiſſion. Notwithſtandyng in the meane tyme, no man depriued hym of his poſſeſſions, neither in his gooddes, or landes ſuffered he any domage, but according to his pleaſure, or phantaſie, he in all poinctes ordered theim, reapyng the fruictes or commodeties thereof, in as ample and large maner, as if he neuer had been forced to exile at all. Neither was this lawe, or cuſtome onely ordeined, to chaſtice and correct the ambious extortioner, but alſo to appeaſe the rage of the common people, moued at times or incenſte againſt their Princes: ſo that by generall conſente, the Commons inioynge thys aucthoritie or priuelege, baniſhed ſometymes thoſe, whoſe abſence in déede, was to their coutrie verie profitable
                     •
                   ſome tymes ſuche againe, onely by vnkinde and vnaduiſed ingratitude, whom for their honeſt ſeruice doen to their countrie, thei neither coulde, nor ſhould without their greate harme or detrement haue wanted. For proofe whereof Themiſtocles that excellente capitaine (by whoſe onely counſaile and diligence, Xerxes was vanquiſhed, and chaſt out of Grece. His nauie alſo diſcomfited and ſcattered on the Sea, neither was Athens only by hym reſtored to libertie, but alſo all Grece to their deſired freedom) was by this practiſe vnkindly exiled. Like ſalerie receiued Simon that renoumed Athenian, whiche liued euen then in the ſame tyme with the other, whiche alſo ſo often tymes had been in fielde for the ſafetie of his countrie, wher, by his prowes, and counſaile, he accompliſhed ſuche enterpriſes, as peraduenture ſhall neuer anie one man againe after hym, to wéete he ſubdued the Perſians on the Sea, and tooke of theim at one tyme twoo hundred Gallies, and the ſame daie not hauyng throwly yet quailed their corrage, landed in good order with all his armie, geuing preſent bataile to the reſude of that companie,

which were then landed before hym, a houge and greate number, whom all notwithſtandyng he victoriouſly conquered, by Sea and by lande a moſt fortunate Capitaine. Beſides theſe his excellente vertues, he was alſo verie large and liberall vnto al men, makyng ſmall accompte of his goods where with fortune aboue others had largely indued hym: he did continually to be opened his fildes, and gardeines, to the ende, the indigent might thence gather ſuche thinges as they had néede of: he ſecretly alſo gaue to all men large almes, throughout the whole Citie, he péetied the afflicted, and comforted the néedie. He farther by expreſſe commaundemente, gaue charge to all his ſeruantes, that if thei any where founde an olde man bare or ill appareled, they forthwith ſhould beſtowe on hym, that theimſelues hadde on preſentlye, contēted to take for chaunge, their meane and poore arraie. To conclude he daily prouided a greate feaſte, for al poore men, without reſpecte, within the compaſſe of Athens, by meanes whereof in ſhorte tyme, he verie nigh hadde conſumed whatſoeuer to hym was lefte by his father Milciades. All theſe notwithſtandyng his princelie demerites, neither coulde or were able to exempte him from this exile, from the vnknowen crueltie, and ingratitude of his countrie, as to their perpetuall ignominie at full recordeth it Cratinus a Poete comicall, and Gorgias Leontinus. In maner ſemblable was baniſhed Ariſtides, the ſoonne of Liſimachus, who for his excellencie, and vertuous life, was of all men for good cauſe ſurnamed the iuſte, notwſtandyng the people both feared, & ſuſpected hym continually. Aboute the time then that thei ſhould proceade in theſe affaires, behold his ſtraūge happe, worthy of conſideration, there approacheth vnto hym one of the citiſens, whiche as he colde not write, ſo neither knewe he at all Ariſtides, but by fame for hys vertues onely, requeſtyng hym to write vpon his tile or ſtone, the name of Ariſtides, whom he ſaied he woulde

helpe at that tyme to baniſhe. Wherat Ariſtides, as altogether amaſed (for he neuer ſuſpected any ſuche matter) called hym, and ſaied: frende come hether, hath Ariſtides doen thee any diſpleaſure? Noe ſaied he, but it greueth me to heare hym ſurnamed Ariſtides the iuſte. Plutarche in this ſorte recordeth this matter, but Paulus Emilius affirmeth, that he framed hym this aunſwere: I knowe not Ariſtides, but I ſuppoſe it will little profite hym, that with ſuche diligence, and in ſo ſhort tyme, he hath attained to that fame, and honour, to bee called (as you heare) of all men Ariſtiſtes the iuſte. How be it, Ariſtides at all, gaue hym no aunſwere, but wrote, as his will was, his owne name in his ſtone. By whiche meanes afterwarde, vnkindly exiled, neither waxte he angrie, or greeued with his countrie, but contrariwiſe moſte quietly departynge, in preſence of the multitude, and before theim all ſaied: I praie the immortall Gods, that the Athenians neuer fall into any ſuch kinde of miſerie, that they ſhoulde haue néede of, or deſire Ariſtides againe. And in déede ſo came it to paſſe, that within fewe daies afterwarde they repented theym of their folly, acknowledging with greate grief their faulte and errour: for before theſe ten yeres of his exile were expired, yea in the ſixte yere, by common conſent, and ſuffrage of the people, he was called home againe, to his perpetuall honour, but to their ignominie, & the inexcuſable ſhame: after which his retourne, he did ſundry valiaunt, and worthie exploytes, beyng in perſon preſente, in that daungerous conflict, on the Sea adioyning to the Iſle Salamina, where Xerxes was vanquiſhed, as alſo preſente, at the ouerthrowe of Mardonius. So that as I firſte ſaied, thys lotte' of exile for the moſt parte ſtil fell on the moſt worthie, Mardonius was one of Xerxes Capitaines. and moſt renoumed perſonages. Notwithſtanding though hence grewe infinite diſcommodities, yet had it neuer the leſſe, a certaine ſhewe, or countenaunce of honour or maieſtie, eſpecially that it helde menne from vſurpation

an tyrannie, dréedyng the diſpleaſure and authoritie of the people. Plutarche writeth that the ſeignorie of Athens on a tyme floriſhyng as well in wealth, as in martiall affaires, and chiualry, there were two great eſtates in honour like, excelling all others, Nicias thone, Nicias, and Alcibiades, eache enuious of others honour. and Alcibiades the othe: which both in all thinges were verie curious and daintie, like ambitious and deſirous of glory, purſuing eche the other with enuious emulation: the time now of this Oſtraciſmus verie faſt approaching of whiche we haue aboue remembred, both fearyng the imminent incōuenience, & peril, did what in theim was, to aſſure theimſelues from the hard ſentence of exile. In this tyme ther alſo was in Athens one that had to name Hiperbolus, of baſe condition, proude, notwitſtanding, & verie ſeditious, whiche, not ignoraunt of the emulation betwixt Nicias, and Alcibiades, practiſed by all meanes, to increaſe the ſame, ſowyng betwixte theym ſeedes of impacable diſcorde and diſſention, hoping by this policie, to gain ſome reputation as alſo preſuppoſing, that theſe twoo, this remainyng (as he well truſted) enimies, the one of theim ſhoulde be baniſhed by the Oſtraciſmus followyng, by meane whereof, he imagined to gaine his place, and honour, and ſo conſequently to be accompted one of the chéefeſt of the whole citie. But thei both verie ſhortly, well ſkilled of his practiſe, diſdainyng that he of ſo meane eſtate, ſhoulde by this meanes become their equall, ſecretly aſſwaged their yre, and malice, plightyng preſent frendſhippe, and amitie, eche to other, better likyng to ceaſe from their rancour and malice, then to abide the haſſard of this preſent ſhame, and infamie. This doen eche of theym attempted nowe buſilie together to exile by the Oſtraciſmus, the malicious, infortunate, and vnhappie wretche Hiperbolus. Wherin they ſo carefullie and ſo wiſely traueiled, that they in déede accompliſhed, that thei ſo then affected, folding hym in that ſnare, that he prouided had for others. At which thing ye whole

multitude brake out into a laughter, beholdyng a wretche of ſo vile condition, in exile to be ſente forth, whither ſo many, and ſo valiaunte a prince, had paſt before hym. But in the ende this mirth ſo chaunged into rancour, that this cuſtome therewith ceaſte alſo for euer.
            
            
               Of ſundrie excellent perſonages, whiche by the ingratitude of their Countrie, haue vnkindly been baniſhed. Chap. 9.
               
                  ALL hiſtories are euerie where full, of the ſundrie and manifolde ingratitudes, practiſed by the moſte aunciente, and moſt famous Cities, euen againſt thoſe, that moſt honourablie haue ſerued, and defended theim, in their neceſſities. We therefore ſhall remember here not many examples, for that to the ſtudious in good hiſtories, it ſhould be leſſe neceſſarie, and ſuperfluous. The greate father of the Romaine eloquence, and Cicero. moſte ſoueraigne oratour, or ſince, or before hym, which from the perilous coniuration of Cateline deliuered that proude, and pompous citie Rome, was notwithſtanding at the ſute of his enimie Claudius, in recompence of his deſertes vnkindely baniſhed. Which his exile, in Rome, was ſo muche bewailed, that twentie thouſande in one daie wore mourning apparell for hym, by meane wherof, he was reſtored to his priſtinate libertie, called home with greate ioye, to his inſpekable honour. Demoſthenes the ſole prince of all gréeke eloquence, patrone, and protectour, of his countrie Athens, was alſo by the Athenians in his olde age, baniſhed, and yet had they had, ſome countenance of occaſion, ſufficiente ſhoulde it not haue been, to haue exiled of theimſelues, ſuche a one as was he. He lamented exceſſiuelie, and be weapte his departure, ſo that he wente thence in greate ſorowe, and melancolie,

who méetyng as he paſte, certaine Atheniens, his heauie enemies, beganne to haue ſome feare, and to doubt theim merueilouſly, whiche not onely did hym no kinde of outrage, but contrariwiſe did ſolace, and aide hym, in what ſoeuer was to him or fittyng or neceſſarie. Whiche thing ſome tyme, conſidered well of hym, as alſo that he was reproued, for bewalynge his departure, ſaied againe to thoſe, that did hym theſe curtiſies. Howe would you, that I ſhoulde not beweepe this my partyng, ſeyng my ſelfe baniſhed, from my natiue ſoyle and countrie, where alſo mine enimies, are ſuche, and ſo honeſte, that I muſt thinke my ſelf moſt happie and fortunate of al men, if in ſome other place I may finde frendes, as aſſured & comfortable? Metellus ſurnamed Numidicus, in reward of his victory, which he obtained againſt Iugurth kyng of Numidia, receiued vnkinde, and harde ſentence of exile, onely for that he woulde not accorde vnto a certeine lawe, whiche ſome others, at that tyme deſired to eſtabliſhe. Hannibal after that he had painfully in ſudry daungers well ſerued his countrie, and although beſides he was the moſt honourable, and moſt renoumed Capitaine of his tyme, yet might he not inioye the liberties of his countrie, but baniſhed, was forſte to range, an vnhappie pilgrime about the world. Camillus was alſo vniuſtly exiled from Rome, at which time the Gaules helde it in beſiege and tooke it, and finally as they aſſaulted the capitoll it ſelf, he beyng choſen againe in his baniſhment Dictatour, and Capitaine general of all his countrie, entered, flewe, and diſcomfited theim, & reſtored the Citie, deliuering theim out of priſō that before had exiled him. Seruilius Halla, after hauynge preſerued the libertie of Rome, from the ambitious oppreſſion of Spurius Emilius, Capitaine of the horſe men, whiche by all meanes poſſible, affected the croune, and had alſo doen him openly to die, in fine receiued in ſteede of iuſte guerdone, through baniſhment to liue, an exiled Romaine. No coū
                  trie

any where reade I of more bound vnto a man, then was Lacedemonie vnto Licurgus, eſpecially for his lawes which he ſo prouidently gaue theim. And although he alſo were of moſte holy, and vertuous conuerſation, courtuous and of a gentle ſpirite, and nature, of whom, as of hym reporteth Valerius Maximus, the oracle of Apollo Pithius, this doubtfully aunſwered, that he knewe not whether he might accompte him, either in the number of the gods, or els of mortall men: notwithſtandyng he often tymes was purſued of the citiſens with ſtones, beaten, and driuen by force out of their toune, and in the ende hauyng pluckte one of his eyes out of his heade, baniſhte hym alſo out of their lande & territorie. The ſemblabe was alſo doen, to Solon, by the Atheniens, whiche alſo gaue them like lawes, and ordinaunces as th'other, whiche if they had (as was his will) continuallie obſerued, their Empire, by all preſumption, had yet ſtill continued. Beſides that he alſo conquered, and recouered the Citie of Salamina, vnto theym, with the ſame alſo, aduertiſing theym of the rebellious coniuration of Piſiſtratus, which by vſurpation and tyrannie, buſily ſought, and affected the Croune, was yet notwiſtandyng in his olde, and ſtoupyng yeres, with moſte rigour exiled, not able by any meanes, at their handes to obtaine any one extreme coruer, or ende, hpon their frontires, whereſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe them there to make ende yet of his werie life, but to cōclude, inexorable, thei exiled him, into the Iſle of Cyprus. Scipio Naſica, whiche was reputed for the moſte vertuous, and worthieſt manne in Rome, whiche alſo neither merited leſſe honoure, in the adminiſtration, and gouernemente of the weale publike, then the other Scipioes by their prowes, and courage in the field, he notwitſtandyng after he had deliuered Rome, from the malice, and tyranny of the Grekes, vnderſtandyng of the enuie, and ſiniſter opinion, that diuers Romaines had conceiued of his vertuous dimerite,

fainyng that he wente ſome where in imbaſie, withdrwe hymſelf,, of purpoſe, and willingly into Pergama, wherwithout maliſing againe his vngrate countrie, ended the reſte of his daies there in peace. In like maner Publius Lētulus, after he had with honour defended his countrie, repreſſyng alſo the furious attemptes of the Gréekes, was with like curteſie, for his paines exiled: howbeit before his departure thence into Sicelie, beſought the gods immortall in the preſence of the multitude, that they neuer woulde permitte that he retourned againe, to ſo vnkinde as were they, and ſo vnthankfull a people. Boecius Seuerinus, a man to the aboue remembred in no poincte inferiour, was by Theodoricus the vſurper, diſhonourably expulſed, onely for that he ſuppoſed, he would paine hymſelf, to reſtore his countrie againe to libertie. For this cauſe alſo Denis, that execrable tyranne, exiled that moſt worthie Capitaine Dion of Siracuſa, who by his exile afterwarde became ſo puiſſant, that he againe reentred, and baniſhed the tyranne, depriuyng hym, of that hys ſeignorie for euer, reſtoryng his countrie to the priſtinate, and auncient libertie. The verie ſemblable happened to Traſibulus, a Capitaine Athenian, which by the fatall malice of thirtie tyrauntes, that then held the whole countrie in miſerable ſubiection, was alſo vnnaturallie, and vnkindlie exiled. But he notwithſtanding to reuenge himſelf on them, aſſembled together diuers others before expelled, with whom, as with the helpe alſo of Liſander, a Lacedemonian, retourned in armes againſt Athens, and deliuered it from ſeruitude. Publius Rutilius Conſull of Rome, baniſhed by the fauorites, or fauters of Silla, though, after deſired to returne again, refuſed ſaiyng: I will that Rome rather take ſhame, that ſhe hath ſo vniuſtly exiled me, then thanke her to returne again, that ſo rageth with tyrannie. Terquinins rhe proude, though not without cauſe in déede, but for his leude demainoure, caſte out of Rome,
                  
loſt his honour, and royalme, for the vnchaſte rape doen, by his ſoonne, on Lucretia. Milo Patricius an honourable Romaine, ſomewhat ſuſſpected, touchynge the death of Claudius, whoſe cauſe though it were of Cicero defended, was notwitſtandyng exiled into Marſeilla. Cliſtines was the firſte, that inſtituted the lawe of baniſhment in Athens, and the firſt that by the lawe was thence exiled. Euſtachius Pamphilius Biſhoppe of Antioche, was baniſhed for that he reproued the ſchiſmaticall ſecte of the Arians, in the tyme, & raigne of Conſtantine the greate. Paulus Diaconus that famous hiſtoriogripher, writeth that Pope Benedictus the firſte, was contrarie to Gods lawes and mans lawes, driuen out of Rome, by his ennemie the Emperour Auton. The ſaide Auton vanquiſhed the Emperour Beringerius, with his ſoonne Albert, and ſente theim bothe into perpetuall erile. Hence wee learne now, that infinite greate perſonages haue been expelled from their countries, and in Rome it was eſtéemed for ſo greate a puniſhment, that none was thence baniſhed, before all the people had throwly, conſulted of the matter. And aſſuredlye the affections that man beareth, or ofte to beare to his countrie, is continually ſuch, and ſo vehemente, that wee can not exile without extreame paine, and languiſhe. For the conſolation therefore, of all ſuche as ſhal be baniſhed, Plutarche hath writen a ſinguler treatiſe, as alſo Eraſmus, to the ſaide purpoſe a notable Epiſtle. Seneca in like maner, in his booke of conſolation, dedicated to Paulinus, touchyng the ſaide ſubiecte diſcourſeth verie learnedlie.
            
            
               Of a ſtraunge aduenture betide a certaine priſoner, and how after his weary impriſonment, he was in the ende made free and deliuered. Chapt. 10.
               
                  
                  AS thinges ſtraunge, and miraculous ſhould not to lightlie for any cauſe bee remembred, ſo neither minde I in this place to paſſe, or to reporte any thing, not lefte vs by ſome other of ſufficient warrant. Alexander of Alexandria, a man as is aboue ſaide, well ſkilled in the ſciences, writeth this among other things, as a truth moſt certaine. There was ſaieth he in Italie, the place he nameth not, a certaine greateprince, or gouernour of that countrie, whom by name he alſo leaueth, in his diſcourſe to remember, in all poinctes mercilis, cruell, and tyrannous. It chaūſed that a poore vaſſaule of his, a man of meane condition, againſt his will, and by happe, ſlewe hym a graye Hounde whiche he muche eſteemed, wherat this tyraunte waxte forthwith ſo wroth, that preſently he did hym to bée throwen into a greate and déepe doungeon, lockte vppe with many kayes, vnder ſafe and good garde. Shortly after his keper, in bringyng hym (as was his maner) hys repaſte or diner, founde all the doores lockte, and barde, as he before had leafte theim: but enteryng into the place where vſually this priſoner arreſted hym, founde hym not, but his chaines or fetters all whole, and not ſundred. Whiche thing reputed for ſtraunge, and merueilous, was incontinently preſented vnto the aboue remembred Gouernour, who with moſt diligence, that was to him poſſible, made generall ſearch for hym, from houſe to houſe, but failed to heare of hym, any thing in the world. The caſe, in this reſpect, ſéemed therfore miraculous, for that the fetters were all found in the pryſon that bounde hym, not crackte, or diſriueted, but faſt and ſurely ioygned, the gates eke ſo poſted that nothyng might paſſe therat. Thrée daies after this, the pryſone ſo remaynyng, as before ſtill faſtened, the kéepers then voyde of al charge, or care, hearde notwithſtandyng a ſoden ſkriche, or crie, in the ſame place, wher

of cuſtome this poore wretch before was lodged, and haſtynge to the place, to ſee what it might bee, founde the poore pryſoner there crauyng hys dinner, who was as before, faſte folded in hys fetters, hys face pale, wan, dreadfull to looke on, his eyes hollowe, and ſtaryng, reſemblyng more perfectly, a deade corſe, then man liuing. Theſe keepers hereat, altogether amaſed, demaunded hym where, or in what place he hadde ſuggerned, but he againe woulde aunſwere theym nothyng, but that they forthwith ſhoulde bryng hym to the gonernour, for that he had to acquainte hym with matters of importaunce, wherof his lorde, and ſeigniour aduertiſed, was brought incontinently, accōpained of many, before whom and in whoſe preſence, he preſented thus hys charge. Findyng my ſelfe ſaieth he, pryſoner, in ſo lothſome and obſcure a pryſon, I entred with verie payne, into déepe diſpayre, callyng on the Fende for ſucker, and aſſiſtaunce, to the intent he thence would carrie me, whither ſoeuer it beſt might like hym: who after ſmall ſute in terrible forme appeared, with whome in all pointes I throwly agreed, ſo that he thence would, and out of pryſon deliuer mee. Immediatly then he tooke me, and remoued me thence, I knowe not how, which waie, nor whither, ſodenly deſcendyng into certaine déepe places, terrible, tempeſtuous, obſcure, and dreadfull, where I behelde infinite millions, and millions again of people, whiche with vnſpeakable torment of fier, as well as otherwiſe, were ſo afflicted, as my tongue in no ſorte canne ſpeake or vtter, their tortors were ougly, and rampyng deuilles: there ſawe I all ſortes of people whatſoeuer, as Kinges, Popes, Dukes, Prelates, with diuers of mine owne acquaintaunce, late deade, and departed hence. Farther there founde I an olde frend of youres, of al others ſome tyme, moſt faithfull and aſſured, whiche of you demaunded me muche, of your behauour, and maners, and whether you yet remained ſuche as you were wonte to bee

(to wéete) a fell, and moſt accurſed tyranne: to whom I aunſwered yea, and that you ſtill remained, without chaunge the ſame, that he at hys death, and departure hence left you. By meanes wherof he moſte inſtauntly beſought me, that at my firſte returne I ſhoulde, from hym earneſtly aduertiſe you, to make chaunge of youre life, to leaue this your tyrannie, with none vnreaſonably taxis, to charge or greue the people, with many ſuch others, the like and ſemblable, for he aſſertened me that your place was there lotted out with him, where you Eternally ſhould ſmart for it, if in time you repented not. And to th'intēt you the better ſhould credite me, he gaue me to remember you, by this ſigne or token: tell him ſaid he, that when we both were in filde, and in armes together, that he remember, that one a tyme our watche worde was ſuche, which, ſuche as it was in dede, the priſoner faithfully recounted. This vnderſtoode, this greate lord or gouernour, began forthwith to feare, to tremble and appaule, aſſured that God onely, his frende, and hym ſelfe, knewe of thys watche worde, and beſides theym none other, and then demaunded what apparell, hys frende hadde on hym preſently, who aunſwered that he was none otherwiſe cladde, then he was wonte to bee here, attired ſumptuouſly in crimſin Satten. How be it ſaide he, in déede, it was none ſuche as it appeared, for it nothyng els was, but a burnyng, and continuall fier, for proofe wherof ſaide he, as I approached to haue thouchte hym by the ſléeue, I burnte my hande, as you preſentlie maye heere ſée. Beſides theſe he ſpake of other viſions, both fearefull, and terrible, of whiche all when this gentleman had well conſidered, he willed hym to be at libertie, in his owne houſe or pallace. Some reporte that heé was ſo pale, and ougly, that hardly hys owne wife, or other his frendes coulde knowe hym. He after this liued not many daies, ſkarce of perfecte minde, f
                     •
                  antike and weake. Notwiſtandyng how fewe ſoeuer they were, he

ſpente theim yet vertuouſly, prouidynge onely for the health and ſafetie of hys ſoule, for hauyng ordered howe his goods ſhould be after hym diſtributed, he continually ſpent the tyme, in bewailyng his offences. But how this matter profited, or called to repentance this noble man, therof writeth Alexander no one worde at all, onely affirmyng this hiſtory to be true.
            
            
               That the bloodde of a Bulle cauſeth theim to die that drinke therof at any time, as alſo, who firſt brought the Bull to the yoke. Chap. 11.
               
                  FOr as much as a Bull is a beaſt ſo common, and ordinarie, that wee as well féede on hym in euerie our neceſſities, as of that which he ingendereth mannes principall prouiſion, it mighte appeare ſtraunge and contrary to nature, that his blood dronke warme, with out anie kinde of mixtion, ſhoulde impoyſon, or cauſe man preſently, to ſterue, and to dye. Dioſcorides notwithſtandyng, as alſo 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . in his▪ 6 booke. Pli. in his. 28. 
                  Plinie affirme that hys blood warme, is verie peſtilente, and venemous, and that it killeth whoſoeuer thereof drinketh. Plutarche writing of Midas, of whom ſo many good hiſtories, and fables alſo make mention, ſaieth that he beyng troubled with certaine terrible imaginations, or viſions, in to whiche without amendmente he dailie entred farder and farder, by no meanes able to finde any kinde of remedie, determined (which he alſo performed) to drinke the bloodde of a Bull ſtrangled, whereof incontinentlie, and forth with he died, Themiſtocles an Athenian, and excellent Capitaine, whiche defended all Grece from the violence, and inuaſions of Xerxes, exiled from his countrie, wente thence to the courte of Artaxerxes,
                  
vnto whom (for iuſt cauſe greued with his vnkynde countrie) he promiſed to vtter a certaine meane, how he ſhould eaſely ſubdue and conquire all Grece: but when after the king called on him for the performaunce thereof, he then againe with minde wholy altered and chaūged, deſired rather to die, then to acquite him of hys promes, and ſo fainyng that he firſt would ſacrifice vnto Diana, drancke the bloodde of a Bull, whiche he then had ſacrificed, whence he preſently dyed as recordeth Plutarche. 
                  Plutarch in the life of Themiſtocles. The cauſe or reaſon that may hereof be geuen, why I ſaie, the blood of a bull droncke warme ſhould kil, is borrowed of Ariſtotle, Plinie, and Dioſcorides, who to Ariſtotle in his thirde boke, de animalibus. Plinie in his leuenth booke Dioſcorides in his ſixte boke. geather affirme, that it is, for none other cauſe, but that this bloodde ſo druncke ſtraungely congealeth, and hardneth incontinently, yea muche more then the bloodde of any other beaſte: ſo that in quantitie, once entered into the ſtomake, it curdeth, cauſing faintnes and ſuffocation, and ſtoppeth with the ſame the forces of reſpiration, and feelyng, whence ſodenlie of neceſſitie followeth alſo death. Plinie wryteth, that Colewo
                     •
                  rtes boyled in the aboueſaide bloodde are verie medicinable againſte an opilation: this bloodde then by it ſelfe drouncke is peſtilente, and venemous, but in compoſition mixt with other thinges, is both holſome and profitable. Manne (to whom god hath framed all thinges ſubiecte) hath by this beaſte no leſſe profite, and ſeruice, then by the others of that kynde, whiche he alone ingendreth. For which onely cauſe Columella preferreth hym before all other beaſtes, affirmyng that to kill a Bull, was in tymes paſte, a crime verie heinous, and almoſt in déede capital. Plinie writeth of one that was baniſhed, for that he kilde a bul. The firſte that tamed the Bull, and laide youke on hys Diodorus in his fourth and fifte booke. necke, was as Diodorus reporteth one Denis, or Dioniſius, the ſoonne of Iupiter and Proſerpina. But Plinie in his ſeuenth booke déemeth the contrarie, affirmyng that it was an Athenian, and hight Briges, others ſome ſuppoſe

that it was Triptolemus, of whom Virgill in thys ſorte ſéemeth to ſaie, that he an infant, was maiſter notwithſtandyng, and inuentour of the crooked Plough. Seruius indifferentlie attributeth it as well to Orſiris, as to Triptolemus. I ſuppoſe that Virgill leafte thereof to diſcouer the name, of the inuentour of a thing ſo profitable, and neceſſarie, for that (as it maie bee preſumed) it was not the inuention of one ſole man onely: but rather the wante and lacke therof, hath forced man in this caſe to deuiſe or inuente ſome thyng, to whiche ſome others to perfect it, haue alſo after added ſome what. Trogus Pompeius recounteth, that Auidis Kyng of Spaine, was the firſte that layde maiſteryng hande on the wilde and ſauage Bull, the firſte alſo that fitted theim to the yoke, or Plough: but in fine whoſoeuer it were, verie neceſſarie is hys ſeruice, and profitable in mannes affaires. This beaſt feedeth contrarie to all others, for in takyng his repaſte he goeth alwaies backwardes, all others, of what ſoeuer kynde, marchyng ſtill on wardes. Ariſtotle wryteth Ariſtotle in his thirde boke de animalibus. of a certaine kind of Bulles in Frigia, whoſe hornes are not faſtened in the inner parte of their heades, and in the bone, but toſſyng to and fro, growe onely copled to the ſkinne, by meane whereof they ſo turne theym at their pleaſure, as their eares, whiche thyng Elian in like ſorte plainly recordeth. The firſt that tamed Bulles in Rome, and kilde theim for mannes vſe, was Iulius Caeſar, whiche thyng Plinie recordeth largelie. This beaſte hath this propertie of nature or qualitie lente hym that he ſkilefully prognoſticateth of the weather continually, for when it ſhall raine, he foreſheweth it, in mountyng hys ſnoute, breathyng into the ayre, or otherwiſe in ſéekyng ſome couerte beſides his wonted manner.
            
            
               How neceſſarie water is in all the vſes of mannes life, of the excellencie of this element, and how to finde or trie, the beſt water from the other. Chap. 12.
               
                  
                  IN all, the vſes of mannes life, no one thyng is founde more neceſſarie, then the elemente of water, for if he lacke at any tyme bread, he maie with ſundry kindes of meates as hearbes nouriſhe the bodie, and if fire faile hym, ſunderie thynges are yet good, and holſome to be eaten rawe, ſo that man maie continue, and liue of them for a tyme: but without water, neither can man, beaſt, or what ſo els is, liue, or continue in this worlde at all. There is neither herbe, neither plante, of what ſort ſo euer he be, that without water, giueth any kinde of increaſe: for what ſo euer is, without exception it needeth ſome tymes water. Whence Thales Mileſius, as alſo Heſiodus, imagined, that water was the beginnyng of all thynges, the moſte auncient, and firſt of the other thre elementes, in vertue alſo, and force, without compariſon ſurpaſſyng them: for as hath Plinie, and alſo Iſidorus, water moiſteth and ſubuerteth greate mountaines, it ruleth, and hath dominion ouer the whole face of the yearth, it quencheth fire, and chaunged, into vapours, it alſo mounteth, or paſſeth into euery the regions of the aire, whence after a time, again it deſcendeth to giue increaſe, and multiplie all thynges vpon yearth. Farther, God ſo muche eſtemed this elemente aboue the reſte, that concludyng, to regenerate man againe by Baptiſme, would that his ſafetie ſhould growe of parte by this elemente. And in the beginnyng of the worlde, when he firſt deuided the waters, he in ſuche eſtimation had it, as hath the texte, yt he almoſte nexte would place it vnderneath the heauens, leſſe mindyng in that place, that houge heape of water, that boundeth, and limiteth the partes of the yearth. The greateſt torment that the Romaines, had at any tyme prouided for the cōdemned, was that thei were interdicted, bothe from water, and fire, remembryng water in this place before the other,

for the more aſſertained, and aſſured excellencie. Sithe then water is ſo neceſſarie, in euery the vſes of mannes life, here muſt we then cōſider of waters, which are the better. For accompliſhement whereof, this maie be the firſte note, who ſo will paſſe through places ſtraunge, and vnknowen, deſirous to learne, whither the waters be there holſome, yea, or not, as alſo whether they bée to be caried any other where, as neceſſitie, at tymes, or for cauſes, maie require, firſt let hym diligently, & with aduiſe conſider, the places adiacent about the ſpryng, or riuer, how long the inhabitantes there liue, their diſpoſition, and nature. Whither thei be healthie, ſtrong, and valiant, and of good complection, their iyes not infected, their legges of good proportion, and able, ſuche where ſo euer thei bee well witnes of the goodnes of their water: but contrary, if you finde them, then contrary muſt be your iudgement. But if your ſpring be late founde, ſo that the fore ſaied experience, of no parte helpe vs, then will we referre you to the practiſes followyng. Take a baſme of Braſſe; or other veſtell, cleane, neate, and very well poliſhed, then throwe ſome droppes of that wate
                     •
                   there on (of that water I meane, of whoſe goodnes you would make experimente) and if after it bee dried, you finde at all no kinde of ſtain, or marke; then is that water aſſuredly, bothe good and holeſome▪ An other good proofe maie be, if you pleaſe to boile of this water, in the ſaied veſſell, and after it hath boiled, to let it for a tyme; to ſtande, to ſettle, and to coole, then after when ye ſhall empte it, if in the bottome, you finde no kinde of ſlime; or ſande, then is that water to be reputed for good: and of theſe waters, if ye make proofe of two, that whiche hath leaſt, is to be accōpted, without more the beſte. Farther if in theſe veſſels, or in the ſemblable, you doe to bée boiled any kinde of pulſe, to make there with ſome potage, or other meate, as beanes, peaſe, or other of that ſorte, that water in whiche thei firſt ſeeth, is beſte. You muſt

conſider alſo, if certainly you will, iudge of waters, in what place, or ſoile thei ſpring, and riſe, if out of a ſandie grounde, cleare, andneate, or contrary out of a mirie ſoile, foule, and vnpure, and whither there growe any Ruſhes, or other herbes, or weedes noiſome, and peſtilente: but for better ſuretie, who ſo would drinke of a water vnknowen, or of ſuche, as he deemeth to bee indeede, leſſe good, lette hym with a ſmall fire, firſte of all boile hym, and then after beyng colde, drinke of hym in his neede. Plinie writeth, that the Emperour Nero, ſo boiled his water, and then coolyng it in the Snowe, gloried that he was the father of ſuche an inuention. The reaſon why water boiled, ſhould therefore be more conducible, is for that it is not pure, and ſimple in his owne nature, but is all together mixt, bothe with the earth, and the aire: notwithſtandyng, the parte windie, as it eaſily reſolueth, by the fire into vapours, ſo that other ſubſtaunce alſo terreſtriall, by the ſaied vertue, or force of the fire (whoſe qualitie, is to trie, and diſioigne contrary natures) deſcendeth to the bottome, and lower partes of the veſſell. By whiche meanes, this boiled water romaineth leſſe vaporous, all the windie ſubſtaunce thereof perfectly conſumed: it alſo again is more ſubtile, and light, beyng this purified from the groſſe and ſtimie ſubſtaunce, and ſo conſequently more eaſie to be kepte, and conſerued, compitently refreſhyng, and moiſtyng the bodie, without any alteration, or opilation at all. Whence it is euidente, that theſe deepe welles, or tye pittes, giue none ſo good, and holeſome waters, as are the others, principally for that, the water more ſauoureth of ſome ſlimie nature, and that it is at no tyme, purified by any ſhewe of the ſoonne, as that alſo it more eaſily putrifieth then any other. How bee it, the more that you drawe out of any ſuche Welle, the better, and the more profitable becometh the water, for that by continuall motion, corruption leſſe ingendereth, and nothing

better frō putrifaction preſerueth any water, then perpetuall, and inceſſante agitation: for ones corrupted, it impoiſoneth the newe waters, in their ſpringes theim ſelues, as letted or lackyng frée courſe or paſſage: but ſtil drawen, newe commeth on more freſhe ſtill, and ſauerie. For whiche cauſe the water of ſtanding pondes, and diches, is of all other moſte peſtilente, and venemous, whiche, for that it hardely ſpringeth, and hardely paſſeth thence againe, putrifieth, and ingendereth ſunderie impoiſoned matters, and ofte tymes (whiche worſte is) it corrupteth the aire, whence the inhabitauntes there about, are ordinarily infected. Conſider we alſo, that theſe waters, whiche flowe towardes the Southe, are not ſo holeſome, as thoſe that runne to the North: for the aire in the Southe, is more vaporous, and moiſte, whiche hurteth of parte, and impaireth the water: but in the Northe more ſubtile, and drie, whēce the water is more light, and more voide of ill mixtions. For whiche cauſe, that water is euer more beſte, whiche is moſte cleare, moſte light, moſte ſubtile, and moſte purified, for it is, as we fore ſaied moſte free, from the mixtion of the other elementes, and beyng ſet ouer the fire, wareth alſo warme, and boileth before any other. Farther alſo, a verie certaine, and ſinguler proofe of waters is this, if ye circumſpectly conſider, whiche of them firſt, or before the other boileth, beyng bothe putre in like veſſels, ouer one fire, with like conſideration of tyme in them bothe, alſo whiche of them in like maner, firſte retourneth to his naturall qualitie, to bee that, he firſte was, colde in taſte, and feelyng, for theſe are aſſured argumentes, of a moſt ſubtile, and pearſing ſubſtaunce: and for as much as the mixture of the yearth, with any kinde of water, forceth, or canſeth ſome alteration in waight, it ſhall be good to chuſe ſtill, that whiche you finde lighteſte, whiche eaſily you maie proue in this ſorte, and maner followyng. You ſhall take twoo peces of linen clothe, of

one and the ſame weight, puttyng one into one water, and the other into the other, vntill they be both throwe moiſtned, and weete, then hang theim in the ayre, wher the Sunne ſhineth not on theim, ſo long vntill thei both be perfectly drie, rewaight theim then againe, and the cloth whiche you finde to peiſe or drawe deepeſt, argueth his water to bee vndoubtedly moſte waightieſt. Other ſome haue vſed for their more expedition to waigh them in veſſeles pure, neate, cleane, in waight not differyng, with out any farther curioſitie at all. Ariſtotle and Plinie affirme, that the greateſt cauſe of diuers qualities in waters, is, and riſeth onelye of ſundrie ſubſtaunces, or maners of their ſoiles, by the meanes of Stones, Trées Mines, and Mettalles, through which theſe ſpringes or Riuers runne, and for this cauſe they become ſome hotte, ſome colde, ſome ſwéete ſome ſalte, ſome ſauerie, ſome leſſe ſauerie: wherefore it is a ſure, and an infallible rule, that theſe waters that haue no taſte, ſmell, or ſauour, are continually reputed, for the moſte holſome, and beſte. Al ſuche notwithſtādyng, as haue hereof writen, togither affirme, that theſe ſpringes, that paſſe thorowe mines of gold, excell, without compariſon, by many degrées the others: for proofe whereof, theſe riuers are accompted moſte worthie of all others, whiche ingender and preſerue gold in their fine, and ſmall ſandes: but becauſe we perticulerly, ſome thyng haue ſaied of the proprietie of ſpringes, and riuers, we leaue here to wearie the reader with examples. Now then, ſith ſome thynges haue been ſpoken of fountaines, and flouddes, it followeth that we conſequently treate of rainie waters, whiche of ſome are reputed for verie ſoueraigne, and medicinable, but of others ſome accompted leſſe profitable, or neceſſarie. Vitruuius and Columella, with certaine other Phiſitians, highly commende all rainie waters, but theſe eſpecially that are receiued cleane, pure, without any kinde of groſſe, or terreſtriall ſubſtaunce:

for that of them ſelues, ſaie thei, theſe waters, are light, and voide of all mixtion, cauſed onely of vapours, which by their onely ſubtilitie, are taken vp into the aire, leauyng, as maie bee ſuppoſed, all impure, or ſlimie ſubſtaunce behinde theim. Some neuertheleſſe, ſaie, that this water, deſcendyng in this ſorte from aboue, prutrifieth incontinently, as is to bée ſeen in ſtandyng pooles, or diches, whiche ingender infinite ordures. How bee it, to ſpeake indifferently, this is not to be attributed, to any defaute, or imperfection in this water, but rather for that it is reſerued in ſo vile a place, into whiche moſte commonly flowe, all noiſome ſinckes, and vnſauerie gutters, with others of that ſorte, leſſe meete to bée here remembred, as alſo of parte, by the ordure, that it draweth, and bryngeth with it, waſhyng the yearth, as it floweth into the aboue ſaied troughes, or diches, eſpecially when it powreth doune, or raineth aboundauntlie. Wherefore, the cauſe of this ſodaine corruption, of part procedeth from the extreme heate of the Sunne, of part for that it is ſo pure, and delicate, but mixte now with ſuche contagious, and lotheſome impurities, that it immediatly, and without ſtaie, corrupteth of neceſſitie. Notwithſtandyng, if this water ſo ſubtile, and well purified, were taken, fallyng from houſes, voide of duſte, or filthe, or rather before it touche any houſe, or other thing, were receiued into ſonie cleane, and pure veſſell, it maie be thought, that it would proue, more pure then any other, as alſo that it longer might bee, without putrifaction preſerned. Others ſome there are, that plainly affirme the contrary, as Plinie that writeth it to bee Plinie in his 32. boke, and third chapiter. nought, and vnholeſome, who alſo commaundeth, that we neither drinke, or taſte of it, for that theſe vapours, whence it in the beginnyng, and firſte of all riſeth, iſſue, and procede of diuerſe thynges, as alſo of diuerſe ſoiles, whence it alſo receiueth diuers, and different qualities, good, and badde, with like, and with the ſame facilitie.

And againe alleagyng ſome farther proofe, for his aſſertion, anſwereth alſo to that, that we aboue remembred, leſſe admitting it for comprobation ſufficient, as to ſaie, that it therfore is pure, or light, becauſe it is drawne into the regions of the aire, whether it (as is euidente) not naturally mounteth, but is taken by ſecrete force, and violency of the ſunne. Neither are theſe vapours, ſaieth he, which in the middle regiō of the aire, by extreme cold are altered into haile, or ſnowe, ſo pure, and ſo perfecte, as moſt men ſuppoſe them, but reſolued into water, are rather founde in verie deede peſtiferous, and noiſome. Beſides whiche defecte, he this againe addeth, that this rainie water, by the onely euaporation, and heate of the yearth, becommeth infected, euen in the ſame tyme, and inſtante that it raineth. For better proofe of whiche impuritie, it onely is to bee noted, how quickly, and how ſone, it becometh putrified, of whiche wee haue experience, often tymes vpon the ſea, where it impoſſible is, to preſerue, ſuche waters from corruption. For theſe cauſes now ciſternes, and depe welles, are of moſt men leſſe commended. How be it, touchyng theſe differente, and contrary opinions, eche manne maie ſentence, accordyng to his phantaſie: as for my parte, I willynglie would not prefarre, a rainie water, before the others, although in truthe it bee, in caſes more fittyng, and neceſſarie, and although alſo Plinie, whiche other wiſe, diſcommendeth it, letteth not to reporte, that fiſhes in ſtā
                  dyng pondes, and lakes, quickely waxe fatte, but then moſte eſpecially, when it moſte aboundantly raineth, ſo as thei maie be thought ſtill, to pleaſe moſte in this water. Theophraſtus ſaieth, that all hearbes in the gardein wéedes, or graſſe, what quantitie of water ſo euer you beſtowe on theim, ſpring thence, notwithſtandyng, in no reſpecte ſo well, as with ſome pleaſaunte, or ſmalle ſhowers of raine. In maner ſemblable writeth Plinie, of the reede, or bulle ruſhe, whiche the better to growe,

or proſpere, thirſteth ſtill for raine. Suche alſo is Ariſtotles opinion, and conſonante to the former, concernyng the fattyng, or impairyng of fiſhes.
            
            
               By what policie we may drawe freaſh water out of the Sea: and why colde water in fallyng maketh greatet noyſe then it woulde doe, if it were warme: finally why a Shippe on the ſalte water, beareth greater weight then on the freaſhe, Chap. 13.
               
                  
                     ARiſtotle writeth, as alſo Plinie, that we ſhoulde frame certaine veſſels of waxe, hollowe within, ſo bindyng, or cloſing theim, that in theim, be founde no hole, or vente, lettyng theim doune into the Sea, faſtned in ſome Nette, or other fitte matter, with long lines, or cordes, whence, (after they there haue béen the ſpace of one whole daie) if wée againe drawe theim, wee ſhall finde in euerie of theim a certaine quantitie of freſhe water, ſuche, and ſo good, as in any ſpring, or fountaine. The reaſon why the ſalte water becometh freaſhe, by the entraunce into theſe veſſels, is in thys ſorte geuen vs of Ariſtotle, who ſaieth, that the waxe beyng a bodie both full of powres, and ſwéete, graunteth paſſage to the moſt pure and ſubtill parte of the water, which as it leaueth without hys groſſe, and ſaulte ſubſtaunce, ſo pearſing it ſauereth of the waxie nature, ſwete and pleaſant. In truthe if it be ſo, (I ſaie againe, if it bee ſo, for that I neuer yet practiſed in any ſorte, this ſecrette) it might well ſerue in ſundrie our neceſſities, whiche commonly betyde vs, in infinite our affaires. How be it, I ſuppoſe, that if thys falte water waxe freaſhe by the onely and ſole enteraunce, in to the aboue ſaide veſſels, the ſaied veſſels in like ſorte, filled alſo full with the Sea, ſhoulde

geue vs ſome ſmall quantitie, or meaſure of freaſhe water, for filled, as is afore ſaide, why ſhoulde not the purer parte, paſſe through theſe porie veſſels, leauyng within, the ſlimie, or ſaulte ſubſtaunce of the Sea, as beyng caſt voyde into the Sea, ſhoulde receiue there, by contrarie order inwardes, water pure, and immixte, without any droppe at all of the other? The reaſon ſeemeth one, as tending both to one ende, vnleſſe we ſhould dwell here, on ſome ſcrupulous difference, arguing that by the ſame meane: and by the ſame facillitie, this freaſhe water diſtilleth not out, of the full veſſell, as on the other ſide it entereth, into the voyde, and emptie: for that ſome appearaunce is, of greater force, in goyng out, then is (as ſome ſuppoſe) at the entraunce, or comyng in: how be it, who ſo curious is, may make eaſie proofe, both of the one & the other. Farther for their ſakes, that pleaſe in theſe experimentes, one other thynge ſhall I write, in thys place not leſſe neceſſarie. Who ſo filleth at anye tyme twoo Bottles of one meaſure, the mouth, & necke, of like length, and widnes, the one with boilyng water, the other all colde, and ſtraigh waies will empte theim, after one ſorte, without gile (at one tyme, I meane, and in one inſtante tegether) ſhall finde that the colde water will, as well be firſt out, as alſo that in fallyng, it aſſuredly will yelde a greater brute, or noyſe: the boylynge water ſlidyng, on the other ſide, ſlowly and with leſſe noyſe. The reaſon is, that the warme water leſſe poyſeth then the colde, whiche by heate of the fier, hath loſte nowe the greateſt quantitie of his groſſe vapours: ſo that when firſte the colde water beginneth to ſtreame forthe, that parte that is behinde ſtill, by his weight puſheth, and thruſteth on the former, by continuall force, or fight as it were, in ſuche ſorte, that the onely weight firſte cauſeth the colde Bottle to empte, as alſo by the ſame meane, it noiſeth as is euident, or reſoundeth ſomthing farther. Whiche aunſwere as Ariſtotle, in this reſpecte

geueth, ſo alſo learneth he vs, of an other the like practiſe, which rather by experience, then reaſon, we ſee daily. A Shippe ſaieth he, in the Sea, or in the ſalte water, carrieth farre a greater weight, then he dothe in the freaſhe: for the Sea (addeth he) is a more thicke or groſſer ſubſtaunce, and beareth a charge, or burthen more houge then the other, beyng of a nature in reſpecte more pure, and ſubtile. For proofe whereof, experience this learneth vs, that if we caſt into a riuer an Egge, immediatly it ſinketh, and paſſeth to the bottome, but contrarie wiſe, if you throwe hym into the Sea, or ſalte water he ſwimmeth, as ſupported, by a greater force, or violēce.
            
            
               Of the renoumed and greate Tamberlaine, of the kingdomes and countries that he ſubdued, and finally of his practiſe, and maner in warre. Chap. 14.
               
                  THere hath béen amonge the Grekes, Romaines, the people of Carthage, and others, innitfie, worthy and famous capitaines, which as they were right valiaunt, and fortunate in war: ſo were they no leſſe fortunate, in that ſome others by writynge commended their chiualrie to the poſteritie for euer. But in our tyme we haue had one, in no reſpect inferiour to any of the others, in this one pointe notwithſtandyng leſſe happie, that no man hath vouchſaued, by hys penne in any ſorte to commende him, to the poſteritie following. So that I, who moſte deſired ſomethynge to ſpeake of hym, haue béen forced together here, and there little péeces, and pamphlets, ſcarce lendyng you any ſhewe of his conquirous exploytes, the ſame alſo confuſely, and without any order. This then, of whom we ſpeake, was that greate and mightie Tamburlaine: who in hys tender

yeres was a poore labourer, or huſbandman, or (as other ſome reporte) a common Soldiar, how be it, in the ende he became Lorde, of ſuche greate kingdomes, and ſeignories, that he in no pointe was inferiour to that prince of the worlde Alexander: or if he were, he yet came nexte him, of any other, that euer liued. He raigned in the yere of our Lord God, a thouſande, three hundred fower ſcore and tenne. Some ſuppoſe that he was a Parthian borne, a people leſſe honorable, then dread of the Romaines: his farher and mother, were verie poore, and néedie: he notwithſtanding was of honeſt & vertuous conditions, wel fewtred, valiant, healthie, quicke & nimble, ſharpe witted alſo, of ripe, and mature deliberation, and iudgemēt, imaginyng, and deuiſing, haute and greate enterpriſes, euen in that his moſt, and extreame penurie, as though he ſome times ſhoulde be a maiſter of many thinges. He was of a valiant and inuincible corage, ſo that from his Cradle, and infancie, it ſeemed he was vowed to Mars and merciall affaires onely. Where vnto he gaue hym ſelfe, with ſuche painefull indeuour, that hardlye a man might iudge, whether he were more happie in déede, in aduiſed couſel, or princely dexteritie. By meane of which his vertues, and others, that we ſhall hereafter remember, he in ſhorte tyme acquired ſuch honour, and reputation, as is to be ſuppoſed man neuer ſhall do againe. His firſt beginning was, as writeth Baptiſta Fulgotius, that beyng the ſoonne of a poore manne, kepyng cattle in the filde, liuyng there with other boyes of his age, and condition, was choſen in ſport by the others for their kyng, and althought they had made in déede, this their election in plaie, he whoſe ſpirites were rauiſhed, with greate, and high matters, forſt theim to ſwere to him loialtie in al thinges, obeyng hym as king, wher, or when, it ſhould pleaſe hym, in any matter to commaunde theim. After this othe then, in ſolemne ſorte miniſtred, he charged eache of theim forthwith to ſell their troope and cattell,

leauing this ſeruile and baſe trade of life, ſéeking to ſerue in warre, acceptyng hym for capitaine: whiche in deede they did, beyng quickly aſſembled of other worke men, and paſtours, to the full number, at leaſte, of fiue hundred: with whom the firſte attempte that euer be tooke in hande, was that they robde all ſuche marchauntes as anie where paſte nigh theim, and after he imparted the ſpoyle ſo iuſtlie, that all his companions ſerued hym, with no leſſe faithe then loue, and loyaltie, whiche occaſioned ſundrie others, a newe to ſeeke, and followe hym. Of whiche newes in the ende, the Kinge of Perſia aduertiſed, ſent forth vnder the conducte of one, of his capitaines, a thouſande horſes well appointed to apprehende and take hym: at whoſe commyng, he ſo well knewe in this matter howe to beare hym, that of his enimie he ſoone had made hym, his aſſured frende, and companion: in ſuche ſorte that they ioigned both their companies together, attempting, then before, enterpriſes much more greate, and more difficill. In the meane tyme a certaine diſcorde, or breache of amitie grewe, betwixte the Kyng of Perſia and his brother, by occaſion where of Tamburlaine tooke parte with the Kynges brother, where he ſo ordered the matter in ſuche ſorte, that he depoſed the King, and aduaunced the other. After this, by this newe prince, in recompence of his ſeruice, he was ordained generall of the greater parte of his armie, who vnder pretexte that he woulde conquire, ad ſubdue, other prouinces to the Perſians, muſtered ſtill, and gathered, more Souldiars at hys pleaſure, with whom he ſo practiſed, that they eaſely reuolted like Rebels followyng hym, ſubduyng their Leage, and Soueraigne. This hauynge nowe depoſed, whom he before aduaunced, he crouned hymſelf Kyng, and Lorde of that countrie. Now moued with compaſſion, towardes his owne countrie, whiche long tymes had been tributorie, to the Princes of Perſia, and to the Sarrazins, did theim to be frée, from all ſeruice,

and exactions, lottyng to theim for Prince him ſelfe, and none other. After this conſideryng with hym ſelfe, that he preſentlie hadde gathered a houge and greate armie, moued priuie mutenies and rebelliōs in other countries, by meanes wherof, in proſis of tyme he conquired Syria, Armenia, Babylon, Meſopotamia, Scythia Aſiatica, Albania and Media, with others, manie territories, riche alſo & famous cities. And although we finde written nothing, of any his warres whatſoeuer, yet is it to be preſumed yt he fought many a bataile in open filde with the ennimie, before he had ſubdued ſo many, kingdomes and territories: for as muche as all thoſe that remember of hym anie thyng, commende to vs the haute exploytes, of this moſte valiaunte perſonage, and farther that hee ſo circumſpectly ordered his companie, that in his Campe was neuer knowen, any brawle, or mutenie. He was verie courteous, liberall, doyng honour to all menne, accordynge to their demerites that woulde accompanie, or follow him, feared therefore equally, and loued of the people. He ſo painefullie, and with ſuche care inſtructed his Souldiars, that in an inſtante alwaies, if it were behouefull, either by ſounde of Trompette, or any other, one, onely ſigne geuen, euerie man was founde in his charge, or quarter, yea though his armie were ſutche, ſo greate, and ſo numerous, as neuer beſides him ſelfe, conducted anie other. In fewe his Campe reſembled one of the beſt, and richeſt Cities in the worlde, for all kinde of offices were there founde in order, as alſo greate heapes of marchauntes to furniſhe it with all neceſſaries. He in no caſe permitted any robberies, priuie figgyng, force, or violence, but with ſeueritie and rigour puniſhed, whom ſoeuer he founde thereof, giltie, or culpable, by meanes where of his Campe, was no worſe of all prouiſions furniſhed, then the beſt Citie in the worlde, in time of moſt ſafe, and aſſured ſecuritie. His deſire was, that his Soldiars ſhoulde euermore glory, in their martiall prowes,

                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
their vertue, and wiſedome onely. He paide them their ſalerie, and wage, without fraude, he honoured, he praiſed, he imbraſt, and kiſte theim, kepyng theim notwithſtandyng in awe and ſubiection. This beyng king nowe, and Emperour, of ſundrie Realmes, and Countries in Aſia, greate troupes came to him ſtill, out of euery quarter, beſides theſe that were in anie reſpect his ſubiectes, for the onely fame, of his honour, and vertue. So that his Campe grewe in ſhort tyme to be greater, then euer was that of Darius or Xerxes, for ſoche as write of hym, reporte that he had, fower hundred thouſand horſemen, but of foote men a greater number, by two hundred thou ſande more, whiche all he ladde with hym, at the conqueſte of Aſia the leſſe: where of the greate Turke aduertiſed, who then hight Baiaceth, Lorde and Prince of that countrie, but preſent then in perſon, at the ſiege of Conſtantinople, hauyng a little before ſubdued ſundris prouinces, and partes of Grece, with other territories adiacent, and Tounes there aboute, thence growen to more wealth, and more feared, then any Prince in the world, was neuer the leſſe conſtrained to raiſe his ſiege incontinentlie, paſſyng thence into Aſia with all his armie, taking vppe ſtill by the way, as many as was poſſible, ſo that as ſome affirme, he had as many horſemen as had the greate Tamburlaine, with a merueilous number of other Souldiars, bothe olde, and of muche experience, eſpecially by meanes of the continuall warres, which he had ſtill with the chriſtiās. This Baiaceth now like a good, and like an expert Capitaine, ſeing that he no waie els might reſiſte, this puiſſante Emperour, determined to méete hym, and to geue hym preſent battaile, hauyng merueilous affiance in the approued manhoode, and vertue of his Souldiars. Wherefore marchyng on within fewe daies, they mette eache with other vppon the confines of Armenia, where both of theim orderyng as became good Capitaines their people, beganne in the

breake of day, the moſt cruell, and moſt terrible battaile that earſt was euer harde of, conſideryng the nomber on both partes, their experience, & pollicie, with the valiant currage, and prowes of their capitaines. This continued they in fighte euen almoſte vntill night, with merueilous ſloughter on bothe ſides, the victorie yet doubtfull, til, in the ende the Turkes beganne to fainte and to flée, more in déede oppreſt with the multitude, then that thei feared or other wiſe, the moſte parte of theim with honour diyng manfully in the filde: and as one reporteth two hundred thouſand were taken priſoners, after the battaile was ended, the reſude ſlaine, and fledde for their better ſafetie. Whiche Baiaceth, of parte perceiuyng before the ende, how it woulde waie, to courage his people, and to withdrawe theim from flight, reſiſted in perſon valianntly the furious rage of the enimie. How be it, he therby gained ſuch, and ſo many knokes, that as he was in the ende, in déede vnhorſte, ſo was he for lake of reſkewe preſented to the greate Tamburlaine, who incontinently cloſed hym vppe, in a Kaege of yron, carriynge hym ſtill with hym, whither ſoeuer he after wente, paſturyng hym with the croomes, that fell from hys table, and with other baddde morſelles, as he had béen a dogge: whence aſſuredly we may learne not ſo much to affie in riches, or in the pompe of this world: for as muche as he that yeſterdaie was Prince and Lorde, of all the worlde almoſt, is this daie fallen into ſuche extreame miſerie, that he liueth worſe then a dogge, fellowe to theim in cōpanie, and that by the meanes of him that was ſomē tymes a poore Sheaperde or if you rather will, as ſome reporte, a meane ſouldiour, who after as we ſeé aſpired to ſuche honour, that in hys time none was founde that durſt, or coulde abide hym: the other that deſcended of noble race or linage, conſtrained, to liue an abiecte, in moſt lothſum, and vile ſeruitude. This tragidie might ſuffice, to withdrawe men, from this tranſitorie pompe,

and honour, acquaintyng theimſelues with Heauen and with heauenly thinges onely. Now this greate Tamburlaine, this mightie Prince, and Emperour, ouer ranne all Aſia the leſſe, to the Turke before ſubiect, thence turning towards Egypte, conquired alſo Syria, Phenicia, and Paleſtina, with all other Cities on their borders, of what ſide ſo euer, and beſides theſe Smirna, Antioch, Tripolis, Sebaſta, and Damaſcus. Afterwarde being come, with al his armie into Egypte, the Soudan, and the kyng of Arabia, with ſundrie other Princes, aſſembled altogether, and preſented hym battaile, but in the ende to their inſpecable detrement diſcomfited, were flaine, and ſpoiled at the pleaſure of the ennimie: by meane whereof the Soudan ſaued hymſelf by flight. How be it, Tamburlaine had eaſely taken from hym all Egypte, hadde it not been, for the greate, and inacceſſible, deſertes in that country, through whiche to paſſe with ſo puiſante an armie, was either impoſſible, or at the leaſte verte difficill, not withſtandyng he ſubdued all ſuche partes of the Countrie as were next hym. Some report of hym, that he then hym helde beſt contented, when he founde his ennimy moſte ſtrong, and beſt able to reſiſt hym, to thende he might be occaſioned, to make proofe of hymſelf, what he was able to doe, and how muche in his neceſſitie: that whiche well chaunced hym at the citie of Damaſcus. For after he had taken the moſt honourable, and moſt valiante perſonages of the citie, the others retired into a certaine Caſtell or Holde, ſuche, and ſo ſtronge, that all menne accompted it inpregnable, where, neuer the leſſe, deſirous to growe, to ſome compoſition with hym, were vtterly refuſed, no intreatie preuailyng▪ ſo that in fine, they muſte néedes fight it out, or yelde theim to his mercie. And findyng no place, where he by any meanes might aſſaulte it, builte faſte by it an other more high and ſtronge then that, where he ſo painfully, and in ſuche ſorte diſpatchte it, that the ennimie by no meanes colde or lette or annoie

hym, ſo that his Forte in the ende or equall, or rather higher then the other, beganne his batterie, ſuche, and ſo cruell, that it neuer ceaſte daie nor night, vntill at laſt he had taken it. It is writen of him, that in all his aſſaultes, of any caſtell or citie, he vſually would hang out to be ſéen of the enimie, an Enſeigne white, for the ſpace of one full daie, whiche ſignified, (as was then to all men well knowen) that if thoſe with in, woulde in that daye yelde theim, he then woulde take theim to mercie, without any their loſſe of life or goods. The ſeconde daie hee did to bee hanged out an other all redde, lettyng theym thereby againe to vnderſtande, that if they then woulde yelde, he onelie then woulde execute Th'officers, Magiſtrates, maiſters of houſholdes, and gouernours, pardonyng, and forgeuyng all others whatſoeuer. The thirde daie he euer diſplaied, the thirde all blacke, ſignifiynge therby, that he then hadde ſhutte vp his gates from all compaſſion and clemencie, in ſuch forte, that whoſoeuer were in that daie taken, or in anie other then folowyng, ſhoulde aſſuredly die for it, without any reſpecte, either of man, or woman, little or greate, the Citie to be ſackt, and burnt withall to aſhes: whence aſſuredly it can not be ſaide, but that he was verie cruell, though otherwiſe adorned, with many rare vertues. But it is to be ſuppoſed, that god ſtirred hym vppe an inſtrument, to chaſtice theſe princes, theſe proude, and wicked natiōs. For better proofe whereof Pope Pius, whiche liued in his tyme, or at leaſte, eight or tenne yeres after hym, reporteth of hym ſaiyng, that on a tyme beſeigyng, a ſtrong and riche citie, which neither on the firſt, or ſecond would yelde to him, which only daies, were daies of mercie, as is aboue ſaide, on the third day neuertheleſſe affiyng on hope vncertaine, to obtaine at his handes ſome mercie, and pardon, opened their gates, ſendyng forth in order towardes hym, all their wemen, and children in white appareled, bearing eche in their handes a branche of Oliue,

criyng with haute voice, humbly requeſtynge, and demaundyng pardon, in maner ſo pitifull, and lamentable to beholde, that beſides him none other was but woulde haue accepted their ſolemne ſubmiſſion. This Tamburlaine, notwithſtandyng that beheld theim a farre of, in A barbarus crueltie of Tamburlaine. this order iſſuyng, ſo farre then exiled from all kinde of pitie, that he commaunded forthwith, a certaine troope of horſemen to ouer runne, to murther, and kill theym, not leauyng one a liue, of what condition ſoeuer, and after ſackyng the Citie, reſed it, euen vnto the verie foundations. A certaine Marchaunte of Genua was then in his campe, who had often recourſe to him, who alſo vſed hym in cauſes familiarly, and who for that this facte ſeemed verie bloodie, and barbarous, hardned hymſelfe to demaunde hym the cauſe why he vſed theim ſo cruelly, conſidering thei yelded themſelues, crauing grace, & pardon: to whom he aunſwered in moſt furious wrath, and yre, his face redde and firie, his eyes all flamynge, with burnyng ſpearckles, as it were blaſing out, on euerie ſide. Thou ſuppoſeſt me to be a man, but thou to muche abbuſeſt me, for none other am I, but the wrathe, and vengeaunce of God, and ruine of the worlde: wherefore aduiſe thée well, that thou neuer againe preſume, to bee founde in any place in my 
                     •
                  ight, or preſence, if thou wilt that I chaſtice the
                     •
                   not, accordyng to thy deſert, and thy proude preſumption. This Marchaunte with out more then ſodenly retired, neither after that, was at any time ſeen in the campe of Tamburlaine. Thoſe thinges this accompliſhed, this greate and mightie Perſonage hauyng conquired many countries, ſubdued and done to deathe ſuudrie Kinges and Princes, no where findyng any reſiſtaunce in any parte of all Aſia, retourned home againe into his countrie, charged with infinite heapes of Gold, and treaſure, accōpanied alſo with the moſt honourable eſtates, of al the cūtries ſubdued by him, which brought with theim in like maner, the greateſt parte alſo of

their wealth and ſubſtaunce, where he did to be builte a moſte famous, & goodly citie, and to be inhabited of thoſe (as we fore ſaied) that he brought with hym, whiche altogether no leſſe honourable then riche, in verie ſhorte tyme with the healpe of Tamburlaine, framed the moſt beautifull and moſte ſumptuous Citie in the worlde, whiche by the multitude of the people, was alſo merueilouſly inlarged, abundaunt, and full of al kinde of riches. But in the ende this Tamburlaine, though he maintained his eſtate, in ſuche aucthoritie and honour, yet as a man in the ende, he paieth, the debte due vnto nature, leauyng behinde hym twoo ſoonnes, not ſuch as was the father, as afterwarde appeared by many plaine, and euident ſignes: for as well by their mutuall diſcorde, eache malicing the other, as alſo by their inſufficiencie, with the lacke of age and experience, they were not able to kéepe, and maintaine the Empire conquired by their father. For the children of Baiaceth, whom they yet helde as priſoner, aduertiſed of this their diſcorde, and diſſention, came into Aſia with valiaunt courage, and diligencie, by the aide of ſuche people as they founde willing to aſſiſte theim, recoueryng their poſſeſſions, and territories fore loſte, whiche, in maner ſemblable did they other Princes, whiche Tamburlaine before had alſo ſubdued. So that this Empire in proſis of tyme ſo declined, that in our age there remaineth nowe no remembraunce at all of hym, ne of his poſteritie or linage, in what reſpecte ſoeuer. How be it, true it is, that Baptiſta Ignatius, a diligent ſearcher of auncient antiquities, reporteth that he leafte twoo ſoonnes, Princes and Protectours of all the countries, ſubdued by hym, reachyng, and extendynge euen vnto the Riuer of Euphrates, as al ſo their ſucceſſors after theim, euen vntill the tyme of Kinge Vſancaſan againſte whom the Turke. Mahomet, waiged ſome tymes bataile. And the Heires of this Vſancaſam, as moſt men ſurmiſe, aduaunced theimſelues, to the honour,

and name of the firſt Sophi, whēce now is deriued the empire of Sophi, whiche liueth this daie, as ſworne ennimie to the Turke. Whiche how ſoeuer it be, it is to be ſuppoſed, that this hiſtorie of Tamburlaine, had it of anie been written, woulde haue been a matter worthie both of penne and paper: for that greate exploytes, no doubte were happily atchiued of hym: but as for me I neuer founde more, then I here preſently haue writen, neither ſuppoſe I that any other thinge, is of anye other man writen, this onely excepted, where on all men accorde, that he neuer ſawe the backe, or frounyng face of fortune, that he neuer was vanquiſhed, or put to ſlighte by any, that he neuer tooke matter in hande, that he brought not to the wiſhed effect, and that his corage, and induſtrie neuer failed hym to bryng it to good ende. By meanes whereof we maie, for iuſte cauſe compare hym with any other whatſoeuer, though renoumed in tymes paſt. This then that I here geue you, that al haue I borrowed of Baptiſta Fulgotius, Pope Pius, Platina vppon the life of Boniface the ninth, of Mathew Palmier, and of Cambinus a Florentine, writyng the hiſtorie, and exploytes of the Turkes.
            
            
               Of many lakes, and fountaines, the waters of whiche haue ſundrie, and ſtraunge proprieties. Chapt. 15.
               
                  IN the Chapiter, where we aboue, ſome thyng ſpake in generall, of the perfection of waters, we promiſed to intreate of the proprietie, or effecte, of certaine ſpringes, or lakes, in perticuler: of which all, the firſt ſhall bée the riuer of Iudea, Aſfaltida, whiche alſo was after called the immoueable, or deade ſea. Of this water Plinie,

Columella, and Diodorus Syculus, reporte many thynges, bothe ſtraunge, and meruailous. Firſte, that there ingendereth, neither fiſhe, foule, or any other liuynge creature, and that nothyng hauyng life, maie there in be drouned, ſo that if you throwe into it, a man, or any other creature, he by no meanes ſhall periſhe there in, yea, though he be bounde in ſuche ſorte, that he neither ſwimme, or moue. Theſe thinges are recited by Plinie: and Ariſtotle to giue ſome naturall reaſon for it, Plinie in his 5. booke, and Ar. in the thirde of his Mereo. ſaieth, that the water of this riuer, is verie ſalte, groſſe, troubleſome, and thicke. Cornelius Tacitus addeth alſo this, an other proprietie, that it neuer moueth, or riſeth in any waues, for no winde, what ſo euer, or greate, or vehemente. Theſe foreſaied aucthours affirme, as alſo Solinus, that at one certaine tyme, there gathereth together in this lake, a ſtraunge kinde of frothe, or ſlime, whiche is ſo good, and ſo ſtrong a morter, that hardly any waighte, or other force diſſolueth it. Diodorus Syculus termeth it Bitumen, and Asfalta, ſo that it ſemeth to take his denomination, of this riuer Asfaltida. Of other lakes we reade, that ingender the like ſlime, or morter, as that, that adioigneth ſo nigh vnto Babilon, with the frothe of whiche, Semiramis did to be built thoſe famous walles of Babilon. Into this water of Iudea, deſcendeth the ſloodde of Iordaine, whoſe water is moſte pure, and excellent: but enteryng into the other, looſeth his priſtinate vertue, by the onely impuritie, and imperfection of the other. It is written, that Domician ſent thether of purpoſe, to be aſcertained of the truthe, concernyng this matter, and receiued for aunſwere, as is afore ſaied. Plinie remembereth vs of an other in Italie, called Aue
                        ••
                     a nigh vnto the ſea, or goulfe of Bayas: and this lake is of this propertie, or condition, that there paſſeth no birde, of what kinde ſo euer he be, ouer it, but immediatly he falleth doune dead into it. The Poete Lucretius, yeldeth this reaſō for it, ſaiyng: that by the meanes of the great

number of trees, that on bothe ſides inuiron it, and of parte by meanes of the continuall ſhadowe, there aſcendeth ſuche a vapour, ſo groſſe, and ſo infectious, that immediately it ſtifleth, or impoiſoneth the birdes: and farther he addeth, that it of parte alſo procedeth, of certaine obnoxious, and ſulfured mines there. Theophraſtus, and Plinie, accorde bothe tegether, of a riuer in Iudea called Licos, as alſo of an other in Ethiopia, of like and ſemblable nature, hauyng the proprieties of oile, or the like matter, whiche put into a lampe, giue lighte, and burne incontinently. Pomponius Mela, and Solinus, writyng of Ethiopia, affirme, that there is a lake, or riuer, verie ſwete, pleaſante, and cleare, in whiche notwithſtanding if any man waſhe hym ſelf, he iſſueth thence againe all annointed, as if he came out of a bathe of oile. The ſemblable to this reporteth Vitruuius, ſaiyng: that there is a certaine floudde in Cilicia, as alſo nigh vnto Carthage, a well of the ſame propertie. Solinus, Theophraſtus, and Iſidorus affirme, that thei haue heard of twoo diuers welles, of the one, of whiche twoo, if a woman fertile, chaunce to drinke, ſhe from that tyme euer after, ſhall liue ſterill, and baron: and contrary wiſe, if a woman ſterill, by happe, drinke of the other, ſhe forthwith becometh fruitfull, and beareth children aboundantly. Thei againe remember vs of an other in Arcadia, of whiche who ſo drinketh, ſtearueth immediatly. Ariſtotle in his queſtions naturall, ſpeaketh of one in Thracia, of like, and ſemblable effecte, as alſo of an other, equall to it in Sarmatia. Herodotus hath, whiche Plinie, and Solinus confirme, that the riuer Hypenis, bothe great and wide, deſcendyng doune from Scithia, is a water right holeſome, and ſauourie, into the which, neuer the leſſe, after the enteraunce of a little ſpring, or fountaine, it waxeth ſo bitter, and ſo vnſauerie, onely by the ſaltneſſe, or vnpleaſante taſte of that welle, that it is vnpoſſible for any man, in any wiſe to drinke of it. The ſaied aucthours againe

as alſo Iſidorus remember vs, of twoo other fountaines, or ſpringes in Boecia, of whiche the one beyng drounke, vtterly taketh from vs our memorie, the other preſerueth it, cauſyng theſe that there of drinke at any tyme, freſhely to call to minde againe, what thei before had, or loſte, or forgotten. Of twoo others alſo, the one mouyng, and prouokyng menne to venerie, the other druonke cooleth, and mortifieth their affections. In Sicilia there is a fountaine, whiche the inhabitauntes call Aretuza, of which (beſides the multitude of fiſhe therin, as alſo that it was an offēce, to take, or to eate of theim) a ſtraunge, and thyng incredible, is crediblie reported, whiche is, that within this water, many notable thynges haue been founde, whiche in tymes long before, had been throwne, into the riuer Alfea, whiche is in Achaia, a conntrie of Grece: by meanes whereof thei maintain, and affirme, that the water of this riuer, paſſeth thorowe the entrailes of the yearth, ſpringyng, and riſyng againe in the aboue ſaied fountaine, paſſyng vnder the ſea, betwixte Sicilia, and Achaia. The aucthours that reporte it, are of ſuche credite, and learnyng, that thei eaſily maie harden an other man, to write it againe after them. Seneca affirmeth it, Plinie, and Ponponius Mela, 
                  Sen. in the. 3. booke of his naturall queſtions. Pom. M. in his ſeconde booke Strabo in the. 6 
                  Strabo, and Seruius commentyng on the tenth Eglogue of Virgil. Solinus, and Iſidorus haue this of an other foū
                  taine, in to whiche, who ſo putteth his hande (for the affirmation, or negation of any thyng) takyng a corporall othe, if he there proteſte any thyng, againſte the truth, or veritie, his iyes incontinently will drie vp, and waxe blinde. Plinie recordeth the verie ſemblable, alſo of an other riuer, whiche brunte of the hande of a periured wretche, whiche reportyng an vntruthe, ſwore by the ſaied water, thruſtyng his hande into it. Philoſtratus in his ſeconde booke, of the life of Apollo, ſaieth that there was a certain riuer, in whiche, who ſo waſhte his handes, and feete, beyng in deede a wilfull, and reatchleſſe

periurer, was incontinently couered, with a foule, add lothſome leproſie. Diodorus Siculus hath the like alſo of an other. But if theſe thynges to any manne, ſeme leſſe worthie of credite, knowe he, that Iſidorus a man vertuous, and learned, in the reporte of theim, hath followed in moſte places, the aucthours aboue remembred and writeth alſo of many others, as of the welle of Iacob in Idumea, whiche fower tymes in the yere, chaungeth his colour, and from three monethes, to three, waxeth thicke, and troubleſome, it now is blacke, now red, now gréene, and at laſte retonrneth to his naturall colour againe. Of a riuer alſo that runneth through the countrie, of the Troglotides, whiche three tymes in the A people in Africa whiche dwell in caues and eate the fleſhe of Serpentes. daie, and night, chaungeth his taſte, or ſauour, to weete, from ſweete to bitter, and from bitter to ſwéete againe. Of an other water alſo in Iudea, whiche continually in the Saboth daie, is founde to be drie, whiche Plinie aſſureth vs, writyng alſo of an other fountaine, emong the Garamantes, whiche in the daie, is euermore ſo ſwéete, and colde, that it is impoſſible for any manne to drinke of it, and contrary in the night, is againe ſo warme, that it burneth his hande, that preſumeth to touche it, and hath to name, the fountaine, or welle of the Sunne. Of this fountaine haue writen, as of a thing moſte certain, Arrianus, Diodorus, Siculus, Quintus Curtius. in his hiſtorie of Alexander, Solinus, and the Poete Lucretius, 
                  Lucretius in his ſixt booke. who there of hath giuen a Philoſophicall, and naturall reaſon. Beſides theſe, like ſtraunge is the nature of the welle Eleuſina, whoſe water is verie freſhe, cleare, and ſtandyng, how be it, if any man plaie on an inſtrument, ſwéete, and muſicall, by it, ſo nigh I meane, that the water maie be ſuppoſed to heare it, it forthwith beginneth in ſuche ſorte to ſwell, that it ouerſloweth bothe banke, and border, as though it had ſome pleaſure, or ſecrete likyng in muſike: this reporteth Ariſtotle in his meruailes of nature, Solinus alſo, and the old Poete Ennius. Vitrunius
                  
writeth of the riuer Chimera, whoſe water in taſte is verie delectable, and pleaſaunte, but partyng into twoo troughes, or twoo ſundrie chanels, the one continueth ſwéete ſtill, the other bitter, and vnſauerie, how bée it, it maie bée ſuppoſed, that he borroweth this alrered qualitie, of the ſoile, or ground onely, through which he paſſeth, and ſo that alteration is leſſe to be meruailed at: as alſo it maie bée thought, that theſe diuers proprieties, of theſe, other waters alſo, ſhould not ſo muche amaſe, and trouble vs, if wee knewe the occaſions, and cauſes, of their effectes. The ſame ones againe, make yet farther mention, of an other ſtreame, hayung to name Silar, whiche, what ſo euer is caſte into it, conuerteth it ſtraight into a ſtone, or ſtonie ſubſtaunce. In Ilirica there is a welle, whoſe water is bothe ſwéete, and pleaſaunt, but burneth what ſo euer is throwne into it, in ſort, as if it were a perfecte fire. There is in Epirus an other fountaine, into whiche if ye putte a Torche lighted, it extinguiſheth, but if you putte hym in not lighted, he taketh fire thence, and burneth: from noone euer more he ebbeth, as it were, and in the ende waxeth drie, but the night growyng on, he growes againe with ſuche ſpede, that at midnight, he is full, and beginneth to ouer run his banckes, or limites. An other fountaine is there alſo in Perſia, of whiche, who ſo drinketh, loſeth incontinētly his téeth. There are in Arcadia certaine ſpringes, whiche diſtill, and droppe out of the ſides of ſunderie mountaines, whoſe waters al, are ſo exceſſiue cold, that there is no kinde of veſſell, be it of golde, ſiluer, or any other mettall, that is able in any wiſe, to holde, and kepe theim, but breake them all, with extremitie of coldnes, onely the horne of an aſſe his foote excepted, whiche cō
                  taineth, and kéepeth theim, as if it were any other, common kinde of water. Wée would hardly credite in this place, that there are certaine riuers, bothe greate, and wide, that ſodainly paſſe doune, entering into the boiles

of the yearth, whiche afterwarde brake out againe, in places farre of, and farre diſtante from thence, if wee had not experience hereof, and ſuche as maie not bee denied, for example of ſome, Vadiana in Spaine, Tigris in Armenia, whiche ſpringeth in Meſopotamia, Licus in Aſia. There are certaine ſpringes alſo, of freſhe water, whiche paſſyng into the ſea, runne wholie vpon the ſea, without any commixtion in any ſorte with it: of whiche there is one, betwixte Sicilia, and the Iſle Enaria, adioygnyng vnto Naples. In Egipte, it is euidente, that it raineth not at all, but that Nilus ouerflowyng the countrie moiſteneth it naturally, whence it giueth her fruite, of all ſortes aboundantly. Twoo riuers are there alſo in Boecia, in the one of whiche, all ſhepe that are watered, beare onely blacke wolle, and beſides that none other, the other contrary, cauſe theim that drinke thereof, to beare white wolle onely. In Arabia, there is a welle, at whiche (as before) what ſheepe ſo euer water theim, beare there wolle, not as the others, white, or blacke, but redde all. Of all theſe waters, hauyng ſuche ſtraūge proprieties, Ariſtotle diſputeth at fulle, and copiouſly. The riuer Linceſtis maketh hym drunke, as ſone as any wine, that drinketh of hym. In the Iſle of Cea, as recordeth Plinie, there was a fountaiue, of whiche, who ſo dranke ones, became forthwith ſtupide, and inſenſeble, of no more felyng, or witte, then an Aſſe. In Thrace there is an other lake, of whom, who ſo drinketh, or ſwimmeth in hym, ſterueth without more, neuer to be recouered. There is alſo in Pontus a riuer, in whiche are founde certaine ſtones, that will burne, whiche alſo then take on fire, when the winde is euer more greateſt, and by how muche the more, thei be couered in the water, ſo muche the better, and ſoner burne thei. Beſides theſe, diuers haue written, of diuers other kindes of waters, as of ſome that heale certaine griefes, or maladies, of whiche ſorte there is one founde in Italie, called

                  Zize, whiche remedieth, or ſalueth all hurtes, what ſo euer in the iye: an other in Achaia, of whiche if a woman with childe drinke, ſhe ſhall be aſſured, of good, and ſpéedie deliueraunce. Others alſo there are, that remedie many other infirmities, as the ſtone, the leproſie, the feuers both tertian, and quartain, of which Theophraſtus Plinie, & Vitruuius remēber vs. In Meſopotamia alſo is founde an other riuer, whoſe water, if you ſmell to it, is bothe pleaſaunte, and odoriferous. Baptiſta Fulgotius, in his recollection writeth, that there is alſo, a welle in Englande, into whiche, if you throwe any kinde of wood it will within the ſpace of one yere, bée conuerted into a ſtone. He alſo faithfully confirmeth that, whiche Albertus ſurnamed the greate, in perſone experimented, in a certaine well, in high Almaignie: and Albertus writeth, that he puttyng his hande into the water, hauyng in it a bough, that part that was vnder the water, chaū
                  ged into a ſtone, the other parte, as before, continuyng that it was. The ſaied Fulgotius, reporteth yet, another matter as ſtraunge, of a welle alſo, about whiche if happely you walke, not vtteryng any worde, or voice, at all, the water then continueth, as before, ſtill, and cleare, but if you ſpeake any thyng, be it neuer ſo ſofte, or little, it then beginneth to rage, and to trouble, as to behold it, were verie ſtraunge, and meruailous: he notwithſtandyng, reporteth to haue experimented it in perſone, who while he attentiuely behelde it with ſilence, found it as is aboue ſaid, bothe quiete, and cleare, but when he ones ſpake, it then began to trouble, as if one, within of purpoſe, with ſome inſtrument had laboured it. In Fraūce alſo is another, equall in coldnes with any of the aboue remembred, and yet often tymes 
                     •
                  lames of fire, haue been ſéen to iſſue out of it. Plinie writeth, that moſte men are ſcrupulous in theſe matters, and make conſcience to credite them: how be it aſſuredly, the ſecretes of nature, are in maner inſcrutable, though in deede, more

euidently ſéen, in this elemente of water, then in any other thyng. And farther, in the worlde ſo many thynges are, ſo ſtraunge, and ſo meruailous, that we iuſtly maie repute no thyng (though leſſe common) therefore impoſſible: eſpecially theſe that are certified vs, of menne, of ſuche credite, as are all thoſe, whom we here haue alledged. Beſides this, we are truely certified, euen by thoſe that haue ſéen it, liuyng yet in our tyme, that in one of the Iſles of Canaria, called Ferra, beyng an Iſle populus, and verie well inhabited, in a certaine place verie nigh the middle, thei haue none other water, then that which diſtilleth, as is well knowne, moſte aboundantly, out of the leaues, or braunches of a certatne trée, at the foote of whiche tree, neither any thyng nigh it, is there to bee founde any ſpryng, or other water, neuer the leſſe this tree continueth alwaies ſo moiſte, that bothe from his braunches, leaues, and boughes, it euer diſtilleth in ſuche quantitie, and aboundance, that bothe nighte, and daie, thei fette there, to ſerue all their neceſſities, whiche hardly we ſhould haue credited, had wée onely founde it written. Wherefore, let it not ſeme ſtraunge, or incredible to any, that whiche, wée haue here tofore recited: for this elemente of water is very puiſſaunte, and meruailous, whoſe force, and hidden qualities, are not to all men, ſo familiar, and well knowen. As concernyng the ſea alſo, it is reported to bée in Winter, more warme then in the Sommer, as againe more ſalte in Autumne then in other tymes any. Moſte true it is alſo, that in ſome partes of the ſea, to weete, in thoſe that bée farreſt of, from the lande, no ſnowe falleth, at any tyme, what ſo euer. Of all theſe thynges, ſundrie haue giuen ſundrie good reaſons, of whiche, the greater parte, attribute it, to th'onely proprietie, or qualitie of the ſoile, mines, ſtones, trees, and mettalles, where fountaines haue their ſprynges, where riuers, and lakes runne. For better proofe whereof, that it ſo is in déede, by daiely experience

we well are inſtructed, that vines, and other fruictes, of one, and the ſame kinde; are more better, and more ſauery in one ſoile, then in another, for that ſome are ſwete ſome ſharpe and ſower, ſome good and profitable, others againe infectious, and noiſome. The aire alſo it ſelf, then corrupteth, and is peſtilente, when it paſſeth ouer any countrie, leſſe holſome, or impoiſoned. What meruaile then is it, if the water that waſheth, and penetrateth the yearth, ſtones, mettalles, hearbes, rootes and trees, with infinite ſuche, and others the ſemblable, receiue holſome, or leſſe holſome proprieties, or natures, be thei neuer ſo ſtraunge, ſo rare, or incredible, eſpecially aided alſo by ſome influences, of the ſtarres, and Planettes.
            
            
               Of diuers ſtraunge thinges, whiche happened at the birth and death of our ſauiour Chriſte, recited by ſundrie famous, and learned hiſtorians, beſides theſe that are recorded by the Euangeliſtes in the ſcriptures. Chap. 16.
               
                  ALthough theſe thynges, writen by the Euangeliſtes, whiche happened at the birth, and death of our ſauiour, ſtraūge in déede, and very miraculous are of all others moſte certaine, and worthy of credite: yet it ſemeth to me no thyng, or very little from the purpoſe, if we remember here ſome other thynges, perhaps not leſſe meruailous, fine, and conſidred of, euen of thoſe that haue written them. Paulus Oroſius, and Eutropius writyng of Octauian, with whom alſo accordeth Euſebius, ſaiyng: that at the birthe of our ſauiour Chriſte, into this worlde, there happened to breake vp, euen at that inſtante, a certaine ſpryng that ranne with oile, by the ſpace of one daie, in an Inne, or common Tauerne, in the citee of Rome. And it ſeemeth that this ſpryng, no thyng els ſignified, but the commyng of Chriſt, to wete, of the annointed, by whom, and in whom, all chriſtians

are. The publike Inne, into whiche all men indifferently, and without reſpecte are receiued, and lodged, ſignifieth our true mother, the holy and true Churche, the greate Inne, or common lodgyng, for all faithfull Chriſtians: out of whiche ſhould paſſe, and procede inceſſantly, all maner of people vertuous, and louyng God. Eutropius to this alſo adioigneth, that as well in ſundrie places aboute Rome, as in Rome it ſelf, euen in the full, plaine, and cleare daie, was ſéen a circle, whiche perfectly compaſſed the Sunne rounde about, no leſſe bright, or cleare, then the Sunne it ſelf, giuing alſo as muche light or rather more then it. Paulus Oroſius in like ſorte reporteth, that euen at the ſame tyme, the Senate, and people of Rome to gether, offered to Octauian Auguſtus, the title of chief prince, or ſoueraigne lorde, and ſiegnior whiche he refuſed in any wiſe to accept, prognoſticating (leſſe thinkyng there on) that an other more greater, and more puiſſante then he was borne, to whom onely, and alone, this title appertained. Commeſtor in his hiſtorie ſemblablie affirmeth, that the Temple, dedicated by the Romaines, to the goddeſſe Peace, then felle, and ſundred on euery ſide, or quarter: and farther ſaith, that at the firſt erection of this temple; the inhabitantes conſulted with the Oracle of Apollo, to knowe how long it ſhould continue, and ſtande, whiche aunſwered, vntill a virgine ſhould beare a childe: whiche thei eſtemed to bée a thyng impoſſible, and that therefore, their Churche ſhoulde ſtande eternally: how bee it, at the deliuerie of the virgine, the mother of our redemer, and prince of heauen, it fell doune, and ſuered, eche parte from other. Whence alſo Lucas of Tuy, in the Chronicles of Spain writeth, that he ſome tymes founde in the aunciente Annaleis, or recordes of that countrie (hauyng by conference, and computation founde out the tyme) that in the very ſame night, that our Sauiour was borne, there appered in Spaine preciſely at midnight, a certaine cloude

that in ſuche ſorte gaue light to the countrie, as if it had then been, the middle of the daie, or noone tide. I alſo remember that S. Hierome reporteth, that at the ſame tyme, when the virgine fled into Egipte, with her ſonne all the Idolles, and Images of their goddes there, felle doune, and defaſte them ſelues, vpon their aultars, and other places, and that the Oracles, that theſe goddes, or better to ſaie, theſe deuilles, to deceiue the people, gaue foorthe then at tymes, then ceaſte, neuer after giuyng them any aunſwere, what ſo euer. This miracle alleaged in this ſorte by ſainct Hierome, ſemeth alſo to be approued by that famous, and moſte excellente, though a Panime, Plutarche, who without any credite that he gaue to theſe thynges, as alſo that he knewe not, or how or why they chaunſed, hath written neuer the leſſe, a perticuler treatiſe of the defect, or ende of theſe Oracles: for euen then in his tyme, whiche was ſhortly after the paſſion of Chriſte, men perceiued that theſe Oracles began to fainte, and faile: neither allegaeth he, for it in his treatiſe, any other reaſon, but that there ſhould be dead, as he ſuppoſed, ſome ſpirites, whiche he ſpake, as a man voide, or leſſe ſkilled in the faithe, for that he vnderſtode not, that the deuilles, or ſpirites, were immortall. Notwithſtandyng, ſtraunge is it, and worthie of conſideration, to ſée how euidently the deuill ſhewed hym ſelf, to bée conquered, and ſubdued, and that after the death of our ſauiour, he ſo remained diſcomforted, that he neuer again was able, to frame in any ſuche ſort, an aunſwer: and that the Gentiles alſo, not able, in déede to yelde any cauſe, or reaſon why, had ſome féelyng of this default, and ſurceaſſyng from his function. By meane whereof Plutarche tooke on hym to write this treatiſe, in which emong others, in effecte he hath theſe wordes (of which Euſebius maketh mention, writyng to Theodorus, as of a moſte notable, and meruailous matter) I remember that I haue heard ſaie, ſaieth he, of Emilian the oratour,

a man prudente and wiſe, and well knowen to many of you, that his father, on a tyme commyng, by the ſea towardes Italie, and paſſyng on a night, by a certaine Iſle called Paraxis, euen when all in the Shippe were then ſtill, and quiete, thei heard a greate, and dreadfull voice, whiche ſrom the Iſle called to them, Ataman, Ataman, (ſuche was the pilotes name of the ſhippe, an Egiptian borne) & although this voice were ones, and againe vnderſtoode by Ataman, yet was he not ſo hardie, to frame to it an annſwere, vntill the third time, whē he ſaid who is there? what is it that calleth me? what wouldeſt thou haue? To whō this voice again, more louder thē before, ſaied: Ataman, my will is, that when thou paſſeſt by the goulfe, which hath to name Laguna, that thou there remember Laguna. to crie out, and certifie the ſaid goulfe, that the greate God Pan is deade. Whiche vnderſtoode, all thoſe that were in the ſhippe, feared, counſailyng the ſaied pilote, to leaue vndooen his charge, neither any thyng to arreſte, or ſtaie at the goulfe, eſpecially if the winde would ſerue them to paſſe further: but approchyng nigh the place, of whiche this voice, admoniſhed hym, the ſhip arreſted, and the ſea waxte calme, not hauyng winde to paſſe preſently any farther: by meanes whereof, thei generally concluded, that Atman ſhould there dooe his legation, or imbacie, whiche the better to doe, he mounteth vp into the poupe, or hinder parte of the ſhip, where he crieth as loude, as he could poſſible, ſaiyng: I will that ye knowe, that the greate God Pan is deade: whiche woorde, as ſone as he ones had vttered: thei heard incontinently, ſuche terrible lamentations, and cries, houling and complainyng, aboue that maie be ſaied: in ſuche ſort that the ſea it ſelf reſounded theſe complaintes, whiche continued moſte dolorous, and lamētable a great while: by meanes whereof the Mariners, though meruailouſly afraied, hauyng the winde good againe, followed their courſe, & arriuyng at Rome, made rehearſal of this their,

aduenture. Whereof the Emperour Tiberius aduertiſed, and deſirous to be certified of the truthe, and none other, founde to conclude, as is aboue rehearſed. Whence it is euident, that the deuilles euery where ſorowed the natiuitie of our Sauiour, and redemer Chriſte, for that he was onely their ruine, and deſtruction. For by iuſte, and true ſupputation of tyme, we finde that this happened, at the tyme of his Paſſion, or perhaps, ſome thyng before, then I meane, whe he baniſhed, and exiled them, out of the worlde. It is to be preſuppoſed, that this great God Pan (accordyng to the immitation of Pan, the God of Shepherdes) whiche thei ſaied was deade, was ſome capitaine, and maiſter deuill, whiche at that tyme loſte his Empire, as did alſo the others. Beſides all theſe Ioſephus writeth, that at the ſame tyme was heard in the temple of Hieruſalem, a voice (though in déede ther was no liuyng creature with in) whiche lamentably cried, and ſaied thus, let vs goe hence, and leaue this countrie in haſte, as who would ſaie, thei truely knewe, that the tyme of their paine, and perſecution was at hande, and that it drewe on faſte, euen by the death of hym, that gaue life vnto others. In the Goſpell of the Nazarites it is reade, that in the daie of his Paſſion, that ſumptuous gate of their Temple, whiche thei neuer lefte for any coſte, to adorne, and beautifie, fell doune to the grounde, and was vtterly defaced. Conſider now in that daie, what ſtraunge, and meruailous thynges happened, though the Euangeliſtes haue paſte theim, as thynges leſſe worthie memorie. The eclipce alſo of the Sunne, whiche continued thrée howers, the full ſpace in deede, that Chriſt was on the croſſe, was not naturall, as are the others, whiche by th'onely coniunction of the Sunne and Moone chaunce vs, but was miraculous, and contrary to the courſe, and order of nature. Suche therefore as leſſe knowe how the Sunne is eclipſed, muſt vnderſtande, that it onely happeneth, by coniunction of the aboue

ſaied bodies, the Mooue paſſyng, or goyng betwixt the Sunne, and the yearth: neuer the leſſe, this eclipſe happened, in th'oppoſition of theſe planettes, the Moone then full, and hundred and eightie degrées, diſtant frō the Sūne, in the vnder hemiſphere, then at the citée of Hieruſalem: for proofe whereof, beſides the teſtimonies of infinite good writers, the ſcriptures them ſelues, record it manifeſtly: for certain it is, that the lambe was neuer Sacrificed, but in the .xiiij. of the Moone, whiche Lambe was eaten by Chriſt, and his diſciples, but one daie onely before his death, as is commaunded in the .xij. of Exodus, in Leuiticus alſo the xxiij. And the nexte daie followyng, whiche was the daie of vnleauened bread, Chriſt the Lambe vnſpotted, was vnkindly crucified, the Moon then of neceſſitie in her full, and oppoſite to the Sunne, whiche then could no more eclipſe the Sunne, then any other Planete. It then was to conclude miraculous, and contrary to the order of nature, doen onely by the onmipotente, and ſole power of GOD, whiche depriued the Sunne of light, for that thrée howers ſpace. By occaſion whereof, that worthie perſonage Denis Areopagita, beyng at ye time preſente at Athens, and beholding in this ſorte, the Sunne to be obſcured, and knowyng on the other ſide, as a learned Aſtrologian, that this eclipſe was contrary to the order of natue, ſaied openly with a loude voice, to bée heard of all menne: either the frame of the worlde ſhall bée diſſolued, either the God of nature preſently ſuffereth. For whiche cauſe, as one reporteth, the ſages of Athens ſtraungely diſturbed, did to bee builte incontinently, an aulter, to the God vnknowen, whether afterward ſaincte Paule arriuyng, learned theim, who was that God vnknowne, and that he was Jeſus Chriſt, God and man, our redemer, whiche then, and at that tyme, ſuffered for our ſaluation: by meanes whereof, he conuerted, greate numbers to the faithe. Some neuer the leſſe haue doubted, whether this defecte were

generall, and vniuerſall throughout the worlde, groundyng here on, though the Euangeliſt ſaieth, that it was ſynne vpon the whole face of the yearth, that, that was onely, but a phrace, or maner of ſpeache, as muche to ſaie as in all the countrie there about, of whiche opinion was that learned doctour Origen: but what? Wee ſée that in Grece, yea, in Athens it ſelf, this defecte of the Sunne was perceiued of all men, whiche leadeth me to ſuppoſe, that it was generall, to bée ſeen, and conſidered through out our whole hemiſphere, in what place, or where ſo euer the Sunne that tyme appered. Whiche I therefore ſaie, for that in all the other hemiſphere, where it then was night, no man could ſée any thyng, no ſhe we then of the Sunne at all there, for at one tyme he onely lighteth the halfe worlde, the other he obſcureth with his owne proper ſhadowe. How bee it, the Moone then beyng in her fulle, not hauyng any other lighte, then that, whiche ſhe taketh or borroweth of the Sunne, and yet then beyng in the hemiſphere, whiche is vnder vs, became alſo to bee vehemently eclipſed, and darkened, by th'onely want of the light, and ſhe we of the Sunne. By which meanes, an vniuerſall ſhadow, couered the whole yearth, the Moone, and ſtarres, not able to giue other light, then that whiche thē ſelues receiue of the Sunne.
            
            
               Of many places alleaged by ſundrie good authors, making mention of Chriſte, and of his life. Chap. 17.
               
                  EFtſones haue I harde the queſtion demaunded, of manie a curious, and learned Clarke, whence it was, or whence it proceaded, that the Gentiles, and Paynimes, ſo ſildome remembred anie thing of our ſauiour Chriſte in all their writinges, of his life, and miracles

ſo manie in number, publiſhed and made common to the worlde by his diſciples, for as muche as the ſaide Painimes and Gentiles haue well remembred ſundrie other things, which were doen, and chaunſed euen in the ſame tyme, in many reſpectes of leſſe waight or importance. Where vnto I aunſwere, that it leſſe true were to affirme, that theſe auncient hiſtorians haue here of written nothing, for in infinite places haue thei diſcourſed of theſe thinges, of whiche ſome fewe notes I haue briefly here gathered, for their onely contentation, that neuer were acquainted with theſe foreſaid hiſtoriogriphers. In the ſeconde place alſo we muſte conſider, that the faithe and lawe of grace geuen vs by Chriſte, begun by himſelf firſt, and by his diſciples, publiſhed, and receaued of certaine that determined to liue and die therin: other ſome rebellious, and obſtinate, ſo deepe drouned in ſinne, that they made no ſcruple to refuſe it, but to the vttereſt of their might purſued, and perſecuted it. Beſides theſe the thirde ſorte were neuters, that healde the meane, to whom, though this religion ſeemed iuſte and vertuous, yet as well for feare of perſecution, and tyrannie, as alſo for ſome other worldely conſiderations, this vertuous profeſſion was alſo of theim neglected. The worlde then ſtandyng this in thrée opinions deuided, thoſe that profeſſed Chriſte did thinges ſtraunge and miraculous, of whom many beare true, and aſſured witnes, of whiche number are Dionyſius Areopagita, Tertulian, Lactantius Firmianus, Euſebius, Paulus Oroſius, with many others, which long were here to recounte, or remember. Theſe others accurſed that perſecuted this Churche, as a thing ſtraunge, abhorring from their lawe indeuoured what in theim was, vtterly to abandō it, couering chriſt his miracles, his life, & his doctrine, for whiche cauſe thei refuced to write of him at all, or at leaſt they that in any ſorte, wrote any thinge of hym, did it to the intente to ſtaine and obſcure his glory, of which predicament were

theſe predeſtinate to damnation, Porphyrius, Iulianus, Vincentius, Celſus, Africanus, Lucianus, with others many, the members of Sathan: againſt whom moſt learnedly hath written S. Ciprian, Origen, Auguſtine, and others. The others that for feare, or for conſideration of gaine, haue lefte to loue Chriſte, to learne, and knowe his Goſpel, for the ſame cauſes haue alſo, in their kookes leafte to remember of hym: or if at leaſte any of theim, haue anie thinge ſpoken of hym, the ſame hath been freaghted with ſkoffes, and lies paſſing hym ouer, in as fewe as was poſſible. Yet neuertheleſſe, euen as he, that woulde couer a veritie, vnder the ſhadowe of diſguiſed treatcheries, it eftſones falleth out, by the preuie proprietie, and ſecret nature of the veritie, that he that faineſt woulde couer it, ſo euill fauouredly diſguiſeth, and fardleth the matter, that in the ende it ill ſauoureth, the truth, mawgre his bearde, breakyng out moſte plaine and euident. Euen ſo hath it happened, to both theſe ſortes, of theſe afore remembred people: whiche although thei toiled to diſcredite, and to ſtaine with ignominie, the miracles wrought by our ſauiour, and his profeſſed doctrine, yet came it ſo to paſſe, that as often tymes as thei, therof wrote any thing, ſome thing thei vttered, in ſuche ſorte as was euident, both their diſpitefull malice, and puritie of that doctrine. Here colde I remember manie thinges, writen by the Sybilles, but for as much as that, yt thei wrote, procéeded not of theimſelues, but from that ſpirite of prophicie, whiche God had lente or graunted theim, though they were in déede nothyng better then infidels, I will leaue of theim to ſpeake any thinge, haſtyng to thothers. Our firſt then and moſt euident teſtimonie, though alſo with the ſame not leaſte common, is, and ſhalbe of the moſt and greateſt ennimies of chriſtianitie, among others of Ioſephus a Iewe both by conſanguinitie, Ioſephus in the ſeconde booke of his antiquities. and nation, as by his life alſo, and profeſſion: his wordes are theſe: In this time liued Ieſus a wiſe and

learned man if it be lafull to terme hym a man, for that aſſuredly he did thinges ſtraunge, and mearuailous, a maiſter and teacher of thoſe that loued him, and ſought the truth, he ioygned vnto him greate nūbers, as wel of Iewes, as Gentiles, this man was chriſt. And although he afterwardes were accuſed by men of greate aucthoritie, fautors I meane, and fauourars of our religion, don to death alſo, and by the ſame crucified, he not withſtanding was neuer yet forſaken of thoſe that before, hadde willingly followed hym, wherfore the thirde daie again after his death, he appeared to theim aliue, according as the Prophetes by diuine inſpiration had before ſpoken and prophicied of hym. And euen in this our time, the doctrine, and name of Chriſtians dwelleth yet, and euer ſhal doe vnto the ende in the worlde. Theſe then are the wordes of Ioſephus, whiche wrote of the ruine, and deſtruction of Hieruſalem, a witnes preſente in perſon, at that ſubuerſion, whiche chaunſed full fortie yeres after the paſſion of our redemour. Pilate in like ſorte whiche gaue ſentence of death againſt him, witneſſeth in maner ſemblable of his meruailous miracles, of whiche by hys letters he certified the Emperour Tyberius, by meanes wherof he conſulted with the Senate, to know whether they would admitte Ieſus Chriſte, to be reuerenced, and adored for God, and although they woulde, in no wiſe there vnto accorde, yet Tyberius of hymſelf ſtreatly inhibited, that no man ſhoulde be ſo hardie, to touche, or greue a Chriſtian. As concernyng the yearthquake, and darknyng of the Sunne, continuyng the full tyme that Chriſt was on the Croſſe, we haue alſo good teſtimonies and aſſured of Ethnikes. Flegon a gréeke hiſtoriogripher, borne in Aſia, of whom Swydas eſpecially remembreth, reporteth for a thing almoſt incredible, that in the forth yere, of the two hundred and tenth Olympiade, whiche by iuſt accompte was in the eightinth yere of the raigne of Tyberius, at whiche tyme our ſauiour ſuffered, there

was a greate Eclipſe of the Sunne, ſuche as earſte had neuer been ſéen, or written of, continuyng from the ſixt hower, euen vnto the ninth, and farther during the time of this defect of the Sunne, ſuch and ſo inſpekable, were the yearthequakes in Aſia, and Bithinia, that infinite houſes fell doune to the grounde. It appeareth farther, that beſides this Flégon that in the ſame time liued, Plinie alſo felte it, and diſcourſed on the ſaide matter, for ſaieth he in the tyme of Themprour Tyberius, greater yearth quakes were then ſeen, then euer had been before, by meanes of whiche were ſubuerted twelue famous cities in Aſia, with infinite and innumerable other houſes, and buildynges: in ſuche ſort that the hiſtoriogriphers Gentiles, though leſſe wéetyng the cauſe, lefte not yet to write the miracles of Chriſt. The other miracle of the veale of the Temple that ſundred, Ioſephus in like ſorte recordeth it faithefully. The cruell murther dooen by Herode, vppon the harmeleſſe innocentes, is writen, of on other Iewe, whiche hight Phylon, an hiſtorian of greate aucthoritie, in his abridgemēt of tyme, where he thus muche reporteth, that Herode did to bee murthered certaine yong infantes, and with them alſo his owne naturall ſoonne, for that he heard ſay that Chriſt, the king promiſed to the Iewes, was borne and this man liued in the tyme of Herode the Tetrarche, as him ſelfe writeth. This hiſtory of the innocentes, is of Macrobius alſo, more fully remembred, a man excellentlie learned and of greate antiquitie, who in reherſall of certaine pleaſant, and merie conceites of the Emperour Octauian (aboute the tyme of the birth, or natiuitie of our ſauiour) whiche ſaied, beyng aduertiſed of the crueltie of Herode, as well towardes hys owne ſoonne, as alſo the others, that he rather would be a Hogge in the houſe of Herode, then his ſoonne, whiche he ſaied for that the Iewes did neuer eate any ſwines fleſhe, whiche pretie ieſte is repeted by Dion in the life of the ſaide Emperour,

ſo that in fine there were many miracles, written as wel by Iewes, as by Gentiles leſſe ſuppoſing to haue witneſſed them, to haue been doen by Chriſte, beſides infinite the others reported by Chriſtians. What farther ſhall I write of the auncient Emperours, and what thei thought of our faith, as what diſcourtiſies they alſo practiſed, againſt the true profeſſors of Chriſt, and his truth? The firſt good Biſhoppe or ſeruaunt of Chriſt S. Peter, S. Paule alſo a faithfull miniſter, were doen to death at the commaundement of the Emperoar Nero, thirtieſix yeres after the death of our redemour, at whiche tyme was the greate perſecution of the Churche, of whiche the Gentiles left not to make mentiō, as among others many, theſe twoo eſpecially, Cornelius Tacitus, and Suetonius Tranquillus, whiche liued at that tyme, bothe famous, and honourable. Suetonius in the life of Nero, ſpekyng of certaine his owne ordinaunces, faieth that hee tormented, and afflicted with ſundry and greuous puiſhmentes, a certaine kinde of people whiche called theimſelues Chriſtians, folloyng a newe faith or religon. And Cornelius T. writyng of the ſaied Nero, affirmeth, that he chaſtiſed and purſued with terrible tormentes, a ſort of people, named commonly Chriſtians, the author of whiche name ſaieth he, was Chriſt of Hieruſalem, the verie ſame, whiche Pilate gouernour of ludea, did openly to be crucified, by whoſe death his doctrine grewe more and more, and increaſed. But conſider wee alſo what ſome other Gentiles haue written, of honour, and authoritie like vnto the others. Plinie the yonger, in one of his Epiſtles, demaūdeth of the Emperour Traian whoſe Liuetenāt he was in Aſia, how he would that he ſhould puniſhe the Chriſtians, that were aceuſed, and brought before hym: and the better to informe his Lorde of what ſoeuer he founde againſt them, he among other thinges many reporteth, that theſe Chriſtians riſe ordinarilie, at certaine houres of the night, aſſembling, and meetyng

together, ſingyng Hymmes, and Songes of praiſe vnto Ieſus Chriſte, whom they honoured for their God and Meſsias, and beſides this meetyng in congregations together, they made alſo vowes not to doe annoie, or domage to anie, not robbyng or takyng from any manne what ſo euer, that they would not committe adulterie, that thei neuer woulde falſe their faith, or promis, not to denie, what ſoeuer had been lent theim, or committed to their kepyng. And farther the ſaide Plinie writeth, that they alwaies did feede, or eate together, not holding or poſſeſſyng any thyng, as proper or priuate. By theſe are well knowen, what were euen then, the exerciſes of the chriſtians, as alſo for what cauſe the worlde purſued theim. Thoſe thinges were recorded thus by an idolatrous infidell, ſixtie yeres fullie after the Paſſion of our Lorde and ſauiour. Vnto whiche letters the Emperour aunſwered, for as muche as thei were accuſed of no kind of riote, or wrong, he ſhould in no wiſe afflict, or chaſtice theim; 
                     •
                  e yet make any inquiſition, what ſo euer againſt theim: not withſtandyng, when they ſhoulde yet be accuſed before hym, that he then did his pain, to withdrawe theim from that Religion: but if they in no wiſe would forgo, or leaue it, that he ſhould not for all that, do theim any kinde of violence. How be it, true it is, that this ſaied Emperour Traian, before this as an infidell, and deceaued by the guile, and fraude of the accuſers, puniſhed both, and perſecuted, the poore harmlis chriſtians. After ſuccided in th'empire his Nephew Adrian, of whō 
                  Aelius Lampridius, an hiſtoriogripher, voide of faithe, and idolatrus, writeth that he began firſt to honour the chriſtians, permitting theim to liue after their loore, and order, and that hym ſelfe alſo, with the people reuerenſed Chriſt, building, and grauntyng theim Temples, for their behoofe, but afterwardes alteryng his good minde and zeale towardes theim, began cruelly again, and odiouſly to perſecute theim, abuſed by the maiſters of his

falſe cerimonies, as by the Biſhops alſo of his falſe gods, perſwadyng with hym, that if he any waie fauoured the Chriſtians, that all the worlde woulde ſhortly be conuerted to that lawe, whence a generall rume would followe to their gods and religion, all whiche is reported by Petrus Crinitus. It is written in the life of Saturninus, that from Seuerinus the Conſull, a letter was writen to the ſaid Adrian the'mperor, wherin he certified him, that in Egipt were ſundrie chriſtiās, among which ſome called theimſelues Biſhops, of which all, no one was found at any tyme idle, but buſied ſtill euerie one aboute ſome exerciſe, or other, and that there was none, no not the blinde, nor the goutie, but tooke ſome kinde of paine, and liued by their labour, which all honoured one onely god, whiche alſo was honoured for God of the Iewes. Wee reade alſo in the hiſtories of that tyme, that this Emperour, this beginnyng, to abuſe the Chriſtians, by the inſtigation, as is ſaid, of his high prieſtes, and biſhops, there was a certaine his Ambaſſadour Serenus Eramyus; an Ethnike borne, as alſo was he, that wrote to hym, aduertiſing hym that it was no little crueltie, to condeſcende in ſuche ſorte, to the miſerable ruine, and oppreſſion of the Chriſtians, beyng of nothing els accuſed, but of the obſeruation onely of their faith and religion, in no other reſpecte or blame worthie, or culpable. By meanes of whiche letter, the Emperour, inhibited Minutus Fondanus then Proconſul in Aſia, that he in no wiſe condemned any Chriſtian what ſo euer, not beyng conuicted of any other crime, but of that onely, of their faithe, and profeſſion.
            
            
               That menne borne of baſe condition, ſhould not leaue, by al meanes poſſible, to attempte to reache, and aſpire vnto honour, with certaine examples ſeruyng to that purpoſe. Chap. 18.
               
               
                  
                  GEnerallie we ſée, that men deſcending of a noble houſe, or familie, becom alſo in tyme berie valiaunt, and honourable, immitatyng the nobleſſe of their birth, and vertue, of their 
                     •…
                  nceſtours: how be it, for that there is no law, nor no rule ſo certaine, which ſuffereth o
                     •
                   admitteth not ſome kinde of exception, this alſo maie be ſaied, to faile with the others: for ſome times the father wiſe, learned, aduiſed, and honeſt, hath a soonne idle, abiecte, leſſe wiſe and vnprofitable: and yet againe admit that this rule were more certaine, more intallible, and more aſſured, then in déede it is, yet ſhould not thei, that deſcende of poore, and meane parentage, leaue to attempte, by inceſſuante paine, and induſtrie, to aſpire to the ſeate, of vertue, and honour: for that theſe families, that this daie are reputed for auncient, and noble, haus taken their beginnyng, and ſpryng of vertue, noblyng their poſteritie, and ſucceſſours with honour. Wherefore, the better to animate men, to aſſpire to great matters, I will remember the examples of ſome in perticuler, iſſuyng out of meane, and ſimple parentage, whiche in the endo, excolled in honour, and vertue. And in the firſte place, Viriat a Portugale, ſo muche renoumed emong the hiſtoriens, eſpecially Romaines, on whom he eftſones did cruell, and bloodie reuenge. This man was the ſoonne of a poore Shepherde, and in his youth a
                     •
                  ded his father in his charge: but hauyng his harte inclined to matters more high, and of greater importaunce, lefte to keepe Shepe, and other tamed beaſtes, followyng more buſily the chaſe of the wilde, and ſauage, where in he excelled in courage all others. After this the Romaines, inuadyng the Spaniardes, he gathered, and aſſembled certaine his companions, by whoſe helpe he ſkirmiſhte, at tymes, with the enemie, at tymes alſo againe, for practiſe with his friendes, where he ſo valiaunte was, ſo noble,

and couragious, that in fewe daies he had gathered an armie ſufficiente, with whiche being entered the field, he gaue battaile to the Romaines, in defence of that countrie: whiche warres, or rather enmitie continued fowertene yeres, duryng whiche tyme, he obtained againſte theim, ſundrie greate, and honourable victories. By meanes whereof, he grewe in honour, and aucthoritie, dreade, and faired for his prowes continually of his enemie: but in fine, vnkindly by treaſon was ſlaine, to the greate diſcomforte, and ſorrowe of all his armie, by whiche he was (as duetie would) moſte pompouſly buried. Arſaces kyng of the Parthians, was of ſuche baſe, and ſimple parentage, that no manne could ſpeake of, or knewe any of pis parentes. Who, after he had withdrawen hymſelf, from the ſubiection, and obedience of Alexander, he ordained the firſt kyngdome, that euer was emong the Parthians, a people, no leſſe renoumed, then dread, in déede, of the Romaines. By meanes of whoſe onely paſſyng prowes, and valiauncie, all other kynges his ſucceſſors, for the ſole memorie, and reuerence of his name, although thei neuer wer crouned, by inheritance or ſucceſſion, were called Arſacides, as the Romain Emperours, tooke alſo the name of Caeſar, for the loue of greate Caeſar Octauian Auguſtus. That excellente capitaine Agathocles, whiche for his ſurpaſſyng wiſedome, and mandhoode, was created kyng of Sicilia, and maintained cruell battaile, againſte the people of Carthage, was notwithſtandyng, of ſo meane a familie, that as I remember, his father was a Potter, whence he beyng aduaunced, to the honor of a kyng, did neuer the leſſe, as often tymes as he banketted, his table to bée furniſhed, with veſſelles, as well of claie, as alſo of golde, or ſiluer, to the intente he ſtill might haue in minde; and remember, the place of his beginnyng, his fathers houſe, and familie. The example alſo of Ptolomie, well ſerueth to this purpoſe, beyng one of the moſte worthieſt capitaines

of Alexander, after whoſe death, he became kyng of Egipt, and of Siria, ſuche, and ſo vertuous, that his ſucceſſors there would after him be called all Ptolomies. This Ptolomie was the ſoonne of a gentleman, that highte Lac. the father of Ptolomie. 
                  Lac, whiche neuer had better office then that, of commō horſe man, in the cāpe of Alexander. Iphicrates an Athenian, was in Marciall affaires, very well ſkilled, he vanquiſhed the Lacedemonians, in plaine, and open battaile and valiauntly withſtoode, the impetúoſitie of Epaminondas, a capitaine Theban, bothe renoumed, and honorable. Theſame he was whom Artaxerxes king of Perſia, aſſigned capitaine generall, ouer all his whole armie, when he had to doe, or delt with the Egiptians. Yet know wee neuer the leſſe (as is euidently written of hym) that he was the 
                     •••
                  nne, of none other, then of a poore Cobler. I had al moſte paſte ouer Eumenes, one of the moſte worthieſte capitaines of Alexander, as well for his valiauntie, as learnyng, and good counſaile: whoſe life, and famous geſtes, are bothe recorded of Plutarche, and Paulus Emilius, who concernyng wealthe and aboū
                  dance of riches, though he were leſſe gracious, in the 
                     •
                  ight of Fortune, yet was he in the policies of warre, ſeconde to manne, reno
                     •…
                  ed, and honourable, by his owne onely de
                     •…
                  es, by no manne aduaunced, but by his onely paine, and trauaile, beyng the ſonne of a poore man, and as ſome deme, a Carter. Emongall other ſe
                     •
                  
                  gniories, and honours in the worlde, none was there euer, ſo greate, and ſo puiſſaunt, as was that, ſome tymes the Empire of Rome, whiche was ordered continually, by ſuche excellent perſon ages ſo ripe in vertue, ſo abſolute, and perfects, and yet for all that, ſundrie haue there attained euen vnto the higheſt, and ſoueraigne degrée of gouernment, deſcendyng of very ſimple, and of baſe parentage. Elius Part
                        •…
                     x Emperour of Rome, was the ſoonne of a certaine artificer, his graundfather a libertine (whiche is to ſaie, ſuche as was ſome tymes a bonde What a Libertaine 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  
man, but was againe afterward, for ſome iuſte cauſe infraunchiſte) that notwithſtandyng, for his vertue, and honeſtie, was aſſigned by the Romaines, their ſoueraigne, and Emperour, and afterward to giue example, to others of lowe condition, he cauſed the Shoppe, to bée doen about with Marble, curiouſly cutte, where his father before hym, wrought, to gette his liuyng. Neither aſſpired this Elius, iſſued of baſe parentage, vnto the Empire onely: for Diocletian, that ſo muche adorned Rome, with his magnificall, and triumphaunte victories, was the ſoonne of none other, then a common Scribe, or Notarie, ſome faie that his father was a booke binder, and hymſelf a bonde man borne. Valentinian was alſo crouned Emperour, but was the ſoonne, notwithſtandyng of a Roper. The Emperour Probus, had to father a gardiner. The renoumed Aurelius, whom euery age honoureth, iſſued out of ſo obſeure a familie, that the hiſtoriegriphers, leſſe agrée emong theim ſelues, of his ſpryng, and beginnyng. Maximinus alſo was the ſoonne of a Smithe, or as others ſome will, a Carter. Marcus Iulius Lucinus, as alſo Bonoſus, by their prudente policie, gouerned the ſaied Empire, of whiche, the firſte was an houſband mannes ſoonne of Dacia, the other the ſoonne of a poore, and ſtipendarie ſchoole maiſter. Of this ſorte was there many other Emperours in Rome, whom, all for breuities ſake, I leaue to remember, as Mauricius Iuſtinus, predeceſſour to Iuſtinian. Gale
                        •…
                     s alſo, in the beginnyng a Shepherde. From this haute, and ſupreme dignitie, let vs deſcende to the 
                     •…
                  a of Rome, vnto which aſſpired men, of like condition with the others. As Pope Ihon the twoo and twenteth, whiche was the ſoonne of a Shoomaker, a Frenche man borne▪ notwithſtandyng for his learnyng, and wiſedome, elected biſhoppe, which increaſed their rentes, and patrimonie buſily. Pope Nicholas the fifte, hauyng the name, tofore of Th
                     •
                  mas, was the ſoonne of a poore P
                     •…
                  . P
                     •
                  p
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  S
                        •…
                     
                   
                  
                     •…
                  he fowerth,

firſt called Frances, by profeſſiō a frier, had to father a poore ſea man, or mariner. I could in this place remēber many others, whō al of purpoſe, I leaue to name for that ſuche offices, are leſſe due to nobilitie of blood, but rather to the learned, & vertues what ſo euer. Whereof Chriſt himſelf hath left vs good exāple: for the firſt that euer ſatte in that chaire, whom alſo Chriſt himſelf there placed, was that good, and true paſtour S. Peter, which before laboured the ſeas for his liuyng, a Fiſher, whom from thence Chriſt elected, to bée a fiſher of men. Hence deſcendyng againe vnto kynges, and Princes, the Romaines to them choſe Tarquinius Priſcus for their kyng, the ſoonne of a ſtraunger, and marchaunte of Corinthe, and that which more was, baniſhed out of his countrie, who neuer the leſſe, augmented the confines of his king dome, the number as well of Senatours, as alſo theim of the order of knighthoode: he appoincted newe eſtates, bothe for their ſeruice, and ceremonies to the goddes, ſo that the people nothyng at all repented theim, to haue choſen them a ſtraunger, for their kyng and ſoueraigne. Seruius Tullius liued alſo longe tyme kyng of Rome, he obtained greate victories, and triumphed thrée tymes, reputed notwithſtandyng, to bée the ſoonne of a poore bonde woman, whence he continually held the name of Seruius. The kynges of Lumbardie, if thei were not ſo aunciente, as the others of Rome, yet were thei in reſpecte, no leſſe famous, then thei: The thirde of whiche hauyng to name Lamuſius, was the ſonne of a beggerly, and common ſtrumpette, whiche alſo beyng deliuered at the ſame tyme, of twoo other childrē, as a moſte wretched, and beaſtly woman, threwe them into a depe, and ſtinkyng ditche, in whiche alſo was ſome kinde of water: by happe kyng Agelmonde paſſyng that waie, found this childe almoſte drouned in the water, and mouyng hym ſoughtly, with the ende of his launce (whiche he at that tyme had preſente there in hande) to the ende he

                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
more perfectely might féele what it was, but this childe euen then newely borne, féelyng it ſelf touched, taketh hold of the launce, with one of his handes, not lettyng it to ſlippe, or ſlide frō him againe, whiche thing the prince conſideryng, all amaſed at the ſtraunge force, of this yonge, little creature, cauſed it to bée taken thence, and carefully to bée foſtered, and for that the place where he founde it, was called Lama, he did hym thence to bée named Lamuſius: whiche afterwardes was ſuche a one, and ſo fauoured of Fortune, that in the ende, he was crouned kyng of the Lumbardes, who liued there in honour, and his ſucceſſion after hym, euen vntill the tyme of the vnfortunate kyng Albouine, when all came to ruine, ſubuerſion, and deſtruction. An other matter like ſtraunge to this, happened in Bohemia, where as one Primiſlas the ſoonne of a Plough manne, was then choſen kyng, when he moſte buſily, was labouryng the ſoile in the fielde. For at that tyme the Bohemians, not knowyng whom thei might chuſe for their kyng, did to paſſe out a horſe vnbridled into the fieldes, lettyng hym to go, whether it beſt liked him, hauing all determined, with moſte aſſured purpoſe, to make him their king, before whō this horſe arreſted, ſo came it thē to paſſe, that the horſe firſt ſtaied hym before this Primiſlas, buſied then in turnyng the gleabe, a ſimple Carter: ſo beyng forthwith confirmed (as is before) their ſoueraigne, he ordered hym ſelf, and his kyngdome very wiſely. He ordained many good and profitable lawes, he cōpaſſed the citie of Prage with walles, beſides many other thynges, merityng perpetuall laude, and commendation. The greate Tamburlaine alſo, whoſe famous exploites, are of parte aboue remē
                  bred, was at the firſt a Shepherde, as we before rehearſed. The valiaunte, and vertuous capitaine, father of Frances Sforca, whoſe ſucceſſion and poſteritie, euen vntill this our tyme, haue béen Dukes continually of Millaine, was borne in a badde village, called Cotignoll, the

ſonne of a poore, and nedie worke man: but he naturally inclined to Martiall affaires, of a valiaunt harte, & very couragious, left that his fathers ſimple vocation, folowyng a troope of ſoldiars, whiche paſt through the coūtrie, and in th'ende by continuaunce, and ſkilfull practiſe, proued a moſte famous, and renoumed capitain. C. Marius a Conſull Romaine, iſſued of ſimple parentage, borne in the village Arpinum, was neuer the leſſe ſuche, and ſo Arpinum. politike a capitaine, that all the worlde yet ſpeaketh this daie of his valiauncie: he ſeuen tymes was choſen Conſull in Rome, duryng whiche tyme, he obtained ſuche, and ſo greate victories, that he alſo twiſe (to his perpetuall honour, and commendation) triumphed. M. T. Cicero, the father, and prince of Latine eloquencie, well ſkilled alſo in euery the Sciences, was Conſull in Rome, and Proconſul in Aſia, and yet was he alſo borne in a ſimple cotage, in Arpinum, by birthe, and parentage a very meane, and abiecte Romaine. Ventidius alſo the ſoonne of a moſte ſimple, and abiecte perſonage, was ſome tymes, by profeſſion a Muletour: but leauyng that vocation, followed the warres of Caeſar, by whoſe fauor he obtained, through his prowes, and vertue, that he ſhortly was appoincted capitaine of a bande, and after that againe vnder him, generall of the whole armie, and from thence was called to the honour of a biſhoppe, and in fine, from thence mounted, to the eſtate of a Conſull: who wagyng battaile with the Parthians, triumphantly conquered them, and was the firſt that euer apparantly, and throughly quailed their courages. It ſhould alſo be long, in this place to remember, all thoſe that iſſuyng from obſcure race, or parentage, haue notwithſtandyng, by their excellencie in learning, béen aduaūced to greate eſtimation, and honour. Virgill was the ſoonne of none other, then a Potter, yet aſpired he to be called, the beſte Poete emong the Latines. Horace in myne opinion, excelled in poetrie, no Prince of birthe, but muche like vnto

the others. Euſtatius, and Pāpinus, were the ſoonnes of twoo, that had been bondinen, but bothe manumitted. Theophraſtus the Philoſopher, had to father a badde Tailer, or Bodger. Menedemus alſo, to whom for his ſinguler learnyng, the Athenians erected a ſumptuous Image, was the ſonne of a poore artificer. Beſides theſe we reade of infinite others, whom all I paſſe, as a thing moſte aſſured, and euidente. By theſe examples, it now thus lieth manifeſte, that of what eſtate ſo euer, or condition manne be borne, he maie if he will, attaine ſome tyme to honor, ſo that he walke ſtill, in the pathe of vertue, whiche onely is acquired by inceſſaunte paine, and diligencie, with a finall conſideration of heauen, our wiſhed citie, for who ſo other wiſe dooeth, if he in deede mighte poſſiblie, conquere the whole, the wide, and the waſte worlde, what aduauntage ſhould he haue, for the ſame, to looſe the ſoule, after this life tranſitorie?
            
            
               Of the opinion that the olde Romaines, and other auncient countries had of fortune, and how they plaſt her in the number of their Gods: in what forme or figure they alſo depainted her: and finally that there is no fortune at all among the Chriſtians, attributyng the cauſe of all thinges vnto God. Chap. 19.
               
                  FOR as muche as we haue ſome thing writtē of the inſtabilitie of the world, and that by ſundrie examples, of ſundry worthy, and famous perſonages (that which euery of them attributed falſly vnto fortune) reaſon would now that we alſo in this place ſpeake ſome what, of that, whiche the Gentiles, and Heathens haue immagined of this vanitie, in fine concludyng, as is our promis with the Chriſtians. Among others many, and ſhamefull errors, which the olde ſages, and wiſe philoſophers,

haue built vppon mans onely, and ſole obſeruation, not feeling at all of that true, and heauenly wiſedome, this was the chéefe and principall occaſion, for that not vnderſtandyng the cauſes, whence theſe effectes proceaded, as alſo not why they were, or who ordained theim, ſundrie of theim termed theim the verie workes of fortune, as all ſoodden aduentures, thinges I meane ſome times leſſe deſired, or thought on: neither haue thei yet ſtaied there, but fortune not beyng any other thinge, then a plaine imagination, voide as well of al quantitie, as of ſubſtaunce or qualitie, haue déemed her to bee ſome celeſtiall or diuine nature, ſome miſtris of much might, and perticuler Goddeſſe, vnto whom they attributed what ſo chaūſed in mans life, were it, without reſpect, in thinges proſperous or aduerſitie. They ſuppoſed her to gouerne, or to holde in hande the bridle, of what ſo happened to vs ether fortunate, or contrarie, and ſo is this follie now growen to this point, that Virgill feareth not Virgill in the eight of his Eneid. to name her, omnipotent, and almightie: and Cicero in his offices bluſtreth out in this ſorte. Who is he that féeleth not the arme of fortune to be right ſtrōg, and mightie, of equall powre, and force, both in good and euell: for if ſhe vouchſafe to aſſiſte vs, with her proſperous winde, then mount we on high to the toppe of our deſires: but if it contrarie, then liue we afflicted in miſerable extremitie. Saluſt a learned, and eloquent hiſtoriogripher, ſaieth that fortune is maiſtris and lady ouer all thinges. With theim alſo accordeth Iuuenal in theſe wordes: if fortune will, of a ſimple aduocate, thou ſhalt be made a Conſull: if the ſame againe, ſo pleaſe, from the eſtate of a Conſull, thou ſhalt fall doune to that, of a poore and néedy aduocat, in ſuche ſorte that they attributed all puiſſance vnto fortune. And yet merueilous is it to ſée, how that beyng of this opiniō, thei ſo commonly and vnfrendly blaſphemed ſtill againſt her, terming her by names, and Epithitons, vnkinde exilyng far frō al reuerence, far alſo from al honour.

                  Plinie ſaieth, that through out the whole world, in all places, and at all houres, and by all men of what degree ſo euer, onely fortune, & ſhe alone is called on, ſhe is deſired, ſhe is accuſed, ſhe is purſued with enmitie, and malice, on her alone all men thinke, ſhe onely is praiſed, ſhe onely is blamed, ſhe onely is charged with iniuries and reproches, ſhe onely is honoured, ſhe onely eſtemed, ſhe onely is reputed for vncertaine, and mutable, of many ſhe is accōpted blinde, and inſtable, inconſtant, fickle ſtill chaungyng, and variable, and commonly to the leſſe worthy very large & fauourable. The cauſes to her we attribute, of our expenſes, and receptes, and in all oure accomptes, or like buſines to be doen, ſhe holdeth ſtill the one ſide, and the other of our booke: in ſuch ſorte that we be of condition ſo ſeruile, that this monſter of vs, is adored for a God, and ſo by this meane would God to be vncertaine. Hetherto Plinie. Our anceſtours framed to her ſundry kindes of Images I meane of ſtraunge and diuers figures, accordyng to the diuerſitie of effectes, that they imagined to be in her. When they would attribute to her the cauſe of anie victory, they depainted her in valiaunt ſhape, fearce, ſtoute, and manly, hauyng a temple perticularlie dedicated vnto mightie fortune, whiche (as ſuppoſeth Liuie) was builte by the Conſul Camillus, with the praie, and ſpoiles he gotte at the ouerthrowe of the Hetruſcians: where in proſis of time afterwardes, it alſo was ordeined, that her feaſt ſhould there be celebrated, the fiue and twenteth continually of Iune, of parte for that Haſdrubal was on that daie vanquiſhed by the Romaines, as alſo the ſame daie Maſsiniſſa their frende conquired in like ſort kyng Syphax of Numidia. Beſides this an other Temple was dedicated to her by the Romaines, twoo little miles, or there aboute from Rome, where ſhe was purtraied in ſhape like a womā, for that in that ſame place Coriolanus comyng in armes againſt his countrie, was wonne by the humble ſute, and intreatie

of his mother, ſo that in fine hee returned, and perdoned the Citie, whiche of purpoſe he came to ſacke, to burne, and to deſtroie. And in this ſhape of a woman, purtraied there in an Image, ſome accurſed ſprite or deuill, by gile ſtreight entered, whiche often tymes thence ſpake, reputed for an oracle. The thirde temple alſo had thei dedicated to ill fortune: at whiche tyme thei ſo blinded were in that their fonde deuotion; that they ſuppoſed all thinges ſhould proſperouſly ſuccéede with hym, that buſily adored, or reuerenced this fortune, but vnto hym that ſacrificed not, ne appeaſed her by offerynges, all thynges ſhould goe amiſſe, where he ſo theim attempted. And of all theſe abuſes the deuell hymſelf was auther, to that intent onely thei ſhould repoſe their whole hope, and affiaunce ſtill in him: as happened ſome times, for proofe therof to Galba, who for that he had taken awaie, a coller of Golde, from this Image of Fortune, to dedicate the ſame, or offer it to Venus, as is reported in ſundrie good hiſtories, fortune the ſaied night immediatly then folowyng, appeared vnto hym, with dreedfull wordes, minaſing, wherof he alſo died or many daies expired. The vanitie of this people was ſuche then, and ſo aucthoriſed, that they yet had alſo an other Image of fortune, ſemely bearded, imaginyng all thoſe, that had her in eſpeciall adoration, ſhoulde haue verie faire beardes, well coloured, and well growen: but thoſe that diſdained her, or none at all, or the contrarie. All theſe thinges did they for diuerſitie of reſpectes, and conſiderations in her: and withall to ſignifie her omnipotēcie, or power, which they déemed all ſhe had, purtraiyng her in ſundrie, and diuers ſortes a goddeſſe. The philoſopher Cebes, depainted her in the ſhape, or figure of a woman, but as furious with al, blinde and with out féeling, mounted on a roūde ſtone, denotyng her inſtabilitie. Vupal was the firſte in Gréece, that framed any ſhape or purtraite, of fortune, in the toune of Smirna; which he depainted with a veale

vpon her head, hauing in her hande a horne of abūdance. The Scithians purtraied her a woman without feete, hauyng not withſtandyng both handes, and winges. Others ſome faſhioned her, with the ſtearne of a ſhippe in one hande, as alſo with the foreſaied horne of abundance in the other: thence inferring that ſhee had dominiō ouer all, diſpoſing all thinges, throughout the worlde as was to her roiall maieſtie beſt ſéemyng. Some others againe of fine, and brittle glaſſe, becauſe ſhe was ſo fickle, with out all holde or ſtaie. Others alſo depainted her turnyng of a wheele, on the higheſt parte of which, ſome preſently were placed, ſome alſo were climbyng, as thoug they would get vp, ſome alſo fallyng into ruine, and diſpaire. One alſo reſembleth her, not vnaptly to a Commedie, in whiche ſome enter at tymes, with countenance, of kinges, and greate Perſonages, and ſtreight againe chaungyng their habite, or apparell, put on the faces, or countenaunces of bondmenne, for that in this life, wée haue none other ſuretie, to daie to liue in pompe, to morowe in rācke beggerie. Socrates compared her to a common place, or theater without order, where commonly it happened, the worthieſt in déede, to be eftſones worſt placed. Others ſome againe, purtraied her all blinde: and to this purpoſe Apuleus, hath theſe woordes in his golden Aſſe. For iuſt cauſe did our elders, depainte Fortune blind, for continually ſhe giueth, to the leſſe vertuous, and vnhoneſte, neuer for his demerites, preferryng any perſone, voide of all election, or diſtinction of menne for vertue, aduauncyng the ribaulde, and the graceleſſe tretcherer, whom if ſhe had iyes to beholde, or to conſider, ſhe then would flie in haſte, from theſe her accurſed dearlynges. Infinite is the number of aucthorities, that might be alleaged, concernyng the names, or titles, that haue béen of many aſſigned vnto Fortune. Valerius, and Claudian, letted not to call her diſpitefull, and enuious: Ouidius in faſtis, right mightie and puiſſaunte, but in his

Epiſtles, accurſed, and diſpitefull. Iuuenall in his Satires froward, and peruerſe. Lucian traiterous, and periured. Siluius Italicus, falſe, and ſubtile. Virgill in one place nameth her omnipotēt, and almightie, but in others again inconſtaunte, vnfaithfull, and diſloiall. Cicero of whom we alſo aboue ſome thing remembred, who alſo then accoumpted her, a Princes moſte of might, and guide alſo to them that would, or did liue iuſtly, ſaieth that nothing is ſo contrary to reaſon, and to conſtancie, as is theſame Fortune. And yet for all this, the vanitie of the auncient Romaines, was ſuche, and ſo greate, that thei ſtil adored her, whom thei knewe to bee blinde, falce, inſtable, and inconſtaunte, dedicatyng to theſame, bothe ſumptuous, and coſtly Temples, vowyng theim ſelues, ſo buſily, to theſe ſuperſtitions, that the Emperours theim ſelues, had euermore the Image of Fortune, in their ſleapyng chambers. But when any of theim died, the ſame was then tranſported into the chamber of his ſucceſſor. The firſte that framed a Temple, to Fortune in Rome, was Seruius Tullius, as recordeth Liue, the ſixte kyng by order; and iuſte accoumpte of the Romaines: though Plutarche in his booke of the fortune of the Romaines, affirme that it was Marcius the fowerth kyng there, whiche framed as is euidente, a Temple to virill Fortune. Seruius notwithſtandyng, gaue Fortune all theſe names, to witte, of valiaunte Fortune, little Fortune, proſperous Fortune, aduerſe Fortune, triumphaunte Fortune, with others more, ſuche, to theſe the like, and ſemblable, to euery of whiche, he dedicateth a parte, a riche, a faire and aſumptuous temple. The firſt of virile or rather valiaunte Fortune, ſtoode nigh vnto Tyber, where all yonge maidens, that were of age mariagable, came to offer their preſentes, with all reuerence, and deuotion: in whiche Temple thei alſo did of all their apparell, all naked, ſaue their ſmocke, before this Idoll of Fortune, diſcoueryng their me heames, and eche their

deformities, if thei had any priuie imperfection, immaginyng that this Idoll, would aſſuredly conceale it, and ſo for theim woorke, by ſome ſecrete vertue, that thoſe, thaut ſhould marrie theim, ſhould neuer at all perceiue it, that whiche Ouide reporteth in his Faſtis. And as this Empire grewe ſtill, to be more greate, and puiſſaunte, ſo grewe this fonde deuotion, throughout emong the Romaines, erectyng to her Temples, accordyng to the difference, or diuerſitie of her names: and this not onely in Rome, or other tounes aboute it, but in euery the partes, what ſo euer, of all Italie. In fine, then muſt we thinke, that all theſe vanities, with many others the ſemblable, whiche maie in this place bée remembred, to this purpoſe, was a plain illuſion, and deception of men, walkyng in darkeneſſe, affiyng, and truſtyng in their owne proper wiſedome. For what ſo euer is, dwellyng in this worlde, in heauen I meane, in yearth, or els belowe in hell, thei ſtill are, and procede, from the inſcrutable prouidence, and wiſedome of GOD: neither is it Fortune, chaunce, or aduenture, for that all in him haue cauſe of their beyng, by hym thei alſo holde their courſe, and eke their order. And againe, though many of vs bee founde, of ſo groſſe a féelyng, or vnderſtandyng, that wee either hardly, or not at all perceiue, the increaſe, or ſucceſſe of thynges, not to be of Fortune, but that what ſo euer is, or any waie multiplieth, the ſame to iſſue, and procede from the principall, firſte, and chief cauſe God, maker, creatour, and gouernour of all, whiche for an aſſured veritie, we muſte acknowledge, and imbrace, that would, or doe deſire, to be numbred for Chriſtians. Lact. Firmianus letteth not to laugh at, or deride thoſe men, whiche attribute the aduentures of the worlde, to Fortune. S. Auguſtine in his retractations, repenteth hym of his errour, that he followyng the common phrace, or wonted maner in ſpeache, did attribute the good happe of man, in like ſorte alſo to Fortune, highly cōmendyng

in the ſaied place kyng Dauid, for that he aſcribed euery his tribulations, to the inſcrutable, and ſecrete iudgementes of God onely. This then muſte we beleue, that what ſo euer is, or any where hath his beyng, that the ſame bothe is, and proceadeth ſtill from God. Farther alſo, beſides that ſundrie our elders, had ſome feelyng in this matter. Saluſte alſo ſawe it, and boldly therefore pronounced, that eche man was the firſte, and principall cauſe of his fortune, and in his proheme, of his warre of Iugurthe, ſaieth: that the ſlothfull, and negligent perſon, complaineth ſtill of Fortune, but without any iuſte cauſe, or reaſon. Iuuenal more plainly in his tenth Satire affirmeth that where aduice is, there Fortune ſtill exileth, though wée repute her for a goddeſſe, and lodge her in the heauens. Other Philoſophers were there, whiche though thei alſo affirmed, that Fortune of her ſelf, could in deede doe nothyng, beleued it notwithſtandyng, that ſhe was an inſtrument, or aide, to the diuine prouidence, as if God ſhould ſtande in nede of ſome other, to aſſiſte hym: whiche is no leſſe vaine, then the opinions aboue rehearſed, and alſo others ſome, that in this place might be remembred, whiche I all leaue, as alſo to be tedious, onely paſſyng in fewe, there by yet to admoniſhe the ignoraunte, and ſimple Chriſtian what ſo euer, that he forſake his fonde, and fooliſhe cuſtome, to gréeue, or to miſlike at any tyme with Fortune, when any thing betideth hym, contrary to his expectation. For in fine, this muſt we knowe, that God diſpoſeth mannes affaires alone, to whom, and to none other, in euery our neceſſities, we muſte appeale, and crie, for his aſſiſtaunt grace and ſuccour.
            
            
               That ſundrie beaſtes, by ſome priuie naturall inſtinct, haue foreknowleage of thynges to come: as alſo of many countries, by the onely force of little wormes, brought to be deſolate, and forſaken. Chap. 20.
               
                  
                  NOt onely the naturall inſtincte of ſundrie creatures, brute, and voide of reaſon, might ſuffice to learne vs, the inwarde proprieties of thinges infinite, as how, and in what ſorte, thei mighte pleaſe, and profite vs, as in the vſe, or practiſe of Phiſicke, or otherwiſe: but alſo a noumber of them, birdes, and foules I meane, as well as any other, haue ſome priuie feelyng, of euery the chaunge, and alteration of weather, as when we ſhall haue raine, winde, pleaſaunt tymes, or tempeſtes, inſtructyng here in man as if he ſawe it preſently. As then wée ſée that Shepe, prognoſticate of raine, when moſte buſily thei diſporte, in ſkippyng to and fro. The ſemblable is perceiued moſt plainly in the bullocke, eſpecially when he licketh directly againſte the heare, liftyng his ſnoute a lofte into the aire, bellowyng, and breathyng eftſones on the ground, féedyng with the ſame more buſily, then is his wont, or maner. The yeawe when ſhe diggeth the grounde with her foote: as alſo when the goates couet nigheſt, to ſlepe together: when alſo the antes, walke thickeſt in a ranke in greater heapes alſo, then is their vſuall maner, runnyng eche on other, as troubled, or amaſed, theſe all bee markes aſſured of moiſture, raine, and weather. When Lyons leaue their wonted ranges, and ſoiles, and ſéeke a newe to preie in other countries, then bee you well aſſured, of greate drieth that yere followyng. Elian recordeth, that the goates of Libia, knowe certainly, when firſte the Caniculer daies begin, and by euident demonſtrations, bothe féele, and perceiue, when it will in dede, or likely is to raine. When Woulfes drawe in troopes towardes houſes, and villages, and come nigher into the ſight of men, then is their common wonte, an infallible rule is it, of a tempeſt ſhortly followyng. Fiſhes alſo no

leſſe ſtraungely prognoſticate, and diuine, of euery theſe chaunges, and mutations of tymes. When the Dolphines leape, very buſily in the Sea, diſcoueryng theim ſelues, by mounting aboue the water, then greate windes ſhall followe, eſpecially from that parte, whence thei ſeme to come: but contrary, when thei trouble the water, beatyng them ſelues there in, a more certaine ſigne then that, can none be of faire weather. When the frog crooketh more, and more loude then is her wonte, ſhe fore learneth vs of raine, and of tempeſtious weather. Neither are birdes exempted from this priuileage, of whiche as muche, or more, maie wée write to this purpoſe, then of all other beaſtes, of what ſort ſo euer. The foules of the ſea, when thei refuſe the deapth, and haſten to the ſhore, denote ſome ſtormie blaſte, and ſodaine chaunge of weather. If the Cranes flie in the aire with out any brute, or noiſe, then promes thei a calme: but if thei crie, and ſlie in heapes diſordered, then be ye well aſſured, thei promes you the cōtrary. When the crowe flieth frō the maine lande, to the ſea, ſhe there by as wel prognoſticateth, ſome chaunge of weather, and raine, as alſo when ſhe plaineth with mournfull noiſe, and crie. If the ſhriche Oule, houle muche, in any ſtorme tempeſtuous, it denoteth ſome preſente chaunge vnto the better: but if in a calme ſhe ſyng, beſides her wonted maner, it noteth againe, as on the other ſide, ſome ſpedy alteration. Plutarche writeth, that when the Crowe ſyngeth with a rawe, and horſe voice, not lettyng to beate her ſelf buſily with her winges, ſhe fore learneth vs of winde, and raine in aboundance. The ſame alſo is euidēt vnto vs, by the ſaied birde againe, as when the Sunne is fallyng in the poincte of the Weſte, if he ſkippe, and ſyng, mountyng ſodainly into the aire, ſtreight fallyng doune againe, as if he ſcarce could flie, beginnyng then again his plaie, euen as before, threatnyng as we might ſaie, ſome bluſteryng ſtorme, or tempeſte. Greate troopes

againe of white birdes, ordinarilie aſſēble, and mete in heapes together, immediatly before ſome greate chaunge, or alteration of weather. When the Cocke, the Capon, with euery other kinde of Pultrie, beate eftſones their winges, aduaunce theim ſelues, and ſyng, as alſo reioiſyng in outward ſhewe, and apperance, it is as moſte ſuppoſe, a true preſage, or ſigne of preſent winde, and weather. When the Larke ſyngeth very earely in the mornyng, whē alſo the Ducke doeth waſhe, or bath her ſelf, beakyng, trimmyng, and orderyng her feathers, it euidently denoteth exceſſe of winde, and raine. When the Swallowe flieth ſo nigh vnto the water, that a man would thinke, ſhe ſtill would touche, or ſtrike it, a preſage no leſſe ſure, of raine, is this then the others. Elian writeth, that the Snite hath full, and perfecte felyng, of th'increaſe aſwell, as decreaſe of the Moone. But I feare I greue the reader, with theſe fore paſte exāples: wherfore I now will ſpeake, of certaine beaſtes, whiche haue forced men to leaue, and forgoe, their countrie, the ſame all not greate, and mightie, but ſome alſo ſmall, and foible. And to this purpoſe Elian recordeth, that in certaine partes of Italie, the rootes of trées, and hearbes, were in ſuche ſorte by Rattes deſtroied, that the inhabitantes in fine (though thei did their paine to kill theim) were notwithſtandyng faine, through penurie to foregoe, and to forſake their countrie. Marcus Varro reporteth, that there was a greate toune in Spaine, ſituate, or ſtanding in a ſandie ſoile, whiche was by Conies, in ſuche ſort vndermined, that in th'ende it ſuncke, & came to extreame ruine. Neither onely haue theſe thynges happened, in wide, and open countries, but alſo in Iſlandes inuironed with the ſea, where bothe Rattes, & Mice, haue in ſuche aboundance ſwarmed, that thei haue forſte the inhabitantes to leaue their place, & dwelling: for proofe whereof, one of the Iſles Ciclades, called Gyare, was by the onely force, of theſe foreſaid vermaine, left voide of man

deſtitute, and inhabitable. Theſaied aucthours again reporte, that there was alſo in Fraunce, a famous toune, whiche by the onely multitude of Todes, and Frogges there, was alſo by the inhabitauntes, lefte, and forſaken. The ſemblable chaunſed, as is euident, in Africa, by the onely malice of Locuſtes, and Graſhoppers. Theophraſtus 
                  The Palmer is alitte worme lōg and rough hauyng manie legges, and in laune may bee called bruchus, or campe
                           •
                        , or multipeda.
                   remembreth of an other countrie, which was by Palmers deſtroied, and forſaken. An other Prouince was there alſo in Libia, very fruitfull, fertile, and aboū
                  dant, from whiche the inhabitantes were chaſte, by the furious rage of Lions: how bée it, as it was no meruaile, ſo neither was it ſhame, for man to leaue his countrie, by the malice of this beaſte. But the greate weakenes, and imbecillitie of manne, is ſufficiently ſeen, in that whiche Plinie reporteth, of a certaine Prouince, vpon the limites of Ethiopia, where as Antes, Scorpions, and other ſmall vermaine, did to exile thence all the inhabitantes. The people of Megaris in Grece, were driuen by Bées onely, to leaue, and flie their citie: as in like ſorte, by the Waſpe, ſome times alſo the Epheſians. Antenor writyng alſo of the Iſle of Crete (as from him reporteth it Elian againe) ſaieth that a certaine multitude of Bées, chaſte out of a greate citie, all the inhabitantes thereof, vſyng their houſes, in ſteede of Buttes, or Hiues. Many ſuche others ſtraunge, and rare matters, are redde, and recorded in olde, and aunciente hiſtories.
            
            The ende of the ſeconde parte.
         
         
            
            ¶ The thirde parte of the Forreſt, or collection of diuers leſſons.
            
               How profitable a thing the inuention of letters was, who firſte founde or inuented theim, as alſo how the Hebrue Characters ſignifie ſome thyng of theim ſelues, that whiche is incident to no other kinde of letters, of what ſorte or kinde ſo euer. Chap. 1.
               
               
                  IF wée accompte thoſe worthy of greate thankes, and praiſes, that haue by ſtudie founde out, and inuented the artes liberal, and mechanical, thoſe alſo that haue left vs diuers other thinges, and doctrines, as well appertainyng to the comfort, and conſolation of the ſoule, as alſo to the vſe, and exerciſe of the bodie. Howe muche then more ſtande we bounde vnto thoſe, that firſt of all haue geuen vs the vſe of letters, whiche onely preſerue, and kéepe, all other inuentions: for without theim nothyng maie be reſerued to the poſteritie, no deuice whatſoeuer canne liue, or remaine: beſides that, that by letters alſo, man continueth in euerie ſucceſſion as immortall for euer. By theim what ſo was doen a thouſande yeres hence is in ſuche ſorte offered, and preſented vnto vs, as if betwixt vs, and theim no time at all had paſſed. By thē man attaineth to all diſcipline, and ſciences, by theym man in theſe daies perfectly acquainteth hymſelfe, with that, whiche others before hym well knewe, and were learned in, as by the ſame againe, what ſo euer man, in this preſent age inuenteth, is preſerued, and laide vppe for the poſteritie followyng. By theim is fully ſien, and

perfectly repreſented, what ſo at any time hath in anie ſorte been doen, in ſuche aſſured wiſe, and in ſuche ample maner, that it might ſeeme alwaies to haue continued ſtill in doyng, whiche neuer had been poſſible, but by the onely meane, and commodetie of letters. Nether Plato, neither Ariſtotle, neither infinite other philoſophers had helde ſtill the reputation, whiche their learnyng merited. To conclude it canne none otherwiſe be ſaide, but that the moſte worthie, and moſte excellent inuention, that euer was by man thought on, is that ſame, of the firſt findyng of letters, whiche who ſo woulde hardely credite, let hym chiefly conſider of thoſe thinges that bee written, whiche all ſhould as well be vtterly loaſte, and forlorne, as alſo againe that no newe thing might be reſerued to the poſteritie. Sith then by letters we reape, ſuche, and ſo greate commodities, it were reaſon wee ſpeake ſome thing, of their firſte aucthonr or inuentour. How be it, it is laborous to ſearche here in a troth, the diuerſities of opinions ſo differēt, and ſo many. The Gentiles in this caſe diſagrée with the Chriſtians, the Chriſtians againe among theim ſelues. Plinie, touching thys Plinie in his ſeuenth boke, different, remembreth ſundrie opinions, and amonge others addeth his aduice, whiche in my iudgemente hath more ſhew of troth then any other. Firſt he ſaieth they were founde out by the Aſsirians, in Aſsiria, though others ſome attribute it, to Mercurie in Egipte. Some againe affirme, that the Pelagians firſt brought theym inuented by theim, in to Italie: and that they were againe tranſported into Grece by the Phenicians, with Cadmus there capitaine, whiche onely then knewe ſixtene, and no more, and that after in the warre of Troie, Palamedes vnto the firſte, adioyned other fower: but Plinie after that he had alleaged the opinions of many, he concludeth, that in his opinion, letters were euen from the beginnyng eternall, to wéete, that thei beganne, euen at the firſt, with the worlde. That the firſte knowledge of

letters, neuer the leſſe came, by the Pheniciens in to Grece, Herodotus, with others many plainly affirme it: the Egiptians notwithſtandyng vaunte theimſelues as Herodotus. wel of the firſt inuention of letters, as of the artes. Diodorus Siculus attributeth it, as is fore ſaide to Mercurie, how be it the ſame Diodorus Siculus in his fowerth boke Diodorus. Sic. ſaieth, that ſome imagen that the Ethiopians, both firſte had, and knewe this excellent vſe of letters, and that the Egiptians, in trueth, borrowed this ſkille afterwarde of theim, ſo that, of theſe writers we can not gather the aſſured truth, which we ſo muche deſire. Concernyng this matter, yet are there others, Iewes a greate many, as wel as alſo Chriſtians, which attribute this firſt inuention only vnto Moyſes, who was before any the letters, or writynges of the Gentiles, for that Cadmus of whom we fore ſpake, whom we alſo ſaide to haue brought the firſte letters into Grece, was in the tyme of Othoniel, duke, and Capitaine of Iſrael, whiche liued fortie and ſeuen yeres, after the written lawe was geuē vnto Moyſes. Theſe that are of this opinion, amonge whiche wee finde Eupolemus, and Artabanus, heathen hiſtoriogriphers, affirme that the Egiptians firſt learned there letters of Moyſes, and that thei afterwarde imperted of their knowledge to the Phenicians, whence after againe Cadmus, paſt with them into Grece. Artabanus noteth, that this Mercurie whiche all agrée on, to haue made the firſt profeſſion of letters in Egipte, was Moyſes himſelf called of the Egiptians Mercurie. Philon, an Hebrue, a man of greate aucthoritie, ſaieth that the inuention of letters was yet againe more auncient, who ſaieth that Adā
                   was the firſt authour of theim, & in deede thei either were inuented by Adam, or by his children, or by them at the leaſte of the firſt age before the generall fludde, or inundation preſerued by Noe, and his ſucceſſours euen vntill the tyme of Abraham, and from hym againe vntil Moyſes. And thus is the iudgement, or opinion of Sainct

                  Auguſtine. Whiche is verified by the aucthoritie of Ioſephus ſaiyng, that the nephewes of Adam, ſones of Seth, 
                  S. Auguſtine in his eightinth booke, de ciuitate dei. Ioſephus in his firſt booke of his aniquities. aduaunced or erected two ſumptuous pillers, the one of ſtone, the other of claie, in whiche they wrote, or ingraned all the ſciences: affirmyng that himſelfe ſawe one of theim in Syria. We finde alſo that S. Iude the Appoſtle, alleageth in a certaine Epiſtle of his, the booke of Enoch, whiche alſo liued, before the fludde. So that wee muſt not doubt, but that Adam, and his children, whiche were ſo wiſe, whiche alſo had experience of ſo many thinges, were alſo they, that firſte founde out the vſe of letters, and that Noe which afterward was both lettered, and learned, carefully preſerued theim in his Arke with hym: howe be it after that, in the confuſion of tongues, whiche happened at the erection of the Tower of Babilon, it may be that the greateſt parte of the worlde loſte then, and there the knowledge of the ſaied letters again, which onely remained in the family of Heber, of, or from whom afterwarde deſcended the Hebrues, who (as wee fore ſaide) neuer loſte their firſte and aunciente tongue. Which as it is true, ſo Sainct Auguſtine reporteth it in his booke aboue alleaged, Euſebius alſo in his firſt booke, of his preparation Euangelicall, as alſo the greater part of the learned of our tyme. Wherefore as well Philon, as alſo theſe others, whiche ſuppoſed Moyſes to haue been the firſt father of letters, were there in all to geather deceaued, for that it is euident, that theſe bookes and hiſtories that were written by Moyſes were not as they déeme, the firſte of all others, ne yet before the auncient ſtudie of Philoſophie, the ſadde, and ſage ſaiynges alſo of the Grekes, as proueth Sainct Auguſtine ſufficiently in the ſame place, Ioſephus againſt the grammariā 
                  Apion, Euſebius alſo and Iuſtinus martirs. I conclude then that letters, were firſt, and before Moyſes, for that we finde it recorded, that Moyſes hymſelfe learned the artes, and ſciences of the Egiptians, which I well knowe not, how

he colde haue accompliſhed, if they before had hadde, no feelyng in letters, although in déede, it be manifeſt, that they hadde certaine ſignes, called literae hierogliphicae, by meanes of whiche as is aboue ſaide, euery of theym ſufficientlye and well vnderſtoode the other. From Adam then drawe wee the originall of letters, as alſo that Abraham was after ſkilled of theim in Siria: whence it cometh, that Plinie hath varied in his opinion, whiche wée haue in fewe now to fore remembred. It nedeth nothing in this place to ſearche the beginnyng, or cauſe, of the vſuall frame, or proportion of our characters, for that eche man maie facion theim, as is to hym beſt ſeemyng, as we daily ſee euery man alter at his pleaſure, adding ſignes, ſome tymes, in ſteede or place, of letters, as affirmeth S. Hierome in the prologue, of his boke of lawes, that when Eſdras, the greate ſcribe and doctour of the lawe, newe wrote, or drewe it out, in to ſome better fourme, hee founde there ſtraunge, and newe characters of letters, whiche the Iewes after vſed, euen in the tyme of ſainct Hierome, as they alſo doe, euen at this preſente daie, whiche Hebrue letters, haue a priuate proprietie incident to no other letters, of any countrie or nation: for the voice, or name, of euerie of theim, geueth ſignification of ſome one thing, or other. The firſte called Aleph, ſignifieth diſcipline, the ſeconde Beth ſignifieth a houſe: Gymel, an other letter, fillyng vp, or abundance: Daleth, tables or bookes: the others alſo ſignifie, and denote, other thinges, whiche all I leaue, as alſo to be tedious. Who ſo here in is curious, and deſireth to knowe more may reade Euſebius, in his firſte booke, de preparatione Euangelica.
               
            
            
               
               Where on our elders wrote before the inuention of Paper, and with what kinde of inſtrument, how Paper, and Parchement were firſte founde out. Who firſt inuented the maner or ſkille of Printyng, as alſo what ineſtimable profite thence riſeth, and in fine by what meane a blinde man maie write. Chap. 2.
               
                  SOme what haue we after a ſorte ſpoken, in the former chapiter, of the inuention of letters, it reſteth nowe that we alſo ſearche, on what matter our elders, or firſt fathers wrote, and although directly we ſhall not be able here of to diſcourſe, ne yet where on thei wrote, before ye general inundation in the firſt age, for the matter is both doubtfull & difficill, to wéete, whether thei had letters then, in very déede, ye or not, though we haue paſt it, as proued by the aucthoritie of Ioſephus, as alſo aided, to that purpoſe, with ſome other profe, or reaſons. Notwithſtanding according to the opinion of al men, the firſt writers had no kinde, or maner of Paper, but wrote continually on the leaues of the Date tree, whence came that worde of leaues of bookes vſed at this daie. After this thei wrote againe on the rindes of trées, but eſpecially on thoſe that moſt eaſely were drawen, or taken from the trée, as the Elme, the Aſhe, the palme or Burche trée, from which thei tooke the innermoſt rinde, that I meane, betwixte the cruſte and the trée, of whiche ſubtilly and finely poliſhed, thei framed, and facioned all their bokes, artificially conioigning, and faſtnyng theim together. And for as muche as, in that time, theſe rindes were called by the latin men libri, hence haue bokes held from ye time, to name this word libri, though thei this day far differ in ye matter as is euidēt. Now after this againe an other waie was foūd, to write in plates of leade, very

thinne, and perfectly fined, of whiche ſome curious, and priuate perſones, made aſwell pillers as alſo bookes, in which thei regeſtred all publike, and common actes. Beſides this, they yet founde an other waie to write, to wéete, on Liuen cloth, fined and poliſhed, with certaine coloures. Here alſo is, and in this place to bée noted, that they then wrote not, as wee nowe do with pennes, but with Reades, whiche in latine may bee called Calami, which alſo ſome vſe, euen yet, in this daie. An other kind of Paper was yet founde againe, whiche was made, as it were of certaine little trées, called (as wee finde) by the name of Papers, which, in déede were none other, then a ſorte, or kinde of bull ruſhes, ordinarely growing, in marſhes adionyng to the riuer of Nile. Of which ſorte ſome others are founde in Siria, nigh to the floodde Euphrates, as recordeth Plinie, hauyng the name, as the others, of papers, little thinne leaues, or ſkinnes haue they, betwixt the rinde and the inner parts, whiche finely taken or drawen out, with the poincte of an Néelde, trimde afterwarde with a certaine glue, or paſte made with meale, tempered with boyled water and vineagar, was in the ende made a good, and perfect paper, to write drawe, or doo anything theron: and by how muche the nigher, you drewe the ſkinnes, from the inwarde parte of this Ruſhe, or Reede, by ſo muche was it both better, and more fine, and ſo accordyng to the goodneſſe or difference of theim, thei alſo had diuers and different names. Who ſo deſireth here in more, let hym reade Plinie. And Plinie in his thirtine boke, the eleuenth and twel
                        •
                     te Chapiters. for as muche as, this Réede, Ruſhe, or little trée, was called paper, the name is thence deriued of that paper, vſed by vs this daie, whiche is made of ſmall péeces, or ſhreedes of linnen clothe, throwly waſted and worne to nothing. Varro affirmeth that the firſt inuentiō to make paper of theſe little trées, or ruſhes, was in the tyme of Alexander the greate, euen then when Alexandria was Alaxandria was founded by Alex. 320. yeres before the incarnatiō of Chriſt. Plin. in his. 31. booke, and ix. Chapiter. by hym firſte founded. How be it Plinie proueth it to bée

more auncient, by certaine bookes which Terence did to be digde out of the grounde, whiche before had been Numa Pompilius his bookes, kinge of Rome, founde in the ſame Tombe, where he was buried, whoſe leaues were of the ſaide ruſhe, whiche we aboue remembred. And although Liuie haue otherwiſe written of this Toumbe, affirming that there were two founde by L. Patilius, yet be we of the minde, that Numa was long before Alexander. With Liuie here in accorde, both Lactātius, and Plutarche in the life of Numa, Plinies opinion notwithſtandyng is of moſt menne approued. Some write that this worde Charta, tooke his originall, or denomination of a certaine Toune nigh vnto Tyre, called Carta, whence Dido altering the name, called it afterwarde Carthage. Our elders alſo wrote in tables weaxt, thinne, and well fined, framyng there letters with ſharpe, and ſmall punchions, which theim ſelues then termed, by the name of ſtiles. Whence it cometh that wee nowe vſually ſaie, that who ſo well inditeth, writeth a good ſtile, borrowyng the name, of the inſtrumente that they then wrote with. Alſo before the innention of paper, where on we preſently write, the aunciente cuſtome was, all other fore vſed meanes ſepoſed, to write continuallie on Parchment onely, made of ſhepe ſkinnes, of whiche remembreth vs well Herodotus, whoſe inuention Varro attributeth to the inhabitauntes of Pergama, whoſe king then was Eumenes, whence in latin it is called at this daie pergamenum, in engliſhe parchement. And wher as in latine it is alſo called Membrana, it taketh as maie he thought the name of the inuentour. Neuertheleſſe in my iudgement, men wrote on theſe ſkines, longe before that tyme, remembred by Varro, ſpecified in like ſorte afterward by Plinie, for that Ioſephus writeth, that the Ioſephus in his 12. booke of antiqnities, bookes of the Hebrues, and ſundrie others, which were manie yeres before Eumenes, were alſo writtē on theſe ſkinnes, as aboue ſaied. As alſo when he reciteth that Eleaſar
                  
Prince of the Préeſtes, ſente the bookes, of holie ſcripture vnto Ptolomie, with the ſeuētie interpreters, to the intent, they for hym, ſhould tranſlate theim, from the hebrue into greke, affirmyng that Ptolomie, bothe ſtraungely was amaſed and meruailed at the ſubtle ioyning of theſe ſkinnes, or parchmentes together. Whēce it is aperte, that what ſo euer was written, in any ſort, in parchmente, was of longer, and greater continuance, then if it had béen doen, in theſe rindes or leaues, though in déede thei both were of more antiquitie, then the firſt. By meanes whereof, this vſe of Parchemente, neither hath, neither will bee, at anye tyme againe leafte, and ſince that paper againe, whiche we daily now vſe, is ſo eaſie to make, and in ſuche abundaunce, that it both helpeth, and profiteth all kinde of ſtudentes. But aboue all other thinges without cōpariſon we muſt confeſſe, that the ſkill of printyng, (by the onely meanes of whiche, ſuche heapes of bookes come, of all ſortes to our handes) is amonge all other inuentions, that ether be, or earſte haue been, in what ſorte ſo euer, to be preferred: whiche, as is written, was firſt of al inuented by an Almaine, inhabitant of Magonce, and hight Ihon Fauſt (though Polidore 
                  Whé and who firſt founde the ſkille of printyng. otherwiſe ſurname hym Petra) by whoſe accompt the firſt printyng of bookes was there, in the yere of our redemption, a thouſand, fower hundred, fiftie and thrée. And ſhortly afterwarde an other Almaine by name Cō
                     radus practiſed this arte firſte of all in Italie. Howe be it Volateranus writeth that thei were twoo, and both brothers, which paſt thence into Italy, beginnyng to printe in Rome, in the yere of oure Lorde a thouſande, fower hundred, ſixtie, and fiue. The firſt bookes that were imprinted were ſainct Auguſtines de ciuitate dei, and the diuine inſtitutions of Lactantius Firmianus. After thys grewe there manie, excellente perſonages, as well in Germanie, and Fraunce, as alſo in Italie, which beſides their arte, or ſkill in printyng, were alſo perfectly, and

paſſyng well learned, as Baldus, Manucius, Badus, Colineus, and Frobenius, verie diligent, and painefull in correction of the lettre, with infinite others, whoſe names to be ſhorte I leaue of to remember. By meanes wherof many bookes, in maner loſt and hidded, were at laſte publiſhed, to the inſpekable profite, & commoditie of man, whiche was in déede the chife cauſe of ſo many learned men, as this daie are euerie where to be founde throughout all Chriſtendome: whiche before both ſeldome, and with greate paine attained, to this abſolute knowledge, and perfection in learnyng. But admit here that it were not the firſt, and principal cauſe, yet am I of that minde, that it aſſuredly is the greateſt cauſe, for that with leſſe paine, wee peruſe nowe ſuche as are perfectly corrected, findyng the others euerie where full of faultes, blottes and errours, committed for the moſt parte, either by the leſſe ſkil, or little care of the writer: but if any one were founde, perhaps emong the others faultles, neither was he to be had, or to bée peruſed of all men, ſo that good letters then floriſhed not, as thei now, and this daie, doe vniuerſally euery where. How be it ſince licence firſt was graunted, by Princes to Printe, all bookes, fabulous, wanton, and fruitles, farre better had it béen, in this reſpect doubtles, that the waie to printe had neuer béen, to man yet, or knowne, or vnfolded: For it deſtroieth and withdraweth from vertue the good minde, principally of youth, whiche noſeled in theſe follies, leſſe affecteth, or deſireth the ſtudie of better leſſōs. Leauing then to ſpeak more of the commodities of printyng, deſcende we to the next, the practiſe of hand writing, which alſo in my iudgement, is this daie more perfecte, more curious, and more abſolute, then at any tyme heretofore, in what age ſo euer. Concernyng which matter, Quintilian giueth ſome rules, not leſſe worthie to bee obſerued, as alſo the learned Eraſmus in his booke, of good, and perfect pronunciation. But of this kinde of hande writyng, will I onely

ſpeake, by the ſole meanes of whiche, as hath the ſaid Eraſmus, certaine blinde menne haue learned orderly to write. Thei did to bee made a table of Porphire, of bone, or otherwiſe of mettall, in whiche was ingraued, euery the letters, as a. b. c. &c. then tooke thei in hande ſome ſmall, and pretie inſtrumente, at the poincte very fine, ſharpe, and ſubtile, ſuche, and ſo well fined, that with eaſe thei might drawe it, through euery the aboue ſaied letters, their handes at firſt by ſome other, wel directed, whiche thyng by long practiſe, thei ſhall in the ende conceiue, hauyng the true forme of eche letter in minde, folowyng it ſtill, with continuall vſe, and induſtrie, by little, and little, ſhall in the ende growe ſo perfecte that afterward thei ſhall bee able, to frame them on any other matter, where though thei ſome tymes faile, yet commonly, and for the moſte parte, thei ſhal doe it well. And thus in fine, thei maie write in paper, by iuſte order, and proportion, what ſo euer, either offereth it ſelf to the minde, or phantaſie.
            
            
               Of the firſt Libraries that euer were in the worlde, and how the men, of that tyme vſed, to haue the Images, or purtraites of the learned in theim. Chap. 3.
               
                  IT is to be thought, that the firſte bookes, and libraries, that euer were in the worlde, were in the beginnyng among the Hebrues: for as it is euidēt, that letters were there firſt knowen, and the perfect vſe of theim, ſo is it to be ſuppoſed, that they alſo had ſome care, to kéepe, and preſerue, that which they at any time had committed to writing. That whiche is as well verified by the aucthoritie of Ioſephus here after alleaged, as alſo by that wee reade in holy write. Iſidorus reporteth

that after the Chaldians hadde burned the library of the Hebrues, with all and euerie their bookes of the lawe, the Hebrues being retourned backe againe into Hieruſalem, the prophet Eſdras illumined by the holy ghoſte, remedied this harme, writyng againe theſe bookes, and reducing theim into the number of twentie two, which was the preciſe number of the letters of their Alphabet. Whence it is manifeſt that after Moyſes had written, the Hebrues incontinently framed to theim ſelues a library, for the better conſeruation of the ſaied bookes of their lawe, as well theſe I meane, that wee preſently haue of the olde Teſtament, as alſo the others, of which we before remembred, among whiche was the booke of Enoch, alleaged, or ſited by ſainct Iude the Apoſtle, in his Epiſtle aboue ſpecified, the boke of the warres of our ſauiour, wherof mentiō is in the twenty and one chapiter of the booke of Numbers, the booke alſo of the true ſeruauntes of God, vouchte in the ſeconde booke, and firſte Chapiter of the kinges, the booke of Samuel the prophet, remembred in the laſt Chapiter, of Paralipomenon, the booke of Nathan the Prophet, with many others, which all ſéemed to haue bien brunt, or other wiſe conſumed. So that it appeareth euidently, that the Iewes had their libraries, and that thoſe of the Gentiles, were after thē and later. The Gréekes report, that the firſte that euer ordained any publike library was Piſiſtratus tyranne of Athens, whiche after was augmented and inricht by the Athenians: whither when as Xerxes after warde came, he remoued the library thence into Perſia, where it was diligently, and carefully preſerued, vntill longe tyme after, that Seleucus, named Nicanor gatte them thence, and brough theim backe againe to Athens. Theſe thinges are reported of Aulus Gellius, and Iſidorus, whiche both affirme that this library, grewe daily after this, to A. Gel. in his ſixte booke. Iſidorus in his ſixte booke. be verie riche of all bookes of what ſort ſo euer. How be it the library of Alexandria in Egypte, whiche king Ptolomi
                        •
                     
                  
                  
by his onely meanes framed, was aſſuredly the moſte excellenſt of all others in the world, for that there in was founde all the olde Teſtament, the other ſcriptures alſo of the ſeuentie two interpreters with infinite others, famous, and learned workes. P
                        •
                     inie not withſtandyng againe reporteth, that the kynge Eumenes in contempte of Ptolomie, did an other to be erected in the Citie of Pergama. A. Gellius, and Am. Mercellinus writte that in the library at Alexandria in Egypte, were at one tyme ſeuen hundren thouſande bokes. Seneca in like ſort on the number accordeth with theim, whiche althogh it might ſeme almoſte incredible, yet who ſo hath redde of the ſumptuous larges, and exceſſiue profutiō of the kinges of Egypte, as well about ſepulchers, Piramides, temples, as alſo other common buildyngs, and ſhippes, with infinite ſuche others, of ineſtimable price, ſome parte, of the whiche Budeus, in his annotations on the pandectes verie well remembereth vs, and Lazarus of Baif, in hys booke intituled, ars naualis, reporteth that this librarie ſéemed nothing to hym impoſſible. From euery parte, and corner of the worlde, bookes were daily brought, to the better furniſhyng of this library, written alſo in all tongues what ſo euer then knowen, of which none had any charge, but ſuche as were beſte learned. Some for the poetes, ſome for hiſtories, others ſome alſo for the others, of other faculties and ſciences, whiche all were waſted and conſumed with fier by the impacable fury of the Soldiours of Caeſar, whiche euen thether followed, and purſued the great and mighty Pompe, ouerrunning alſo at that ſame tyme the force of Ptolomie, brother to Cleopatra. Concerning that other, ſo riche of bookes, and ſo famous, by the paine and labour of Eumenes in Pargama, Plutarche in the life of Marcus Antonius, ſaieth, that he thether had gathered two hundred thouſand volumes euery one from other of ſundrie, and diuers matters. As touchyng the library in Grece, Strabo affirmeth, that Ariſtotle
                  
was the firſt that euer gathered or brought together any bookes in Athens: where in he leſſe accordeth with other hiſtoriogriphers, whiche attribute the commendation of that ſo honeſt a dimerite onely to Piſiſtratus whiche was as is euident many yeres before Ariſtotle, wherefore we muſte in this place vnderſtande, that Strabo mente his wordes of a meane, and priuate perſonage, and not of king, or prince, as was in effecte Piſiſtratus. Howbeit, very likely it is, that Ariſtotle herein was aided, by the buſie paine of Alexander. After all theſe an other was erected in Rome, both publike, and common by Aſinius Pelion. But the firſt that euer brought greate ſtore of boakes thether was Paulus Emilius, after the conqueſte of Perſeus. And after hym againe L. Lucullus, which he brought among other thinges as a praie out of Pontus. Iulius Caeſar againe, with like care inrichte thys library, committyng it to the charge, or kéepyuge of M. Varro, whiche afterwardes with ſome others in Rome was brunte & deſtroyed, by meanes of the often ſackyng and ſubuerſion of that citie. Whiche neuer the leſſe was reſtored againe by the Emperour Domitian, who euery where and in all countries made diligent ſearche for bookes, cauſing with the ſame, that famous library in Grece, to be traſported and brought from thēce vnto Rome, whence it is euident, that al Ptolomies librarie was not there conſumed as we before ſaide it to bee with fier, for that ſome parte of it was now cōueighed to Rome. Farther Paulus Oroſius geueth vs to thincke, that it throwly in deede was not brunt, and conſumed, when he ſaith that there were burned only four hundred thouſand, for that the number of bookes there, as we reade in others, was no leſſe then ſeuen hundred thouſande, ſo that wee may conclude thre hundred thouſand to be ſaued, how be it, diuers hiſtories paſſe this in ſuch ſorte, as if none had been reſerued from the rage of the fier. But to retourne to the library of Rome, the ſaide Paulus Oroſius ſaieth,

that in the daies of the Emperour Commodus, this ſaide library was once againe burned, and that Gordian (as the others) to repaire it, gathered againe fiftie two thouſande volumes, whiche all as ſome reporte were geuen hym by the teſtamēt of Seranus Samoniquus, whoſe thei firſt were as hath Iulius Capitolinus. Beſides theſe were many others both noble, and riche libraries, gathered by our elders, as well priuate, and meane menne, as greate Lordes and Princes. The firſte library that euer was knowen among the Chriſtians, was that, as recordeth Eſidorus of Panphilius the Martir, whoſe life is at large writtē by Euſebius, in whoſe ſtudie after his death, were founde thirtie thouſande diuers volumes. One common vſage or cuſtome, was ordinary in the olde age, to weete, that they had in their ſecret Cabinetes, or Studies, the perfect Image and purtraite, of all ſuche as had in anie ſorte, excelled in learnyng. Plinie writeth, that Marcus Varro beyng yet then liuyng, merited for hys rare vertue, and knowledge in good letters, that hys Image ſhoulde haue place, in the library of Aſinius Polion. Cicero wrote to Fabian, that hee ſhoulde prouide hym, of ſome purtraites, the better to adorne and beautifie hys ſtudy. Plinie the yonger writing to Iulius Seuerus, ſaieth, that Ere. Seuerus, a man verie well lettered, would order in his ſtudie among other his purtraites, the Images of Cornelius, and Titus Arius. Of theſe thinges finde wee euerie where ſufficient, and good proofe: whoſe libraries as alſo thoſe of other learned men, and greate Princes, whiche after in ſucceſſe, and proceſſe of tyme followed, were deſtroied, and defaced by the Gothee, and Vandales, vntill now, that in our tyme by the greate bounty of God, infinite are founde both ſtudious and learned, that haue gathered together houge heapes of bookes, though not in deede the tenth parte, of theſe aboue remembred, by our anceſtours. And aſſuredly a greate nōber of thoſe, whiche from their tyme vntill now haue been carefully

preſerued founde neuer the leſſe ill written, leſſe perfect, and incorrected, in ſuche ſorte that had it not been, for the grerte paines, of certaine worthy perſonages, hardlie had they euer been brought to any kinde of perfection.
            
            
               ¶ Of the amitie and enmitie of ſundrie thinges, iſſuyng by priuie, hidden, and ſecrete proprieties. Chap. 4.
               
                  THe aunciente philoſopher Heraclitus, as alſo others ſome after hym, helde and maintained, in their diſputations this opinion, that eche thyng had his firſte cauſe or beginnyng, by concorde, and diſcorde, by peace, and enmitie, whiche is in all thynges of what kinde ſoeuer, whence alſo iſſued the generation, and corruption of them: on whiche poinct of Philoſophie I leſſe mynde here to dwell, of parte for that it is bothe intricate, and difficill of parte alſo, for that the reader in my phantaſie, ſhall thence reape as little fruicte, as he ſhall conceiue pleaſure. Notwithſtādyng, we ſhall ſome what ſaie, of the ſecrete loue, and hatered, whiche naturally is in many thynges, whiche, whence, or how it cometh no manne directly knoweth: and is therefore aſſuredly, no leſſe ſtraunge, then marueilous. As firſt of all, the enmitie betwixte the Dogge, and the Catte, betwixte Oile, and Pitche, the Harte, and the Serpente, with many ſuche others, whiche in ſuche ſorte malice, and enuie eche the other, this ſecrete rancor, of no parte proceading from th'elementes: for the difference, or contrarietie in thynges mixte, or compounde, is to all men aperte, and euident, as wee ſée. The water firſt diſaccordeth, as of nature contrary with the fire, for that the fire is hotte and drie, but the water contrary, theſe elementeseche to other oppoſite, and repugnaunte. The water

and the yearth, accorde well together, but in this reſpect onely, that thei bothe bee colde: in the other, that one beyng moiſte, that other drie, eche here leaueth the other, as his auncient enemie. Betwixt the fire, and the yearth there is a conformitie, to wéete, in that thei bothe be drie a contrarietie againe, euen betwene theim bothe dwelleth, the fire hoate, that other colde. So that as theſe elementes of parte, agrée together, ſo alſo diſagrée thei, of, parte as is euidente. All thynges then what ſo euer are, cauſed of theſe elementes, muſt be ſubiecte of neceſſitieto theſe contrary qualities, whiche bee in theſe elementes, whence thei mixte are, and compounded. Wherfore that thyng, in whiche ruleth moſte, ſome elementarie qualitie, boroweth his name of the ſaied qualitie: and ſo wée ſaie it to bée, either hoate, colde, moiſte, or drie, ſome in more high degrée then others, accordyng to the predominant force, in any theſe elementes. And this theſe bodies, contrary either to other, are the onely, and ſole cauſes of contrary effectes, ſo that whence this diſcrepante, or different nature in thynges is, is now manifeſte, and nedeth no farther explication. But this other enmitie, that proceadeth not from any the elementes, but rather from ſome hidden proprietie, or ſecrete influence, to find the true cauſe, and occaſion thereof, would aſke more earneſte ſtudie, and longer contremplation. The Dogge and Catte (as is aboue ſaied) eche hateth other, neither knowe we the cauſe why. Other creatures alſo ſée wée, that mutually are affectioned either to other, neither iſſueth this their loue, from any the elementes, whereof thei are compoſed. The Aſſe eateth Fenell gyante, or otherwiſe Sagapene, whiche in Latine maie alſo be called ferula, and findeth it bothe good, and toothſome, whiche to all other beaſtes, of Horſe kinde, is a very ſtarcke, and plain poiſon. The Fox ioieth, and liketh of the Serpent whiche neuer the leſſe, enuieth all other beaſtes what ſo euer. Neither is this leſſe to be meruailed emong men,

then alſo emong any other creatures, for that man neither knowyng why, ne yet for what cauſe, eftſones at the firſte ſighte, when he ſhall méete an other, neuer hauyng before, or ſeen, or knowen hym, will notwithſtandyng diſdaine, and hate hym, and immediatly findyng againe the ſecond, no leſſe ſtraunge to hym, then the firſt, will well conceiue of hym, loue, and like hym, and that whiche more is, ſometyme will bothe honour, and reuerence hym, yea, though he be in déede, for cauſes iuſte his inferiour, little accoumptyng of the others, were thei though in truthe greate Lordes, and Rulers. Againe, we ſometymes ſée, twoo men ſo ſtraungely affectioned, that the one voweth hym ſelf to the will, and aduice of the other, whiche oftſones hath happened, betwixte the ſeruaunte, and maiſter, ſo that by nature it ſéemeth (the order of reaſon inuerted) that the vaſſaule was the better; no reaſon to bée giuen, of ſo greate a diſorder. In caſe ſemblable ſuche ſubiection, poudered ſometymes, with malicious enmitie, bothe is, and chaunceth emong birdes alſo, as betwixte the Eagle, and the Swanne, the Crowe, and the Kite, whiche at times hardneth her ſelf, to take a preie from the Crowe, euen out of her folded foote, or pinchyng pawes ſliyng. Like enmitie is alſo betwixte the Chough, and the Kite; the Egle alſo, and the Gooſe, in ſuche ſorte, that if you laie but one feather of an Egle, emong many, or in a heape of theſe of a Gooſe, that one waſteth, and conſumeth all the others to nothyng. The Harte is mortall enemie vnto the Snake, for with his vehemente reſpiration, aboute her hole, he draweth the Snake out, by force of his breath onely: and without more incontinently deuoureth hym: for proofe whereof, who ſo pleaſeth to burne, onely ſome ſmall parte, or portion of his horne, ſhall finde that no Serpent, will abide the ſmell thereof. The Crowe, the Aſſe, and Bulle, in like ſorte diſagrée, whoſe iyes the Crowe ſtill beaketh, and laboureth to plucke out. The birde called Flore, ſkilfully

counterfaiteth the braiyng of a Horſe, by meanes whereof, he as commonly feareth the horſe, as the horſe by the ſame meanes feareth alſo hym. Greate enemies to the Woulfe, is the Foxe, the Aſſe, and the Bulle, betwixt the Vultur alſo, and the Ele, nature hath proclaimed continuall warre, and hoſtilitie. The mightie Lion dreadeth, and feareth the Cocke, he alſo flieth the ſighte of fire, and the noice of a carte, the Panther in like ſorte, the preſence of the Hinde: the Scorpion purſueth with fatall enmitie, the Tarentula, whiche in Latin we maie call Falanga, whoſe venime, when he hath bitten any mā is no waie (as ſome write) cured, but by pleaſant harmonie, and Muſicke, and the malice of theſe twoo beaſtes is ſuche, and ſo impacable, that who alſo is ſtonge, or bitten of the Scorpion, findeth preſente remedie in that oile, where the Tarentula, or Falanga hath tofore béen drouned. The monſterous, and houge Elephante, bothe feareth, and flieth the ſimple Serpent, he trembleth at the preſence, and ſight, of a ſhepe, he by no meanes indureth the grunnyng of a Hogge. The Horſe, Aſſe, or Moile, with greate paine abideth to ſée the We ſell, the Snite, or woode Cocke, hardly dwelleth in the ſight of the houſe Cocke. There is a kinde of Faucons, whiche Ariſtotle calleth Tico, that liueth in continuall warre, and enmitie with the Fox, neuer miſſing to fight with him, where he ſo at any tyme findeth hym. Elian mindeth vs or inceſſante malice, betwixte an other ſorte of Faucons, called Pelagra, and the Crowe, betwixte the Crowe againe alſo, and the harmeles Turtle. Betwixt the Oule and the Curlue, & in fine, betwixt the partridge and the Tortuis The Pelican aboue all other birdes, hateth the Quaile, and the Horſe, without compariſon, with moſte pain indureth the ſhamois. Like enmitie is alſo naturallye emong fiſhes, the Crabbe maie not abide in cōpanie with the Oiſter, the Dolphin, and the Whale ſlie eche the other, the Cunger naturally hateth the Lampraie, and

Oiſter. The Oiſter on the Ele, hath ſuche a predomināt, and malicious force, and the Ele in ſuche ſorte abhorreth and feareth hym, that if by happe ſhe ones ſée hym, ſhe incontinently dieth thereof. The Pike fatally proſecuteth, the fiſhe of ſome, called Mongilla, or Mugra: the Snake beholding a man appareiled, wiſheth him harme and hardeneth her ſelf, as ſhe maie, to bite, and annoye hym, but ſeyng the ſame naked, feareth againe, and flieth hym. The Ratte, or Mouſe rather, is to the Snake an auncient enemie, as well when ſhe is buſied in couching her Egges, as alſo in the Winter, when ſhe lieth deepe hidden, in the intrailes of the yearth: by meanes whereof, the Snake to liue in more ſecuritie, heapeth togither in her hole, good ſtore of prouiſion, meates fitte, and wel pleaſyng her aduerſarie the Mouſe, to the intente that the Mouſe beyng well fedde therewith, ſhe at that time might forget, her farther rage, and malice. The Woulfes malice towardes the Shepe is ſuche, and ſo naturall, that if you make a drumme of the ſkinne of a Woulfe, the Shepe with no leſſe feare, flieth the ſounde thereof, then if the Woulfe were liuyng, and preſent then before hym. Farther alſo ſome others affirme, that if you make any ſtringes for the Viall, or Lute, of the guttes as well of the Shepe, as of the Woulfe alſo, you neuer ſhall accorde them, or frame thence any harmonie. If ye hange the ſkinne of a Woulfe, either in your ſtable, or Shepehouſe, or where your flocke is fodthered, the ſighte, and feare thereof, forceth theim to forget their feedyng. The Mouſe by a ſecret proprietie, ſo muche enuieth the Scorpion, that whom ſo euer he impoiſoneth, is by clappyng of a Mouſe, on the parte affected, cured. The Viper and Snake, dread meruailouſly the Crabbe, whiche naturally hath ouer theſe wormes, ſuche aſſured maiſterie, that if a hogge by happe, ſhould be bitten of the Viper, he immediately expelleth the poiſon, hauyng eaten of the Crabbe. Beſides, whiche moſte ſtraunge is, as ſone as

the Sunne entreth into the ſigne of Cancer, all Serpentes then languiſhe, as ſicke of ſome maladie. The fiſhe called Scorpio, and the Crocodile, wage continuall battaile, eche killyng ſtill the other. The Panther in ſuche ſorte feareth the Ounce: that as ſome write, he ſuffereth hymſelf to be ſlaine of hym, without any kinde of reſiſtance: and alſo if you hang the Panthers ſkinne, in that place where you kéepe the Ounce; the Panthers ſkinne will then pill, waſte, and conſume. Suche is the enmitie alſo of the Chough, and the Dawe, that as Ariſtotle reporteth, eche robbeth, and deſtroieth the others Egges. The Waſpe liueth in continuall warre with the Spider: as doeth the Ducke alſo; with the Mouſe or Ratte, eche ſéekyng to deuoure, and eate the others yonge ones. The Kite continually malliceth, and hateth the Foxe. There is a ſmall kinde of Haukes, whiche Plinie calleth Eſalon, whiche with fatall enmitie, purſueth ſtill the Crowe, he ſearcheth out her neſte, and deſtroieth her egges. The hogge hardly indureth the preſence of the weſell. The Woulfe, and Lion are enemies ſo contrary, that the blood of the one, will not bee mixte with the other. The Mole or Wante, ſo diſliketh of the Ante, that he abideth not in the place, where the others bee. The Spider wageth priuie warre, againſt the Serpent, and as Plinie reporteth, doeth hym ſhamefully to dye. Beſides all theſe, emong thynges alſo voide, and lackyng life, like repugnancie, or contrarietie of nature is to be found for as wee firſte ſaied, oile is enemie to Pitche, for triall whereof, who ſo putteth oile into a pitchie veſſell, ſhall ſée that the Pitche will ſone conſume the Oile. Oile againe diſagréeth with water: as dooeth alſo in like ſorte Lime, but Oile and Lime liue in perpetual league, and amitie. The Olife hath a ſecrete, & hidden force, againſt the vnchaſt lecherer, ſuche in déede, and ſo ſtraunge, that as it is written, if a woman leſſe chaſte, attempt to plāt hym, ſhe ſhall languiſhe, and die of it, the trée alſo withereth.

The Colewort hardly groweth, beyng ſowen nigh to Maioram. Salte water waxeth ſwéete, mixte with Wheaton flower, in ſuche ſorte, that within twoo howers afterward, a man maie eaſily drinke thereof. Wee might in this place loade the reader, with infinite ſuche examples, of fatall, and mortall enmitie, as well emōg thynges hauyng life, as alſo others inſenſible, whiche al to tarrie, were long and tedious: as on the other ſide alſo wee might ſpeake of many thynges, that ſecretly occord well by the priuie inſtincte of nature, as of the Pecocke, and the Pigion, the Turtle, and the Popingaie, the Thruſhe, and the Crane. Ariſtotle reporteth a ſtraunge example of amitie, betwixte a certaine kinde of Sparowes, and the Crocodile, he ſaieth, that this houge beaſte openeth his mouthe, to th'intent, this little birde ſhould come in there at, to beake, trimme, and make cleane his téethe, to purge his gummes, and eaſe him euery where, and in fine addeth that this Sparrowe, feedeth, and pleaſeth, in that lothſome filthe, he there gathereth. It is alſo ſaied, that the Fore loueth well the Crowe, the Dawe alſo the Henne of India, and in fine the Larke, an other birde called the Ioncke. The Foxe is neuer indomaged by any kinde of Snake, the Pigion ioieth in the preſence of the Turtle, the Partridge alſo with her beloued the Wooddoue. The fiſhe, in Latine called Talpa marina, is aboue all others fauoured, and beloued of the Whale, whiche as witneſſeth Plinie, rolleth carefully before her, aduiſyng her where to ſhoune the whirlyng gulfes, and déepe holes. Beholde now the meruailous woorkes, and ſecrete force of nature, through the prouidence of GOD, moued, by the influence of the Starres, and Planettes, whiche all wee finde ſufficiently, and well aucthoriſed, by Plinie, Ariſtoile, Albertus Magnus, Elian, Marbodeus the Poete, in his bookes of the nature, and proprietie of ſtones, with many others, bothe auncient, and late writers as well of the nature of beaſtes, as of other thynges.
            
            
               
               By what meanes both amitie and enmitie procede from the heauenly, and celeſtiall influence: and why a man hateth or loueth another. Chap. 5.
               
                  AS we haue aboue ſaied concerning the ſecrette, and priuie force of nature, ſo are there certaine Starres and Planettes, whiche haue more perticuler dominion on ſome thinges, then on ſome others, forcyng by their priuate influence ſome aſſured proprieties, whiche neither are cauſed, bee of any elimentarie qualities: how be it, we neither yet may properly ſaie, that there is any hoſtilitie, or diſcorde betwixt the ſtarres or fignes in heauen. Notwithſtandyng the auncient philoſophers and Aſtrologians, conſideryng the ſundrie and contrarie effectes of the influēces, cauſed by the Starres and Planettes in theſe our yearthly corruptible and inferiour bodies, by their onely motions and irradiations, haue attributed vnto theim for iuſt cauſe, diuers qualities, as well of ametie, as enmitie together, whereof we finde moſt aperte, and plaine demonſtration as well in Guido Bonatus, as Schonerus, and infinite others, Mars and Venus are enimies to Saturne, Iupiter alſo and Mercurie malice eche th'other: the Sūne and the Moone with all other Planettes liue in leage perpetuall, and amitie with Iupiter, Mars onely excepted, generall ennimie to theim all, Venus alone exemted. Iupiter and Venus with like loue imbrace the Sunne, whoſe cōtraries are Mars Mercurie, and the Moone. Venus fauoureth all th'others, and is ſole ennimie to Sarurne. So is there then betwixt theſe (whiche to be ſhorte I paſſe ouer) bothe amitie, and enmitie, as is aboue ſaied. The caſe then thus ſtandyng thoſe thynges that are ſubiecte, as gouerned by any one Planette, muſte, by inclination naturall, either lone, or

diſdaine, what ſo els is ſubiect to any other, bée it either Planet, ſigne, or conſtellation, accordyng to the conformitie or diuerſitie of nature, whiche ſhall bee betwixte theſe ſtarres whiche rule, and raigne ouer thē, and then is this enmitie, of greateſt force, and efficacie. Whē that betwixt the natures, & qualities of theſe Planets, vnto which thei bée in any reſpecte ſubiecte, bée of moſte repugnant, and contrary nature: as on th'other ſide, that mutuall amitie, ſhall ſo muche be the ſtrōger, as the conformitie of theſe celeſtiall bodies, ſhall bée either nigher, or greater. And this ſupernall force, or cōſtellation, no leſſe extendeth it ſelf to man, then it alſo doeth to euery other creature. How bée it man, beyng of more frée, and aduiſed determination, although he of parte féele this repugnancie, or inclination, yet by grace is he able to withſtande, and reſiſte it, where as other creatures voide of reaſon, not vſyng this priuilege, are ordered, and carried euery where, accordyng to their naturall inclination, executyng to their vttereſte, what ſo ſéemeth to theim agreable: theſame alſo is incident to hearbes, and to plantes. Concernyng the mutuall loue, or affection betwixte men, Aſtronomers affirme, and emong thē their Prince Ptolomie, that thoſe, that in their natiuitie, ſhall haue one, and the ſame ſigne, for their aſcendente, ſhall like, and loue very friendly togither, as alſo ſemblably thoſe, that haue bothe the Sunne, and the Moone, in any one ſigne togither. And againe, thei adde that to theſaid purpoſe, it ſufficeth to haue one alſo, and the ſame Planette dominatour, in their birthe, or natiuitie, for it naturally prouoketh loue, and conformitie of nature, or if one Planet, to bothe be not perhappes lorde, it yet ſufficeth, that the two, be frendes themſelues togither, or that, the one beholde the other, with good, and fauourable aſſpecte: whiche eaſily is ſéen, the figures of bothe natiuities erected. Greate helpe alſo groweth to this conformitie, if their haue ſome parte of Fortune, in the ſame ſigne, or

houſe togither, and that the houſe, or ſigne, in which the Moone ſhall bée, in the natiuitie of the one, ſhall haue a fauourable aſſpecte, in the birthe of the other: for as thei more, or leſſe ſhall accord in theſe conditions, ſo ſhall the affections of the parties increaſe, or els diminiſh. Whēce it is, that twoo menne hauyng to doe, one, and the ſame thyng, the third without his deſertes, or cauſe what ſoeuer, is affectionate, and leaueth, as ſworne friend to that one, and on the other ſide wiſheth harme, and ſiniſter Fortune to that other, without any annoye, or offence on that ſide committed: whiche might happen to twoo ſuche, whoſe aſcendentes were of repugnante qualities, and of a contrary triplicitie, the lordes alſo of their natiuities, of nature oppoſite, and enemies, as the Sunne, and Moone in oppoſition, in ſignes of diuers natures, and that theſe Planettes, in the birthe of the firſte, bee in vnfortunate aſſpectes, to theſe of that other. For theſe thinges, and ſuche others, as here might bée alleaged, are the cauſes why one beholdyng an other, conceiueth ſtraight againſt hym, ſome inwarde diſdaine, or pleaſure (as is euident when we ſée twoo men plaiyng togither, fight, or diſpute for what matter ſo euer) for that neither ſtandyng bound, to the one, or the other, neither euer hauing knowen theim, who, or whence thei are, wiſheth notwithſtandyng, the deſired victorie ſoner, to the one, then to the other. Concernyng that, whereof we haue ſpoken that one manne without any occaſion, ſhould ſo muche dread, or feare an other, that he ſubmitteth hymſelf, and boweth, faine, and gladde to bee ruled by hym, though indeede he bee his better, more worthie, or more honourable, the caſe is euidente, and by experience common. Of whiche al, Ptolomie giueth this reaſon, ſaiyng: that who ſo in his natiuitie, ſhall haue his lorde, or ruler, or for better demonſtration, to exēplifie of twoo, of which the one hauyng the lorde of his natiuitie, in ſome ſigne aſcendēt, in the firſte, or Eaſte angle, the other in the Southe, or

tenth angle, the houſe of honour, he naturally ruleth, ordereth, and gouerneth the other. The ſemblable againe alſo chaunceth to thoſe, in whoſe natiuities, the one hath that Planette for his lorde, whiche to the other is moſte vnfortunate, voide of euery kinde of dignitie. If twoo alſo haue one, and the ſame ſigne, for their aſcendēt or otherwiſe for their lorde, and ruler one Planet, he to whom this Planet ſhall bée of moſte force, and aucthoritie (as was aboue ſaid in beaſtes voide of reaſon) ſhal naturally rule, and haue dominion ouer the other. When then this aduauntage, happeneth to ſuche a one, as is of the other, bothe loued and fauoured, he by meane thereof, immediatly bothe ordereth, and gouerneth hym: but if it chaunce, or betide, percaſe to a poore ſeruaunt, or vaſſaule, he then aſſuredly is faithfull, obedient, and loiall, if to twoo friendes of equall birthe and habilitie (as is, and hath many tymes béen ſeen) eche then liueth with other, in moſte perfecte integritie, the one for the moſte parte orderyng, euery the affaires, or buſines of the other.
            
            
               ¶ That the memorie maie be hurte, and that it alſo by arte, and by pollicie maie be fortified. Chapt. 6.
               
                  EVen as the memorie in manne, is a thing moſte excellent, ſo alſo is it very daintie, an delicate, obnoxious, and ſubiecte, to ſundrie miſfortunes, as to ſickneſſe, hurtes, and woundes on the heade, age, ſodaine feare, faules from high places, with many ſuche others. All whiche offende, and hurte the memorie, indomaging her vſuall place, or ſeate, as alſo the organes, or inſtrumentes thereof. Whence it commeth in this place to bée conſidered, that ſome by the weakeneſſe, and debilitie of memorie, haue vtterly forgotten all thynges, what

ſoeuer thei ones knew, or otherwiſe had learned. Some again in one thyng haue béen onely maihemed, as Plinie 
                  Plinie lib. 7. cap. 8. well noteth, of Meſſala Coruinus, who after a diſeaſe (of whiche he well recouered) liued euer afterward in ſuche caſe, that he neuer could remember, his owne proper name. Valerius alſo diſcourſyng of miracles, reporteth that a learned man, by the knocke of a ſtone, whiche he receiued on the head, forgatte what ſoeuer he before had profited, in any the Sciences, or other good ſtudies, and yet not withſtandyng in al other affaires, was of memorie as freſhe, and as perfecte as at any other tyme. An other by a faule, from a place on high, forgat alſo to know his owne naturall parentes. I haue bothe red, and heard it reported, that Franciſcus Barbarus, a man of our tyme, not meanely learned, but eſpecially in the Greke, wherin he moſte pleaſured, by the meane of a maladie, wherwith he was troubled, forgate all what ſoeuer he before had gained, in the ripe, and exacte knowledge of the ſaied tongue: remainyng in all other thinges, no leſſe learned then at the firſte, a thyng in trouthe very ſtraunge, and merueilous. It is alſo recorded, that Georgius Trapeſ. a man famous for his learnyng, forgatte in his age, what ſo in good letters, he tofore had profited. And as we finde here, that memorie in manne, by ſundrie occaſions, maie well be weakened, ſo alſo finde we ſome, that naturally haue had fainte, and ſlippyng memories. The Emperor Claudius here in ſo holted, as Suetonius writyng his life, reporteth, that ſome tymes hauyng in bedde by hym his wife, incontinently after he had talkte any thyng with her, he ſo became vnmindefull of hym ſelf, and all other thynges, that he would aſke where ſhe was, why ſhe came not to bedde, and why ſhe ſo longe taried. And hauyng doen to death on a tyme, a noble man, the daie following made inquirie for hym again, to determine with the others of his counſaill on controuerſies. Herodotus Sophiſta had a ſoonne, of ſo ſimple a memorie, that by no:

labour poſſible, he could learne, or attaine to the knoweledge of the letters by order, by meanes whereof, the father (who ſo muche deſired, his enteraunce in learning) the better to bryng hym to ſome kind of féelyng, did to be foſtered in his houſe, twentie fower younge boies, all of his owne age, to euery of whiche for name, he gaue the name of a letter, to the intente that he acquainted with theim, and callyng theim by the ir names, might alſo remember the noumber, and order of the letters. And as it is ſaid aboue, that ſodaine feare eftfones troubleth the memorie, ſo aſſuredly true is it, that although in deede it vtterly deſtroie not the memorie, yet at times it forceth manne, to forgette theſe thinges, that he before carefully with paiue, had committed vnto her, as it ones happened to Demoſthenes, a moſte excellent Oratour, whiche paſſyng imbaſſadour, to Philippe king of Macedonie, felt in hym ſelf ſo ſtraunge an alteration, beyng preſente to vtter his charge, before ſo puiſſante a prince, that hauing paſt in ſome little parte, of his premeditated oration, arreſted of the ſodaine, forgettyng that whiche remained, as if he neuer had before thought thereon or in any ſorte digeſted it. The very ſemblable reade wée of Theophratus, whiche being mounted in his chaire, would haue vttered ſome woordes, before the Areopagites of Athens, of Herodes the Atheniā, who receiued in charge, to haue ſpoken before the Emperour Marcus Antonius: of Eraclides in the preſence of the Emperour Seuerus, at leaſt, as is lefte vs, by recorde, of Philoſtratus. And almoſte in this our age Bartholomeus Socinus, borne at Sienna, a man abſolutely grounded, and learned in the lawes, aſſigned imbaſſadour for his countrie, vnto Pope Alexandre in whoſe preſence (as the maner is) when he a little while had ſpoken, abaſhed ſome thyng by the ſighte, and preſent beyng there of theſe princes, whiche were there aſſembled, beyonde the wonted number, forgat hymſelf, ſodainly ſo amaſed, that he farther in order, could not pronounce

one woorde. To me alſo ſuche an alteration ones happened, as was that other aboue remembred of Demoſthenes (not that I would here enter into compariſō) in the preſence of a worſhipfull, and learned audience, and that by the greate affection, whiche I had, to the conſideration of my cauſe, whiche in ſuche ſorte altered me, before all the ſenators, that I leſſe able was to ende my matter there beganne, though before I had wel thought Pet. Crinitus lib. 5. cap. 3. there on and well diſpoſed it in order. Now that the memorie maie bee aided, and preſerued by arte, can of no man, what ſoeuer, for any cauſe bee doubted, of whiche, and whoſe remedie, many a learned hande hath curiouſly written. As Solinus, and Quintilian bothe at large, and in many. Seneca alſo in the place aboue alleaged, where he reporteth this arte memoratiue, to be ſo facill, and eaſie, that in fewe daies all men, maie bee well ſkilled therein. It is alſo written, that Cineas, the ambaſſadour of the renoumed Pirrhus, practiſed this arte to help, and aide his memorie. Plinie, and Quintilian write, that Simonides firſte founde this meane, to preſerue the memorie, although the ſaied Plinie affirme, that Metrodorus reduced it afterwarde to perfection, who alſo by that arte meruailouſly fortified, and confirmed his owne memorie. Cicero in his boke de oratore, Quintilian alſo, and Valerius in his miracles, reporteth, that Simonides on a tyme inuited, with ſundrie others, to a greate bankette, the houſe where thei feaſted, ſodainly fel doune, by meanes wherof no one eſcaped that death, Simonides excepted, who euen in that inſtante roſe, and went forthe, called by ſome one, he neuer yet knewe who, by whiche happe at that tyme, he there ſaued his life. And the hiſtories recorde, that when the deade bodies were drawen out, whiche were many, all inuited geaſtes, to that ſo infortunate a dinner, Simonides declared where, and in what order euery of theim were plaſte, and ſatte at the table, euen then, and in that inſtante, when the houſe ſo

fell on theim. The examples that might bee alleaged, in this place, to this purpoſe, are many, but it ſufficeth vs, to arreſte on that, whiche is ſaied. One other thyng alſo, riſeth here to be noted, whiche is that the Philoſophers, and principally Ariſtotle, finde a ſcruple, or difference, betwixte the memorie, and recordation, for that memorie ſaie thei maie be, as well in beaſtes, as in man, although not in ſo perfecte, and in ſo abſolute a ſorte, and maner, but recordation to man onely, and to hym alone is proper, whiche is to recorde with diſcourſe, ſtudiyng on thinges, as in caſes of contemplation, deſcendyng from the generall, to the partes, and perticulers, not omittyng, the circumſtances bothe of tyme, and perſones, and that all with due conſideration, and aduiſe: for beaſtes voide of reaſon, remember alſo the place, where thei at any tyme haue hardly been intreated, the Horſe ſhunneth to dwell, where he hath been harmed, and in like ſorte all others, more or leſſe in their degrées. But as wee haue ſaied, recordation then in man, is muche more abſolute, and perfect, aſſiſted with ſounde aduiſe, and intelligence, orderly paſſyng from matter to matter. So that accordyng to the opinion of Ariſtotle, that manne, that hath a moſte ſharpe, and fined witte, is alſo of better recordatiō then an other, though ſome other perhaps exceade hym, in the perfection of memorie: for that to recorde well, is a certain maner of inueſtigation, whiche forceth the memorie as it were ſlepyng to awake, to call to minde, and to remember, any thyng, what ſoeuer, wherefore the moſte quicke, and beſte fined wittes, ſoneſte conceiue thynges, and committe them to memorie, and memorie by recordation, maketh of them again, at all times faithfull reſtitution. The Grekes emong others many, the vanities of their Goddes, adored, or reuerenced a Goddeſſe of memorie, in ſuche ſorte that this force, or power, of the minde, hath euermore béen hadde, in greate reuerence, and eſtimation. Wherefore to conclude, man ſtā
                  deth

highly bounde vnto God, for this ſo heauenly, and excellent a benefite, and ought ſtudiouſly to indeuour, to maintaine, and preſerue it. Marcilius Ficinus in his boke, de triplici vita giueth ſundrie inſtructions, and preceptes to this purpoſe.
            
            
               In what honour, and reputation, Philoſophers, Poetes, and all others, in what arte, or ſcience, ſoeuer they were learned, liued with Emperours, Kynges, and Princes, in tymes paſt. Chap. 7.
               
                  TRulie and for iuſte cauſe maie we not complaine, of the want of learned men, in euerie arte and ſcience: but on th'other ſide I ſee good letters to mourne, that they nowe bee not ſo well eſtimed, and thought of, ne yet ſo well recompenſed of princes in this age, as the well lettered in tymes paſte were, by Emproures, Kinges, and other noble perſonages in thoſe daies. And to ſpeake the truth, whither in déede thei haue ſo good reaſon to plaine them I will paſſe it nowe in fewe, and in place of diſputation, wil only remīber here ſome fewe hiſtories, or examples of auncient princes, and ſundrie Monarkes, which ſo foſtored and fauoured the ſtudious, & learned, that entring into compariſon of their vertuous demerites, with theſe others that liue now in theſe our vnhappie daies, it may be euidēt to all men, what cauſe thei haue in truth to ſorrowe, and to complaine. Firſte to beginne with that moſt excellent, and moſt victorious Pompe, of whom we reade, that when he ſubdued, and vanquiſhed Mithridates, with others many victories, and aduentures of armes, beyng entered Athens, with all his ſpoyles triumphantly,

the Enſignes and Standers of his ennimies borne before him, as was thā the maner of the Conſulles, and Romaine Capitaines, was aduertiſed that the Philoſopher Poſsidonius laie preſently then ſicke, and diſeaſed in his bedde, who deſirous to viſite hym, woulde not onely honour hym with hys perſonall preſence, but approchyng nigh vnto his houſe, commaunded that hys foreſaide imperiall Enſignes, ſhould alſo be carried into the philoſophers Chamber with him: for that in his aduice, all Kinges, and Emperours, ought true duetie, and reuerence to learning, and vertue. This then, and in this manner bowed he to this poore manne, that woulde haue refuſed to haue ſtoopt to any Prince then liuynge. Denis the tyrante Kyng of Siracuſa, hauyng wounde by intreatie, the diuine Plato to come, and viſite hym, and vnderſtandyng that he was on the waie comyng, iſſued in meruailous pompe of purpoſe to méete hym, whom he receaued into his owne coache, drawen with white horſes, with moſt greate and ſolemne triumphe, that was to be deuiſed poſſible, for the marueilous reputation, in thoſe daies, due to the learned. Alexander determinyng to ſacke, and deſtroie the toune of Thebes, commaunded firſt that no man ſhould touche in any wiſe, the houſe of the Poete Pindarus. In what honour Virgil liued, and reputation with Octauian, is euident to all men through out the whole worlde, whom the people of Rome healde in ſuche admiration, that as Plinie in his ſeuenth booke amplie recordeth, when hee entered into the Theatre to pronoūce ſome his verſes, al the multitude roaſe to him, doyng hym no leſſe reuerence, then they did to the Emperour: and that which more is Silius Italicus a famous Poete a Spaniarde borne, hadde his daie of natiuitie of all menne ſo ſolemnized, that they more carefully did, with more reuerence, and deuotion prepare to adorne to bliſſe, and ſanctifie that daie, then they did any others, that hadde any care to ſolemnize, or beutifie his owne

birth. The giftes alſo that were preſented vnto Virgil, as well by Octauian, Mecaenas, and others, were ſutche, and ſo riche as reporteth Seruius, that he in ſhorte tyme was found to be worth no leſſe then ſix thouſande Seſterces in redie mony, whiche with vs mounte to twoo hundred, and fiftie thouſande frenche Crounes: he hadde in Rome a ſumptuous, and an honorable palais, by meanes wherof 
                     
                        •
                     uuinal in his ſeuenth Satyre, accompted him for one of the richeſte in that tyme. On a daie this Poete in the preſence of Octauiā, & Liuia his wife, mother to Marcellus, vtteryng certē verſes of his AEneidos, and drawyng to the ende, where he with ſuche an excellent grace, and comely maieſtie, had alſo ſome thinge ſaide of the aboue remembred Marcellus, whiche lately before hadde then yelded to nature, in ſuche ſorte, that the poore paſſionate, and ſorrowfull mother, beganne to faint, falling into an extaſie, not hearing the ende or laſt of his verſes. But after warde reuiued, commyng againe to her ſelfe, cōmaunded that for euery verſe that ſhe then had loaſt, that ten Seſterces ſhoulde bee numbered forthwith vnto Virgil, who after that ſhe fainted pronounced, by accompte, iuſte one and twentie, for whiche all he receaued as was her commaundemente a rewarde mountyng to the value of fiue thouſand Duckettes. It is written that the people of Siracuſa, had certen Athenians priſoners, which by hart had learned ſome verſes, out of the Greke poete Euripides, which at tymes thei applied in talke, as occaſiō beſt ſerued theim, by meanes wherof onely, in th'onour of that Poete, they infranchiſte theim, deliuered theim, and ſent theim home into their countrie, Scipio Africanus, carried euermore in warre with hym, duryng his life, the Image or purtraite of the learned Ennius, and diyng ordained, that it ſhould be faſtned on his tombe, or ſepulchre. Silius Italicus a worthy poet, was by meanes of Domician thrée tymes Conſull in Rome, which Mercial recordeth in an Epigramme thus beginnyng Auguſto

pia thura: but what? what honour the princes of our tyme haue dooen either to Polician, Pontanus, to Sannazar and ſuche others, I neuer yet any where hearde any thing at all. And againe to ſpeake of others, that liue yet preſently, as Ronſarde in France Belay and others, Poetes lauriate, and learned men of worthy memorie. But ſome will ſaie, they yet liue, and therefore may be aduaunced, of litle tyme and fewe yeres, though of great wiſedome, and readyng, whiche all might bee compared to theſe, whiche longe ſince were, of rare wiſedome, and grauitie. Mithridates alſo, to ſpeake againe of our elders had Plato, for his learnyng, in ſuche admiration, that deſirous to haue his purtraite or Image, cauſed eche wher to be ſought one Silan to doe it, for that, for his excellencie he ſurpaſſed all others, for in thoſe daies it was accompted a ſinguler honour, to haue in places publike, the true purtraites of the learned, neither was it lawfull to haue any of theſe tables, or paintynges, but of ſuche as had dooen ſome vertuous exploytes, by their wiſedome and learnyng commended to the poſteritie. For whiche cauſe the Athenians hadde the Image of Demoſthenes, with a ſubſcription of ſuche, and ſo muche honour, as neuer to fore had been graunted to any: it was thus of hym writen, that if the puiſance of Demoſthenes, hadde been ſuche as was his wiſedome, the Kyng of Macedonie had then neuer entered into Grece. Ioſephus the Iewe being brought to Rome, priſoner and captiue, amōg th'others of Hieruſalem, had notwithſtanding, for that he had writen of the antiquitie of the Iewes, hys Image erected among the others of Rome. The Athenians ſtraungely againe rauiſhed with the ſinguler excellencie of Phalericus auditour, and diſciple of Theophraſtus, did his Image to be placed in thirtie partes of their Citie. Now then if theſe men were in this ſort honoured, it can not be gainſaide but that they alſo receaued ſalaries equiualent, to theſe their honors. For as Athenes writeth in his ninth

booke de Sinoſophiſtis, Ariſtotle for his booke de animalibus receaued of Alexander eight hundred talentes, whiche might value of our monie, four hundred, and fower ſcore thouſande frenche Crounes or there aboute, which alſo is verified by Plinie in his eight booke, who reporteth that Alexander ſo muche deſired to haue this woorke finiſhed, and ended, that he ſent many thouſandes through out al Grece, and Aſia, with his expreſſe letters and commaundementes, that thei ſhould as well be obaied as inſtructed, in what ſo euer they ſought, concerning the vſe nature, manner, and cuſtome, of beaſtes, foules, fiſhes, and ſuche others, to the intent they might be ſkilled in euerie their naturall proprieties and qualities, to the intent they thereof might aduertiſe Ariſtotle. If Homere the onely Phaenix of all the Greke Poetes, had happelie liued in the daies of Alexander, it is to be preſumed that he would haue doen hym no leſſe honour, then to Ariſtotle, for that on a tyme a certen little Cheaſte beyng preſented to him, in whiche Darius had euer kepte his riche, and ſweete ointementes, ſaied (verie gladde that his hap was then to haue it) that he woulde kéepe, and preſerue there in a farre more precious Oile, and with the ſame coucheth Homeres bookes with in it, with whiche he daily buſied hymſelf, continually readyng theim. The Emperour Traian, for his learning onely, ſo muche honoured the philoſopher Dion, that when hee to recreate hymſef, woulde paſſe in to the fieldes, he did hym to be plaſte by him, in his owne proper Coache, and ſo would enter, with hym in to Rome, in moſte triumphant maner. In theſe warres which the'mperour Octauian had in Egypt againſt M. Antonius, heeſaied that he had leafte to ſacke and ſpoile Alexandria, for the only honour and renoume of Alexander that builte it, and of parte alſo of the Philoſopher Arrias. The ſaide Emperour alſo, ordained Cornelius Gallus Tribune of the people, only for that he was ſo excellente a Poete. Snetonius in the life of Veſpaſian
                  
ſheweth, what rewardes in the olde tyme were lotted to the learned. For though (ſaieth he) that this Emperour were noted of auarice, yet fauoured hee notwithſtandynge learned exerciſes, and the lettered, and gaue to euery the maiſters, or readers of the ſciences, ſuche annuall ſtipendes, and groſſe ſummes of monie, that reducyng theim in to our monie, accordyng to the computation of Beroaldus and Budeus, eche receiued yerely twoo thouſande, and fiue hundred Ducketes. By the teſtimonie of Plinie in his ſeuenth booke, writyng of Iſocrates a Greke Oratour, is euident in what ſorte learnyng was reuerenced: for (ſaieth he) this Iſocrates, hauing ſpoken opeuly for a certain man, in recompence forth with, receaued twentie talentes, mountyng to the ſumme of twelue thouſande frenche Crounes. It is alſo redde that the Emperour Antonius, ſoonne to Seuerus, gaue to Appian, ſo manie Duckettes of Golde, as there were verſes in a greate booke, whiche he then had digeſted, of the nature, and proprietie, of all kinde of fiſhes. Themperour Gratiā
                   oduertiſed, that Auſonius the poete, wrote a verſe with no leſſe good grace, then aſſured facilitie, called him to the honor of a conſull immediatly, then which, none was greater, ſauing that of The'mperour. Domiciā
                   alſo, though he were otherwiſe, accurſed, and impius, inricht with greate rewardes the Poete Euſtachius, whom in the daie of his natiuitie (euen in his moſt pompous and curious ſolemnitie) he did to ſitte at his owne proper table, cro
                     •…
                  yng hym with baie, or lawrell, where with poetes in thoſe daies were principally honoured. Seleyus Vaſa a Poete lirique, was imbraſed of the Emperour Veſpaſian, with curtuous, and frendly wordes euery where intertained, and in fine receaued of hym, no leſſe rewardes then the other aforeſaide Arrian for his hiſtory compiled by hym in Greke of the famous oxploites, of the renoumed Alexander, as alſo that hee was otherwiſe well lettered, was ordained Conſull of

Rome by Adrian & Antoninus. Nether were theſe men onely this honoured liuyng, but in like ſorte alſo after their death, by the poſteritie, as is manifeſt, in that Ptolome kyng of Egypt, did to be erected both an Image, and Temple, noleſſe ſumptuous to Homer, thā to any other his goddes, what ſo euer. In Mantua alſo, long after his death, was erected an other, to the poete Virgil. That excellent Horace, though we leſſe aſſure our ſerues, of hys greate ſubſtaunce, and wealth, yet was he aduaunced to greate officies, by Octauian the Emperour. Here colde I remember you many other examples ſeruyng to thys purpoſe, but I leaue to be tedious. Now if any wil obiecte here that the fage Seneca, was cruelly doen to death by the wretched Nero, I anſwere he was a tyranne, and did it therefore beſides reaſon, and that he liuyng was in Rome of greate worſhippe and ſubſtaunce. It is a true, and auncient prouerbe, honours make the learned, and nouriſhe the ſciences. So finde we that in the daies, of theſe Kynges, and Emperours, when they ſo fauoured the ſtudious, and lettered, greate ſtore was eche where founde of men wiſe, and learned, as when Octauian liued, Claudius, and Adrian, Veſpaſian, Antoninus, Alexander and others. And to ſpeake of others that liued in theſe our daies, as of the Emperonr Sigiſmonde, Robert Kyng of Sicilia, Nicholas the fifte Biſhoppe of Rome, Alphonſus, and Mathias kinges of Naples, & Hungarie, theſe alſo of the houſe of Medecis in Florence: the ſlower of which houſe liueth this daie crouned in France, followyng the ſteppes, and vertues of his elders, but eſpecially of that good kyng Frauncis, in whoſe tyme France ſo floriſhed in learnyng, that it iuſtly might haue béen ſaied an other Grece, or Athens.
               
            
            
               That lernyng is neceſſarie as well vnto Princes as alſo to all Capitaines, that liue at any tymes in armes. Chap. 8.
               
                  
                  
                     I
                   Mighte here remember many auncient hiſtories, beſides the true, and aſſured proofes, that Princes in times paſte were for the moſte parte learned, as that they alſo knewe, that nothynge, for fitte, or good gouernemente was more neceſſarie, then to taſte, or ſauour in any ſorte of good letters. But for as much as theſe thinges are euident, plaine, and well knowen, I will not dwell long, or ſtaie here much on theim. We reade not withſtandyng that Philippe Kyng of Madonie, ſeyng Alexander to bee borne to hym, Ariſtotle then in Athens, he ſent hym a letter to thys purpoſe notable, recited by Plutarche, and A. Gellius, in whiche he A. Gel libr. 15. cap. 3. yeldeth his humble thankes vnto the gods, not ſo muche for that he hadde a ſonne then borne, as for that he was borne in the daies of Ariſtotle: whēce it is, euen in theſe fewe euident, howe muche this good prince affected and deſired that his ſonne ſhould be foſtered in all kinde of litrature, to th'intent he might be ſuche a prince and capitaine, as was his fathers deſire he ſhould, and as he after proued, whom as ſone as he was of age fit for ſtudie, hée gaue hym (as is ſaide) Ariſtotle for maiſter, whom preſentlie he inrichte with greate and large ſalaries, reedifiing alſo for the loue of this his ſonne, a houge and waiſt citie, which he to fore had raced, where he did to be builte for hym alſo a ſchole more ſumptuous, and gaie, then earſt had elſe béen ſien. Antigonus alſo king ſome tymes of Macedonie, well knowyng how neceſſarie learnyng was for gouernmente, tickled with the renoume of the famous Zeno, a Philoſopher moſte excellent, & prince of the Stoikes, deſired beyōd meaſure, to haue him at home with hym, whiche thyng he ſtraighte attempted by letters, and ambaſſadours: whiche letters Diogenes Laercius in this ſorte remembreth: Antigonus kyng to Zeno Philoſopher gretyng: I knowe well that in riches, in the

giftes of Fortune, and in ſuche others, like thynges of reputatiō, I farre excell, and paſſe thée euery waie: how be it, I gladly alſo confeſſe, that thou again exceadeſt me, in the true felicltie, in the ſtudies of the artes, the ſciences, and Philoſophie. Wherefore my deſire is, that thou ſhouldeſt ſuggeourne here with me: whiche thyng I beſeche thée graunte, and accorde me, to the ende, that I maie vſe this thy deſired cōpanie: whiche doyng, be thou aſſured, that thou ſhalte not onely rule, and maiſter me, but alſo ſhalt order, all others the Macedonians, for who ſo well inſtructeth, and ordereth well the Prince, ſchooleth with bountie, and vertue, all his ſubiectes: and that this is true, wee commonly dooe ſée, that ſuche as is the kyng, ſuche alſo are his vaſſaules, and ſuche as is the capitaine, ſuche continually are founde, and ſéen to bee his ſouldiers. Theſe letters receiued, by this venerable Philoſopher, he ſorrowed that he could not, by meanes of his greate age, aunſwere the expectation of this vertuous, and good prince, but ſent hym of parte, to contente hym with all, twoo of his wiſeſte, and beſte learned ſcholers, by whoſe induſtrie, he profited bothe in vertue, and learnyng. Ariſtotle in like ſorte, whoſe auditour Alexander was, for the ſpace of fiue full yeres, profited him, his ſcholer in ſuche ſort, that he afterward proued a moſte excellente, and wiſe prince, ſuche in deede, and ſo perfecte, as none was founde to hym comparable, throughout the whole worlde. Beyng in the middle of his armie, he neuer would leaue, or abandon his ſtudie, but with his ſworde did to bee ſaied, vnder his beddes heade, Homers Iliades, and other bookes, whiche he vſually carried. So yt as appereth, he made equall accōpte, as well I meane of the ſtudie of Philoſophie, and good letters, as alſo of the conqueſte of greate kyngdomes, and countries. And farther ſaieth Plutarche, A. Gellius, and Themiſtocles, that he beyng buſied, aboute the conqueſte of Aſia, was aduertiſed, that Ariſtotle had publiſhed, certaine bookes

of naturall Philoſophie, the ſame in déede, whiche he had painfully tofore redde to hym: by meanes whereof, he wrote to hym in effecte, as followeth. In very truthe Ariſtotle, thou haſte not dooen well, in makyng common theſe bookes, of Philoſophie, by thee compoſed, ſor how in thine owne iudgement, maie I now ſurpaſſe others, if this now, whiche thou ſome tymes didſte teache me, by thy meanes become common, and well knowen vnto all men? Knowe aſſuredly, that I more affecte to ercell others in learning, then in any the riches, or kingdomes, of the worlde. Whiche thing as ſone as it was, ones vnderſtoode of Ariſtotle, he aunſwered that his bookes, whiche he then had printed, were ſo intricate, obſcure, and difficill, that it was impoſſible, for any man to profit by theim, if hymſelf did not firſte of all expounde, and interprete them. Pirrhus an excellente capitaine, and kyng of the Epirotes, whiche long liued in armes, at de
                     ••
                  aunce with the Romaines, who alſo at tymes diſcomfited, and vanquiſhte theim, not onely buſied hymſelf, in the often readyng of the Sciences, but alſo publiſhed certaine bookes, of whiche ſome were written, of the policies, or preceptes of warre. That whiche alſoin our tyme, hath doen that worthie perſonage, Gulielmus de Bellai, ſeigniour of Langei. What ſhall we alſo write of Iulius Caeſar, the firſte Emperour, and beſte capitaine that euer ledde ſouldiar, he no leſſe profited in the ſtudie of letters, then of armes: who firſte was a ſtudente, before he would be a ſouldiar, and after as occaſion, or tyme, mighte ſerue hym, would viſite the ſchooles, or Vniuerſities, of Poetes, and marchyng ſtill, or trauaillyng, would write, or reade ſome thyng. On a tyme beyng at Alexandria in Egipte, the better to ſaue hym ſelf, beyng in mernailous daunger, ſkilled in ſwimmyng, committed hym ſelf to the water, through whiche he carried in one hande, the bookes, whiche he had written, giuyng others to vnderſtande, that he no leſſe helde theim deare to hym, them

his life, hauyng no leſſe care to ſaue the one, then the other: and what he had profited, in the ſtudie of good learnyng, his commentaries, whiche he hath lefte vs ſufficiently witnes. And not onely Caeſar, but all th'other Emperours, verifie the ſame, whiche we here haue reported, whiche alſo were for the moſte parte, good capitaines, and gouernors: who alſo when ſo euer thei were inricht with children, acquainted them ſtraight, and out of hand with their bookes, prouidyng them excellente maiſters, and learned men out of Grece. Very fewe knowe, what men the twoo Catoes were, how valiant in Martiall exploites, what graue, and wiſe Philoſophers. Cenſorinus the greate, ſo vowed hymſelf to ſtudie, that what he was and how he profited, his writynges yet dooe witnes: he was an worthie Oratour, and well ſkilled in hiſtories, vniuerſally learned, in all ſtudies, and ſciēces, the Greke tongue he beganne in his olde, and ſtoopyng age. The other ſurnamed Vticenſis, though he were in deede leſſe ſubtile, and ſharpe witted, yet ſoughte he to haue with hym, ſuche as he could finde any where, the beſte learned, emong whom he retained the Philoſopher Antipater, and ſo gaue hym ſelf totally vnto his ſtudie, that as Cicero reporteth in his bookes de finibus, he hardely might be drawen at any tyme, from his papers, in ſuche ſorte, that he neuer entered into the Senate, without ſome booke to buſie hym ſelf, if he happely might haue there ſo muche leaſure. Scipio Africanus that triumphed ouer Hanniball, was ſo inamored with the ſtudy of good learnyng, that he neuer lefte to haue, the Poete Ennius with hym: and after all his warres, and triumphant victories, gaue hymſelf moſte earneſtly, to continuaunce of reading. Hannibal his cōpetitor, though he were in déede of Africa, had not withſtandyng his bookes, in his tentes continually with hym, neither would he in tyme of war intermit, or leaue any tyme fitte for ſtudie, but in what place ſo euer he came, yea, though ſome daungers were

imminent, yet would he retain with hym ſtill, Silan and Saſilas, all bothe Lacedomoniens, by meanes whereof, he became right learned in the Greke. We haue alſo tofore ſaied, that Denis the tyranne, retained with hym the diuine Plato for maiſter, and that he alſo helde with hym, many others well learned. Who after he was baniſhed, and chaſt out of his countrie, one in deriſion, boldly bourdyng with hym, demaunded in what ſtéede, his Philoſophie, ſometyme learned of Plato, now ſtoode hym. To whom he anſwered, that it very well then ſerued him, patiētly to ſupporte, and indure that his aduerſitie. Themiſtocles alſo that excellent capitaine, had in armes, and in ſtudie, like, and equall pleaſure, he continually conferred with Anaxagoras the Mileſian. Epaminondas with theſe others, capitaines of Grece, were all very ſtudious and eloquente Oratours. Mithridates in all his warres, whiche by the ſpace of fourtie yeres, he had continually with the Romaines, neuer lefte or forſooke, by meanes of any the force, or furie of his enemies, his wonted pain or labour in ſtudie. He alſo as the others, had ſunderie Philoſophers with hym. Octauian Auguſtus aſſigned to hymſelf, certaine howers in the daie, for his ſtudie, neither lefte he that his wonte, in the tyme of warre, leadyng with hym to that purpoſe, ſundrie excellent perſonages, as Apollodorus of Pergama, the Philoſopher Aſperarius, Aſimius Polion, Valerius, Meſſala, Virgil, Ouide, and many ſuche others. Before this Emperour was Lucius Lucullus, a moſte excellent, and famous capitain, whiche neuer lefte, or abandoned in tyme of warre his ſtudie, and in tyme of peace, gaue intertainment, to greet troopes of the learned. Paulus Emilius, that ſubdued the kyng Perſius, beſides that hym ſelf, was in good letters moſte excellente, did his paine to the vttereſte, that his children ſhould be like hym, ſo that at his inceſſant, and moſte earneſt ſute, he obtained in the ende Metrodorus of the Athenians, a maiſter to inſtructe, and bryng vp his

children. But to what ende name I ſo many here by order? Pompeius, Q. Fabianus the greate, M. Brutus, Traianus, Adrianus, M. Antonius, were all very ſtudious, whoſe bookes, letters, and orations yet ertante, witnes what the men were, of what iudgement, and learnyng. In fine therefore, if I nothyng be deceiued, fewe good capitaines euer were there, that were not addicted to the ſtudie of good letters. How bee it, twoo there were of whoſe learnyng, wee nothyng canne finde, or reade any where, to weete, Caius Marius, and Marcus Marcellus: Marcellus neuer the leſſe, as ſome recorde, loued, fauoured, and defended eche where the learned, ſo that wée maie preſume, that he alſo was lettered, though in deede (as is ſaied) we no ſuche thyng, haue yet founde written and yet of parte it well appereth, that he throughly was not vnlearned, by his wiſe defence of Archimedes, at the ſackyng of Siracuſa: although in déede, he yet ſuffered not without the greate grief, and ſorrowe of Marcellus. Let then the capitaines of this our age ſaie, what them beſte liketh, and that, to be wel lettered, is a thing leſſe neceſſarie, but I to them will ſaie, and to ſuche, as that maintaine, that thei obſtinatly ſeke to couer, their foule defaulte, and ignoraunce. Wee reade againe that oure elders, in no reſpecte leſſe eſtemed, the bookes of the learned, then the force, or puiſſuance of infinite their capitaines, affectioned alſo to ſtudie, and to learnyng, aſwell remembreth Robartus Valturinus, in his hooke, of the ſtratagemmes of warre.
            
            
               ¶ Of a ſtraunge medicine, where with Fauſtine the wife of M. Aurelius was cured, languiſhing, and conſumyng with infinite, and extreame paſſions, of vnchaſte, and diſloiall loue, as alſo of ſome thynges remediyng the ſaied paſſions. Chapt. 9.
               
                  
                  THat, that affection, or priſon of the minde, whiche ordinarily wée terme by the name of loue, is a paſſion ſo vehement, and of ſo greate force, wee nede onely to conſulte, but with thoſe that haue felt it, with thoſe I meane, whoſe examples are notorious, honorable, greate, and ſtately perſonages, whiche ſo farre herein, ſuffered theimſelues to bee caried awaie, that ſome of theim haue languiſhed, and died of that follie. Iulius Capitolinus, amōg many other examples, remembreth, that which chaunced to Fauſtine, doughter to Antonius, wife to the Emperour M. Aurelius, whiche became inamored of a certaine ſworde plaier, or fenſor, in ſuch ſorte that for the only deſire, that ſhe had to vſe his companie, waſted, and conſumed, death euen at hande with herre. Whiche thing vnderſtoode, as alſo the cauſe thereof, by Aurelius, he aſſembled greate numbers incōtinently, as well of Phiſicians, as alſo of Aſtronomers, with theim to conſulte, if it were poſſible for ſome remedy. Amonge whom in fine, this was the concluſion, that the Fenſor ſecretly ſhould bee doen to die, of whoſe bloodde a good draught was preſented vnto Fauſtine (ſo couertly that ſhe nether knewe whence it was, or what) with this determination, that immediatly after ſhe had receaued it, the Emperour ſhould acquaint hymſelfe in wonted maner with her. This remedy as it ſéemeth very ſtraunge, and meruailous, ſo cleane did it alter, her fonde and fooliſhe phantaſie, in ſuche manner, that ſhe neuer after, at any tyme remembred him, and as it is, in the ſaide hiſtorie recorded, at that tyme he begate on her Antonius Comodus, whiche after proued ſo cruel, and bluddy, that he more reſembled the aboue ſaide ſworde plaier, whoſe blooodde the mother drancke, at the tyme of her conception, then the Emperour whoſe ſoonne he was, by meanes wherof alſo the fore ſaide Comodus would euer

more bee conuerſante, and in companie with Fenſors, whiche alſo witneſeth Eutropius in the life of this Commodus. The Phiſicians of Grece, as alſo of Arabia, accompte this diſeaſe, or torment of loue, among th'others the moſte daungerous infirmities of mans bodie, prouidyng ſundry ſalues, & remedies therefore, for it. Cadmus the Mileſian, as reciteth Suydas hath written one whole boke of the only remedies to chaſe & remoue loue. Ouide alſo hath well ſaide in his bookes de remedio amoris. And among other healpes, whiche the Phiſicians haue preſcribed againſt this franticke maladie, one is, that vnto thoſe, troubled with theſe paſſions, greate weaghty matters, and affaires of importaunce be offered, ſuche as equally concerne both their profite, and their honour, to the intent that the minde buſied aboute theſe matters, may alienate and ſtraunge it ſelf, from the imagination that offendeth: they alſo geue in rule, that ſuche ſhoulde abſtaine from all wanton toies, of ether daintie, or dalliyng damſels. Plinie ſaith that againſt this paſſion it ſhal Plinie lib. 13. be good to take that duſte, or powdre, whereon a Mule hath in any place waltered or ſoiled her ſelfe, ſprinckling or caſting the ſame on the amorous: or as Cardanus wil in his booke of ſubtilties, to rubbe hym, with the ſweate of a Mule heate, and well chafete. The Phiſicians alſo learne vs, how we ſhall know the partie, on whom the amorous, is at any tyme inamored, and the ſame rule is it, by whiche Eraſiſtratus Phiſician to the king Seleucus, vnderſtoode of the diſordinate loue of Antiochus towardes his mother in law, the Quéene Stratonica. For being extreame ſicke, and in meruailous daunger, hauing choſen rather to die, then in any wiſe to vtter the cauſe of his tormentes, proceadyng of loue onely, whiche he bare to his fathers wife, who then enteryng in to the chamber, when the Phiſician felte the pulſe of his vnhappie patient, whiche ſo vehemently, on the ſoden moued, a
                     •
                   the comming of the Quéene, that Eraſiſtratus forthwith

perceiued, that he on her was inamored, and ſhe the onely and ſole cauſe of his grief. By meane where of he did his buſie paine, in good ordre to aduertiſe the kyng here of, whiche matter how he handled would be long here to write, and the hiſtorie beſides is well knowen, and common, which thing as ſoone as it was once knowen to the father, ſeing the daunger be preſently was in, if no remedie were then prouided, contented hym ſelfe (though it farre was beſide the intention of the ſonne, whiche rather, did wiſhe, or chuſe any ſhameful death, then by the detriment of his father, to purchaſe hym health) to forgoe, and leaue the Quéene, geuyng her for wife to his tormented ſoonne. And here alſo, to ſpeake the trueth, both the age, and beautie of this dame, as alſo the mariage whiche after followed, was muche more comformabie in the ſonne, thê in the father. By meanes wherof Antiochus liued many yeres afterwarde, in greate ioye, & wealth with his dearelibeloued Stratonica. The hiſtory is very pretie, written by Plutarche in the life of Demetrius, whence it is, that in ſuche caſes, Phiſicians geue in commaundement to féele the pulce of the paſſionate partie, rehearſing, and remembryng the names of many, and among theim the partie alſo beloued, whoſe name when ſo euer, it ſhall in anie ſorte be vttered, the pulce of the amorous will then more buſily ſkippe, or daunce, then at any other tyme, and this eaſely may you finde ſtill the partie ſo beloued. By many other ſignes, it alſo is euident, either when one loueth, as alſo where, or whom, whiche I leaue to ſpeake of, as ſufficientlie knowen to all men.
            
            
               Who firſt did ſette or plante the Vine, who alſo did firſt to drike water in wine, to whom alſo, and how the Romaines firſte af all forbadde the vſe of wine, with ſome other thinges concernyng this purpoſe. Chap. 10.
               
                  
                  OF all kinde of fruictes, whiche the yearth produceth (theſe I vnderſtande where of wee make lycors) none is ſo profitable in mine aduice as is the Vine, ſo that he be moderatlie, and with diſcretion vſed. For whiche cauſe onely Anacraſes ſaide, that the Vine geueth or preſenteth vnto vs thrée grapes: the firſt of pleaſure: the ſeconde of dronkenneſſe: the thirde of teares, mournyng and ſorrowe, in ſuche ſorte, that who ſo paſſeth the firſt grape, to wete a litle wine, moderatly, and ſeldome, in takyng it receaueth greate ſhame and domage. Our prophane authors, that neuer were acquainted with, or euer hearde of the ſcriptures, deuiſe, and imagen ſundry inuentors of wine. Diodorus Siculus, in his fourthe boke attributeth as well the inuention of wine, as alſo that he firſt founde to plante or ſette the Vine, to Denis the ſoonne of Iupiter, called otherwiſe Bacchus, and pater liber, ſo termed for the liberty and force of wine. For whiche cauſe thei dedicated to him a Temple vnder the Capitoll in Rome, where were celebrated theſe feaſtes, which thei commonly called Dioniſians, or Bacchanalia, verie laſſiuious, and full of impudicitie. And that this inuention was truelie attributed to this Denis, Virgil wel aſſureth it vs, in his firſte entree, into his ſeconde boke of Georgikes: although Marcianus Capellus affirme that he only ſkilled the Gréekes to make wine. Others write that it was Icarus father of Erigonus whiche firſt found the meane to make wine in Athens, where after warde beyng drounke▪ was ſlaine of the people. In Italie they ſaie that Saturne there firſt had wine, whiche he brought from out the Iſle of Candia. Plutarche writeth that Ar
                     
                        •
                     us an Etruſcian, enrichte Fraunce with the firſte Vine that euer was there. But the trueth is that the firſt inuentor of wine, was Noe, as alſo the firſt that euer was

droncke, whiche witnes (beſides that whiche is redde in the ninth of Geneſis) Lactantius Firmianus and Ioſephus 
                  Lac. li. 2. inſti, diuinarum. Ioſep. li. 1. an
                        •
                     . whiche Noe immediatly after he iſſued out of the Arke, planted the Vine with his owne proper handes, and drinking after, of the fructe therof, was alſo firſt drunke: in whiche that his diſeaſe ſleapyng, he ſo diſcouered hym ſelf, that, that there betided hym, which is writtē of him in Geneſis. After this men léeking of this kinde of licour, drancke it at firſt pure, and with out water: for as recordeth Plinie one named Staſius, was the firſt that did water Plinie lib. 7. cap. 5▪ 6. into wine to qualifie it. By meane whereof greate good hath followed, with the preſeruation of health through out the whole worlde, for that wine ſo tempered hath his moſt excellent effectes. Plato by Macrobius, in his ſeconde booke recordeth, that wine taken moderatly fortifieth the vnderſtandyng, it augmenteth the puiſſance, force, and ſtrength, it yeldeth the harte ioious, it taketh from man all ſorroufull, and penſiue imaginations. Plinie ſaieth that the honeſt, and reſonable vſe of Plinie leb. 2
                        •
                     
                     ▪ cap. 1. wine delaied, increaſeth the force, blo
                     •
                  dde, and couler in mans face, the vaines ſaieth he, are ſtrēghtned by wine, the ſight ſharpened, the ſtomake comforted, the appetite thence groweth, Vrine alſo prouoked, it haſtneth ſléepe, and diſturneth Vomites, it purgeth melancolie, and reioiſeth the harte, & in fine profiteth in many other vſes. Aſclepiades the Phiſician hath written a whole booke, of the only vertue of wine. Sainct Paule writyng to Timothie counſeleth hym to drinke a little wine, the better to ſtrengthen, and comforte his ſtomake. The Phiſicions vſe wine in many their medicines, for that wine wil reſtoreth health, increaſeth bloodde, it offendeth not anie melancoly humours, it diſſipateth and drieth 
                     •
                  eame, it moiſteneth and fitteth choller to be purged. Plato introducing Socrates, commendeth wine ſaiyng, euen as rain moderate geueth increaſe of all hearbaege, tempe ſteous inundations vtterly deſtroiyng it: ſo wine with 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
ration reioiſeth man, and coumforteth his ſpirites, but coutrariwiſe, in abundaunce, ſcorcheth, and conſumeth hym. Among all other ſweete, and pleaſing odours, the ſmel alſo of wine is of the Philoſophers commended, for that it addeth force (as is ſaide) to the vitall ſpirites, it is very ſubtill, and ſoone penetrateth: but what ſo euer is ſpoken or ſaide any where of wine, that ſtill is mente of wine moderatly taken, and delaied. The auncient Romaines forbad the vſe of wine, to women as well, as alſo to children, as hath Valerius, writyng the cuſtomes, 
                     
                        •
                     al. lib. 2. Plinie. lib. 14. & lawes of the Romaines. So that as Plime ſaieth, that in thoſe daies, when Romulus raigned in Rome, a certen Citiſen ſlewe his wife, for that ſhe had dronke wine and although the murtherer were immediatly apprehended and taken, yet the Prince with out ſute would pardon that offence. Thei eſtemed it a fault ſo greate and ignominious, to ſée a woman bouſe, or drinke wine, that as Fabian reporteth, a certaine maide hauyng ſtolen, the kaies of a wine Seller, preuely to haue dronke or taſted there, of wine, was by famine done to die, euen by her owne parentes, for that faulte. For this cauſe men vſed to kiſſe women on the mouth, to féele, or perceiue, if they had drinke of wine. It is recorded, that N. Domician, beyng ordained, ſome tymes, a iudge in Rome, depriued a woman there of her Dourie, for that ſhe hadde dronke more wine, then was for her health either neceſſarie, or conuenable. Salomon in his Prouerbes prohibeteth wine, to kinges as well, as alſo to there counſell, for that in dronkenneſſe ſaieth he nothyng is kepte ſocrette, or concealed: the pore mans cauſe alſo is then not conſidered of, or harde iudgmente at the leaſte proceadeth then againſt hym. We reade not with ſtandyng, that it was permitted to the kynges of Egypte, to drinke wine, but that moderatly, and by appointed meaſures. A
                     •…
                   
                  R
                        •
                     mulus inuited to a feaſt, would hardly ſee, or taſte an
                     •
                   wine, for 
                     〈…〉
                  eth he muſt
                     •…
                  
                  
I determen of a greate, and weightie matter. Auicenna ſaieth, that who ſo geueth wine to a child to drinke, heapeth one flamyng fier on an other. Ariſtotle inhibiteth Ariſt. li. 7. pol. wine to be geuen Infantes, as alſo to all Nurſes, that geue ſucke of their bodies. Plato, by his lawes, in hys bokes de republica, though he ſéeme in the firſte to aucthoriſe the drinkyng of wine, yet in the ſeconde ſaieth, manne muſt drinke little wine, wel drouned in water, and that alſo in no wiſe before he bee eightine yeres olde, in the preſence continually of olde menne vntill he be fortie, to the intente that if he exceede, he receaue puniſhment for his exceſſe of theim. But after that age he permitteth, that the quantitie be of ſome parte augmented, to mittigate, or aſſwage the coldnes, and melancoly, of thoſe yeres. How be it, his minde is, that a certaine meaſure bee preſcribed theim: farther he excludeth all ſeruauntes of what age ſo euer, iudges alſo, and magiſtrates, and ſuch as haue offices, or charge in the weale publike. To ſtudentes alſo he geueth in counſell, that they ſauer not of wine, and as concernyng bondmen, the ſame order was alſo, obſerued of theim in Rome. Auicenna accoumpteth Plato his lawes, as good rules in Phiſicke, with whom alſo accordeth Galene, in this matter. Alexander Aphrodiſeus in his problemes affirmeth, that thoſe, that neuer drincke, other licour then water, haue as wel their ſight, as all other their ſenſes, more ſharpe, and fine, then thei that drinke continually wine. But howe to water, and ordre our wine, there are ſundry rules, and opinions: Heſiodus commaundeth, that to one cuppe of wine, ye adde thrée of water: Atheneus ſaieth, that the auncient Greekes, did fiue partes of water, to be mixt commonly with twoo of wine, and ſome tymes) whiche more was) thrée partes of water with one of wine, which accordeth with the rule of Heſiodus. And this maie here be noted, that the Grekes neuer did to be poured water into their wine but wine continually, in ſmall quantitie, in to their water,

by meane where of Theophraſtus aſſureth vs, that theſe twoo licours are more perfectly medled. And this did our elders, not onely well droune, and water their wine, but dranke there of alſo in very ſmall quantitie. Eubolus the Greke Poete, bringeth in Bacchus, ſpeaking to the Elders or Sages of that age, I will geue you to drinke of wine, but thre times at your refection, the firſt for health, the ſeconde for the good ſmell there of, the third to inforce ſleape, how oftē ſo euer you more drinke, it al ſauoureth of diſorder, and dronkennes. Apuleus Paniaſis, the ſame that wrote of the diuerſitie of meates, is with the other, of one, and the ſame iudgement, ſaiynge that ye may once drinke incontinently after grace, the ſeconde cuppe moueth, or quickeneth in vs Venus, the thirde is cauſe of ſhame, and diſhonor. Iulius Caeſar verie ſildome, woulde taſte, or drincke of wine, which thinge Suetonius reporteth, by the teſtimony of Cato, the ſame I meane that was ennimie vnto Caeſar. The excellente Demoſthenes alſo, or fewe times, or neuer dranke of any wine. Apollo Tianeus of whom ſo many thinges are ſo famouſly written, as hee neuer did eate any kinde of fleaſhe, ſo alſo did hee neuer drinke any droppe of wine. And among all Chriſtians in theſe daies temperancie in drinkyng is highly commended. Saincte Iames the leſſe, neuer dranke in his life ether wine or Ale, nether would he eate of any kinde of fleaſhe, imitating there in Sainct Ihon the Baptiſte. The ſemblable finde we of Fulgentius the Biſhoppe, of Emerys alſo the ſoonne of Steuen, kinge of Polonia. Ioſephus in his antiquities highly extolleth Ioſephus lib. 8. ant. that vertuous modeſty of the Eſſeiens (whiche were one of the three ſectes, that were among the Iewes, the Pharaſies, and Saduces the other two) whiche as he ſaieth neuer dranke wine. In a certen Epiſtle Saincte Hierome ſharpely reproueth Preeſtes, bouſinge, or pleaſinge any thing at all in wine, addyng that Sainct Paule, aduiſeth theim to the contrarie, and farther ſaieth, that in the old

lawe, theſe that had charge, or office in the Churche, neuer dranke either wine, or other kinde of licour, that coulde, or might force theim any waie to lightnes. Good potte men in theſe daies, and gallant taſters, approue their wines by theſe fower qualities, he muſt be delectable in mouth, to pleaſe the taſte, he muſt ſmell well and farre of, to content their riche Noſes, he muſte bee well coloured, pure, and neate to pleaſe the eye, and in fine it muſt haue his commendation of the ſoile, to wéete, that it came from a hoate, and high countrie: and of this good wine they quickly can make vinegar, but of the commodities or diſcōmodities herof, I preſently leaue to ſpeake more in this place.
            
            
               Of infinite diſcommodities, whiche take their ſpringe of wine immoderatly vſed, as alſo what Phiſicians they were, that thought it good, and medicinable, ſome tymes to be dronke. Chap. 11.
               
                  THough Wine in ſome diſeaſes bothe healpe and comforte nature, yet thence riſe ſo manie miſchiues, if it immoderatlie be taken, that the diſcommodities thereof paſſe, and ſurmoūt the commodeties, in ſuche ſort that it might ſéeme better, wée neuer had ſéen, or knowen it, contentyng our ſelues with water, whiche in the beginnyng was onely geuen vs: of parte for that we can imagen nothing to be better: of parte alſo, that all other creatures content theim ſelues with the ſame. Conſider wee All creatures ſaue man content theim ſelues with water. alſo, that by wine, ſundrie haue loſte the vſe of their ſenſes, ſome their liues, ſome alſo all hope of ſaluation, and their ſoules. And although men well knowe the greate inconueniences that betide theim by wine, yet ſo farre

of be they from any intention to eſchwe it, that they nothing ſo much ſéeke, as continuall occaſions, to bouſe, and drinke inceſſantly, in ſuche ſorte that fewe houres in the daie may paſſe theim, in whiche they kiſſe not the cuppe, at leaſt fiue or ſixe tymes, not ſlightly, and for facions ſake, but with ſtaryng eyes gladly, and with right good deuotion. Plinie writeth, that where as many eftſones drinke, nether for any néede, or thirſt thereto prouoking theim, that wine amōg al other licours hath this nature, or proprietie, that with eaſe it will be dronke, ye though you nothing nede it. But afterward it handleth thoſe, accordyng to their demerites, paiyng theim the paine, of that ſinne, and exceſſe, the vapours thereof mountyng alofte in to the braine, depriuyng theim incontinentlie of the vſe of eche their ſenſes, reſemblyng for the tyme, ſome dull and brutiſhe beaſte, and after thei at times, by vſe, haue learned well to abuſe theim ſelues, this infirmitie then taketh holde and full poſſeſſion of theim, and ordereth theim as doeth the hungrie Catte the Mouſe, I meane it either killeth theim, or at leaſte it chargeth them with infinite diſcommodities, and ineuitable infirmities, tormentes muche worſe then preſent death in déede, as the Goute, the Palſie, both in handes and féete, the dropſie, the eies ſtand ſtaring full of blooddy humors, the Liuer inflamed, the face full of fier, and verie richely coulered, the Noſe ful of rubies, with many other honeſt and pretie commodities, of very good grace, and much to be deſired. Cato ſaied, that dronkennes was a voluntary All creatures ſaue man, contente thē ſelues vvith vvater. folly: Plinie ſaieth, that it dulleth, and weakeneth the memory: prouoking dreames, very terrible, and fearful. Seneca writyng to Lucullus affirmeth, that it meameth and féebleth both the armes, and legges, prouokyng men to laſciuious thoughtes, and venerie. Deoniſins Areopagita, alleageth out of Plato, drounkennes to reſemble, ſome luſtie yong daunſer, whoſe thighes in the beginnyng are ſore, hardly able to beare hym, néedyng ſome

ſtaffe, or croache to reſt, or ſtaie on, ſhe alſo is well ſkilled, to alure, and drawe vnto her, with frēdly face reioyſing, her dronken Souldiars daily. Sainct Paule writing to the Epheſians, aduertiſeth theim to flie, and to forſake wine, the ſpring, and beginnyng of all vnchaſte liuynge. Salomon alſo, who ſo drinketh wine in abundance, and exceſſe, neuer keepeth counſell or ſecrette, what ſo euer. Whence grewe for iuſte cauſe, this olde, and auncient Prouerbe, wine runneth without ſhowes, to wéete ſecretly, priuely, pleaſantly, hardly ſéen, or perceiued, ſhamefully diſcoueryng mans foule, and vitious apetites. To this purpoſe; the Poete Eſchilus alſo ſaide, that as in a glaſſe is ſien, the true fewture of the body, ſo alſo is ſien in wine, the affections of the minde. Plato ſaieth that wine maketh plaine, and euidente demonſtration of the manners, and conditions of all menne. Hence haue wee good exāples, in Noe both and in Loth: for the one beyng dronke, diſcouered his ſecrete partes, whence he became infamous to al men: and Sodome againſt Loth had at all no powre, whom wine notwithſtandyng, not hardly after conquired, blindyng hym, to abuſe his owne naturall doughter. Beholde here the fructes then and forces of wine. Among the lawes of Solon, one of the ſeuen wiſe men, or ſages of Grece, it was ordained, that what prince ſo euer, was founde or knowen dronke, ſhould therefore immediatly be executed to death. Pitacus alſo decréed, an other of the ſaied ſages, that who ſo beyng dronke, committed any offence, ſhoulde aſſuredly receiue double puniſhement there fore, once for the treſpas, and fault by hym committed, and the ſeconde tyme for his dronkennes, the cauſe of the wrong doen. Ariſtotle in his problemes geueth a reaſon, why ſuch as are geuen to wine, are leſſe able in the acte of generation: as alſo an other, why among ſuche as are dronke, ſome be pleaſant, ſome ſory, ſome ioyous, ſome terrible. Some Phiſicians alſo are there, among whom I onely remember Auicenna, and

                  Raſis, whiche affirme it to be a thyng very medicinable, and holſome, at times to be dronke, though not ordinarily, and commonly: but their reaſons, wherfore, nothing at all content me, by meanes whereof, I vtterly refuce to be of their opinion. And where as diuers honourable perſonages haue been ſubiect to wine, had they aſſuredly forſaken, that there wonted vſe in bouſing, their glory, and renoume had ſo muche been the greater. Alexander ye greate was taxed of this vice, ſo that as ſome good writers, haue leaſt vs plainly of hym, he did in theſe his cuppes, ſundry his frendes to death, and afterwarde repenting him, of that his rage, and malice, would for reuenge haue ſlaine alſo hym ſelfe, and ſurely it maie be thought, that by meanes of theſe hys tyrannies, he in the ende alſo was traitrouſly impoiſoned. Marcus Antonius, one of the three pillers of the Romaine empire, hauyng eſpouſed the ſiſter of Octauian, pleaſing to muche, as the other alſo in wine, cōſequently acquainted himſelf with Cleopatra Quéene of Egypte, by meanes where of in fine, hee both loſt his life, and alſo the empire, firſt vanquiſhed by wine, and after by Octauian. The Emperour Tiberius, as in hym were many, and ſundry greate defaultes, yet none ſo much annoied hym, as that he to much loued exceſſe of wine, & drinking, whēce in place of his name Tiberius, was eftſones in deriſion, of many called Biberius, endyng at the laſte an infortunate and wretched miſer. Denis the yonger, tyranne of Sicilia, ſo much was geuen to exceſſiue drinking, that he became blinde, in both eies vnprofitable. Cleomedes King of the Spartiens, practiſing to immitate the Scithians in bouſing, and did ſo valiantly by his luſty quaffing, that he proued in the ende, a ſenlis, and lothſum monſter. It is reported that the Philoſopher Archeſilas died of dronkennes, and no other maladie. The Poete Anacreon was alſo a greate drinker, and in drinkyng was chockte with the Pepin of a grape, whiche entered by the wrong waie or paſſage through

hys throate. The Biſhoppe Flauius, renoumed for his learning, reporteth that Bonoſus ſo pleaſed in wine, that Aurelius would ſaie of him, that he was not borne to liue but to drinke: and herein he farre exceaded all others, for when ſo euer he dranke, or els in what quantie, he neuer thence was ſéen, or drounke, or leſſe aduiſed. But it maie be ſuppoſed, that he paſte it againe in vrine, as faſt as he receiued it, how be it in the ende, he eſcaped not the pain of his exceſſe, and malice, for that beeyng vanquiſhed of Probus, was in moſte ſhamefull, and lothſome maner hāged. Some alſo write, that the king Antiochus, which was, maugre his bearde, ſubdued by the Romaines, ſo muche giuen, to ſtrong wines, and feaſting, that he ſpent the greater parte of his tyme in ſleapyng: by meanes whereof, he committed almoſte the whole gouernment of the Empire, to twoo his choſen, and very truſtie dear
                  
                     •
                  yn̄ges, hymſelf banquettyng, and diſportyng ſtill, with a certaine yonge damoſell, ſo that when after he ſhould mete in field with the Romaines, his armie was ſtraight diſordered, & he an effeminate captiue. Eſchilus the poete alſo did pleaſe in drincke, by meanes whereof Sophocles left not to ſaie vnto hym, Eſchilus theſe thynges, that thou haſt ſaied, and doen, haue onely paſte thée by happe, and by fortune, and by no knowledge that thou haſte, or ought that thou vnderſtandeſt.
            
            
               ¶ Of certaine greate perſonages, whiche died, called hēce by thoſe, whiche before them ſelues, vniuſtly had cauſed to be executed, euen in the inſtante, and tyme to them aſſigned, as alſo ſome what of the Archebiſhoppe of Magonce or Ments. Chap. 12.
               
                  WHen the aide of man faileth thoſe, to whom by man ſome wrong, and grief is doen, God aſſuredly notwithſtandyng, neuer leaueth to aſſiſte theim: and although it chaunce not at ſuche tymes, ſo ſone, and ſo apertly, as

percaſe ſome would, or could in harte deſire, yet God that knoweth when, and howe, he ſhoulde auenge hym, on thoſe that haue vniuſtly oppreſt, or wronged the innocente, ſo woorketh that at tymes ſuche trecheries come to lighte, and eke mannes falce iudgementes, to his heauie condemnation. Whereof wée could remember many true, & ſtraunge examples, emong which we reade of a certaine knight, of the houſe of the Templiers, executed as is ſuppoſed, very vniuſtly: this knight an Italian, borne in Naples, beholding as he paſte to the place of execution, Pope Clement the fifte of that name, aduaunced in a windowe, as pleaſyng in this ſpectacle, whiche onely did this ſentence, to paſſe againſte hym wrongfully, and nigh to hym Philippe, ſurnamed Bellus, kyng then of Fraunce, ſaied to hym with a high, and loude voice incontinently: O thou cruell, and merciles Clement, for as muche as in the worlde, none other iudge is, to whom, from thy vniuſt ſentence, I might appeale, I appeale yet from thée, and from thy greate iniuſtice, vnto him that all ſéeth, that true, and vpright iudge Ieſus Chriſte the rightuous, before whom I thee aſſomen, as alſo the kyng there (at whoſe ſute, thou haſt ſentenſed me to death) to appere in perſone bothe, before his tribunall ſeate, there to receiue, as ye by me haue deſerued, without fauour, or perciallitie, without reſpecte of perſones, and that alſo within the ſpace, of one yere followyng. And ſo it came to paſſe, that as he there had cited them, the Pope died, iuſte at the tyme appoincted, as alſo the kyng to holde theother companie. Whiche thing aſſuredly, onely proceded, from the inſcrutable iudgemē
                  tes, and iuſtice of God. The ſemblable alſo happened, to Ferdinande the fowerth kyng of Caſtile, whiche alſo did to death, twoo other worthie knightes, of pretenſed malice, not hauyng any ſhadowe, or pretexte at all of iuſtice whom no ſorowfull teares, or often ſupplications could, or might deliuer, from the blouddie miſer. In fine therefore

arreſtyng, without more, on this extremitie, cited the king in like maner, as before, within thirtie daies folowng, to appere before that iudge, the laſte of whiche in déede, he made chaunge of life for death, and ſo departed hence. Suche was the happe alſo, of a capitain, of certain gallies, of the toune of Genua, of whiche Baptiſta Fulgoſius, in this ſorte reporteth, that he tooke a little Boate, or Barke of Catelongna, in whiche alſo was an other, or capitaine, or gentleman, which neuer had dooen to the inhabitātes of Genua any wrōg, or iniurie, neuertheleſſe, for that priuate malice, yt this Capitaine of Genua, bare to the Catelanes, cōmaunded that he ſhould incōtinently be hanged, who mournfully beſought hym, not to do him that, or any ſo greate vilanie, for that he neuer had offended, nor hym, ne yet his countrie, but findyng in the ende no kinde of grace, or fauour, his laſte recourſe was vnto the diuine Iuſtice, ſaiyng to this cruell, and to this merciles capitain. that ſith he nedes would take his life, for no cauſe from hym, that he then preſently appealed, for iuſtice vnto God, aſſummonyng alſo hym, with hym that daie to appere, before the Iudiciall ſeate, or throne of the moſte higheſt, to yelde to hym accompt, of that his greate iniuſtice, in whiche ſame daie as the others, this capitain alſo died and paſt to plaide his cauſe, in the true courte in deede of iuſtice, where as well maie bee preſumed, ſuche was his rewarde, as his tretcherie had deſerued. I could here longer dwell, in others like to theſe, but for a finall example, I will one, onely, more, remember you, no leſſe perchaunce ſtraunge, then very true, and certaine, whiche happened at Magonce in Almaignie, troublyng, & diſorderyng the whole ſtate of that citie, as briefly remembreth Gontier the Poete, in his deſcriptiō of the life, and geaſtes of Fredericke the Emperour, the firſte of that name, as he recordeth. The biſhoppe Contadus in his hiſtorie alſo recordeth it, as alſo Henry the ſixte, ſoonne to the ſaied Fredericke. In this fore ſaied

toune then, of Ments, or Magonce, in the yere of our Lorde a thouſande, a hundred, fiftie, or ſome thyng more, there dwelte an Archebiſhop, who had to name Henrie, a man for his vertues, of all men eche where renoumed: this Archebiſhoppe then as became a good paſtour, puniſhed ſynne, and vice ſeuerely, with a ſpeciall regard to his flocke, and charge, true ſeruaunte vnto GOD, and friende vnto his neighbour: by occaſion whereof, ſome libertines, and enemies of Gods honour, beganne to malice, & to enuie his eſtate and conditiō, ſo that he was accuſed of euill demanure before the Pope, and ſaied to bée leſſe worthie, of ſuche an office, or honour, chargyng him with many open, and ſlaunderous infamies, whiche vnderſtoode by the Pope, although in trouthe, he thought hym to bee bothe iuſte, and vertuous, yet would he not deny audience, to thoſe that craued it, and hauyng heard their plaint, aduertiſed thereof incontinently the Archbiſhop. By meanes whereof, the better, to diſcharge, and pourge hym, he choſe out emong his friendes, ſuche a one as he loued moſte, for whom alſo he had doen, more then for any other, this was a Prieſte, or Prelate, and had to name Arnoulde, highly aduaunced, to ſundrie dignities, by the biſhop. This Arnoulde now was riche, eloquent, and learned, and beyng entered into Rome, ſuborned by the deuill, determined on a ſodaine, to depriue his lorde, and maiſter, inrichyng hym ſelf with that honour, if it were poſſible: whiche thyng the better to accompliſhe, with greate ſummes of money, he corrupted twoo impious, and twoo accurſed Cardinalles, before whom (to the hearyng of this cauſe deputed) in place to haue ſpokē the truthe, as bothe faithe, and loialtie willed, he vttered againſte hym, what ſo he faſly could imagine, ſaiyng, that he more ſtode bounde to god, & to the truthe, then in any wiſe he was, or could be vnto man, and therefore muſte nedes confeſſe, that the biſhop in deede was ſuche, as he to be was accuſed: by meanes whereof, the Pope, as abuſed

by this Arnoulde, ſente vnto Magonce, theſe twoo honeſte Cardinalles, there to depriue, and remoue the Archebiſhope, whiche beyng arriued, cauſed by prorſes this good manne to appere before theim, whoſe matter was there in ſuche order handeled, that ſentence was there in fine pronounced againſte hym, depriued of that honour, and of that poſtorall dignitie, in whoſe rome this Arnoulde, was preſently then ſubſtituted, whiche ſo had ſolde his maiſter, as Iudas did our ſauiour: at which ſentence vttered, the Archebiſhop ſaied, God knoweth that I am vniuſtly here condemned, how bee it, I minde not to appeale from this your ſentence, for that I ſurely knowe, that you ſoner ſhal be credited though liers, then I in truthe, wherefore I receiue this ſentence, a puniſhmente for my ſynnes, appealyng neuer the leſſe from you, vnto the eternall Iudge, before whom, I aſſomon you all three to appere, at whiche woordes, theſe Prelates burſte out into a laughter, ſaiyng: that when ſo he wente before, thei incontinently would followe hym. This chaunſed in the yere of mannes redemption, a thouſande, a hundred, fiftie and ſixe, whiche wronge this good prieſt tooke verie paciently, withdrawyng hymſelf into a certain monaſterie, where he obſerued the ſtraite rules of that order, without any coule, or habite religious. But to conclude, God neuer long permitteth ſuche tretcherie, and iniuſtice any where vnpuniſhed, to the intente eſpecially, that the innocencie of the iuſte, might the better alwaies be knowen. One yere and a halfe after this, this Henry died very vertuouſly in his Abbey, mountyng ſtraight into heauen, as maie well bee preſumed. Newes hereof was broughte, and of his death to Rome, whereat theſe twoo Cardinalles, foorthwith began to ieaſte, either chargyng other, to ſéeke and ſearche out the Archebiſhop according as thei had promiſed. And beholde immediatly, or within very fewe daies afterward, the one of them was ſo bruſed, by miſhappe of his

owne ſeruaunte, that his bowelles, and intrailes burſte out at his foundment. The other fel madde incontinently in ſuche extremitie, that he brake his bones, eatyng, and deuouryng his owne wretched carrion, and as concernyng Arnoulde, in recompence of his diſloialtie, and ſedicious tumultes, whiche he moſte carefully foſtered eche where emong the people, he became ſo odious, and lothſome to the multitude, that about that tyme, thei alſo inuironed hym, ſhutte vp into a monaſterie, where in fine thei tooke hym, and mangled him moſt miſerablie, caſtyng his carriō into the diche of the citie, where it laie full thrée daies followyng, all the people, as well womē, as menne, doyng to it, though dedde, the moſte villanie that was poſſible,
            
            
               ¶ Of a pretie guile practiſed by a vertuous, and good Quene, towardes her houſebande, by meanes where of, I ames Kyng of Aragon was begotten, and of his birthe, and death. Chapt. 13.
               
                  IN the old Chronicles, or annales of Aragon, it is recorded, that the Lorde Peter Counte of Barcelon, afterward by ſucceſſion, the ſeuenth kyng of Aragon, receiued in marriage the ladie Marie, doughter to the Earle of Mont Peſulin, nephue to the Emperour of Conſtantinople, a ladie no leſſe faire, then vertuous, and honeſt. The kyng notwithſtādyng, who pleaſed muche in varietie of concubines, and therefore leſſe forſte of this faire, and vertuous ladie, not vſyng her cō
                  panie, as reaſon woulde he ſhould haue dooen, miniſtred to her occaſion, of greate annoye, and ſorrowe, and eſpecially for that, the kyng had then no iſſue to inherite, and ſuccede, in that kyngdome after hym. Wherfore by the

meanes, of one, of the kynges owne Chamberlaines, whiche alſo perhaps, had ſerued hym in other ſuche like affaires, ſhe was conueighed vnto him, though vnder the pretexte, and name of an other, where hauyng vſed his companie, to her full contentation, and the kyng perceiuyng, that it drewe towardes daie, commaunded her to withdrawe her ſelf, for the ſauyng of his honour: but ſhe ſaied, my houſebande, and my lorde, I am none ſuche as you ſuppoſe me to be, but am your wife, your obediente, and your lawfull bedfellowe, dooe me what paine, or ſorrowe, ſhall beſte like you, for aſſuredly I will not departe out from your companie, before you doe to bee called, ſome one of ſufficient credite, that maie if neede bee, witnes, that I alone this night, was with you, and with none other, to the intent, that if it pleaſe God, to graunt me, to be with childe by you, whiche is my ſole, and onely deſire, that the worlde then maie knowe, that it alſo is yours. The kyng conſideryng of her honeſt guile, was (though in deede he thought, that he had been ſerued otherwiſe) contented to fatiſfie that her expectation, and did to bée there of witneſſes, twoo honeſt, and ſober gentlemē. Now ſo it came to paſſe, that this vertuous dame, within ſhorte tyme after, knewe well ſhe had conceiued, and at the terme by accompte, well aunſweryng to this purpoſe, was deliuered of a ſoonne, the firſte daie of Februarie, in the yere of our Lorde, a thouſande, a hundred ninetie, and ſixe, whiche as ſone as he was borne, the Quéene commaunded immediatly, that he ſhould be carried to the Churche, and incontinently as thei (whiche is to be conſidered) to whom this charge, was carefully cō
                  mitted, were on the point of entrie into the Churche, or Temple, the prieſtes aſſuredly leſſe wetyng of any ſuche matter, began to ſyng Te deum laudamus, in moſte ſolemne maner. And thence departing afterward with the ſaied childe, vnto an other Churche, thei alſo not knoweyng of any ſuch gehaſte commyng, euen as he entred beganne

that Pſalme of Benedictus dominus deus Iſrael, whiche was a meruailous ſigne, and aſſured preſage, of the great vertue, and bountie, that ſhould be in the yong prince. And the Kyng and Quéene, not knowyng now what name thei beſte might giue hym, did to bee lighted twelue Torches of equall length, and bignes, lottyng to euery of theim, the name of an Apoſtle, with this determination, that the name of that Torche, that firſt ſhould be conſumed, ſhould be giuen to this Prince, for name at his Baptiſme: and the firſt that failed, was that of ſainct Iames. So afterward then baptiſed, thei gaue hym Iames to name, he was an excellente Prince, in peace no leſſe wiſe then valiaunte, and fortunate in all affaires of warre. His inuaſions, and incurſions were terrible againſt the Mores, he was large, and liberall at all tymes to his ſouldiars: and emong others his notable attemptes, he leuiyng on a tyme a greate, and groſſe armie, paſt into the Iſle of Maiorque, whiche then was onely inhabited of the Mores, where he foughte many, bothe bloudie, and daungerous battailes, but after he there long had beſieged their principall citie, in th'ende wonne it, as all the other Iſles adioignyng nigh vnto it, and in fine ſubdued all the other Mores, as alſo the citie of Carthage it ſelf. He had many children, as well ſoonnes, as doughters, whiche all while he liued, he aduaunſed to greate and mearueilous honours. The Prince Peter was after hym kyng alſo of Aragon, Iames kyng of the Iſles Maiorque, and Minorque, his thirde ſoonne was Archebiſhop of Toledo, the ladie Yollant, was eſpouſed to the kyng of Caſtile, the ladie Iſabeau, to the kyng of Fraūce, the ladie Vrroque, to the lorde Emanuel prince alſo of Caſtile, and the prince Peter in his fathers daies eſpouſed the doughter of the kyng of Nauar. This kyng liued ſeuentie and twoo yeres, and died then vertuouſly, and in his death bedde choſe to him, the habite of a religious man, renounſyng his kyngdome, and his roiall ſcepter,

with aſſured determination, if he euer had recouered of that maladie, to haue imploied the reſidue of his daies in the ſole ſeruice, and veneration of God: but his paines growyng, and doublyng continually, he gaue ouer vnto nature, in the towne of Valence, in the yere of our lorde God, a thouſande, twoo hundred, ſixtie and ſixe, in the beginnyng of the moneth of Auguſt.
            
            
               ¶ Of an aunciente and ſtraunge cuſtome, obſerued by the inhabitauntes, of the Prouince of Carinthia, at the coronation of their prince: as alſo how thei ſharply puniſhed thieues. Chapt. 14.
               
                  POpe Pius, the ſeconde of that name, a manne no leſſe learned, then painfull, and ſtill buſied in aunciente hiſtories, when he liued, reporteth in his Coſmographie, or deſcription of the worlde that the prouince of Carinthia is incloſed, within the territorie, and ſeignorie of Auſtria, & ſaieth that the inhabitauntes there, at the coronation of their prince, vſed a very ſtraunge, and pretie cuſtome, whiche alſo is remembred by A. Sabellicus in his tenth Decade, as alſo by Sebaſtianus Munſterus, in his newe Coſmographie. In this Prouince of Carinthia, there is a greate plaine, of very olde, and ruinous bulidynges, as if the were the ſteppes, or monumētes of ſome auncient citie, in whiche alſo ſtandeth a certaine greate ſtone, wherevpon (at the coronation of their newe duke, the daie and tyme appointed) a houſebande man, or labourer incontinently aſcendeth, vnto whom that office by inheritance belongeth. On his right hande ſtandeth, nigh to hym a blacke Cowe: and on his left, a lame, a weake, and an ill

fauored Mare. Rounde about the ſtone, ſtandeth a great heape of clounes, or countrie carels. Then commeth the Duke on, with a greate noumber on horſebacke, all in very good, and in decent order, hauyng twelue enſignes borne there before them, of which one is more large, and more apparent then the others, whiche is borne by a certaine Earle there, by eſpeciall priueledge: ſo now approcheth this Archduke, cladde like a ſhepherd, vnto ye ſtone, where as is plaſte this carell, who incontinentlie crieth out with a loude and haute voice, demaunding what hée might be, that cometh in ſuch pompous, & in ſuch proude arraie? to whom the others aunſwere, that ſtande there about hym, he is the Prince, and gouernour of this countrie. Then thundereth out this vilaine, as harde as he maie poſſiblie: is he a iudge rightuous? will he doe iuſtice to all men? will he ſeke the aduauncement, and commoditie of the countrie? will he defende it, and ſaue it from the enemie? Is he a free man, and of a free houſe borne? Is he valiante, and worthie of honour? Is he a true chriſtian man, and will he defende the faithe? Thei all aunſwere yea, he is, and euer ſhall be. Then beginneth he againe a freaſhe to demaunde: by what right maie he diſpoſſeſſe me of this place? Then aunſwereth the Earle, that bare that beſte enſeigne, thou ſhalt receiue for this thy place, ſixtie Duckettes of golde, this Cowe alſo, and Mare, in like ſort ſhall be thine, alſo the Princes roabe, whiche he laſte of al did of, finally thy familie, and kinne ſhall all bee free, from all kinde of taxes, or paimentes, what ſoeuer. This carell then giueth the Prince, a ſmall buffette on the cheke, admoniſhing him to be an vpright, and a vertuous Iudge, and ſo leauyng the ſtone, giueth place vnto the duke, carriyng thence with him his cowe, and his Mare. Then alighteth the Duke from his horſe, and goeth vp on the ſtone, where hauyng a ſworde naked in his hande, brandiſhyng it, tourneth to euery parte of the ſtone, promiſyng to miniſter true, and indifferent

iuſtice to all men. This dooen, one bringeth hym water to drinke, out of a poore labourers, or houſebandmannes cappe, whereof hauyng taſted, he deſcendeth incontinently, thereby makyng ſhewe, that he vtterly condemneth th'uſe of wine. Then taketh he his horſe again, and with hym all his companie, paſſyng thence to ſome Churche, where thei heare Maſſe, after whiche he diſpoileth hym ſelf, of his ragde, and ill fauoured robes, puttyng on hym apparell of Princely eſtate, and honour, then dineth he, and his nobilitie, in moſte ſumptuous maner, after whiche he retourneth to the ſaied ſtone againe, hearyng the complaintes, and greifes of all men, doyng them iuſtice, without percialitie. And theſe are the Ceremonies obſerued, in the creation of this Duke. An other cuſtome haue thei, in the puniſhyng of thefte, whiche is no leſſe cruell, then in truthe vniuſte, eſpecially to be vſed emōg chriſtian men: for hauing any ſmall ſuſpition, or ſurmiſe in this caſe, againſt any man, thei doe hym immediately to death, without any farther triall, and the third daie after, thei examine the witneſſes, & al ſuche as can in that caſe giue euidence, as diligently, and as ſtraitely as thei can poſſibly: ſo as if that in th'ende, he in déede be thereof founde culpable, then hangeth he on the gibbotte, vntill he rotte of by peeces: but contrary wiſe, if thei finde him innocente, then take thei hym thence, honouryng hym with glorious, and with ſolemne obſequies, with many praiers alſo, & almoſe, for his ſoules health. And as thoſe of Carinthia, dealte this ſtraightly with their Thieues, ſo alſo ſome other Countries, haue dooen their paine to foſter theim, as the Egiptians, of whom A. Gel. concernyng Lib. 11. nocti. Atticarum. this matter writeth. Alſo the Lacedemoniens, whiche permitted their children to robbe, and ſteale euery where, to the intent thei might bee the more hardie, and apte there to in warre. How bee it Draco, that gaue lawes to the Atheniens, ordeined that all kinde of theft what ſo euer, ſhould be puniſhed with none other paine,

then death: by meanes whereof, Solon after ſaied, that he had written that his lawe with blood, whiche he mitigated, doyng it to be more eaſie, and fauourable. That maner, whiche nowe is ordinarily eche where vſed, to hang, or to ſtrangle thieues on the gibbotte, was firſt ordained 
                     •
                  y the Emperour Frederike the thirde, as writeth that famous, and excellent L. Viues, in the ſeuenth booke of his diſciplines.
            
            
               ¶ In what parte of the Zodiacke the Sunne, and the Moone, as alſo the other Planettes, were in the creation of the worlde, and when the firſt were made, of the beginnyng alſo of yeres, and tymes. Chapt. 15.
               
                  AS ſaieth the Philoſopher, man naturally is curious to ſearche, & to knowe thynges, and there to bendeth he his full force, and indeuour, leſſe contentyng him ſelf with theſe thinges, whiche onely concerne hym, but farther he toileth with meruailous preſumption, to haue ſome feelyng, of thynges impoſſible, or at leaſte very difficill. Neither hath this his labour, been all together in vaine, though it ſome times haue alſo failed, of the deſired ende, for that by inceſſante contemplation, and continuall ſtudie, ſunderie thynges haue been founde out, whiche ſemed bothe ſupernaturall, and impoſſible, as the motions of the heauens, the true courſe bothe of ſtarres, and Planetes, their influences, and forces, with others the like, and ſemblable: emong whiche is alſo compriſed, that whiche I now muſte ſpeake of, to wete, in what tyme of the yere, and in what daie, the worlde firſte beganne, or to ſpeake it better, when, or at what ſeaſon, God firſte created the worlde: where tyme 
                     ••
                  irſte began, and the yere to be accompted, in what place

the Sunne was, when he firſt began his courſe, the Moon alſo with the other Planettes, Ariſtotle as with hym, many other Philoſophers, paſte theſe ſcruples, accoumptyng neuer on them, not taſting at all, or ſauouring of our faith, demyng that the worlde had béen in deede eternall, neuer to haue begun, or, neuer to haue endyng: but theſe others, that were not ignoraunt of theſe thynges, knowyng by iuſte accompte, when the worlde firſte did begin, are deuided into twoo ſundrie, and cōtray opinions. Some emong theim ſaied, that in that verie inſtante, when the worlde firſt was created, the Sunne was preciſely in the firſte degree of Aries, whiche was aequinoctium Vernale whiche happened at that tyme, in the eleuenth of March. But others again contrary, that the world had his beginnyng, the Sunne beyng founde directly, in the firſt of Libra, whiche tyme wee call aequinoctium Autumnale, and commonly chaunſeth in the thirtenth, or fowertenth of September. And of this opinion, were certaine Egiptiēs, Arabies, and Grekes, as recordeth Linconienſis, in a certain treatiſe of his, dedicated to Pope Clement, and Vincentius in his mirrour hiſtoriall. Thoſe that reſted on this opinion, for their proofe vſed this reaſon, whiche howe weake it is, and what ſmalle ſhewe of trothe it hath, ſhall bee here after, in place conueniente ſaied: For ſaie thei, all fruites on the yearth were ripe now, and in their perfection, the yearth of verie neceſſitie, was then alſo moſte perfecte, alledgyng for their proofe, theſe woordes Deute. 32. out of Deuteronomie, God in the beginnyng made al thinges abſolute, and perfecte. Others ſome againe affirme, that then was the firſte beginnyng, bothe of tymes, and yeres, when the daie was of moſte howers, and at his longeſte, whiche is at the entrie of the Sunne into Cancer, aboute the eleuenth, or twelueth of Iune. Iulius Firmicus, an aucthour aunciente. and of greate aucthoritie in Aſtronomie, ſaieth in the beginnyng of his thirde booke, that in the firſte creation of the worlde, the Sonne was

in the fiftenth degrée of Leo, in whiche ſigne he hath his greateſte dignitie, or honour, eſpecially for that it is termed, the houſe of the Sunne, and in this ſorte diſcourſeth he of the other Planetes. But the moſte reaſonable opinion of all others, and moſte agrean
                     •
                  e aſſuredly vnto the truthe, is that, when bothe the worlde, and the heauens, were firſt made, the Sunne was then founde in the firſt pointe of Aries, whiche mighte bee in the Monethe of Marche, the Somer then beginnyng to come, and growe on. Whiche aſſertion (beſides other likelihoodes, that we alſo ſhall remember) is alſo confirmed by the moſte parte of auncient writers, as well Chriſtians, as alſo Heathēs, emong whiche, we finde Sainct Hierome, Ambroſe, and Baſill, with others, whiche all togither accorde, that the firſte beginnyng was, as is aboue ſaied, in aequinoctio veris. And although it might appeare, that there was yet ſome little difference betwixte them, for that ſome will, that this woorke was wrought in Marche, but ſome a little after, in the Monethe of Aprill. Yet here on thei well agree, that it was in the Spring, as alſo in the Equinoxe whiche preſently is in Marche, for, as is ſaied, the Equinoxe is not euer firme. For Chriſt hymſelf died the .xxv. daie of Marche, and at that time, was the daie, euen with the night, and now this equation, is but about the eleuēth of Marche, whence it well maie be preſumed, that in the beginnyng, it was in Aprill. For whiche cauſe ſome, accompted Aprill for the firſt monethe, other ſome March, & yet thei all wil ſaie, that then this frame was wrought when that the Sunne firſte entered into the ſigne of Aries, and that then is this Equinoxe, whiche well is proued by the ſcriptures, where it is ſaied, that in the Monethe Niſan, whiche with vs is Marche, the yere began to haue his firſt daie of accompte. Vincent alſo in the beginnyng Exodus. 12. of his mirrour hiſtoriall ſaieth, that the aunciēt Hebrues, beganne their yere in the Monethe of Marche, for that then was the Equinoxe, ſaieth he, whence, and

from whiche tyme, the worlde tooke his beginning. Certain Gentiles alſo, defende, and maintain, with like care this opinion, as Elpaco in his treatiſe, written of Aſtrologie, where he ſaieth that the Chaldeans, excellente Aſtronomers, ſuppoſed that the firſte daie, in whiche the worlde was created, the Sunne entered into the firſt degree of Aries, whiche opinion is maintained of moſt part of Aſtronomers, as well aunciente, as newe, and late writers. When then the Sunne was founde in that poincte, then alſo was the beginnyng of the yere: then alſo the firſte daie, for before that was none other, neither can it bee denied, but that the firſte daie that was made, was alſo the firſte daie in the accoumpt of yeres, for that before it was neither tyme, or yeres. For whiche cauſe onely, this ſigne of Aries, is of all the others reckened the firſt, and foremoſte. And who ſo will iudge, and diuine of thynges to come, he erecteth his figures, calculatyng continually, from that fore ſaied poincte, or beginnyng of the worlde. And farther it is plain, by an euident coniecture, that God when he firſt created the wide, & waſt worlde, that he then alſo plaſte the Sunne (as is ſaied) in Aries, as maie well be gathered of that, whiche is fore ſaied, in the chapiter, of the daie and tyme, in whiche our ſauiour ſuffered, to wete, that this Planete was in that place, in the creatiō, that he alſo was in at the regeneration, whē Chriſt hymſelf ſuffered his death, and his paſſion, which happened, as is there ſaied, in this Equinoxe, ſo often to fore remembred. It alſo ſemeth credible, that it therfore was ſo, for that thoſe that haue any felyng in the ſphere, or otherwiſe in Aſtronomie, ſhall well perceiue, that the Sunne beyng entered into this ſigne of Aries, makyng Or in the contrary poincte the firſte of Libra. there his reuolution, by the ſpace of one whole daie, no corner is on the yearth, whiche he in that daie ones, leaueth, or to comforte, or ſolace, with his preſence, whiche at no tyme chaunſeth in any other poinctes of the Zodiake, for that where ſoeuer he els bee, ſome place is on

the yeareh, where the Sunne is not in that daie ſéen: but beyng in this degree (as is ſaied) or in his oppoſite, no parte of the worlde is there, whiche in that daie, ones ſeeth hym not. And it ſemeth reaſonable, that the Sūne when he firſte of all beganne his circuite, that he there, and in ſuche place ſhould beginne, where he might viſite euery the partes of the whole worlde, and that, that, rather ſhould bee, in the firſte of Aries, then of Libra, it of parte is euidente by that, whiche wee haue ſaied, that in the daie of the death, or Paſſion of our ſauiour, this Planet was in that verie ſame place, in whiche he alſo hath a certain perticuler dignitie. Reſtyng then on this poinct as on a truthe aſſured, thei doubtles are deceiued, that imagined the worlde firſte beganne, in the Equinoxe of September, though it pleaſed theim to ſaie, that then all fruites were ripe, and in ſeaſon, whiche if we well conſider, is nothyng ſo in deede: for when thei are ripe in the Northe parte of the worlde, thei nothyng at all, then are ſo in the Southe, but in verie truthe, and aſſuredlie the contrary. For whiche cauſe, I neither would leane to the opinion of thoſe, whiche ſaied, that in this Equinoxe of Marche (whiche is in the ſame beginnyng, whiche we in deede approue) was, or ought to bee, the entrie therefore of the worlde, for that then, & at that tyme is the ſpring, for that flowers alſo, and graſſe eche where then begin to come that then alſo all beaſtes, acquainte them with their matche, for if it be to vs, as it can not be gainſaied, the commyng and beginnyng of all graine, and graſſe, it then is Winter, or at the leaſte Autumne, to theſe that inhabite the Southe partes of the worlde. Theſe then maie ſuffice, with the aucthorities aboue remembred, to ſatiſfie and contente, the reaſonable in this matter although the yere Romaine, whiche onely now is vſed, take his beginnyng of the firſte daie of Ianuarie: whiche thyng happened by the fonde deuotion, and ſuperſtition onely, whiche the Gentiles vſed towardes their God Ianus,
                  
doing their yere to beginne by his name, as the chriſtians did theirs, from the natiuitie of Chriſte, although then in deede, the yere had not his beginnyng. The Romaines alſo beganne their yere in Marche, as writeth M. Varro, and Macrobius in his firſte booke, Ouide alſo in Faſtis, with many others. Farther GOD ſhewed to vs his greate fauour, and goodnes, in that it pleaſed hym, to place our firſte parentes, Eue and Adam, in theſe Septentrionall partes of the worlde, after their exile, and detrution out of Paradiſe terreſtriall, whiche bothe entered into this worlde, at the firſte commyng of the Spryng, findyng the yearth then greene, and flowred, the aire verie ſwete; temperate; and pleaſaunte, the better to ſolas, and comforte them in their miſerie; and nakedneſſe, whiche at none other tyme of the yere, could ſo well haue chaunſed them. But paſſe we this matter now, as ſufficiently proued; and ſpeake we of the other Planetes, eſpecially of the Moone, as one emong the others of moſte force, and vertue, whiche as ſome ſuppoſe in the firſte daie, or inſtaunte of her creation, was placed by diuine prouidence, in coniunction with the Sunne: others ſaie that ſhe was then at full, and in direct oppoſition Sainct Auguſtine cōmenting on the fifte of Geneſis, remembreth bothe, theſe remembered opinions, ſaiyng: that thei that maintaine, that ſhe then was in oppoſition, argue that it was not reaſon, in that her firſte creation, that ſhe either ſhould lacke, or bée defectuous in any thyng. The others ſaie that it is more credible, that ſhe in coniunction beganne there her firſte daie, ſo increaſyng, accordyng to our accompte in her age: but to abridge this controuerſie, in myne opinion, ſhe at her firſt beyng was in plaine, and perfecte oppoſitiō with the Sunne, whiche opinion is moſte receiued of the learned. Auguſtine in the place aboue alledged, and Rabanus alſo on the twelueth of Exodus, arreſt them bothe on this opinion, accordyng with that whiche is redde in the ſcriptures, where as it is ſaied, that God made twoo excellent

lightes, the one to lende comforte, and brightnes to the daie, the other and the leſſe, to ſhine in the night. But in that inſtant it ſelf, when the Sunne firſt appered, he gaue light on the ſodaine, to the one halfe of the worlde, ſo that in that halfe, it preſently was daie, the other beyng darck, and couered with the ſhadowe of the yearth. How bee it, it ſemeth reaſonable, that on that other moitie of the earth, cladde as is ſaied with the night, and darknes, the Moone there ſhould doe her charge, and office, in illightnyng it, ſo as thei bothe were created at one, and the ſame inſtant, ſo thei bothe alſo might execute their office at one inſtante, the one giuyng light, and ſolace to the daie, the other not obſcuryng, or darkenyng the night, euenſo, and in ſuche ſorte, as hath in deede the texte, for then was verified that parte of ſcripture, the whole worlde through lightened, bothe on the one ſide, and the other. And contrarywiſe, if the Moone then had been founde in coniuction, then this common light could not haue chaunſed, vntil fiftene daies after, and farther three, or fower daies muſte alſo firſte haue paſte, before her light could haue béen ſeen, or perceiued any where, and the ſame ſhould haue been a verie ſmall light alſo, as that whiche we ſee, when ſhe fower, or fiue daies is of age. Wherefore theſe two in concluſion aſſuredly, gaue light to the whole worlde, at one inſtante in the heginnyng. And againe I ſaie, the Moone then beyng in oppoſition with the Sunne, of neceſſitie had her beyng then in the contrary ſigne, in Libra, which thing thus ſtā
                  dyng, ſhe executed that daie, the effectes of the Sunne, viſityng euery parte of the worlde, in that one daies courſe, whiche to haue doen had been then impoſſible, hadde ſhe been plaſte in any other parte of the Zodiake, by meanes whereof this opinion hath more plaine, and more euident ſhewe of truthe, though Iulius Firmicus gladly would inferre, that this Planette in her firſte creation, founde her firſte place, in the fiftenth of Cancer, where in deede, ſhe hath her greateſt dignities, of whiche opinion is alſo Macrobius
                  
in his firſte booke de ſomnio Scipionis. As concernyng the other Planettes, it ſhould bee more difficill for me to vtter herein a truthe, then in any reſpecte profitable, to hym that would faine knowe it, for which cauſe I leaue to dwell here on, in many. How bee it Iulius Firmicus, in his ſeconde booke alleaged, hardeneth hym ſelf to aſſigne them their places, in whiche at the firſte, euery of them was, as Saturnꝰ in Capricorno, Iupiter in Sagitario. Marsin Scorpione, Venus in Libra, Mercurius in Virgine, whiche are the ſignes, in whiche thei haue greateſte force, and dignitie, ſignes appoincted to theſe Planettes, ſor their houſes. Of whiche mynde herein, is alſo Elpacus, as well remembreth Ioannes Agricanus, in his ſummarie intituled Agricane. Macrobius alſo in his booke aboue alleaged De ſomnio Scipionis, accordeth plainly with Iulius Firmicus, who lotteth to them, the ſame ſignes aboue remembred: although others ſome haue ſuppoſed the contrary, and that thei all in that inſtante, were in coniunction with the Sunne, whiche opinion the Mouncke walterus, in his treatiſe of the ages of the worlde, affirmeth that the aunciente Indiens helde for moſt aſſured. But in truthe I ſuppoſe, that GOD. ſo plaſte, and ordered theſe ſtarres, eche one in his place diſtaunte, and ſeuered from other, not méetyng in any coniunction with the Sunne, to the intent that euery of them in that firſte daie, might with his glitteryng beames, giue light vnto the yearth, whiche had béen impoſſible for them to haue dooen, if thei had béen in coniunctiō with the Sūne, for that being nigh vnto hym, within the ſpace, I meane, of certaine degrées, he ſo couereth, and drouneth their little light, that thei or hardly, or not at all might haue béen ſéen from the yearth But how, or in what ſorte, ſo euer it were beyng created, and framed, accordyng to the will, and pleaſure of GOD it ſufficeth, ſaieth Saincte Auguſtine, that thei were by hym in any ſorte perfected, and framed.
            
            
               
               That men maie take example of Birdes, Wormes, and other creatures, to liue a iuſt, and a vertuous life. Chap. 16.
               
                  AS we haue, aboue by occaſion, ſome thing ſpokē of theſe creatures, though to ſome other intent, and purpoſe, ſo nowe ſhall wee breflie, and in fewe ſpeake, how their example maie bee profitable, to mans bodie no leſſe, then to his vnderſtandyng and minde. For aſſuredly who ſo diligently and attentiuely, will conſider as well the nature, as the properties alſo of beaſtes, he thence ſhall not onelie take good inſtructions of life, for the better preſeruation, and maintenaūce of the bodie, but leſſons alſo to frame, and perfect his maners. Whence is it that manne liueth not in peace with his neighbour, ſeyng the ametie, and concorde, of beaſtes together, how they accompanie, and ioigne in one, in euery kinde, defending theim ſelues to their vttereſt, from the force of any other? How is it, that man ſhameth not, to liue a trifelyng, and an idle loyterer, conſideryng howe painfully and buſely the poore Ante toileth, in the ſomer gathering her prouiſion and ſtore for the winter? What ſubiectes are thei that doe not true ſeruice and honour to their Prince, conſideryng the true loue, and obedience, of the litle Bée towardes her ſoueraigne? Why take not theſe publike weales, whiche haue no Prince, but liue in cōmon, example to liue quietly, with out grudge, or mutinie, of the foreſaide litle antes, whiche dwell together in greate multitudes, with good order, doyng iuſtice, eche one, to the other? And Princes on the other ſide, why alſo aduiſe they theim not, with what lenitie, and curteſie, they ought ſtill to vſe their ſubiectes eſpecially when thei behold the Kyng of the Bées, for no cauſe to greue or offende any of the others? Greate Perſonages,

and noble men, maie learne an example of humility by the Camell, whiche then ſtoopeth, and kneleth when he ſhall be charged. The good and loyall huſbande, may learne to ſchole himſelf, in the rules of chaſtitie, by birdes, by the Turtell I meane and by the Doue, whiche both, the male, as well as alſo the female, for none other cauſe then death, what ſo euer, ſeuer or diſioigne, hauing once acquainted theim ſelues together. Farther it is alſo written of the Turtle, that hauyng once loaſt by anie occaſion her mate, that ſhe neuer after chuſeth, or lotteth to her any other. Saincte Ambroſe counſeleth all vertuous widowes to imitate this example of continencie in the Turtle. And here in moſt beaſtes excéede vs in perfection: among whom, as ſone as the femal hath once conceaued, ſhe neuer ſéeketh or deſireth againe, the male in long tyme after. They alſo ſerue vs for examples in temperancie, for commonly thei wil eate no more then nature aſketh, ne ſléepe they more, then neceſſitie requireth. To defende maintaine, and well to order our houſes, to be merie, and liberall towardes our famely, and charge, the Cocke well inſtructeth vs in this place with his example: for he geueth out again of his owne mouth meate to his hennes, and farther to cheriſhe, and keepe theim, leaueth not to expoſe hymſelfe to euerie kinde of daunger. The greate obligation of all children to wardes their parentes, and in what ſorte thei ought, both to ſerue, and ſuccour theim, the Storke moſt plainlie, and moſt euidētly ſhe weth vs, whiche lodge in their neaſtes, foſter, and prouide for, their olde, their weake, and their foible parentes, as thei by them were foſtered and fedde in their youth. Why ſhameth not man to fainte through feare or timiditie, conſideryng the Lions prowis, and inuincible courage? Faithe, amitie, with the perpetuall recordation or memory of a good turne, reaſt, or dwell cōtinually in the dogge, whiche neuer forgetteh his maiſter, whom he hath ſerued, loueth, and falloweth hym,

neuer leauyng to be thanckful, for ye breade, that he hath receiued. Man that would profite hymſelfe, by the vſe of an other mannes goodes, without his hurte, or domage, muſt ſo there in learne to ordre and beare hym ſelfe, as doth the litle Bée whiche draweth Honie out of the flowers without offēce, or annoy, in any wiſe doen to them. The order and meane that man ſhoulde vſe, for the preſeruation of his health, is not only geuen vs of one beaſt, but ſufficiently of many, which knowe what foode may annoie, or greue theim, chaungyng from place to place, as occaſion, and tyme of the yere requireth, inhabityng places agreyng to their complexion, and nature, paſſyng man here in, as alſo in all other thinges. Whie refuſeth manne to learne, and to be inſtructed in theſe thinges, of whiche he is ignorant, hauyng vnderſtandyng, and euery his ſenſes? Whie leaueth he any thing leſſe aſſaide, or vnatempted? the Elephante practiſeth that which is taught hym, the Dogge by paine becommeth ſkilfull in many thinges, and the birde in fine by long watche, is taught to prate, or to ſpeake. Who ſo hireth the Nighttingale with her diuerſitie of notes, eake alſo manie other birdes like pleaſaunt and ſweete, how is it that he leſſe pleaſeth in the ſkille of muſike? Why practiſeth not manne to bee exquiſite in all kinde of buildynges, conſideryng how artificially the litle Swallowe frameth to her a lodgyng, with what diuerſitie of matter ſhe fortifieth, and ſtrenghneth it? What better proportion is vſed in Geometrie, then that whiche vſeth the litle poore Spider? what Aſtrologian diuineth better of the chaūge of weather then doth the Ante, or the fiſhe which is called Vranoſcopos (as hath Galen) whoſe eye ſo ſtandeth, Vranoſcopos a fiſhe hauyng but one eye. that the euermore loketh vpwardes. Why prognoſticate not men, and why iudge thei not of theſe matters? How many other excellencies, and perfections are in beaſtes, of whiche menne haue ſome learned, and daily yet do learne? The firſte inuention to make holes, or paſſages

through the yerth, as alſo the firſte knowledge of that place to be habitable, manne receaued at the beginnyng from the Badger and the Foxe The maner, and facion, to twiſt and make ſilke, man hath learned, and receaued of the little worme, whiche in latine is called commonly Seres, by meanes whereof we now twiſt woll and other thinges. After this of the Spider, manne alſo learned to ſpinne thréede, and of hym to make Nettes, to deceaue, and take birdes. Of beaſtes alſo hath manne learned to ſwimme in the water: for no one is there of them, that ſwimmeth not, but mā naturally vnapte therto, by long paine ſome thing profiteth there in. Howe we by theim are ſkilled: in ſome experimētes in phiſicke, is els where ſaide, as alſo ſome what, of the alteration, and chaunge of the weather: and yet on theim féede we onely, in our neceſſitie, and hunger, in ſuche ſorte that I knowe not howe we poſſibly might leaue theim. Of their ſkinne, heare, and wolle we frame to vs apparel, from ſtraunge countries thei bring to vs, what ſo we haue néede of, and being ſo neceſſarie, force man there to ſeke theim. They labour, and turne the earth, whēce we reape our breade and moſt parte of other fruictes, ſo that they be the chefe ſtaie, and ſuſtentation of mans life, and althogh thei bee ouerlaboured by vs, beaten, and hardly vſed, yet neuer leaue thei to be obedient, to knowe, and to followe vs. In battaile oftentimes, they not onely fight, but die for vs, and in tyme of peace, they ſerue in euerie our vſes. But ſpeake we now how thei profite, the minde, or the ſoule, a matter, then the other of greater weight, and importance. Now whence then ſhall man, take better, or more examples, for vertuous life, or perfection in maners, thē he may from many, and ſundry kindes of beaſtes? All theſe vertues, which philoſophers haue ſo carefully leaft vs, are founded on ſimilitudes, and parables of beaſtes: Oratours to perſwade drawe from theim compariſons, as alſo all others that haue well, and eligantly written.

GOD hymſelfe, and his ſainctes, moſte vſually in holy wréete, and moſt commonly inſtructe vs, by the maners and conditions, of rude, and brute beaſtes, leadyng vs to perfection, and integritie of life, willyng manne to bée prudent, as is the Serpent, ſimple alſo as is the Doue, meke and gentle as is the Lambe, ſtrong again and conſtante as is the Lion. This then by the examples, of mute, and dull beaſtes, we are taught to be men reſonable, and ſpirituall. We alſo finde many offices, and eſtates of the Churche, applied, and compared to beaſtes, accordyng to their propertie. By the Oxe (as hath Sainct Auguſtine, on the ſeconde of Ihon) are ſignified theſe that publiſhe, and preache, the ſacred ſcriptures. And accordyng to this interpretation ſaithe he, the Prophetes, and the Apoſtles, were reputed as Oxen, but ſuche as did labour, and huſebande our ſoules, ſowyng, and plantyng in theim, the true worde of God. Saincte Paule, and alſo Salomon in his prouerbes ſaieth: thou ſhalt not mouſell the mouth of the Oxe that trauaileth. The holy doctours and preachers of the woorde, whiche with their lawes, and doctrine, gouerne, and defende the Churche are efteſones termed by the name of Dogges, whiche Saincte Gregorie affirmeth, writyng on theſe woordes of Iob: Quorum nō dignabar patres ponere cū canibus gregis mei. The ſame Saincte Gregorie, alſo moueth vs to a contemplatiue life, if not for other cauſe, yet by yt ſole example, and imitation of the goate, which continually climeth vppe, in to high and haute places, paſſyng as it were there hys tyme in contemplation, vtteryng to that purpoſe theſe woordes of Leuiticus: out of the troope lette the Goate be offered. And againe he ſaieth that the true preachers ſhould imitate the Cocke, groundyng on theſe wordes of Iob, where he ſaieth: who hath geuen intelligence to the Cocke? adding, that as the Cocke, ſo preache they, in the darkenes, and in the ſhaddowe of this life, the light and cōforte, of the life to come, wakyng vs with their admonitions,

and remouing vs from ſleape, criyng and ſaiyng continually with Saincte Paule, the night is paſte, and the daie at hande. And an other ſaieth, it is tyme that we ariſe, and forgeate againe to ſleape, looke abrode ye iuſt, and ſinne not. The true, the holy, and the immaculate Churche, is ſemblably campared alſo to a Doue, for as hath Salamon in Canticis, O how faire, and beautifull art thou, O thy eyes, the eyes of a very Doue. Farther we ſée, that of fower Euangeliſtes, thrée of theim were figured by three beaſtes. If I woulde dwell longer in thys matter, I ſhould haue muche to doe, and ſhould parcaſe wearie alſo the reader. But aboue all other examples, that of our ſauiour, and redemour, Ieſus Chriſte is notable, whiche alſo woulde be figured by a beaſte, as is euident by Sainct Ihon, in his Apocalypſe ſaiyng: the Lion of the race of 
                     
                        •
                     uda is victorious. And Dauid in his Pſalmes ſaieth, he is raiſed as a Liō: with many ſuch others long to remember: as S. Matthewe where he ſaieth, O Hieruſalem, Hieruſalē, how often times would I haue gathered thy children together, euen as the Henne clocketh her Chickens vnder her winges but thou wouleeſt not. Euen ſo then as Chriſte compareth his workes, to the properties of beaſtes, ſo ſhall man doe well to receaue inſtructions by theim, the better thence to frame, and more vertuouſly his life. And on the other ſide what ſhame and infamie is it to man, to ſee howe beaſtes perfectly followe euery one their nature, & man the ſole and onely creature, that ſauereth of reaſon, ſo much abuſeth that ſuperexcellent gifte lente hym: for he who onely ſhould honour God moſt, offendenth ſtil his maieſtie far aboue al the others, neglectyng, and abuſing his graces continually: in ſuche ſorte that ſome beaſtes there are, of whom man ſhould rather take example, then of ſome men that liue preſently among vs: for more feling haue they of iuſtice, and leſſe offende they in euerie reſpecte, then man which knoweth, or ſhould do, what is his duetie.

And therfore ſaith god by the mouth of Eſaie, the Oxe knoweth his lorde and maiſter, the Aſſe alſo her Cribbe or Maunger: but Iſrael knoweth him not, nether will his people vnderſtande hym.
            
            
               Why triumphes were firſt vſed in Rome, as againe how many they were, that there alſo triumphed, what a Triumphe is, and that there is twoo ſortes of theim. Chap. 17.
               
                  MOrally to ſpeake, and after the maner of man, two thinges principally moue vs to attempte greate and dangerous affaires, in peace as well, as alſo in warre. The firſte is renoume, and honour, the ſecond none other, then vtilitie, and gaine. The noble harte, and valiaunt courage chiefly deſireth, and affecteth the firſt, the minde abiecte, baſe, and vngentle, gréedily hunteth for gaine, and ſaliry. Cicero in an oration of his pro Archia poeta, ſaieth, that we all are drawen with deſire of commendation, and who ſo in déede is moſt famous, and honorable, is moſt, and aboue others ſtirred there with, demaunding none other paiment, or guerdon, of his vertue, then onely glory, and praiſe of the people. The ſame Cicero againe in an other pro Milone, ſaieth, that the true, wiſe, and valiaunt gentleman, ſo muche toileth not at all for wage, and gaine, as he doeth for honour, which followeth his paines. Whiche thing well conſidered by the auncient Romaines, they aſſuredly more ſought then all other nations, beſides their ſalary, to honour, and extolle, with all kinde of reuerence, ſuche as had doen any notable, and vertuous exploites. In ſuche ſorte, that in ſhorte time was found in Rome, more ſtore of excellent Capitaines, and prudent gouernours, then in any other

place, through the worlde whatſoeuer, by meanes wherof thei after got the vniuerſall empire. For which cauſe, aſwell for exāple of this tyme preſent, as alſo to content the curious in antiquities, I thought it good in this place, to diſcourſe of the true order, & maner, which the Romaines vſed, in giuyng fame, & renoume, to their capitaines victorious. And for that emong al other honours, the triumph was the greateſt, we will there begin, letting the reader to vnderſtande, that a triūphe was a forme of entrie, or welcome into Rome, doen to ye capitain generall, with moſte pōpe, & ſolēnitie, that was poſſible to be doen in any wiſe to man: & although theſe triūphes wer much vſed in Rome, yet wer thei not the firſt inuentors of thē For Diodorus Siculus, & Plinie ſaie, that Denis, of the antiquitie, Diod. Sic. li. 6. Plinie lib. 2. called Dionis, or other wiſe pater liber, was the firſt that euer triūphed in the world. It ſemeth alſo that the people of Carthage, vſed ſome tymes in like ſorte to triumphe: for as Iuſtine recordeth, emong other thynges that were writtē of Haſdrubal, he fower tymes in his life triumphed magnifically. We in maner ſemblable reade, of the triumphes of the kinges of Egipt, but principally of the kynge Soſeſtris. How be it to ſpeake here in truely, theſe triumphes were neuer els where ſo ſolemnized, as they were at tymes in Rome, for on that daie, that any Capitaine there triumphed, the whole multitude ceſte from euery kinde of labour, as not lawfull for theim at that tyme to do any thing what ſo euer. The inhabitantes then of euery the townes adiacent, came runnyng to Rome, to beholde this ſpectacle: then was all the citie ouer, the Temples, the gates, and the ſtreates, yea and the windowes hangde eche where with clothe of Golde and of Siluer, with ſilkes, with boughes, with flowers odoriferus, and with all other coſtly, and ſumptuous ſightes poſſible, which might geue any token, or note of ioie. The Senate, the Préeſtes, and Nobilitie of Rome, with al the other citiſens that were of any countinance, went

out into the fieldes honorably appareled, to receaue hym that triumphed then entryng into Rome, all clad in purple, and crouned with Laurel, moūted in a coache of gold, drawē with iiij. white ſtedes. All the captiues marchyng before hym, attired as bond men, with their heades ſhauen: and the generall, or kyng hym ſelf, that was at that tyme taken, went nigheſt before the coache of any one other. His owne Souldiars entred the Citie in good order, euery of theim hauyng in his hand a Laurell. Before hym alſo paſte other Chariotes, or Waggons all charged with armour taken from the ennimie, & with theim alſo paſt all the treaſure, and plate that he had gotten, as well of Siluer, as of Golde, all the money, and Iuels of what ſort ſo euer, and with the ſame alſo, but a parte, al giftes and preſentes, that he had receaued of any princes or cities, frendes, or aſſiſtātes to the people of Rome. Before hym alſo paſte, greate Caſtels, Fortreſſes, and Engines of warre, moſt ſkilfully framed, or facioned in woodde, repreſentyng the tounes, and holdes that he had raſed: and in marching made ſhewes, and countenances of battaile, but eſpecially of ſuche, as had chaunſed theim in that voiage, doone in ſuche ſorte, and ſo repreſentyng the thing in deede, that it made theim to tremble that attentiuely behelde it. And theſe ſhewes were ordinarily ſo many, and ſo diuers, that the triumphe commonlie continued full three daies, to the intente that all theſe thinges might orderly be doen. In euery triumphe were many ſtraunge inuentions (as ſhowes, and pageantes) with others the ſemblable long here to remember. Nether was it lawfull vnto all capitaines, ne yet for all victories, what ſo euer, to triumphe, but certaine notable lawes, and cuſtomes were eſtabliſhed, for which onely, and for none other, the triumphe was graunted. The capitaine that demaunded that honour, entered not at the firſte in to Rome, but the Senate woulde ſende hym an aunſwere thereof vnto Vatican, to wéete, whether they

woulde licence hym to triumphe or not. Firſte no general, or other capitaine, of what condition ſo euer he were mighte at any tyme triumphe, were he not a Conſul, Proconſul, or Dictator, for the triumphe was neuer graunted to man of meaner condition, by meanes wherof it was denied to M. Mercellus, that moſt victoriouſlie conquired, and ſubdued Siracuſa, as alſo to Scipio that ouerranne all Spain. Againe to the obtainyng of this fore ſaide honor, it was alſo requiſite, that the battaile fought with the ennimy ſhould be greate, and daungerous, and that there ſhould be ſlaine therin, a boue fiue thouſande. Of theſe thinges writeth Valerius Maximus. It is alſo written, that Cato, and L. Marius tribunes, ordained a lawe, to dooe ſharpe, and ſeueare, animaduertion on all Capitaines that ſhould make falſe report of the number ſlaine. Neither was it ſufficient to winde the battaile, were it neuer ſo blooddy and dangerous: but he alſo muſt make tributory, and ſubiect the whole prouince, leauyng it quiet, and in peace to his ſucceſſor, bringing alſo home with hym his army victorious. For which cauſe as Liuie recordeth, the triumphe was denied to Titus Manlius, though in truthe he hadde obtained greate victories in Spaine, for that after him thei were forced to ouerrunne the countrie againe, to wage newe battaile, to kepe by force, and defende that whiche before was gotten. For this cauſe alſo Quintus Fabius the greate, triumphed not, though in deede he once had ſubdued all Cāpagna, as alſo recordeth Valerius Maximus. It alſo was the maner that he that triumphed, ſhould inuite to hym that might, the Conſuls to ſupper, which they vtterly (ſuche was the maner) refuſed, for that, at that feaſte, was at no time anie, to whom greater honour was doen then to the triumpher. Theſe triumphes were euer ended in the temple of Iupiter, with in the Capitoll, where he offered vp the whole ſpoile whiche he had taken from the ennimie, where alſo (for greater ſolemnization) publicke aſſemble

was then made. And to the intente that this Capitaine ſhoulde not glory to muche of this honour doen to hym, it is reported that a bonde man ſhould that day be placed by hym, to whom it was permitted to ſkoffe, and deride hym, in ſuche ſorte, and manner, as it beſte ſhould like hym, where of ſundry examples are found in olde hiſtories. But to make more plaine this kinde of triumphe if it be poſſible, we wil remember ſome, but firſt of al that, of Paulus Aemilius, a capitaine Romaine, moſte famous, and valiaunte, to whom, for that he had ſubdued, and taken Perſius king of Macedonie, vtterly ſpoilyng, and waſtyng his countrie, the triumphe was graunted, by common ſuffrage of all men, who as Plutarche reciteth, triumphed in this maner. Firſt of all, the inhabitantes of Rome, as well as of other places nigh adiacente, were that daie ſeen in their moſt ſumptuous, and riche attire, euery of them indeuouring to place himſelf, in ſome tootyng hole, or windowe, the better, and with more eaſe, to beholde this ſpectacle. All the temples in Rome, were on euery ſide open, hangde, and apparelied, with moſte coſtly furniture, with grene boughes, & perfumes, of no ſmal value, the ſtreates alſo were like gaie, and glorious. And for that the multitude of people in the citie, was then infinite, as well of ſtraungers, as alſo of others, a number of ſticklers was appoincted, to make through the ſtreates, eaſie waie, and paſſage, and for that the diuerſitie of ſhewes, were ſuche, and ſo many, neceſſitie conſtrained them, to parte them into three daies: the firſt hardly ſufficed, in good order to bryng in the banners, ſtandardes, and enſignes of the conquered, the Coloſsi, Images, and tables of price, whiche all were brought in on cartes, verie curiouſly depainted, and trimmed. On the ſecond daie came in the armour of the kyng conquered, as alſo of all th'other Macedomens, whiche as thei were riche, bright, and glitteryng, ſo were thei with moſte cunnyng to the ſhe we ordered, and couched on cartes. After theſe cartes

entered three thouſande men in order, bearyng nothyng but money open, and to bee ſeen, and that in houge chargers, and veſſelles of ſiluer, waighyng euery one three talentes at the leaſte, of whiche were three hundred and fiftie in noumber, fower menne lotted to euery veſſell. The others, the reſidue I meane of this three thouſand) brought in cundites ſtreming, moſt artificially wrought with other plate all ſiluer, no leſſe faire, then maſſie, and in paſſyng of theſe companies, in iuſte and ſemely order, thei ended the ſecond daie in moſt pompous ſolemnitie. The thirde daie, euen in the breake, or ſpryng thereof, with the firſte band entered (a ioyous ſigne of conqueſt) infinite flutes, drommes, trumpettes, with others ſuche like Martiall, and warlike inſtrumentes, ſoundyng all togither, not delicately, or ſwetely, but in moſte terrible and cruell maner that was poſſible, in ſuche ſort, as thei preſently ſhould ioigne in battaile: and after them came an hundreth and twentie Kine, all white, hauyng their hornes curiouſly gilted, their bodies couered with certain riche vailes, whiche thei accompted as ſacred or holie, bearyng alſo garlandes of flowers on their heddes, driuen by certaine yonge boies, no leſſe well fauoured, then curiouſly attired, to the place where thei ſhould bee to their goddes Sacrificed, after whom alſo, came other children againe, charged with greate platers of gold, and ſiluer for the Sacrifice. After theſe came others againe, ſeuentie and ſeuen, whiche in veſſelles of golde, carried all the gold that thei had gathered in coigne: after whom came then thei, that carried the greate gobblet, poiſyng fully tenne talentes of gold, whiche Paulus Aemilius had dooen to be made, ſette alſo, and inrichte with ſtones of rare price: and thei that bare theſe veſſels of golde, were ſuche as were nigheſt, and beſte beloued of theſe kinges, to wete, of Antigonus. Seleucus, and other kynges of Macedonie, and eſpecially of Perſius the honourableſte of them. After this followed the couche of the kynge conquered,

with his owne proper armour laied a parte to be ſeen, his diademe, or croune, with his ſcepter roiall, laied in ſemely order, to the vewe, vpon his armour. After his coache came priſoners on foote, the little infauntes, his owne naturall children, and followyng theim, a greate troope of his ſeruauntes, and officers, as maiſters of the houſhold ſecretaries, vſhers, comptrollers, chamberlaines, with others ſuche of his courte, or familie, all weepyng and wailyng, in maner ſo dolorous, ſeyng them ſelues brought nowe into ſuche ſeruitude, and extremitie, that thei moued to compaſſion, all ſuche as beheld them. Of the kynges children there were twoo boies, and one maide, of age yet then ſo yonge, and tēder, that thei were leſſe capable of their infortune, and miſerie, by meanes whereof the people were more moued to pitie, ſorroweyng in ſtraunge maner, to ſee them in that miſerie. In this triumphe, then followed the father, his owne childrē after the vſage of his countrie, cladde all in blacke, who marchte by his countenaunce all amaſed, and fearfull, as in deede he had good cauſe, his preſente eſtate conſidered. Then followed the kyng, ſundrie of his approued friendes, which beholding in that plight, their vnhappie prince brake out into teares, and ſighes, ſo bitterly, that the Romaines themſelues, be wepte that their infortunacie. After theſe folowed one, carriyng certain diademes, whiche ſome auncient cities in Grece, had preſented vnto Aemilius, who immediatly followed in perſone triumphantly, mounted in a chariotte, appareiled with purple Tiſſue, hauyng a bough of Laurell in his hande, with a croune alſo of theſame on his hedde, whom followed his owne ſoldiours, bothe foote menne, and horſe menne, all armed in moſte decente order, holdyng alſo eche of them a Laurell bough in his hande, their enſiegnes, and banners ſoldiour like diſplaied, ſyngyng delicate ſonges, in the honour of their capitaine triumphyng, with many other like matters moſte roiall, and magnificent. This then was the

order of Aemilius his triumphe in Rome. Th'others for the moſt parte followed alſo this order, addyng or diminiſhyng ſome fewe thinges as beſt liked theim, and laſte of all offered vppe the ſpoile or bootie, in the temple of Iupiter with in the Capitoll, where in ſuche forme and maner, as their vaine religion required, they gaue thankes to their Gods, for their victorie obtained. And although in this ſorte thei commonly obſerued their triumphes, yet were there certaine lawes, that of parte limited the maner of theſe triumphes, and that accordyng to the demerites of the triumphant, makyng diſtinction, and difference both of the ſtréetes and gates whereat thei ſhould enter, the tymes alſo, by the Senate were appointed theim, but as touchyng all other thnyges, as ſhewes, plaies, bankettes, and ſuche others, it was lawfull for euery man accordong to his apetite, to inriche, and beautifie his triūphe, as beſt pleaſed him: and as for his Coache he alſo vſed that, as was to hym beſt ſemyng, for it is euident that ſome drewe them with fower white horſes, others ſome with bulles. The greate Pompe when he triumphed for his victories in Africa, he entered Rome, hys Chariote trained with Elephantes. Suetonius recordeth that when Caeſar triūphed, he entred Rome, drawne with fortie Elephantes: in mauer ſemblable came in the Emperour Gordian alſo. And as Flauius writeth the Emperour Aurelius whiche in like maner was alſo king of the Gothes, had his Coache triumphant drawen with wilde Hartes: M. Antonius alſo with Lions. The Romaine capitaines farther vſually accuſtomed, to haue euermore in their triumphant Coache with theim, one childe verie yong; or ſome tymes more: whiche Cicero well remembereth in his oration pro Murena. Some alſo broughte with theim, from the place where thei conquired infinite numbers of ſtraunge and ſauage beaſtes, as Lions, Ounces, Beares, Tigers, Rinocerons, Panthers, Dromadaries, Elephantes, with many ſuch others, as did Titus
                  
and Veſpaſian, as recordeth Ioſephus. Other ſome alſo entered, with moſt diuerſitie of muſicke that was poſſible, vſing as well their inſtrumentes, as their voices, with inſpekable others, ſuche harmonious delectotions: among all which triumphes, ſome were more exquiſite, and more abſolute thē the others, as thoſe of Pompe, and Caeſar, theſe alſo of the two Scipioes, brothers, and in fine theſe of the Emperours, whereof Blondus remembereth in his booke, de Roma triumphante: and as writeth Paulus Oroſius, there triumphed in Rome at ſundrie tymes, thrée hundred, and twenty famous Capitaines, the laſte of whiche all was the Emperour Probus, in whoſe time the Empire firſte beganne to decline. There was alſo vſed in Rome an other kinde of welcome, or ſolemne receauyng, whiche was ſome thing leſſe coſtly, and leſſe honourable then the triumphe, whiche they termed, or called an ouation, which as A. Gellius recordeth, was graū
                  ted vnto Capitaines for their victories, then I ſaie, when ſome one thinge or other failed in theim, ſo that they might not by their cōſtitutions demande the triumphe: as for example, if the Capitaine were nether Conſul, or Proconſul, or had conquired at his pleaſure without any daungerous reſiſtance, or for that the battaile was leſſe cruell and blooddy, or for that he had ſubdued a people barbarous, and of ſmall reputation, or that the warre was enterpriſed, without expreſſe commaundement from the Senate, or for other ſuche like, and ſemblable cauſes. So that in place then of the triumphe, this Ouation was graunted theim, whiche was in ſuche ſorte as followeth. The Capitaine entered Rome on horſe backe, in ſteade of a Coach, and ſome alſo at the firſte came in on foote, A. Gellius lib. 6 cap. 6. noct. At. crouned with hearbes, whiche were offered vnto Venus for that theſe victories were rather eſtemed venerius, then Martial. Neither entered the ſouldiars of theſe capitaines armed, ne yet ſounded they any Trompette, or Dromme which might geue or force ſome Martial noiſe,

but vſed onely flutes, vials, and others, ſwete, & muſicall inſtrumentes. How be it, thei brought with them in opē ſhe we their praie, or bootie, the Senate meting thē without the citie in the fieldes, feaſtyng, praiſing, and cōmendyng them merueilouſly, whiche honour (though in déede farre inferiour to th'other) ſundry honorable perſonages hath both yet ſought, & accepted it. The firſte that in this ſorte was receaued in to Rome, was Poſthumius Libertus, for his victorie obtained againſt the Sabines, and next Marcus Marcellus, for his victorie in Siracuſa. Suetonius writeth, that Octauianꝰ Caeſar, entered Rome alſo with this petie triumph poſt bella Philippica, and his other warres in Sicilie. Plinie writeth that there were ſundry Capitaines, to whom the triumphe beyng denied, contented theimſelues notwithſtandyng with this kinde of Ouation. The cauſe why this little triumphe was termed by this name, was for that the ſacrifice whiche the Capitaine did, or offered that daie, was of a ſheepe, whiche may in latin be called Ouis, but thei that triumphed offered a Bull, ſo that from this worde Ouis, came that other of Ouation, their welcome, or ioious receauyng in to Rome againe. Others ſaie that it tooke his beginnyng of that voice of ye people Oe, or other wiſe Oue, but for that Or it might be ſaied to riſe of the latin word Ouo, whiche is to reioice. Whence alſo is deriued Ouatio and frō thence this Ouation. to reſte here on is a matter of leſſe importance, let it ſuffice that thei called it an Ouation, whether it tooke his denomination, ether of that firſt latin worde Ouis, or els of that other Oe, or Oue. It farther was permitted to all Capitaines triumphant, that thei ſhould ſette vppe their Images, in all Temples, and common places, that they ſhould erect at their pleaſure any Columnes, or pillours, geuyng theim the name of Pillours triumphant, builte of Marble, workyng in theim, in moſte curious manner poſſible, euery their battailes, and victories, to their perpetuall renoume, and honour, a ſhewe of whiche, is yet this daie to be ſeen in Rome. Whiche thinges thei firſte did, followyng, the Trophees of the Grekes, whiche alſo

were doen in ſuche ſorte as followeth. In the very ſame place, where any Capitaine, obtained the victory againſt his ennimy, he did to be ſet vp there a greate, and houge tree, cuttyng from the ſame, all his armes, or boughes, faſtnyng to the ſtocke, the armure of the vanquiſhed, to his perpetuall honour, and renoume, and this called thei a Trophe, of that Greke word Tropi, whiche may ſignifie conuertion, flight, or retraite, for that in that place, the ennimy was put to flight: and this with theſe Trophes, the Romaines firſt acquainted theimſelues, for as Saluſt writeth, Pompe on a time hauyng vāquiſhed the Spaniardes, plaſte his trophes, on the toppes, of the moūtaines Pirenei, whiche vſage by tracte of tyme, grewe after into ſuche eſtimation, that thei made them of ſtone, wronght artificially. How bee it, this thyng ſemeth to bee of more antiquitie, and that other nations alſo before the Grekes vſed it, for it is redde in the fiftenth Chapiter of the firſte booke of the Kynges, that Saul hauing vanquiſhed Agag King of the Amalachites, came after to mounte Carmell, where he erected an arche triumphall, in the onely remembrance, and memorie of his victories. To conclude the honour of a triumphe was ſuche, and ſo eſtimed, that no one other was ſo much deſired in Rome, ſo that their Capitaines refuſed no paine, no perill, or daunger, howe greate, or what ſoeuer, ſo that in fine thei might attaine to that ineſtimable honour. Beſides, theſe Capitaines that thus triumphed, became merueilous riche, by the ſpoiles of the conquered, to theim alſo were geuen, great preſentes by their frēdes: which I onely to this purpoſe, in this place would remember, that princes might hence learne, how to recompenſe, and reward their capitaines, and other ſoldiars what ſo euer, accordyng to their deſertes: for commonly in theſe daies, the daintie coward, and niſe Carpette man, is more largely conſidered of, then thoſe that imploie, both their gooddes, and their liues, in the ſeruice of the Prince, and defence of their countrie.
            
            
               
               ¶ What names the Romaine capitaines gained by their victories. Chapt. 18.
               
                  THe capitaines of Rome, were yet beſides their triumphes, in an other lort honoured, to wete, by names, and ſurnames giuen them, of the people, and prouinces, whiche thei had conquered, and ſubdued, whiche aſſuredly was no ſmall recompēce, for their worthy demerits. Somtimes thei alſo gat additiōs to their names for their onely prowes, or courage in armes, whēce ſundrie families in Rome grewe, moſte famous, and honorable. Firſt we maie ſpeake of the thre Metelli, of which the one (as hath Saluſte, & beſides him others) for hauyng vanquiſhed the kyng Iugurthe, and conquered his countrie, and all the territories of Numidia, was called Numidicus. The other Quintus Metellus, for his victorie obtained againſte the kyng of Macedonie, was ſurnamed Macedonicus, and the laſte Creticus, for that he ſubdued the Iſle of Crete. Before theſe were Marcius Coriolanus and Sergius Fidenatus, of which the firſt gatte that name, for that he ſubdued to the Romaines, the citie Corialis, the ſeconde, for that he brought Tributorie Fidena in Italie. And finally an other Metellus was there named Balearicus, for that he ſubdued to the Romaine Empire, the Iſles Baleares, whiche other wiſe haue this daie to name Maiorque, and Minorque, with the others adioynyng to theim. Lucius Numius, was ſurnamed Acaicus, for that he conquered Acaia, and Corinthe. Brutus alſo for that he ſubdued the Gaules, receiued in recompence, the name of Gaulois. The twoo Scipioes brothers, were alſo honoured with the names, of twoo ſundrie nations, by them vanquiſhed, and ſubdued: the one Africanus, the other Aſiaticus, for that he bothe conquered Antioche,
                  
and Aſia, and was the firſte that euer brought, any Romaine enſiegne into Aſia. After this the other Scipio, ſonne to Paulus Aemelius (of whoſe triumph aboue ſome thyng is ſaied) and nephewe by adoption, vnto the greate Scipio, was alſo as th'other, ſurnamed Africanus, for that he bothe aſſailed, and wōne, the riche, and famous citie of Carthage. He alſo receiued for like guerdon, the name of Numantinus, or Numāticus, whiche was to hym no leſſe honour, then the other, for hauyng ſackte Numantia in Spaine. It is alſo readde, that Emperours themſelues ioied, in the names of tounes, and places by them conquered, vyſyng theſame euer more, in their letters Patentes, and other inſtrumentes, as did Seuerus, and after hym his ſucceſſours: as for the conqueſte of Arabia, Parthia, Armenia, Germania, and others, the one named himſelf Arabicus, an other Parthicus, an other againe Armenicus, Germanicus, and Aſiaticus, eche honouryng hymſelf, with his victories obtained. For other cauſes alſo, yt 
                  Romaines, at times gained like names of honor, as Marcus Manlius, who for that he defended the Capitoll from the violente force of the Frenche men, gained the name of Capitolinus. The familie of the Toroquates, receiued firſte that name, for that o
                     ••
                   of them toke by force from the necke of his enemie, a chaine, or coller, in Latin torques. Q. Fabius the greate, who for his delaies, and daliaunce vſed with Hannibal, deliueryng by the ſame meanes alſo his countrie, was ſurnamed afterwardes Cunctator: For this cauſe he alſo was called the Targette of Rome, whiche turned hym to great aduantage, and honor. Marcus Marcellus, which liued alſo at theſame time, for his valiaunte prowes, and courage, and continuance in ſtel
                     •
                  e, ſtill againſte his enemie, was in fine called the knife, or ſworde of Hanniball. That excellente capitaine Silas, though he were cruel, was not withſtādyng for his happie victories, ſurnamed Fortunate. Pompe for his ſo many, ſo honourable, and ſo re
                     •…
                  ed victories, was

through the worlde called Pompe the greate, then whiche name, I knowe not what might bee more roiall, or magnificent. And thus were thoſe names giuen, to thoſe vertuous capitaines, in ſuche ſorte, that their generalles, and conductours of armies, were alſo termed by the names of Emperours, whiche this daie of all others, is the ſupreme, and higheſte dignitie, ſo that thei were, either Pretors, Conſuls, or Proconſuls, and that alſo had ſubdued his enemie in ſome famous battaille, had alſo deſtroied, and waſted his whole countrie, ſlaine, and murthered greate heapes of his ſubiectes, and finally by the loſſe of twoo thouſande of his owne, to haue ſlaine tenne thouſande of the contrary, at the leaſte, for other wiſe he gained not the name of an emperour. This happie name gate Iulius Caeſar, the father of Iulius Caeſar, for his victorie; whiche he obtained againſte the Samnites, and Lucans, in the daies, and tyme of Silas. Pompe was alſo called Emperour, for his fortunate victorie in Africa, againſt Domician. Cicero aſſigned Proconſul in that warre, againſte the Parthians, was by his ſoldiours, for his happie ſucceſſe, continually called Emperour. Iulius Caeſar alſo before he was elected Emperour, was, for that he was fortunatein warre, euery where called Emperour. But what capitaine ſo euer founde not his aduerſary ſtrong, and puiſſaunte, ſuche as durſte, and would, bothe meete, and incounter with hym, neither merited, or obtained that name of an Emperour, yea, he ſharpely was reproued, that ambiciouſly deſired it. Hence Marcus Antonius ſemed to grudge, and m
                     •
                  rmure, for that hauyng ſackte a greate citie, on the farther ſide of the riuer of Euphrates, that the name of Emperour, was notwithſtandyng, denied hym. After this Iulius Caeſar, and his ſucceſſours, affectyng the ſeigniorie of Rome; and knowing how odious the name of a kyng was, vnto all the people, did them ſelues to be called, by the name of Emperours, whiche from that tyme hath continued, euen vntill this daie, a name of

all others moſte reuerente, and honourable. And as the Romaines, this honoured their owne capitaines, with theſe titles, ſo in maner ſemblable, neither left, or forgate thei to gratifie any ſtraunger, that for friendſhip ſerued, or liued in wage with theim, in maner as ample, as if he had been borne in Rome: and as thei founde them hardy, and valiaunte, ſo were thei gratious, and large, in recompenſyng their ſeruice: ſo gaue thei vnto Atalus a parte of Aſia, with the title (for more ample ſatiſfaction) of a king of which benefite, he neuer became obliuious, or vngratefull, for diyng, he retourned the profites therof, to Rome again. A. Eumenes brother to this Atlaus, for that he ha
                     •
                   bothe painfully, and faithfully ſerued the Romaines, againſt Antiochus, the Senate gaue hym in recompence, all the tounes, that thei had gotten of Antiochus in Aſia. Vnto Iotar kyng of Galicia, for hauyng aided Pompe againſt Mithridates, thei gaue the whole prouince of little Armenia. In like ſorte thei rewarded Maſsiniſla kyng of Numidia, receiued by Scipio for companion, and frende to the people of Rome, to whom thei franckly gaue what ſo euer, he had gotten from Siphax, whiche had aided the Citezeins of Carthage, againſt the others of Rome. Neither thus rewarded thei princes, and greate perſonages onely, but vnto men of baſe condition, thei preſented iules, offices, and honours. The Conſull Marius, cōſidering the notable courage, of twoo ſmall bandes, whiche meruailouſly withſtoode the furious, and violent incurſions of the Cimbrians, whiche then were entered vpon the Cimbria is that vvhich vve novv call Denmarke. frontires, or confines of Italie, infrancheſt them immediatly, reputing them for citezeins of Rome, wherof beyng reproued, as hauyng doen it againſt their lawes, ſaied, that in the middle of that fight, when blowes were dealt thickeſte, he heard no lawe ſpeake in what ſorte ſo euer.
            
            The ende of the thirde parte.
         
         
            
            ¶ The fowerth parte of the Foreſt or collection of hiſtories.
            
               ¶ Of the ſeuen meruailes, or wonders of the worlde. Chapt. 1.
               
                  SVche as haue imployed any parte of their time, in the readyng of hiſtories, oratours, and olde Poetes, haue founde that often mention is made, of the ſeuen wonders of the worlde, at ſundrie tymes erected, and in places farre diſtaunte. All ſuche as haue hereof written any thing, agree, and accorde togither on ſixe, but as touching the ſeuenth, we finde diuers opinions, and therfore leſſe determine, on whiche, or where, with beſte warrāt to arreſte vs. How be it, in the firſte place we will ſpeak, of the walles of Babilon, one of the ſeuen, and that for good cauſe, as well for the meruailous circuite of theim, as for the ſeate alſo thereof, whiche bothe to moſte men, might ſeme a thyng impoſſible: and although it might ſuffice, in this place now to aduertiſe the reader, of that, whiche is aboue ſaid in the chapiter, of the diuerſitie, and confuſion of tongues, and that it was there builte, where Nembrothe erected the Tower of Babel, of whiche the toune (as is euidente) tooke his denomination, yet will we not ſo, and in ſuche ſorte paſſe it. Theſe waules then accordyng to the approued opinion, of moſte men, and of Trogus Pompeius, as hath Iuſtine, were firſt of all founded, by the famous Quéene Semyramis, mother vnto Ninus. Whiche opinion D. Siculus, A. Marcelinus, and P. Oroſius, with the greateſt parte of al the Gentiles, haue

vniformely agreed on: although Saincte Auguſtine, and Ioſephus in his antiquities, attribute it vnto Nembrothe 
                  Aug. lib. 16. de ciuitate dei. Ioſephus li. 9. de antiquitatibus. aided by his people: but were it, that Semyramis, either laied the foūdation, or repaired it, it ſufficeth that it was perfected, and inrichte meruailouſly by her. This Citee was ſeated on a plaine on the one ſide, on the other ſide paſte the greate riuer of Euphrates. It was proportioned in a ſquare, or quadrante, the walles verie high, and curiouſly wrought, the matter was ſtone, laied with hoate lime, and an other kinde of cimente, whiche vſually is founde in the mines of that countrie, but chiefly in that greate riuer of Iudea, where ſome tymes ſtoode Sodome and Gomorra, called Asfaltida, giuyng a ſlime, whiche holdeth more faſte, then any kinde of Pitche, or Glewe. Some writers diſagree, as well about the height of this walle, as alſo aboute the circuite thereof, whiche might peraduēture happē by diuerſitie of meaſures, Plinie ſaith that this walle had in compaſſe ſixtie thouſande paſes, ſo that euery quarter, or fowerth parte of the quadrante, had by computation iuſte fiftene thouſande: he farther addeth, that it was twoo hundred foote high, which foote exceded by thrée inches, the meaſure of the foote Romain and xv. foote thicke, whiche was aſſuredly very ſtraunge and meruailous. Diodorus Siculus affirmeth, that it contained in all, three hundred, and ſixtie ſtadia, and was alſo, ſo thicke that ſixe Cartes there on, without annoye, might paſſe, on a fronte togither. The bridges, fortifications, towers, and gardines, that Semyramis did on, and through this walle to bee made. is a thyng more miraculous, then eaſie to be credited. It farther is written, that ſhe retained in this woorke, three hundred thouſande woorkemen, gathered throughout all the territories, and countries ſubiecte to her. To the former lengthe, Quintus Curſius addeth yet eight ſtadia more, & in height he ſaieth it had iuſte an hundred cubites: but Paulus Oroſius 
                  Paulus oroſius lib. 2. ſaieth, that it conteined in lengthe, fower hundred

and eightie ſtadia, whiche mounte (giuyng an hundred, twentie, and fiue paces, to euery ſtadium) to the ſixtie thouſande paſes, that Plinie remembred. Strabo writeth, Strabo lib. 16. that this walle was in compaſſe, but three hundred eightie, and fiue ſtadia, but in breadthe was ſuche, that many Cartes might paſſe on it, not touchyng, or hurting any one tho'ther. Farther ſtraūge thynges are written, of the pleaſaunt, and fine gardeins, that were on certain turrettes, and towers, in this wall, in whiche alſo grew trees of greate height. Iulius Solinus here in accordeth with Plinie. Beſides this, ſome of theſe writers alſo affirme, that without, it was inuironed, with certaiue motes, or diches, full to the bankes continually with water no leſſe brode, or deepe, then ſome reaſonable good riuer. In this citee were an hundred gates, all of mettalles, no leſſe ſtronge, then beautifull, and curious: and in fine, what ſoeuer is written of the excellencie of theſe walles it nede not to any manne ſeme leſſe true, or incredible, for that this citee was then the moſte proude, and moſte ſtately of all others in the worlde, the ſeate, and chaire longe tyme, of the vniuerſall, and generall Monarche, whiche is an argumente, or note ſufficiente, of the greate pompe, and roialtie ofit, of parte deſcribed by Ariſtotle in his Politiques, who there ſaieth, that it beyng on a tyme, taken by the enemie, theſe that inhabited the farther parte of theſame, neither felte, or knewe any thing of their miſerie, before full three daies afterward. In the ſeconde place of theſe wounders, wee ſhall remember a Coloſſus, whiche was made at Rhodes, offered by the Gentiles, and dedicated to the Sunne, although ſome others Coloſsi, vvere Images of excedyng greatnes, hauyng the ſhape, or proportion of man. Plineus li. 34. cap. 7. ſaie vnto Iupiter: this Coloſſus was of mettall, of a houge, and incredible greatneſſe, and height, muche like to ſome greate, and ſtrong tower, in ſuche ſorte, that it well might bee meruailed, howe, or in what maner it might be ſette vp, or raiſed. Plinie who hardly paſſeth any thyng, writeth that it had ſeuentie cubites in height,

and although to make it, there were a greate number of good woorke men continually buſied, yet wrought their twelue yeres, before thei could finiſhe it, and the charges thereof drewe to iij. C. talentes. It was made by the commaundement of Cares, ſcholer to Lyſippus. This Image was of ſuche horrible greatnes, that it ſeemed the yearth was vnable to ſuſtaine hym: he ſtoode as bothe Plinie, and Oroſius record, but onely fiftie and ſixe yeres, at th'ende of which tyme he fell, ouerthrowen by a meruailous yearthquake, and beyng fallen, infinite multitudes came to beholde hym, as a moſte ſtraunge, and rare ſpectacle, eſpecially for that fewe men were founde, that could well fathome his thombe, the little finger beyng greater, then all other ordinarie Images. Some write of an hundred others, whiche alſo were at Rhodes, but all farre inferiour to this in greatnes, whiche to remember therefore, is leſſe incidente to our purpoſe, vnleſſe perchaunce, wee ſhould here mynde the reader, that ſome therfore haue thought, that the Rhodians by this meane gate the name of Coloſſenſes, hauyng at one tyme, an hundred ſmall Coloſsi, beſides that other greate Coloſſus, now aboue remembred: how be it this opinion leſſe pleaſeth Eraſmus, for that (ſaieth he) the Coloſsiens, to whom ſaincte Paule wrote, were the inhabitauntes of Coloſſas, a citee in Frigia-Retourne we then to this Coloſſus again: whiche laie rottyng, and ruſtyng there, many yeres after, euen vntill the tyme of Pope Martin the firſt, whiche was in the yere of our Lorde God, iuſte ſixe hundred, when the Infidelles, with their capitaine the Soudan of Egypte, inuaded the Rhodians, and as Platina writeth, in the life of the ſaied Martine, with, whom alſo accordeth Antonius Sabellicus, carried thence all the peeces, or partes, that remained of that Coloſſus, where with thei loaded nine hundred Camelles. Of all th'other Coloſsi, whiche were as well in Rhodes, as in other places, but in quantitie, or bignes, farre inferiour to this, I

maie in this place at all, ſpeake nothyng, onely hauyng here to intreate of, the ſeuen wounders of the worlde. The thirde was, the Pyramides in Egypte, concernyng whiche, if all thynges be true, in good hiſtories reported, thei were then no leſſe miraculous, then ſtraunge, in deede, and meruailous. Pyramides were then, certaine What a Pyramis is. edifices, or buildynges, whiche beganne in a quadrante, and ſo continued ſtill, by inſenſible differēce, ſtreatning, and ſharpenyng vpwardes, ſome thyng like vnto a Dia
                  
                     •…
                  ant, of a meruailous greateneſſe, and height with all, builte, with ſuche, and ſo houge ſtones, cut, and framed in ſuche meruailous perfection, that it were hard to write, the true proportion of it, harde alſo, to bring men to receiue it for a truth, and credite it: how be it, theſe thynges are ſufficiently aucthoriſed, as well by Chriſtians, as by Gentiles, of whoſe reporte (vnleſſe we wrong them) we neither maie, or can doubte any thyng. Theſe Pyramides are then Towers of incredible height, endyng euermore at the toppe, in a ſmall or ſharpe pointe. This woorde Pyramis, taketh his beginnyng of this Greke woorde Pyr, in Engliſhe fire, for that it endeth as a flame, ſharpe continually at the pointe. Emong all the Pyramides, any where remembred of, perticuler mention is eſpeciallie made of three, and thei al in Egypte, betwixte the citee of Menſis, now called Caira, and the Iſle of Delta, inuironed on euery ſide, with the riuer Nilus, of whiche one, is accompted, one of the ſeuen wounders: for as is reported there laboured continually to raiſe, and erecte it, three hundred, and ſixtie thouſande menue, for the full ſpace of twentie yeres: which thyng Plinie paſſeth not, alleaging Plinie lib. 36. cap. 12. Diod. Sic. li. 1. Strabo lib. vltimo. Pomp. M. l
                        •…
                      1. Herod. lib. 2. Am. lib. 2. twelue aucthours, whiche all together affirme it, as alſo doeth Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Pomponius Mela, Herodotus, Amianus, with others. Some alſo write that the foundation of this Pyramis, contained ſo muche grounde as maie bee well ploughed, with one plough in eight dayes, whiche maie mounte to eightie Iugera: others ſome

abate againe ſo muche thereof, as maie bee ploughed of one plough, in one or twoo daies, ſo that it containeth the full compaſſe of ſixe, or ſeuen daies iournies at the leaſt, and in height it alſo had, ſo muche, or ſome thyng more. Plinie writeth, that eche quarter conteined in lengthe, eight hundred, eightie and three foote. The ſtones were all of Marble, brought out of Arabia, and as Pomponius Mela recordeth, the moſte parte of theim were thirtie foote longe, whence it ſemeth not incredible, that there were there on buſied, ſo many thouſande men, ſome to carrie, tourne, and remoue ſtones, others to ſquare, fine, and frame thē, others again to faſten, iointe, and laie thē, beſides the multitude buſied in Iron woorkes, and other thynges like needefull, and neceſſarie. Farther of other Pyramides, ſome alſo write this, or at the leaſte of twoo or three, of whiche one was erected, by the vaine pompe of the princes and kynges of Egypte, whiche were of all others moſte riche in that tyme, of parte as well by the fertilitie of their countrie, as alſo of parte, for that in Egypt, no man then held in his owne poſſeſſion any thyng, the kyng onely excepted: and thus there beganne, in the tyme of Ioſeph, ſonne of Iacob, whiche counſailed Pharao, to reſerue, and kepe, the corne of the ſeuen plentifull yeres, to helpe himſelf, and his people, in the other ſeuen yeres of famin folowyng, duryng whiche tyme, the king by meanes of his graine, became Lorde, and ſeigniour of euery mannes landes, rentes, and poſſeſſions, throughout all, and euery his territories, and countries. Conſider here then of the wealthe, of theſe princes, & how all their ſubiectes ſerued them, without reſpecte, as thei had been bōdmē. And as it is fartherreported in good hiſtories, theſe princes for none other cauſe, did theſe Pyramides to bee raiſed, but onely to giue meate, & ſuſtenance to their hungrie ſubiectes, to ſuche I meane, as in theſe workes labored, & farther, not to leaue their treaſures to their ſucceſſors: for thei more deſired in ſuche ſort to ſpende thē, then

to leaue occaſion to their poſteritie, by theſe meanes to paſſe, and ſurmount their prediceſſors, in wealth and abundance, inioiyng after theim, that whiche they before carefully had gathered. It alſo is written, that theſe Pyramides ſerued, as Sepulchers for greate Princes: and who ſo wel cōſidereth the greate multitude of Hebrues, whiche ſerued in Egipte, whoſe aide the Princes vſed there, to erecte Cities, Caſtles, and Holdes, will nothing at all maruaile at that which is aboue ſaide: for it is moſt certaine, that there were deliuered from this bondage ſix hundred thouſande men, beſides an infinite multitude of women, and children, whiche all were imploied in theſe, and the like woorkes, ſo that by theſe meanes it was no ſtraunge thyng to aduaunce theſe famous edifices: and as ſome alſo report, the Radiſhe rootes, and ſaletes, beſides other prouiſion of like meates in theſe workes ſpent, mounted to the ſumme of eightie talentes, which might value, of our mony, one million, and foure ſcore thouſand Crounes. Diodorus writeth, that rounde aboute this Pyramis, bothe nigh, and farre of, there was not to bee founde, ſo muche as one ſmall ſtone, nether any ſhewe, or ſigne, that any man had earſte been there, and in fine, no foundation thereof, to be ſéen, or perceiued, onely ther was fine ſande as ſalte, and that in greate abundaunce or quātitie: in ſuche ſort that it ſéemed, it onely had been, by ſome ſecrette miracle, or by the mightie hande of God, or that it had out of that place growen vp, whoſe height almoſte ſéemed, to haue ſtreachte vnto the heauens. If we would leaue to remember olde hiſtories, yet coulde wee not in this matter lacke, good witneſſes of our tyme. Petre Matyr borne in Milan, a man of no leſſe experience, then learnyng, ſente as Ambaſſadour vnto the Soudan of Egypte, from the Emperour Ferdinande, in the yere, of our redemption, a thouſande fiue hundred and one, cō
                  poſed a booke of theſe thinges, which he ſawe, and did, in that ambaſſade, where hee vttereth in writynge, that,

whiche by mouth he hath often tymes ſpoken, touching, and concernyng, theſe fore remembred Pyramides, agreyng in euery pointe with that whiche theſe auncient authors haue leafte vs: and perticularly he diſcourſeth, in many of twoo, whiche both he ſawe, of height incredible, and farther ſaieth that hee meaſured the quarters of one of theim, which were all equal, eche hauyng .iij. hundred, and fiftene paſes, in leanght, and in circuite all to gether almoſt thirtene hundred: and againe he addeth, that on euery ſide, there were certeine houge, and greate ſtones, imboſt, and ſwellyng outwarde for the more better conueance of certaine roumes with in. And more he ſaieth, that ſome of his company, in long tyme, & with merueilous paine aſcended to the top of one of them, where thei founde one ſtone, ſuche and ſo greate, that with eaſe thirtie men might at once haue ſtode on hym, and beyng deſcended againe, woulde not otherwiſe thincke, but that thei had been in ſome cloude, & farther ſo high thei were, that their ſight beganne to faile theim, their braines rollyng and turnyng, as people amaſed. So that as he ſaith, it nothing may be doubted, neither of the nūber of workmen, nether of the greate expenſes. The fourth was the ſepulchre, or tombe, whiche Artemiſia did to be built for her huſebande Mauſolus kyng of Caria, a prouince in Aſia the greater, nigh vnto the Sea Icarium. This woman as writeth A. Gellius, and others, in ſuche ſorte loued A. G
                        •
                     li. 10. noctium At. 
                  Mauſolus her huſebande, that all men remember her, for an example moſte notable: who after the kyng died, did in ſuche ſorte lament, and bewaile hym, as nether can I write, or finde experience thereof in others, erectynge to hym a ſepulchre, aunſweryng of parte, the greate loue that ſhe bare hym, whiche for the coſt beſtowed theron, the excellent frame, and workmanſhippe with all, was, and is reputed, for one of the ſeuen wōders. This tombe was built on an excellent kinde of Marble, in compaſſe iuſte four hundred, and a leuen foote, and in height, twē
                  tie

and fiue cubites. It alſo had thirtie, and ſix pillers, all of ſtone of rare priſe, moſt ſkilfully ingraued: it laie open to the veu, on euery ſide to be ſéen, with Arches containyng ſeuentie and three foote, in breadthe, bulte by the moſte excellent workmen that were in the world to bee found. The parte openyng to the Eaſte, was ingraued, and wrought by Scopas: that toward the north by Briax, the South parte by Timothee, and that of the Weſt, by Leocares: the perfection of this worke was ſuche, and the frame therof ſo excellent, that it therby gained the name of Mauſoleum, and that for the deade Kynges ſake, for whom it was builded, whence alſo all other ſepulchres, that euen vntill this daie haue any where béen made, if there be any beauty, or excellencie in theim, for that Sepulchre onely, holde the name of Mauſolea. And of thoſe thinges make mention Plinie, Pomponius Mela, Herodotus, 
                  Plinie li. 35. cap. 5. P. Mela. li. 1, Stra. lib. 7. 
                  Strabo, Aulus Gellius, and others. It alſo is euident, that Artemiſia after the death, and departure of her huſebande, liued in continuall teares, and wéepyng, and that her ſelfe alſo paide the tribute of nature, before this worke was fully finiſhed, and ended, hauyng drouncke notwithſtandyng her huſebandes bones firſte in pouder, lodging theim in the Sepulchre of her owne proper body. The fifte was the Temple of Diana, whom fondly, the Gentiles adored for a goddeſſe, it ſtoode in the citie of Epheſus in Aſia, in the prouince of Ionium. Plinie ſaieth that it was builte by the Amazones, whoſe fame, and renoume, was ſuche, and ſo ſtraunge, that no parte of the world was there, that reſounded not of it, ſo that Democritus there of onely hath writen, one whole volume. Plinie diſcourſing of this temple, ſaieth that it contained foure hundred, twentie and fiue foote in lengthe, and in breadthe twoo hundred, and twentie. This woorke was of ſuch merueilous excellencie, that all Aſia about it was buſied ij. C. and twenty yeres, it was ſeated in a Fenne, or mariſhe ground, onely to auoide the daūger of yearthquakes:

the foundation therof was laide with Cole duſt, hard troden, and beaten doune, and on that againe great ſtore of Wooll, to aſſure the place, other wiſe moiſte, and watrie. In it were an hundred fowertie, and ſeuen pillours, euery of theim of Marble, and ſeuenty foote high, all erected by Kynges of Aſia. Of theſe thirtie ſeuen were moſt exquiſitlie ingraued, the others alſo of Marble (as is ſaide) poliſhed. The maiſter of this woorke, as recordeth Plinie was Creſiphon, but Strabo otherwiſe Strabo. lib. 14. ſaieth that it was Archifron. Howe bee it, this diuerſitie of opinions is excuſable, conſideryng howe longe tyme this woorke continued, and therefore of neceſſitie it required more then one, or twoo maiſters, beſides, many thinges were added at ſundrie tymes to perfecte it. Solinus, and Pomponius Mela, write that this Temple was firſte erected by the Amazones, and Solinus farther addeth, that when the mighty, and puiſſant Xerxes, was buſied aboute the conqueſt of Grece, he brunte, and conſumed euery other Temple, onely reſeruyng, and ſauing this. All writers accorde, that on theſe pillours, was framed a roufe of Ceder, in moſt curious ſort wrought, that was poſſible to be deuiſed, the doores through out, beyng all of Cypres. After this a leude perſon conſideryng of this ſo riche, and ſo renoumed a woorke, deſired ſtill in harte (whiche he after did) to burne it, and beyng apprehended immediatly vpon the facte, confeſt that he had for none other cauſe doone it, but that his fame might line, hym ſelf eche where remembred, for euer, of the poſteritie, whence as Valerius Maximus, recordeth, in his title of renoume, and honour, and alſo with hym in like manner Aulus Gellius, it was immediatly enacted, that no A. Gel. lib. 2. manne vnder paine, of greate, and greuous puniſhment, ſhould at any tyme bée ſo hardy to ſpeake, or write, hys name, to the intent he yet might faile, of that his deſired purpoſe. But this leſſe ſerued, for both Strabo, and Solinus, witneſſe of his name, and call hym Heroſtratus, of

whom proceded afterward this prouerbe, Hero
                        ••
                     rati gloria, applied vnto theſe that ſeke either fame, or honor, by any their like wretched & villanous tretcheries. Farther wee may remember here, as not altogether impertinēt, that the very ſame daie, that this temple was thus burned, Alexandre was borne, that Prince of worthy memory, whiche conquired, and ſubdued eache Prouince throughout all Aſia. Which thing well noteth Plutarch, in the life of Alexandre, as alſo Cicero twiſe in his ſecond booke de natura deorum, alſo againe in his booke de diuinatione, where as hee ſaieth, that then, when this Temple was in burnyng, the Sages there prognoſticated, of the generall deſtruction, and conqueſt of all Aſia, as in deede it after was, ſubdued by this Alexandre. Some reporte that this temple, was againe réedefied, inlarged alſo, and beautified, muche more then at the firſte, as alſo that the maiſter of this worke had to name Democrates. The ſixt maruaile was none other, then the Image of Iupiter Olympicus, which was erected in the Temple of Iupiter in Acaya, betwixt the two Cities of Elida, and Piſa, whiche place, as alſo the Temple, after the denomination of Iupiter Olympicus, were both called by one name Olympia, whiche Image as both Strabo, and Pomponius Mela 
                  Stra. lib. 8. P. Mela. li. 2. reporte, was no leſſe renoumed for the arte, perfection, and finenes of the woorke, then it alſo was, for his exceedyng houge greatneſſe. Some ſaie that it was, all of Porphire, other ſome of Yuorie, wrought, or doone by Phidias, to graue, or carue, the moſt excellenſt that euer was. Of this Image writeth Plinie, as beſides hym ſundry Plinie. li. 34. & 36. others. Strabo addeth that the excellencie of this Image, conſiſted in his greatnes to whiche alſo came that, whence in déede it was more ſtraunge, and merueilous, that it al was wrought of Porphire, cut, and deuided into moſt ſmale, and fine partes. It is reported that Phidias, in one onely pointe, failed in this woorke, to wéete, that the compaſſe of this Image was leſſe conformable, and

agreant, with the true proportion of the Church, for that beyng made ſittyng, was yet neuer the leſſe ſo high, and ſo greate, that if you woulde haue conſidered hym at any tyme to haue ſtoode, the churche then by no meanes could any waies haue healde hym. Notwithſtandyng this Image muche beautified this Temple, doyng it to be ſpoken of much more then before, though it alſo were before very famous, eſpecially by the meanes of thrée ſolemne plaies, and games, kepte in the honour of Iupiter, called Olympia. Thence came it, that the Grekes counted thier yeres, by Olympiads, which vſually were from fiue yeres, to fiue, whiche plaies were firſt inſtituted, and ordained by Hercules. But this vſage ſome tymes leafte, was after againe practiſed, and put in vre by Emonis, or as others ſome will, by Sfiton, foure or fiue yeres after the deſtructiō of Troie, at leaſt as Euſebius accompteth, at whiche tyme beganne againe the firſte Olympias. Cō
                  cernyng the ſeuenth meruaile, ſome ſuppoſe it to bee the Towre that was in the Iſle Pharos, nigh to that renoumed Alexandria in Egypte. This Pharos was a ſmall Iſle, longe, and ſtreate, liynge on the one ſide of Egypte, ſtraight againſt the mouth of Nilus, which in olde tyme, or long ſithe, as gaithereth Pomponius Mela, and alſo Plinie, was of one ſide onely inuironed with the Sea, or P. Mela li. 2. Pline lib. 5. water, but after warde in their tyme was ſo foolded in with fluddes, that onely at one place, and by one Bridge, paſſage was, and by none other. In this Iſle Pharos (ſo called after the name of a certeine diſcrite Pilote, which ſometimes was at Meneleas, and there alſo was buried) the kinges of Egipte builte a certaine towre of Marble, in height, and curious woorke, ſurpaſſyng all others, on the toppe of a hill inuironed with water, whoſe frame, and facion was ſuche, and ſo ſtatly, that it coſte theim eight hundred talentes, which mounte to foure hundred, and foure ſkore thouſande crounes, accordyng as Budeus accompteth; and was erected for none other cauſe, but to

bee a Lanterne for certeine Torches or lightes in the night, onely for the comforte, and ſuretie of all thoſe that ether were then in voiage by Sea, or by Lande, the better to conduct theim to good and ſure harbour. Which tower neuertheleſſe as moſte men holde, was builte at the proper charges of Ptolome onely, whoſe maiſter of that woorke hadde to name Siſtratus, as Plinie alſo hath Plinie lib. 35. plainly leafte vs. Caeſar in his commentaries no leſſe cō
                  mendeth the height, then he doth the beautie, and excellencie of this tower, and ſaieth that it hadde the name, of the Iſle Pharos. The very ſame reporteth Amianus Marcelinus, writyng the hiſtory of this worthy woorke: A. Marc. lib. 2. to which Solinus addeth, that what towers ſo euer were any where to this purpoſe built, were, to the imitation of this alſo called Pharoos, as that (for example) of Meſſina and others. And farther I ſuppoſe that theſe lightes, or Lanternes, which ordinarily are caried, in ſhippes by the night, eche one the better to drawe, and directe the other, by this meanes in like manner were alſo cauled Pharoos. So this is now the laſte of theſe ſeuen maruailes, although in dede, of many it be accompted none, in whoſe place ſome number the hangyng gardeines of Babilon, where of alſo is to fore ſome thing ſaide. Lactantiꝰ Firmianus reporteth, that theſe Gardeines were plotted on high, on the very toppes of Arches, and Towers, in ſuche ſorte that vnder theim were faire, and pleaſante lodginges, and aboue grewe trees of greate, and rare hougenes, with abundance of ſpringes, at all tymes to bede we theim. The forme of theſe buildinges, is amplie deſcribed by Diodorus Siculus. Celius Rhodienſis, diſcourſing of theſe mearuailes remembereth no thinge of this Tower Pharos, ne yet of theſe ſtraunge Gardeines of Babilon: but in the ſeuenth place addeth an Obeliſcus, framed, and perfected by the commaundement of Semiramis, whiche in ſhape nothing differed, or facion from a Pyramis, beginnyng in a ſquare, and endyng in a pointe,

in this notwithſtandyng diſagreyng with the other, that the Obeliſcus euer was of one onely ſtone, nether péeſte, or patchte, in any parte, or place, and yet therefore little yeldyng in height to any Pyramis, of whiche we reade that ſome, were greate, as any Towers, of a faire, and good ſtone curiouſly grauen. Of whiche ſorte is one yet this daie in Rome, knowen by the name only of a neelde whiche by inſpeakable paine and pollicie, was brought, out of Egypte, of height no leſſe merueilous, then it was to bring ſo houge a weaght thether. This Obeliſcus now of Semiramis, whiche Celius, as is ſaide, reckneth for the laſt maruaile, had in height an hundred, & fiftie foote, and in circuite nintie ſixe, eche ſide in length, by equall proportion conteainyng twentie fower foote, whiche as it was one whole, and perfecte ſtone, ſo was he alſo, by expreſſe tōmaundement of Semiramis, cut out of a certeine hill or mountaine in Armenia, and afterwarde thence brought to the aboue remembred Babilon. But who ſo will conſider how harde it was to drawe it thence, howe harde alſo afterwarde to erecte it, might thincke, in truth it was, a thing almoſte impoſſible, were ti not, that the antiquitie had thinges like ſtraunge, and difficill, whiche euery where are leafte vs, of authours worthy credite, whiche aſſure vs alſo of others, in like ſorte perfected, by other Princes of Egypte. Plinie ſheweth the maner, how with out any hurte, bruſe, or annoie, thei firſt were Plinie lib. 6. cap. 8. & 9. remoued from the place where thei were made. Of theſe Pyramides Obeliſci, Coloſsi, and ſuche others, at full diſcourſeth the learned Polyſias, in the beginnyng of his booke of loue and fire.
            
            
               ¶ What maner of women the Sibylles were, how many in number and of their prophecies, but eſpecially of thoſe that concerned Chriſt, and his commyng. Chapt. 2.
               
                  
                  THe hiſtory of the Sibylles is generally aucthoriſed of all menne, ther learnyng, and prophecies verie well knowen, but perticulerly to intreate whē and what thei were, whereof thei Prophecied, and at what tyme, that onely knoweth he, that hath ſpente ſome time in old, and auncient hiſtories. Wherefore my deſire was, ſome thyng of them to gather, eſpecially conſideryng the meruailous gifte of Prophecie, whiche God in ſunderie wiſe beſtowed at tymes on theim, and principally to fore ſaie, of the cummyng of his ſonne, of his life, and paſſion, with other many miſteries of our belefe, and faithe, of whiche wee ſhall ſome thyng, in this place remēber, to the intente the Ethnicke, & Panime, that will aucthoriſe nothyng, but their owne proper writinges, might no better haue to excuſe hymſelf, then the perfecte Iewe whiche affiyng in his owne, neither liketh, or accepteth, the true faithe, or religiō. And this ſaie I, for that by common admiſſion, and conſente, ſuch bookes were of all the Gentiles receiued, & theſe Sibylles alſo credited, but eſpecially of the Romaines, whiche in euery their affaires, or neceſſities whatſoeuer, had their due recourſe to the Prophecies of theſe Sibylles, conferring, and conſultyng of all thynges, by them written. But for that ſo many, as well Grekes, as Latines, haue in ſuche ſorte, ſo fully diſcourſte, and written of theim, wee ſhall here followe, and imitate the beſte, not greuyng, or weriyng the reader, with any others. Diodorus Siculus, Plinius, Solinus, Seruius, Marcianus Capellus, Lactantius Firmianus, Elianus, Suidas, Strabo, Marcus Vario, and Virgill alſo, with the better parte of Poetes, Sainct Auguſtine, Euſebius, Oroſius, with the moſte parte of all good hiſtorians, haue ſome thyng written, and diſcourſte of theſe Sibylles. Diodorus ſaith, that this worde Sibylla, ſignifieth nothing els, but a woman Propheteſſe, and one ful

of God. Seruius, as alſo Lactantius, in his fowerth booke of diuine inſtitutiōs, nameth them none otherwiſe, then the counſaile of God: Suidas, women Prophetes. The others diſagree, as well about the number of them, as alſo when thei were. Some nombryng more, ſome leſſe but as thereof vncertaine. Marcianus Capella, mindeth vs of twoo onely, others ſome of fower, as chiefly Elianus in his variable hiſtories. Marcus Varro remembreth no leſſe then tenne, with whom Lactantius Firmianus occordeth in his firſte booke, whom I haue determined in this place to followe. The firſte was of Perſia, called Samberta, 
                  The firſt Samberta. of whom Nicanor maketh mention, the ſame that wrote the renoumed geſtes of Alexander, others write, that ſhe was of Chaldea, others a Jewe, borne in the toune of Noe, nigh the redde ſea, whoſe father hight Beroſus, & her mother Erimanta: this woman wrote twenty fower bookes in vearſes, in which ſhe diſcloſed ſtraūge and wounderfull matters, concernyng the commyng of Chriſte, his miracles, and his life, though ſecretly, and as ſhadowed, not to be vnderſtode of all men. With whom all the other Sibylles vniformely accorde, in ſuche ſorte that Lactantius Firmianus, as well in his fowerth boke, as in ſunderie other places, leaueth vs their perticuler Propheſies of Chriſte. And Saincte Auguſtine alſo hath lefte vs, a brief, or ſhorte ſummarie, of ſome certain, and principall matters, whiche as well this, as the others alſo haue Propheſied, eſpecially of the death, and paſſion of our Sauiour, and emong others theſe woordes by order. After this he ſhall bée apprehended, by the handes of Infidels, thei alſo ſhall beate, and buffette hym aboute the face, with their impure, and ſacrilegious handes, with their mouthes accurſed, and blaſphemous ſhal thei ſpitte on hym, he ſhall geue theim his bodie, as contented to be whipte theron, he ſhall loue ſilence, and vtter fewe wordes, ſo that whence hée ſpeaketh fewe menne at all ſhall knowe, ſemblably he ſhall be crouned with ſhearpe, and

pearſing thornes, Gaule ſhall thei geue hym to eate, and ſower Vineager to drincke. See here the banket that theſe men ſhall make hym: ſo that thou O Nation bothe ignorant, and blinde, ſhalte not knowe thy GOD, here preſent and with thée, but tyrannouſly ſhalt croune hym (as is fore ſaide) with thornes, medling Gaule, and vineger together (a potion) for hym. After this the Veale of the Temple ſhall ſundre, and the midle of that daie ſhall be darckned as the night, by the whole ſpace of three full howres, ſo then ſhall the iuſte die, who ſhall lie deade, or ſleape onely thrée daies, and hauyng paſte through Hell ſhall riſe, or reuiue, neuer to die againe. Theſe woordes are ſuche, ſo plaine, and ſo euidente, that thei in nothyng differ, from theſe of the Euangeliſtes, cōcernyng Chriſt, our maiſter, and Meſsias: or otherwiſe, from theſe, of the holy prophetes, but emōg the others principally of Eſaie, whiche the Churche alſo this daie doeth holde, and ſhall doe euer. And theſe Propheſies are recorded, ſome by Lactantius Firmianus, ſome by ſainct Auguſtine, and others ſome by others, as by Cicero, Marcus Varro, and others, Gentiles all deade before the birthe, and natiuitee of our Sauiour, as is bothe plaine, and manifeſte by the ſaied Lactantius, who farther of theſe Sibylles, addeth alſo Lact. li. 4. ca. 15. this muche: he ſhall raiſe the dedde, the impotente, and the weake by hym again ſhall goe, the deafe ſhall heare, the blinde ſée, the dombe ſhall ſpeake, and laude his name freely, and againe ſomwhat before, with fiue loaues, and twoo fiſhes, he ſhall fede fiue thouſande menne in the deſerte, and that whiche ſhall remaine, ſhall alſo refreaſhe the hungerie nede of others. The ſeconde by report, was The ſecond libyca. borne in Libya, of whom mention is made by Euripides, in his Prologue of Lamia. The thirde hight Themis, and was ſurnamed Delphica, for that ſhe was borne in the The third Delphica. Citée Delphos, of whom remembreth Chryſippus, in his booke of Diuination. Vnto this woman, the Romaines erected an Image, whiche was, as recordeth Plinie, before

the deſtruction of Troie, ſo that Homere in his workes, hath ſundrie, and diuers of her vearſes, as is euident. Diodorus Siculus ſaith, that this was Daphne, the doughter of Tireſias, whō, when the Grekes had ſubdued Thebes, thei ſent her foorthe immediately, and without ſtaie to Delphos, where ſhe after became a propheteſſe, in the Oracle of Apollo, ſo that ſhe thence (as he ſuppoſeth) and not otherwiſe, gatte the name of Delphica. The fowerth The fowerth Cumea. had to name Cumea, or Italienna, and not Cumana Amaltea, ſhe was borne in Cimeria, a toune of Campania, adioinyng vnto Cumae, whoſe propheſies are written, as well by Neuyus in his bookes Punici, as alſo by Piſon in his annalies, and briefly remembred by Lactantius, by Virgil alſo in his Eglogue this beginning, Scicilides muſae. The firſt was that famous Erythrea, whiche by the eſpeciall The firſt Erythrea. grace of God, ſo plainly propheſied of the greateſte miſteries of our religion, wherefore as hath Lactantius, the Gentiles in the ages paſte, ſuppoſyng it impoſſible, that a virgine, ſhould heare a childe, as alſo other thynges ſupernaturall, whiche thei in like ſorte wrote, remembred as well, by old Poetes, as alſo in aunciente hiſtories, accompted of theſe vearſes, none otherwiſe, thē of light, vain, and fonde matters, Apolodorus writeth of this Sibyll, that ſhe fore ſaied to the Grekes, that thei aſſuredly ſhould ſacke, and ouer runne Troie, whence moſte ſuppoſe, ſhe was before the deſtruction thereof. How be it Euſebius contrariwiſe thinketh, that ſhe liued in the tyme of Romulus. Strabo againe in the daies of Alexander. Of this Erythrea were theſe woordes, recited by Euſebius, whiche in order tranſlated, ſounde in Engliſhe this muche, Ieſus Chriſte the ſoonne of God, and Sauiour. Whiche was in deede no leſſe ſtraunge, then meruailous. Others alſo wrote ſhe, whiche Sainct Auguſtine gathereth in his eightenth De ciuitate dei, which dooen by hym into Latine, maie in our tongue ſaie this muche: The yearth ſhall ſweate, an aſſured ſigne of iudgemente,

from heauen ſhall come a kyng, whiche ſhalbe kyng continually, but cladde in mannes fleſhe, to the intente he maie iudge the worlde, ſo ſhall the incredulous ſee, aſwell, as ſhall the faithfull, and with their iyes ſhall boholde, God hymſelf aduaunced in the middle of his angelles: and in the ende of this worlde, the ſoules of men ſhall appeare, with their owne proper bodies, whiche all hym ſelf ſhall iudge preſente then in perſone, at whiche tyme the yearth ſhall bee bruſed, and diſordered. Menne ſhall then deſtroie bothe Images, and Idolles, their iuels eke, and treaſures ſhall thei not accompte of, he ſhall goe doune into helle, and breake vp the infernall gates, then to the iuſte ſhall ioye, and peace bee lotted, and fire ſhall tormente ſtill the reprobate, and impious. All ſecretes ſhall in this daie bee diſcouered, euery man ſhall knowe the thoughtes of an other, God then ſhall laie open the hartes, and conſciences of all fleſhe: there ſhall bee weepyng, and gnaſhyng of teethe, the Sunne; and the Starres, in that daie ſhall bee darkened, the heauens them ſelues ſhall breake, and the Moone ſhall loſe her lighte, the mountaines ſhall fall doune, and the valies ſhall lie euen with the ſwellyng hilles, nothyng in the whole worlde ſhall higher bee then other, bothe mountaines, and valaies ſhall be reduced, into plaines, eche thyng hauyng in that daie his endyng: the yearth ſhall be ſkorchte vp, and brought then to pouder, bothe riuers, and ſprynges ſhall in that daie burne, and with that fire alſo the yearth it ſelf, the ſea, and the aire ſhall be conſumed, a trumpette then from heauen, moſte terriblie ſhall ſounde, at which voice the yearth incontinentely ſhall open, diſcoueryng the obſcure, and diſordered face of helle, the paines eke, and the ſmartes of the damned ſoules therein. By this Sibyll theſe, and many others were written at large in vearſe, plainly declaryng Chriſte hym ſelfe incarnate, with the reſurrection of the dedde, and the finall iudgemente. But theſe thynges, before thei came to paſſe in

déede of fewe might, or could in any wiſe bee vnderſtode, reputed for meare follie of the Panimes, and the Gentiles. Notwithſtandyng Erithrea, well knowyng what was to come, lefte not this muche to ſaie, in like ſorte of her ſelf: vaine ſhall thei accoumpte me, a light, and liyng dame. But when theſe thynges ſhall bee accompliſhed, then ſhall thei remember me againe, not as a detyng, or as a ſenſlis wight, but as a true ſouthſaier, or prophetiſſe of the higheſte. From this Sibyl Erithrea, the Romaines at tymes receiued many vearſes, whiche Feneſtella with ſilence paſſeth not in his fiftene Forces, ſaiyng, that by ordinaunce of the Senate, thei ſente Ambaſſadours vnto her, onely to haue (if it ſo might pleaſe her) of her propheſies, whiche frō her brought backe papers in greate number, whiche were bothe carefully, and curiouſly reſerued in the Capitoll, emongſte others ſome, whiche thei alſo had receiued before. This womā was of Erithrea, a toune of Ionyum, in the Prouince of the leſſe Aſia, adioinyng vnto Caria, whiche I would the reader ſhould certainlie vnderſtande, for that many other tounes are alſo of this name, as one in Libia, an other in Boecia, the third in Locris, the fowerth in Cyprus, but to aſſure vs that ſhe was of this Erithrea in Ionyū, Strabo maie onely in this place Strabo lib. 4. The ſixt Samia ſuffice. The ſixt Sibyll was of Phytō, a toune in the Iſle of Samos, inuironed with the ſea Egeum, borderyng on Thrace, or as others ſome ſuppoſe, in that other Iſle of Samos cōpaſſed with the ſaied ſea, right againſt Epheſus, for which cauſe ſhe had to name Silia Samia, of which remembreth E
                        •
                     atoſthenes. The ſeuenth was Cumana, otherwiſe Amaltea, how bee it, ſome others gaue her to The ſeuenth Cumana. name Demophila. Suidas termeth her Hierophila: neuer the leſſe Cumana was ſhe called, for that ſhe bothe dwelt and propheſied in the toune of Cumas in Italie, not farre of from Baias. Of this woman writeth Dyoniſius, Halicarnaſleus, Solinus, Aulus Gellius, & Seruius, ſhe brought to be ſold to Tarquine the proude, kyng of the Romaines

nine bookes (though Suidas otherwiſe ſuppoſe, that it was to Tarquimus Priſcus) for whiche ſhe demaunded three hundred Crounes, or other peeces of golde, ſuche as might be, or was, in Rome at that tyme moſte currante, but for that the kyng thought her therein vnreaſonable, he refuſed vtterly theſe her offered marchaundiſes, by meanes whereof incontinently, ſhe did three of theim in his preſence to be burned, not leauyng therefore, to aſke againe the whole price, for the other ſixe, whiche thyng the kyng diſdainyng more then, then at the firſte, began to deride her, chargyng her with follie, whence ſhe again taketh others three, and as the firſt, ſo burned them immediatly, demaunding for the remnante, the whole price of the nine, where at, and at whoſe conſtancie, the kyng then muche amaſed, imagining that thei contained ſome ſtraunge, and hidden miſteries, bought theſe three, at the price of all the others, whiche afterwarde were laied vp, and reſerued in the Capitoll, in meruailous honour, and reuerence of all the people. Plinie writeth that ſhe had but thre in all, of whiche ſhe burned, as he reporteth twoo receiuing notwithſtanding for the third, the value of thē all, but how ſo euer it were, it ſufficeth that theſe bookes were had in ſuche greate reuerence, ſo kepte, and reſerued, with theſe of the other Sibylles. For as M. Varro alleageth out of Lactantius, the Romaines with inceſſant paine, ſought throughout all Grece, and Italie, thorowe Aſia alſo, and euery parte thereof, for all bookes, vearſes, or propheſies whatſoeuer, that might, or could be founde any where of theſe Sibylles, and eſpecially emōg the others of that excellent Erithrea, for accompliſhemēt whereof, and more expedite gatheryng of theſe foreſaied papers, fiftene menne of honour, were charged with this buſines, none medlyng, or dealyng beſides them in theſe matters. Feniſtella recordeth, that whē the Capitoll was burned, the Senate ſente backe againe to Erithrea, humblie requeſtyng her, to inriche them ones again, with her

bookes, if it ſo 
                     •…
                  ight pleaſe her. Whence it maie be preſumed, that thei had not Cumanaes verſes onely, but euery the propheſies of eche, and al the others: and that, that Sibyll, of whiche Virgil maketh mention in the beginnyng, or entrie, of his ſixt of Aeneydos, which then dwelt or continued in Cumas, where he affirmeth that Aeneas imbarkte hym ſelf, ſhould bee ſome other Cumana, not this of whiche we now haue ſpokē, by common accompt, and reckning, the ſeuenth of that order: for it hardly may be thought, that Virgil knew of any Sibyll, at that time, when Aeneas firſte entered into Italie, ne yet that ſhe liued in the daies, of the fifte kyng of Rome. And Seruius interpretyng theſame place, ſaieth: of neceſſitie it nedes muſte be, that ſhe, that ſolde theſe bookes, ſhould alſo bee called Cumana, though in trothe her name were nothing ſo at all, this woman alſo died in the ſaid toune of Cumas. The eight was borne within the territorie of Troie, in the toune of Marmiſa, ſuche, and ſo auncient, that as Heraclides 
                  The eight Hel Ieſpontia. 
                  Ponticus writeth, ſhe liued in the tyme of Solon the Philoſopher, and of that greate, and mightie Cyrus. The ninthe was borne in Phrigia, and Propheſied dwellyng The ninth Phrigia. The tenth Albunea or Tyburtina. in the toune of Ancira. The tenthe hight Albunea, borne at Tibur ſixtene mile from Rome, whens alſo ſhe is called ſome tymes Tiburtina. So theſe Sibylles, lefte many bokes and verſes, in whiche thei Propheſied, of ſundrie thynges to come, but principally of the proſperous, or aduerſe ſtate of Rome: ſo that the Romaines, in euery their affaires, diligently peruſed, and with reuerence all their bookes, or papers, orderyng, and directing them ſelues, continually by thē. And as when we would be credited, and be thought to ſpeake a truthe, we vſually will ſaie, it is written in the Goſpell, ſo alſo ſaied thei in like ſort of the Sibylles, ſuche was their affiaunce, or greate truſte in theſe women. For proofe whereof Iuuenal paſſeth ſuch a vearſe, Credite me vobis folium recitare Sibyllae, whiche he ſo ſaied, for that theſe women, gaue

foorthe their Propheſies, written in leaues of trees, as Virgil well witneſſeth in his ſixt of his Aeneydos. Cicero with great reuerence ſpeaketh alſo of them, eſpecially in his booke De diuinatione, where he thus muche ſaith, as we tofore haue ſaied, that out of their firſte, & greate letters of euery vearſe, ſenteēces of weight, & great matters ſtil were drawen. Among other thinges manie, eche one of theim haue ſpoken, of our faithe, and of the Chriſtian religion, of the birth, the life, and of the death of Chriſte, as we efteſones tofore haue alſo ſpecified: as among the others, the Sibyll Delphica alſo ſaide. A Prophete ſhall be borne of a woman not knowyng man: and an other this, he that yet is to come, ſhall here after come, he ſhall raigne in pouertie, his greate & mightie force ſhall he to fewe diſcouer, out of a virgines woumbe ſhall he alſo bée borne. Ioſephus againe (a Iewe though he were by race, and eake by his profeſſion) ſpeakyng of the tower of Babilon this much reporteth, that a certaine Sibyl rememberyng when firſte men ſpake but one language, ſaithe, that thei builte to theim a proude, and haute Tower, as if by the ſame thei ſhould haue entered in to heauen, but God ſente fourth greate windes to raſe, & to ſubuerte it, as alſo diuers tongues, the ſpring of deuiſion, and diſcord among the people, whence this Tower gained the fitte name of Babilon. Theſe thinges and others, the ſemblable, writen by theſe Sibylles, haue well been recorded by Chriſtians, Iewes, and Gentiles, whiche the Gentiles repleate with ſinne colde neuer yet vnderſtande: but the Chriſtians as ſoone, as theſe Propheſies came to their handes, as well recorde Lactantius Firmianus, Euſebius, and Saincte Auguſtine, with others, gathered thence greate fruict, and comforte immediatly, the Panym, and the Gentile neglectyng theim to their confuſion. Beſides theſe were yet ſome others, that alſo were called Sibylles, reputed as fore ſhewers, or fore ſaiers of thinges to come, as Caſſandra the doughter of Priamus, Campuſia

Celofonia the doughter of Calcas, Manta Theſſalica the doughter of 
                     
                        •
                     ireſias the Thebane, but all hiſtories, onely accorde on the aboue ſaide tenne.
            
            
               Wherefore ſleepe by nature was geuen vnto man, and that to ſleape to muche is bothe noiſome, and domageable. Chap. 3.
               
                  SLéepe was geuen man for his preſeruation, for that nothing hauing life is ther that ſleapeth not. Ariſtotle ſaith Ar. lib. 4. de animalibus. that al creatures hauing bloodde, take their repoſe, and ſleape, in whiche place he proueth by reaſon, and by experience, that fiſhes alſo at tymes as other thinges dooe ſleape. Sléepe is a ſurceſſing of all the ſenſes from trauaile, whiche is, or is cauſed, by certaine euaporations, and fumes, riſing of our meate, and ſuſtenaunce receaued, mountyng from the ſtomake immediatly vnto the braine, by whoſe greate coldnes theſe vapors warme are tempered, caſtyng into a ſlumber euery the forces, or ſenſes exteriour, at whiche tyme the vitall ſpirites retiryng to the harte, leaue all the members of the bodie in a ſleape, vntill ſuche tyme againe, as theſe ſaide vitall ſpirites (whiche are the onely inſtrumentes, by whiche the Soule bothe gouerneth, and ordereth the whole bodie) recouer newe force, and ſtreangth to theim againe, and ſo theſe vapors, or ceaſſyng, or diminiſhynge mā againe awaketh, or retourneth to himſelf, more apte then to his buſines, then at any tyme tofore. Of theſe occaſions of ſleape, Ariſtotle is long in his booke De ſomno, & vigilia: and Plutarche reciteth the opinions of ſundrie philoſophers, with many natural reaſons concerning the ſaide matter. But although it be good, and neceſſary for the body, yet muſt it not be with exceſſe and immoderatly taken, for that to muche fleepe (as well recordeth Ariſtotle)
                  
weakneth the ſpirites, of the bodie as well, as alſo of the Soule, euen as moderate, and competent reaſte, bettereth theim, increaſing, their vigor and their force. For as many thinges are neceſſary, and nedeful in mans life, ſo taken in exceſſe, annoie, and greue vs muche, as to eate who feleth not how hunger vs compelleth? and yet, who to muche eateth, repenteth it, we ſee: in ſemblable ſorte exerciſe with moderation alſo pleaſeth, but in exceſſe therof no man hath any liking. So ſleepe then muſt be taken, for neceſſitie onely, to reuiue, refreaſhe, and comforte the wery ſenſes, the ſpirites alſo vitall, and other wery members. For to much ſleape (beſides that it maketh heauie the aboue ſaide ſpirites, and ſenſes, the partie alſo becometh ſlouthfull, weake, and effeminate with ouer muche idlenes) ingendereth muche humiditie, and rawe humors in the bodie whiche commonly aſſault it with ſundrie infirmities, meſſenges of death, and of finall ruine: for when we to muche fleape all the moiſtures, and humors of the bodie, with the naturall heate retire to the extreame partes therof, no where purgyng, or euacuatyng, that what ſo is redundant. So then vnmeaſured ſleepe, is not onely forbidden by philoſophers, and phiſiciens, but alſo, is a thing odious to the wiſe, & vertuous. Ariſtotle ſaieth that while wee ſleape, and ſlumber, no difference is knowen betwixte the wiſe man, and the foole, and ſurely were there none other cauſe, to breake, and call the wiſe man, from long, and weary ſleape, but onely to eſchewe, and vterly refuſe, in any pointe to bee like, or reſemble hym that is not, yet therefore ſhould he flie it (though moderate ſleape geue life, and be therefore right neceſſarie) conſideryng that he that ſleapeth, is not then as one liuyng. And as Plutarche addeth in his boke, of the contention of water and fire, who ſo ſleapeth hath none other force, or vnderſtandyng ſleapyng, then if him ſelfe were deade, a colde, or ſenſlis carrion. Plinie alſo is of this minde ſaiyng, that ſléepe ſtill bereueth vs, of the

one halfe of our life, for that when we ſleape, we neither knowe, nor féele whether we liue or not. Ouide with other Poetes, and men of like learnyng, tearme ſleape an Image, or purtraite of death, and in the Scriptures ſleepe, is compared vnto death, as where Saincte Paule ſaieth, brethren, we will not, that ye be ignorant of theſe that are a ſleape: by whiche woordes he meaneth theſe that now are dedde, and a little after, God ſhall draw out after hym, thoſe that haue ſlepte in Chriſt. Slepe alſo is the figure of negligencie, and of ſloth, whiche theſame S. Paule againe, in plaine woordes vttereth, my brethren, it now is tyme ye ariſe, & wake out of your ſlepe. Slepe alſo ſignifieth ſynne, as hath Sainct Gregorie, who ſaith that to ſlepe, is to continue, and perſeuere in ſynne. And againe, if that to ſlepe muche, had not been accoumpted ſynne, Saincte Paule then neuer had remembred theſe Paul. cap. 4. primae epiſt. ad Theſ. woordes ſo often, awake ye iuſte, and leaue any more to ſynne. Lette vs beginne to ſhame then, that ſpende the greater parte of our tyme, in ſlepe, and in our bedde, for ſurely who ſo doeth, his offence is nothyng leſſe, then his that all daie doeth ſitte, in fatte diſhes ſurfettyng, like a groſſe, and ſwolen Epicure, conſideryng theſe creatures, ſhould onely be taken, to the ſole ſuſtentation, and maintenaunce of life, and not to fill, or pamper voluptuouſlie the bellie: in whiche ſorte ſlepe muſte alſo bee taken, onely for neceſſitie, nothing at all for pleaſure. Sith then ſlepe none otherwiſe muſte be vſed, lette vs now ſpeake in what ſorte is beſte to ſlepe, whiche waie, and how to tourne, beyng laied doune in bedde to reſte vs, to the intent that our ſlepe maie not annoie, but profit vs. Suche then as are of bodie not impotente, or leſſe hardie, ſhould paſſe as ſome ſuppoſe, their firſt ſlepe on the right ſide, but after that, the greater part of the night, vpō the left, thēce chaungyng towardes the mornyng, vnto the right again. The reaſon is, for that mannes ſtomacke is ſo ordered, that the mouthe thereof, ſomewhat more bendeth towardes

the right ſide, then it doeth to the left, but the bottome contrary wiſe to the leafte, declining from the righte. So ſlepyng one hower, or twoo, on the right ſide, the ſtomack ſtretcheth foorthe it ſelf at large vpon the Liuer, whence twoo ſinguler commodities inſue, the firſte, that the ſtomacke ordereth, and inlargeth her ſelf in wiſſhed maner, by meanes whereof, it paſſeth with more eaſe, and contentment, the late meates receiued, or nutriment what ſo euer: the ſecōde the moiſture, or humiditie of the foode in the ſtomacke, cooleth, refreſheth, and comforteth the Liuer, by meanes whereof, the naturall heate waxeth ſtrong within the ſtomacke, whiche mattereth not a little to haſten the digeſtion. This dooen it ſhall not be diſcommodious, to turue vnto the other ſide, on whiche beyng ſometymes laied, the Liuer ſtraight imbraceth, and couereth the ſtomacke, whēce in this maner aided, it perfecteth, and cauſeth immediately digeſtion. How bée, it, it alſo ſhall be expedient, ſome what before you riſe, ones againe to tourne, and caſte you on the right ſide, to the intente the ſtomacke, diſburden, and diſcharge it ſelf again of the Liuer, expellyng all noiſome aire, and ſuperfluitie of the digeſtion paſſed. This rule maie profite ſuche, as haue their Liuer temperate, their ſtomacke alſo not watriſhe ſtill, and colde, and to whom in fine, theſe twoo are well affected: but vnto hym whoſe Liuer percaſe maie be inflamed, whoſe ſtomacke alſo is ſubiect vnto cold, which bothe are common in many to bee ſeen, to hym I thinke it noiſome to ſlepe on the right ſide, for that the ſtomack then falleth, and reſteth on the Liuer, ſtrainyng or chargyng it, on euery ſide or parte, whēce in exceſſe it heateth and inflameth immediatly, the higher parte of the ſtomacke, remainyng ſtill vncouered, coolyng ſo, and weaknyng more then before, beſides that the Liuer draweth alſo to it, euen that little heate, that before was in the ſtomacke, whence conſequently inſueth, late, and il digeſtion, the bodie indiſpoſed, leſſe apte to folowe any thing.

Wherefore, whoſe ſtomacke is colde, but Liuer contrary wiſe inflamed, and hoate, beſte ſlepyng is for hym continually on the left ſide, for that the ſtomacke couered on euery ſide with the Liuer, it happely haſteneth, and perfecteth digeſtion: and concernyng the Liuer, liyng ſo a lought, it bothe is diſcharged, and diſburdeined of the ſtomacke, hy meanes whereof it cooleth, cleane voide of inflamations. Some alſo ſlepe grouelyng, their face, and bellie dounewardes, whiche ſemblablie aideth, and comforteth digeſtion, for that it both draweth, and retaineth the heate naturall in the ſtomacke, whiche thence expelleth, and exileth all ſuperfluities. The contrary happeneth to them that ſlepe on their backe, the face open, and directly vpwarde, for that the naturall heate is diſperſte in partes abrode, leſſe apte, or leſſe able to perfecte, or cauſe digeſtion, for neither can the ſuperfluities bee purged well by the mouthe, ne yet by any other cundites, or ordinary paſſages, but arreſte theim continually in the ſtomacke, and in the throate, whence ſome tymes ſpring vehement ſuffocatiōs, the fallyng euill alſo, with others many the ſemblable, and like infirmities, The wiſe alſo here learne vs, that we ſlepe not to muche, ſtretcht forth throughout our bedde, for thence again digeſtion, of part maie alſo be weakened: for as hath the Philoſopher, whē the vertues, and forces are vnited well together, the operation of nature is then ſo muche the ſtronger, and ſo liyng of parte, drawne as it were togither, that parte of the bodie, whiche couereth nexte the ſtomacke, ioigneth more cloſe vnto it, comfortyng, and warmyng it more then it did before. Theſe rules percaſe maie profite, the daintie, the delicate, and eke the weaker ſorte: but concernyng thoſe that are luſtie, and well diſpoſed, the beſte aduice I maie, or any other giue them, is that thei retain theſame cuſtome, that thei tofore haue vſed.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of three ſundrie doubtes, whiche the auncient Philoſophers were neuer able to reſolue, with the cauſes why. Chapt. 4.
               
                  THE aunciente Philoſophers, by the meruailous inſtincte of God, curiouſly ſearchte out the cauſes, of eche the workes of nature, aſſertainyng their propoſitions, without contradiction, or repugnauncie, of any others. Yet neuer were thei able to reſolue theſe three thinges, of parte doubtfull, and of ſome importance with the cauſes aſſured of their ſpryng, and beyng. The firſt is, that thei well knewe, there was giuen vnto man by nature, a deſire neuer to dye, or departe hence, neuer to fele ſmarte, or any annoye what ſoeuer, but continually to ſugiorne, with felicitie perpetuall, and pleaſure in this worlde, neuer ſauoryng of any lacke, or defaulte of any thyng, but yet could not attaine to that deſired ende or marke. And on the other ſide well aſſured, that GOD and Nature, neuer attempted any thyng in vaine, and farther that this, mannes appetite proceded onely of nature, toilyng, & ſuppoſyng herein to finde the cauſe, eſpecially that this axiome in any other thing neuer failed, thei folded, and refolded theim ſelues, in infinite perplexities, ceſſyng in diſpaire, to loſe this knotte or ſcruple. The ſeconde was that thei ſaied, that eche manne felte in hym ſelf, a certaine naturall, and peruerſe inclination of the fleſhe, and farther, a ſenſuallitie plaine contrarie to the aboue ſaied deſire, or appetite, whiche was not to dye, or ſauour of corruption, as in this carnall motion, whiche caſteth man into ſundrie daungers, and infirmities, ſhortnyng his tyme, and his daies ſo muche deſired. The ſemblable alſo riſeth of exceſſe in ſurfeting, beſides that others ſome againe, deſirous ſodainly to mounte to greate pompe, and honour, haſſarde themſelues to winde

the ſporres in field, where cōmōly thei fall, or els returne oft times, with a fearce, & troubled minde, or in fine ſome miſhap or infortune there betides thē, an ende al cōtrary to that thei ſo muche affected. The third is, that in the order of nature, the bodies inferiour, are gouerned by the ſuperiours, as for example the elementes, by the bodies celeſtiall: the Orbes, or Spheares of the Planettes (as Philoſophers will) by the intelligences, and they againe by the firſt maker, or mouer of al thinges, God the onely and the ſole cauſe, and prince eternal. But in man alone this order is now peruerted, who being of two partes, to weete the ſoule, & bodie, we ſee that the fleaſhe in truth both vile, and abiecte, rageth, and rebelleth againſt the minde, and reaſon, and that whiche worſt is draweth it, to his owne frowarde will and pleaſure, whence the Apoſtle ſaide, that he in his members felte, a lawe contrarie, and repugnant to the lawe of reaſon, mouyng it to ſinne, and to vniuſt rebellion. The philoſophers therfore that liued before the commyng of our ſauiour knew nothyng at all, the occaſion of this diſorder, but curiouſly ſekyng ſome cauſe thereof, or reaſon, fell into ſundry erronious, and fonde opinions. Whence Anaxagoras ſaide, that this monſtroſitie, or diſordered rebellion, began at the firſt, in the beginnyng of the worlde, whē all thinges were folded without regarde, or reſpect in that auncient Chaos: for ſeparating this force of reaſon by diſcorde and reioynyng it againe afterwarde by concorde, it ingendereth euerie thing good, and perfecte in his kinde, man alone excepted, whoſe body it vniteth ſtoberne, and diſloiall, with the ſoule onely abſolute, and reaſonable. And therfore as theſe twoo, in this Chaos firſte diſagreed, ſo euer more continue thei in diſcorde, and in enmitie, contrarie to the rule, and order of all other thinges. In this ſorte this poore, and leſſe aduiſed philoſopher, attributed the faulte hereof to the diuine prouidence. Others alſo ſaide, that this onely happened, by diuerſitie of conſtellations,

vnder which man was both borne, and conceaued. Ariſtotle neuer hardned himſelf, plainly and appertly to vnknot this preſente ſcruple, but rather he gainſaieth it, himſelf affirmyng, that mans will is naturally inclined to euill, ſo that with greate difficultie, it is, or maye bee brought ſubiecte vnto reaſon. And in an other place hee ſaieth, that the felicitie whiche manne by vertue here acquireth, is the abſolute, and perfecte gifte of God alone. To conclude then, vertue, in the action, or operation where of, the felicitie of man fully conſiſteth, muſt be the gifte of God, and not of nature onely. On the other ſide the Manichies deſirous to yelde ſome reaſon of this peruerſe, and iniuſte order ſaide, that in manne were twoo ſoules to geather, the one good, of the true and perfecte ſubſtaunce, of the prince of light, the other impious, and accurſed, takyng his ſpring of the Prince of darckenes, whence this warre, was this in man continued. Origen ſaieth, that before the creation or frame of the worlde, all ſoules ſinnyng againſt the diuine maieſtie, were kept and reſerued in heauē for a time, but afterward for their puniſhmente, were plaſte againe in bodies, of harde, and noughtie nature, whence this rebellion, in man, in this ſorte liueth. But all theſe opinions both erronious, and deteſtable, are confuted by Sainct Auguſtine writyng againſt the Manichies, in his booke De duab. anim. and in an other of his, De nat. boni. where with longe reaſons moſt learnedly he ſheweth, the cauſe why they neuer attained to the knowleage, or felyng, of this foreſaide diſorder, which was for that they neuer had hearde, or knowen any thing of the ſcriptures, by whiche we fully are reſolued in euery, and all theſe ſcruples, by whiche alſo it is euident, that both theſe propoſitions are aunſweryng, and conſonant vnto the order of nature. To weete that God, and nature attempte nothyng in vaine, and that it againe is conuenable, that man by nature ſhould feare, and refuce to taſte of death, deſirous to liue in continued

ioie, and pleaſure, though he yet neuer attaine thereto in any ſorte: ne yet therfore is this deſire of his in vaine, but rather accordeth perfectly with nature, but not to attaine to the effecte, or ende thereof, is to manne an accident, and therefore leſſe naturall. For God created man, firſte to liue immortall, in ſuche ſorte that accordyng to the opion of moſte diuines, he neuer ſhould haue died, or taſted of any miſerie, had he, or kepte, or obſerued the cō
                  maundementes geuen him, but hauing tranſgreſt theim he ſtreight became ſubiecte, to the ſtormie tempeſtes of this world, and finally to death: and this by diſobedience, man here hath purchaſte anguiſhe, the graue, and corruption. So as the Apoſtle ſaieth, by the ſinne of diſobedience, death firſt crepte in, and entered into this worlde. Hence nowe it then is euident, that death was neither naturall in our firſt father Adam, ne after him in vs, but caſuall and accidentall, as nothyng at all leſſe mente vs by the diuine prouidence. Now then this doubte, maie alſo this be reſolued, that the deſire neuer to die, or to endure annoie, is lent vs from nature, and that not in vain, for that it ſome tymes was in vs, if manne then had not ſinned) aſſuredly to haue attained, the effecte ſo much deſired: but beyng (as we are) rebellious and obſtinate this deſire ſtill remaineth, but ſo to be, is denied vs. The ſeconde doubte alſo, by this meanes may be reſolued, for that through glotteny, and venerie, we haſten our fall, and ruine. In ſemblable ſorte the thirde alſo, by the ſinne of Adam, by meanes where of, he fell from that originall iuſtice, or ſtate of grace, whiche God before to hym, had freely geuen, and graunted, ſeruyng hym to moderate, his life, and each his actions. Whence immediatly began to followe this diſordre, for reaſon that ſhould rule, and order thinges aright, lieth ſubiecte vnto the will, and to euery the ſenſes: ſo that it appeareth plainly, that thys peruerſe order, is in no reſpecte naturall, but (as is ſaide) of fortune, and altogether caſuall. By which meanes we

here conclude, that thinges of greateſt excellencie, and of aſſured perfection ſhould, and ought to gouerneth others of baſe condition, and this neuer miſſeth, or faileth at any tyme, as is more then plaine, in euerie the bodies, immixte, and celeſtiall, but although in manne experience ſhewe the contrarie, that iſſueth of fortune (who by hys fall hath merited not that, but greater puniſhment) and not at all from nature.
            
            
               What ceremonies the Romaines vſed before they denounced warre to any prince or countrie. Chap. 5.
               
                  WHo ſo hath readde of the holy ceremonies, and religious obſeruations, practiſed cōtinually by the aunciente Romaines, as wel in matters concerning peace, as in thoſe alſo of warre, maie nothing at all mearuaile, of all theirs ſo many, and ſo famous victories, againſt ſuche migtie Princes, ſuche warlike and bluddie nations, nor on the other ſide might thinke it, or ſtraūge, or els impoſſible, to ſée the fatall ruine of this greate; and ſtately empire, which firſt of all beganne, when contemptuouſly thei firſt diſdained theſe ſolemnities. For as we ſee by examples of infinite hiſtories, by how muche the more deuoutly, they obſerued the 
                     •
                  boue ſaide vſages, ſo muche the more grewe this Romaine ſtate, and empire, their capitaines alſo happy, and renoumed, and dreadde throughout the world, as is and maie be ſeen in Pompe and in Brennus, with others, more knowen, and more then I canne remember, whiche though they were in deede idolaters, voide of al knowledge, or perfecte feling of God, yet of parte it appeareth that God ſtill was propitious to the fautors of religiō, which percaſe might be to this, and none other ende, that as this people was ialous

of this religion, of which thei yet had no perfect, nor none other aſſured grounde, ſo by more ſure reaſon, they gladly ſhould haue bene Patrones and Protectors of the true and Chriſtian faith, if it had been to theim, as to vs it is reuealed. By the effecte it then is euident, that long tyme he kepte, and preſerued theim in proſperitie, with fortunate ſucceſſe in their affaires tēporall. The ceremonies then which the Romaines vſed in time of peace, are many and diuers, whiche I leaue to ſpeake of, for that if I ſhould all penne theim, I ſhould wery, & greue percaſe the reader, & to ſpeake therof to little, were iniurious in my phantaſie. Wherfore I ſhall in this place remember fiue onely, whiche they orderly obſerued before thei proclaimed warre againſt any prince, or countrie, to the intent that Princes of our tyme may ſee, how muche they erre, raſhlie to denoūce, warre and hoſtilitie, not crauing firſte Gods aſſiſtaunce, his aide, and his ſuccour: and farther that thei alſo maie knowe, that hēce onely, on them befalleth, commonly ſuche euill, aduerſe, and finiſter fortune, and finally how farre in pointes of religion, thei in truthe be inferiour, to theſe Ethnikes, and Idolaters. Now then when newes came to Rome of any rebellion or that any prince barbarous, had inuaded their territories, or that any other had doen iniurie to their confederates, thei immediatly ſente foorthe their ambaſſadours vnto hym, by whiche the Senate, by faire meanes aduiſed hym, to make reſtitution of the domage, and wronge committed, and farther that he euer afterwarde, refrained from ſuche incurſions: whiche aduiſe if he eſtemed not, then did thei warre to bée proclaimed immediately. The Senate then hauyng choſen ſome capitaine for this iourney, did all their Sacrificatours, incontinently to be called, whiche receiued in commaundement, to praie vnto their Goddes, for the happie ſucceſſe, and good fortune of their people. For the Romaines went neuer forthe, to ſpill the blood of their enemies, before their prieſtes had

bitterly wepte, and praied in their Temples. After this the Senate, beyng aſſembled all togither, wente in good order to the Churche of Iupiter, where ſolemnely thei ſwore al, or plighted this faith, that when ſo euer yet, the enemie (againſte whom warre by theim was then denounced) would deſire a truſe, or peace againe with thē, or otherwiſe would craue pardō of his defaute, that mercie ſhould not in any caſe be denied hym. This dooen the newe Conſull, choſen for this expedition, haſtneth thēce againe forthwith vnto the Capitoll, where he voweth to hym of the Gods, in whom he repoſeth, or moſte hope, or confidence, that he will offer, if he retourne victorious, the beſte thyng that he hath, of what price ſo euer. And although the thyng offered, were of neuer ſo greate value, yet were the people bound to repais it hym againe. After this an Enſigne, hauing in it an Egle (whiche was the true, and auncient armes of the Romaines) was brought out into the filde of Mars, whiche thei onely did to this ende or purpoſe, that the people might knowe that it was then leſſe lawfull, to vſe any plaies, or other pleaſant ſpectacles, whilſte that their frendes, and kinſmenne, were then in filde, and in armes, and in fine the Pretor, beyng mounted on high, on one of their gates, ſounded a Trumpette, to call together their Souldiars, deliueryng with the ſame certeine Enſignes vnto the Capitaine. Hence it appeareth, that thei neuer woulde arme themſelues before thei firſt had appeaſed, and honored their Gods, crauing their aſſiſtaunce in that battaile, or fight, againſt their ennimies. For if the Conſull or Capitaine, aſſigned by the Senate, happely ſubdued any Prouince, or Citie, not valiauntly, and honourably, but by prodition and by tretchery, he afterwarde ſhould be puniſhed by the ſaide Senate greuouſly. Where of we finde ſundry examples, of whiche I ſhall remember but twoo here preſently, the one of their excellent prowes and vertue, the other how thei handled one, that by a diſhonorable

policie had conquired his ennimy. Fabritius on a time, with an armie of the Romaines liyng before Fidena, a certain ſcholemaiſter iſſued with his ſcholers out of the Citie, who ſuppoſing highly to gratifie this Capitaine, haſtely did himſelf to be brought into his preſence, whom incontinently this Conſull (although by the retainyng of theim, beyng as thei were, the ſoonnes of the moſt honorable, & richeſt of the towne, he ſtreight ſhould haue been receaued for their Lorde into the citie) not only refuſed to accepte, and receaue hym, but did hym to be ſtripte in their preſence naked, and bindyng his handes, gaue to euerie of his ſchollers, roddes to ſkurge hym, ſendyng this traitour backe ſo, vnto their frendes, and Parentes, by meanes whereof he wonde the hartes of the Citiſens, which immediatly yelded theimſelues ſubiect to the Romaines. On the other ſide, in the yere of the foundation of Rome three hundred, and eightene, warre was proclaimed by the Conſuls againſt the Sarmates, and others the inhabitauntes of the moūtaine Caucaſus, whiche as is ſien in tables of Coſmographie, deuideth Aſia in the midle, bandyng Scythia on the one ſide, and endyng in India, where by meanes of extreame colde, no Grape at all groweth. In theſe warres Lucius Pius was appoincted generall, where after many a bloody, and cruell ſkirmiſh, he ſōe times gainynd the better, ſome times the worſe. But during a truſe betixte them accorded, Lucius royally feaſted, and banketed the Capitaines of the Sarmates, and after this hauyng trained theim eftſones vnto hym, and conſideryng howe they pleaſed muche in bouſing of his wines, eſpecially for the greate ſkarſnes, and wante thereof in thoſe countries, in the ende againe inuited theim, to a ſolemne and riche ſupper, where he gaue theim of wine, in ſuche abundance, that thei al held theim ſelues, well contented of hym, yeldyng by this meanes their prouince tributory to the Romaines. This warre now ſo ended, and Lucius retourning home again

to Rome, demaunded of the Senate, to triumphe, for hys conqueſt, which was not onely, in moſt diſdainefull maner denied hym, but alſo this forme of victorie was ſo odions, that thei did hym to die for it openlie, on whoſe Toumbe this Epitaphe, for more contempte was written: here lieth Lucius Pius Conſull, who not by vertue of armes in the filde, but by banketyng diſhes on his table, not with the Launce, or Sworde in hande, but with good wine that ouer ranne the Sarmates. The Senate, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   yet contented with theſe excedyng cruelties, farther proclaimed throughout eache parte of Rome, that what ſo euer Lucius had doone, in the name of the Romaines, ſhoulde not be taken or reputed for any thing, and beſides it was written alſo vnto the Sarmates, that thei againe ſhoulde be free, in their priſtinate, and wounted maner.
            
            
               That it profiteth a Prince muche to be faire and well fewtered. Chap. 6.
               
                  THe greateſt matter in my iudgement, that any waie may cō
                  mende the maieſtie of a Prince (ſpeakyng now onely of graces exteriour) is the comely feauture, and proportion of his bodie, accompanied with a decent grauitie, an argumente infallible of pregnant ſapience. And although we ſome times ſee, the rule of Pithagoras, to faile, and be leſſe certaine, to wete that in a bodie crooked are crooked maners (for that vertue eftſones dwelleth in a frame leſſe fined, rough hewē, and ill proportioned) yet aſſuredly for the moſte part a man hardly ſhall finde the cōtrary. And albeit, that an honorable, aſpect or repreſentatiō, to no other purpoſe, maie profite a prince, yet purchaſeth

it hym reuerence, and inlargeth his authoritie, eſpecially if it haue alliance with bountie and honeſtie, as on the other ſide, it cōmonly is deminiſhed by odious deformitie: for as ſaieth Cicero the habite of vertue, is of ſuche greate force, and efficacie, that it conſtraineth vs to loue theim, that haue her in poſſeſſiō. Euen ſo in a prince the maieſtie of hys perſonage hath in it a certeine ſecret veneration, alluryng the hartes of his vaſſaules to loue hym, moued therto percaſe by ſome hidden phantaſie, perſwadyng theimſelues, that he is both iuſte, merciful, and vertuous, his life and maners conformable, to the feawture of his bodie. Hence certeine people barbarous ſuppoſed, that there was no manne of ſufficiente aduice, and diſcretion, to accompliſhe, and abſolue matters, of greate charge, and importance, but ſuch only as were by nature indued, with an ameable countenaunce, and good proportion of bodie. Macrobius reciteth that in the Iſle of Neroe, borderyng on the riuer Nilus, the inhabitantes, (which liue halfe as long againe as do we) chuſe continually, their Prince, the moſt valianſte, and moſte beautifulleſte perſonage (without regarde of his parentage) throughout their whole countrie. How be it, no man I ſuppoſe, ſo farre exileth from reaſon, that will not prefer the Prince harde fauoured beyng vertuous, before that other well fewtered, vertulis, and impious: but both beyng of condition equall, my 
                     •
                  elfe would preferre th'other before the counterfaite. Demetrius ſoonne of Antigonus was of a repreſentation ſo honourable, and excellent, that no Painter, or Caruer, colde in his tyme be found, that durſt to take on hym, in any ſorte to purtraie hym: for in hym was a certeine mekenes, and terrour together, conioigned with ſo muche good nature, and grauetie, that it appeared he was borne, in one, and the ſame inſtant, to be dradde together, and alſo to be loued. It is alſo writen that Marius, who ſo many times triumphed, was of ſuche a venerable, and louing coūtenance, that beyng

taken priſoner by his ennimie Sylla, a certeine frenthemam was ſente with expreſſe commaundement to kill hym, who beyng entered into the Priſon, with hys ſworde drawen, but beholdyng there ſo graue, ſo perfect, and ſo feareful a viſnomie was immediatly, ſo ſtrangely amaſed, that he turning retired, & leafte the priſon open, by which meanes he happely then ſaued his life. Alexander the greate, for that he was but of a ſmall ſtature, and not of face moſt amiable of all others, walkyng with hys welbeloue
                     •
                   
                  Epheſtion, the mother of the Kinge Darius came to ſalue hym, and knowyng not whiche of the two was in deede Alexander, reuerenced for the kyng moſte humblely Epheſtion, for that ſeyng hym of ſo honorable a repreſentation, ſuppoſed aſſuredly that he had been Alexandre. The olde hiſtories reporte, that Alcibiades, and Scipio, with others in any, honored, & aucthoriſed the dignitie of their offices, with their ſo reuerent, and comelie graces, withe vnited and connected, to their excellent vertues, profited not a little their common weale, and countrie On the other ſide we finde, that many princes, and Capitaines, as well in the olde tyme, as in this oure age: haue by meane of their baſe ſtature, liued in diſdaine and contempte of many, and that ſome alſo, for that thei were deformed, were at tymes in greate haſſard to haue loaſt their life, of whiche for examples ſake; I will remember two, the one long ſith, the other of late, though we lacke not; to this purpoſe, infinite others. Philopome
                     
                        •…
                     s. Duke of the Achaiens, a man renounied, and verie honourable, was of a ſmale ſtature, euill faeſte, and deformed, ſo that when he was cladde in baſe, and 
                     •
                  ile apparell (as was his maner eftſones to be) he rather ſemed to be of a vocation moſt abiecte, then a Prince orderyng, or gouernyng a count
                     •
                  is. This Duke pleaſed muche in huntyng, by meanes whereof, he often tymes came to Mega
                        •
                     la, where on a tyme 
                     •…
                  y earneſt in followyng the chaſe, wente 
                     •…
                  other from home then was perhappes his

will to haue doone, ſo that hee was faine to harber that night in the houſe of a certeine poore gentleman, in the coūtrie, one of his eſpeciall, and aſſured frendes, who alſo had then maried very lately before, hauing onely at that tyme but one ſeruante in the houſe, hauyng ſente for the his others, aboute other his affaires: when then this Duke was come to his gates, with out more he knockte a loude there at, immediatly his wife lokyng out at a windowe, demaunded whom he ſought, whēce he was, and what he woulde? to whom his ſeruaunt aunſwered, that it was Philopomines the Duke, that was come thether to lodge, with his frende that night. The gentlewoman ſtreaght amaſed, that on a ſoden ſhe ſhould receaue ſuche an honorable geaſte, and ſuppoſing theim bothe at the gate ſeruauntes to the Duke, whiche were fore ſent to aduertiſe theim of his comyng, and for as much as thei were but twoo onely, with out any more 
                     •
                  he opened to theim the gates incontinently, the Duke then with hys ſeruaunt beyng entred in to the Haule, ſhe ſendeth forth a Paege with ſpede, to ſeke her huſebande, whiche preſently was then at the nexte village, and turnyng her aboute to Philopomines and his ſeruant, willed them to ſitte doune, while ſhe prouided the ſupper, ſo buſied in ordering thinges aboute the houſe with her maide, no leſſe in truth trobeled, then almoſt amaſed, beganne now one thing, and then on other, not finiſhing or endyng at all any thing. So ſeeing her matters to goe but ſlackly forwarde, beholdyng the Duke faſte folded in his Cleake, whiche alſo percaſe was colder then hee gladly woulde haue been, (mouyng hym to laugh thereat beyonde meaſure, deſired him to put of his Cloke, and healpe to make the ſire before her ſeruant were returned, to the intent the ſupper might be redie againſt his Lordes commyug. Than tooke Philopomines a wedge in hande, beginning to ſunder Logges as faſt as he coulde, hauing firſt ſecretly charged his ſeruaunte, in no thing to do him then anie

reuerence or duetie, to the intent the poore gentlewoman might not know him to be the Duke. Nowe while he thus labored in cleauyng of Blockes, the maiſter of the houſe in greate haſt came in, who very wel knowing Philopomines, imbraſed him with greate reuerence, and demaunded of hym ſaiyng, my Lorde what do you with theſe tooles in hande? To whom he aunſwered with ſmilyng couutenaunce, my frende content thee, that I dooe my buſines, for herein paie I the price of my deformitie. In our tyme Ferdinande Kinge of Spaine, a Prince no leſſe diſcrete, then wiſe, but of ſtature rather little then reſonable, who alſo though he had a Princely face, or coū
                  tenance, and with the ſame of aduiſed, and politike gouernement, the other partes of his bodie were yet leſſe coreſpondent, beſides that continually he wente appareled in cloth, ſuche, and ſo made, that he of theſe that knew hym not, was rather reputed for a meane citiſen, thē for ſuche as he was, a greate and mightie Prince. The king on a tyme nowe paſſynge to Naples, with his wife the Quéene Iſabella, where hee at that tyme was earneſtly lookte for, and arriuyng in the mornyng with one Gally onely, the others leſſe redie, but folloyng after, was receaued of the inhabitauntes honorably, who while hys breakefaſte was then a prouidyng, whilſte alſo the Palace was then a furniſhyng, walkte alone without company in the greate haule, whither alſo at the ſame tyme by happe came a fiſher, whiche euen then had taken a goodly greate fiſhe, which he there mente to preſent vnto the king: but this fiſher not knowyng hym in dede, demaunded of hym, where the king might be, who incontinētly ſaid; that himſelf was he, whereat the fiſher began to laugh, ſuppoſing that he had but borded with hym merily, and beſought hym againe to learne hym where hee was, to whom he aunſwered, as before, that he was hee, but the fiſher neither ſeeyng in hym (as he thought) any the porte, or maie
                     •…
                  e of a Prince, withdrewe hymſelfe

with his fiſhe againe, wherat the king had greate ſporte, and laught. And immediatly certaine courtiers entering to whō, (after their accoſtomed, & vſuall reuerence doone to his maieſtie) the King ſaieth, laughing merily: gentlemen if ye geue not yonder good fellowe to vnderſtande, that I in dede am the king whom he ſeketh aſſuredly we ſhall not taſte, of that greate fiſhe for our breakefaſte. Whiche wordes as he thus ſpake, the fiſher againe returned, and ſeyng hym in ſuche ſorte, on euery ſide honored, imagened that he then, was King in dede, and ſo fallyng on his knees preſented to hym, his fiſhe. But thys happened to hym, a harmelis, a pleaſant, and a mery ieſt, farre otherwiſe, then an other chaunce, which afterward betided hym, by the very like, or ſame occaſion. For an other time beeing hym ſelfe at Barcellona, and following the ſacrament, with all his courte, in the daie of ye ſolēnization thereof, he ſodenly was aſſailed of a certeine Spaniarde, which with a weightie, and long dagger, reachet hym ſuche a blowe on the necke, that had it not been for a greate chaine that he wore on, whiche bare of, and defended the greateſt force therof, it very nigh had ſundred his heade from the bodie. This Spaniarde was incontinently apprehended, and the multitude doubtyng leaſte hee alſo hadde ſome conſortes, the ſoner to force hym to confeſſe therein a truthe, did hym to be rackte, in moſte cruell maner, but for all the tormentes that thei poſſibly might deuice, coulde not be brought to ſaie, that he hadde doone it for other cauſe, but that hymſelf, was moued in conſcience, onely for the diſdaine, and malice that he bare hym. And being demaunded, why he either ſhoulde malice, or diſdaine hym, aunſwered for nothing els, but for his euill fauored viſnomie, as alſo that he was ſo crookte, and ill fewtered, and that it ſo muche greued hym, that he had not diſpatchte hym, as any their cruell tormentes might any waie annoie hym. Sée nowe here then, theſe ſtraunge aduentures, for that not beeyng formed to the

contentation of men, we either are refuſed, or diſdained, walking efteſones in daunger, and perill of death.
            
            
               ¶ Of the horrible tyrannie of Ariſtotimes, a matter or ſubiecte not leſſe fittyng for a tragedie. Chapt. 8.
               
                  
                     ARiſtotimes by the onely fauour, and meanes of Antigonus tyrannouſly vſurped the ſeigniorie of Eleuſis, where he ruled as Prince ſo intemperately, that there was no kinde of mercileſſe crueltie, whiche he there practiſed not on the miſerable, and poore citezeins: for of nature was he more bloodie, and cruell, then any one other, that liued in his tyme. And the better to increaſe this his excreable villanie, he vſed ſtill the counſaill, and aduiſe of men barbarous, to whom he not onely committed the adminiſtration, and gouernment of al the whole countrie, but with the ſame alſo the garde of his perſone. Now emong other his cruelties, whiche he many committed, it ſhall not bée impertinent, for example, in this place to remember, that which he practiſed, more then tragicall, againſte Philomides, a citezein very honoble, and of good countenaunce. This Philomides hadde a daughter, of a maruailous good grace, and excellēt beautie, called Micca, on whiche a certaine ſoldiour, that hight Lucius, well fauoured of the tyranne, became inamoured by meanes whereof, he ſent to the father, that he immediatly, and without ſtaie, ſhould ſende him his doughter. Philomides all amaſed, at this vnchaſte demaunde, and with the ſame knowyng his aucthoritie with the tyran, dreadyng leaſte percaſe worſe ſhould betide hym, bothe he, and his wife earneſtly, intreated their doughter to go to hym. But the yong maide, whiche better loued her honour, then her life, as ſhe that had been chaſtly, and vertuouſly

brought vp, threwe herſelf doune on her knees before her father, imbraſyng hym, as harde as ſhe could doe poſſiblie, moſte humbly beſechyng hym, in no wiſe to permitte, that ſhe ſhould expoſe her ſelf, to ſuche, and ſo greate a diſhonor, and that he rather ſhould haſten, to ſee her dedde before hym, then with ſuche barbarous crueltie, ſo to be deflowred. The father then moued with theſe her many teares, beganne alſo to weepe in moſte bitter maner, ſo did the mother ſobbyng, and blubberyng with paine, and hauyng now ſtaied ſome little tyme, without reſolution, Lucius inpatient, in his immoderate villanie, not ſeyng her to come, as was his commaundemente, went himſelf in moſte furious rage to her fathers houſe, where findyng her, on her knees, imbraſyng her father, with thunderyng threates commaunded her, incontinē
                  tly to riſe, and followe hym. But ſhe beginnyng a fre
                     ••
                  e, then her moſte bitter plaintes, ſtaiyng, and refuſyng to riſe at his commaundement, this odious monſter forraged, trailed her aboute the houſe, rentyng her apparell, not ſparing to diſpoile her, till ſhe was al naked, beatyng her more cruelly, then my penne can here ſpeake, but ſhe with ſuche conſtaunte courage, ſupported this villanie, that ſhe neither ſkrichete there at, or vſed any exclamation, ſhewyng her ſelfe ready, to indure, and tolerate, what ſo he would, or could dooe to her more. At the ſight of whiche ſo horrible a ſpectable, the father and mother, bothe moued, in ſtraunge maner, weepyng, and criyng, fell on their knées before hym, beſeehyng hym to haue pitie, and compaſſiō, bothe on her, and them, but ſeyng that thei nothyng might gaine of this mercileſſe lecherer, began to appeale, bothe to the goddes, and menne. Where at this homicide, more wrothe then before, drew out his ſworde, and ſlue the maide, imbraſyng her fathers knees. At whiche moſte inhumane, and vnheard vilanie, Ariſto
                     
                        •
                     imes, was not onely not moued, but of the Citezeins, whiche blamed, or miſlikte of this tyrannie, ſome he did

to death, ſome others he baniſhed, ſo that more then .viij. hundred, by this meane in haſte fledde thence to Etolium whiche afterward wrote their earneſt letters to the tyranne, deſiryng hym that he woulde graunte licenſe to their wiues, & children to come vnto them, whiche thyng thei could not in any wiſe obtaine. But certaine daies afterward, he tretcherouſly did proclamation to bee made (as was the maner) vnder ſounde of Troumpette that it ſhould bée lawfull, for all the wiues of the baniſhed, with their gooddes, and children to departe to their houſebandes. Whiche newes to theſe dames, was ſo glad, and ioious, that thei forthwith beganne to make their males, and packettes, ſome prouidyng horſes, ſome waggons, and Charriottes, more eaſily to paſſe theim ſelues, their gooddes, and their children, but at the daie appointed, being all at the gate, at whiche thei ſhould paſſe, with all their waggons charged, as is fore ſaied, with their gooddes, and children, as thei were then ſettyng foreward in their iourney, there came againſte theim, all the garde of the tyranne, whiche with horrible threates, criyng a far of ſaied vnto theim, arreſte ye, ſtaie ye, whither will ye, ye harlottes? and approchyng to them, commaūded them in haſte to retourne, ouerthrowyng their Charriottes, and wagons, on the grounde, with all their gooddes, and children in theim. But theſe women, by meanes of the preſſe, leſſe able to retourne, ne yet to aſſure themſelues in that tumultuous thruſte, and that whiche was moſte lamentable of all, thei ſawe their children ſlaine, and diſmembered vnder horſe féete, and waggons, not able to helpe them in any ſorte, whatſoeuer. So that when theſe ſoldiours had chaſte into their companie againe, certaine women, and children that ſtragled out, hopyng to haue eſcaped their tyrannous, and bloodie force, thei draue thē all together, as a flocke of ſhepe, beatyng theim, and laiyng them on, vntill thei came to the palace, where when the tyranne had taken from theim, all their money, or

treaſure, he did theim to bée impriſoned togither, bothe theim ſelues, and their children. This crueltie ſo muche now diſpleaſed the citezeins, whiche not knowyng how, thei beſte might moue this tyranne to compaſſion, determined to ſende ſixtene Veſtall Nonnes, conſecrated to Denis, beyng apparelled in their moſte holie, and moſte religious habites, hauyng alſo with theim, all the ſacred thynges in their Churche, and ſo in good order, proceded the right waie to the palace, intendyng to craue mercie of the tyranne, for theſe women, and children. Whither when thei arriued, the garde beyng moued, with their reuerente ſolemnities, made theim eaſie paſſage, to the preſence of Ariſtotimes, who arreſtyng to vnderſtande the cauſe of their commyng, perceiued at the firſte, bothe what their ſute was, and commyng thether, where at al wrothe, tourned hym to his garde, checkyng theim maruailouſly, for hauyng permitted theſe Nonnes to enter. Wherefore the garde, without any reſpecte, either to their, or ſex, or Religion, with greate wannes that thei commonly carried in their handes, ſo miſerablie outraged theſe poore, and innocente women, that thei moſte pitifully were bothe beaten, and bruſed, or thei might paſſe out from the courte again: and farther, for that thei preſumed to enter into his preſence, eche of theim was condemned in twoo Talentes vnto hym. In this Citee was there a noble gentleman that hight Elanicus, twoo of whoſe ſoonnes, this tyranne had vniuſtly doen to die, but the fathers force (for that he was very olde, and decrepite he neuer at any tyme feared, or ſuſpected. This manne not longer able to ſupporte this outrage, this inſpeakable tyrannie, and oppreſſion of his countrie, determined by ſome meanes to auenge hym on the tyranne. Now while theſe thinges thus ſtode, the citezeins which were fledde (as is fore ſaied) into Etolium, had gathered togither, a certaine companie of ſoldiours, entryng with them in armes, into the countrie of the Eleuſions, where

thei gate certaine holdes, whiche thei ſtrongly fortefied, and determining to arreſt there, mouyng warre ſo to Ariſtotimes, ſundrie others of the ſaied countrie, came daily vnto them, ſo that quickly thei were growen to a reaſonable multitude. By meanes whereof the tyrāne, was in ſuche a maruailous perplexitie, that immediately he haſteneth to the aboue ſaied dames impriſoned, and for that he was of nature fell, and cruell, he rather thought to obtaine of them by minaſyng wordes, then by intreatie, or conrtuous ſpeache, and therefore commaunded theim, with rigorous threatenynges, that thei ſhould by Ambaſſadours, write vnto their houſebandes, that thei immediatly lefte, and retired, from their purpoſe, otherwiſe that he would murther all their children, & whippe their wiues naked aboute the citée. To whom theſe women would not aunſwere at all any thyng, whence all in choller, with frownyng face he crieth, acquainte me, I charge you, with your determinate reſolution. But this poore companie with feare all appalled, durſte not to anſwere hym one woorde in the worlde, eche of theim beholdyng, and lookyng on the others, as though thei nothyng had accompted of, or feared his malice. Now emōg the others, was there one Megeſtena, the wife of Temoleon, whiche as woll for the nobilitie of her houſebande, as alſo for her owne rare vertues, & honeſtie, was as the principall, honoured of all th' others. This woman at the commyng, and entrie of the tyranne, neither would her ſelf riſe, neither would ſhe permitte that any of the reſte ſhould, whiche at laſte, when ſhe had aduiſed her, of his diſcourſe throughly, without mouyng from her ſeate, or doyng any other reuerence, aunſwered without more as hereafter followeth. If in thee Ariſtotimes, were any kinde of wiſedome, or diſcretiō, thou neuer wouldeſt addreſſe thy ſelf vnto vs ſely womē, willing vs to preſcribe to our houſebandes by letters, what is moſte expediente for them, or what thei ought to doe, but rather ſhouldeſte

ſende vs ſafely hence vnto theim, vſyng thy ſelf in woordes more diſcrite, and ſober, farther in thy deedes ſhouldeſt thou alſo be more conſiderate then thou lately waſt, when thou in this ſorte diddeſte, bothe impriſon, and abuſe vs. And now againe perceiuyng, that there remaineth to thee, none other practiſe, wouldeſte vſe vs as inſtrumentes, with woordes to deceiue, and delude our houſebandes, as thou lately in like ſorte haſte abuſed vs, thou loſeſt thy labour, and trauaileſte in vaine, for we by thee againe, will neuer ſo bee betraied. Neither thincke thou them on the other ſide, to be in deede ſuche wantōs, that onely to gaine the liues, of theſe their children, to kepe, and ſaue their wiues from momentarie ignominie, thei will leaue to purſue, that whiche ſo honeſtly thei now haue enterpriſed, that I ſaie, whiche thei are bound to doe, for the libertie of their countrie: for the loſſe of vs, and their children, ſhall not be ſo greuous vnto theim, as thei ſhall be well ſatiſfied, if thei maie deliuer their countrie, and their neighbours from thy tyrannie. Megeſtina this aboute, yet to haue ſaied more, the tyranne could no longer refraine his ire, but in furious rage, commaunded her childe to be brought hym, whoſe bloud himſelf threatened preſently, to ſpill before her, but whileſt his miniſters ſought the childe, emong the others then there priſoners, the mother with maruailous conſtancie, called him by his name, ſaiyng: Come hether to me oh my little ſoonne, to th' intent thou rather dye in my handes, which tenderly loue thee, then with the ſworde of ſo barbarous, or monſter, or tyranne. Theſe woordes more moued Ariſtotimes then before, which laied his handes on his faucheon, incontinentely to haue ſlaine her: but Cilon then preſent, one of his familiers, ſtaied hym, labouring to appeace his harde, and cruell malice. This Cilon was one of them, whiche with Elanicus ſecretly, ſought the ruine of this tyranne, not longer able to ſupporte, or to indure his villanie. And in fine by good happe, ſo muche prenailed

with hym, that he did againe his ſworde into his ſcaberde, ſhewyng hym that it was a deede moſte ſhamefull and ignominious, and of all others moſte vnworthie of a prince, to laie violente hande, or dooe force on a woman. Shortly after a ſtraunge, or prodigious matter befell, fore ſhewyng the aſſured falle, and ruine of the tyrāne, for beyng in his bedde, hymſelf, and his wife, while the Cookes in the mornyng were buſied, prouidyng his breake faſte, an Eagle was ſeen to flie, with meruailons impetuoſitie, directly ouer the palace, lettyng fall a ſtone vpon the kynges chamber, preſicely againſte that place, where he laie in his bedde, and with the ſame giuyng, a greate, and loude ſcriche, vaniſhed out of the ſight, of all ſuche as behelde her. The tyranne thē awaking, through the noice of his people, which well behelde this ſtraunge aduenture, & maruailouſly amaſed at the diſcourſe thereof, cauſed to be called incōtinently a ſoothſaier, in whom he repoſed greate truſte, and confidence, to knowe (if it were poſſible) what this might ſignifie: who badde hym to be of good courage, and merie, and that this none other thyng, at all denoted, but that Iupiter had care of hym, and fauoured his doynges. But to the Citezeins, he ſaied the contrary, to whō he was aſſured, that he might vtter franckly, and without offence his minde, eſpecially for the malice thei bare to Ariſtotimes, for he eftſones warranted them, that the tyranne was then threatened from heauen, and then preſently liued in greateſt daunger that was poſſible. Whence Elanicus with his companie, ſuppoſyng it not good, to protracte the tyme any longer, determined to aſſaile hym the nexte daie followyng. This night then commyng Elanicus dreamed, that one of his ſoonnes came to hym, tofore executed by the tyranne, whiche with a loude voice cried earneſtly, and ſaied: father, why kepe you your bedde? why lye you now ſlepyng? why ſlacke you your matters? why ſtaie you ſo long? doubte you any thyng to morrowe, to be Prince of

this citée? Elanicus affiyng then maruailouſly in this viſion, haſtened in the mornyng earely, to finde out his confederates, whiche he exhorted without ſtaie, to ſette forward in their buſines. Euen in this ſame inſtant, newes came alſo to Ariſtotimes, that Craterus was come with greate force, to aide, and aſſiſte hym, and that thei preſently, incampte nigh vnto Olympia: whence he waxt ſo glad, and ioyous, that he then thought no occaſion remained more, of feare, and on a brauerie iſſued out of the palace incontinently, accompanied onely of Cilon, not lookyng, or caryng for his garde, that ſcatteryngly a loofe, and farre of followed hym. Whiche thyng Elanicus perceiuyng, and thinkyng that occaſion, was then well offered, not giuyng the ſigne betwixt them appoincted, lifted vp his handes, to the heauēs, and with a loude voice ſaid: what, longer abide you, ye valiaunte, and couragious? Why ſhewe you not your prowes, in the middle here of your Citée? Then Cilon immediately draweth out his ſworde, and ſlue one of theim, that in haſte, was come to waite on the tyranne out of the palace. And on the other ſide Ariſtotimes, ſeyng bothe Traſibolus, and Lampidus aſſailyng hym, and ſuppoſyng to eſcape theim, fled to the Temple of Iupiter, where he was ſlaine, by the multitude purſuyug hym, and his bodie drawen out thence, in the ſight of all men, libertie beyng proclaimed throughout the whole Citee. The multitude in heapes, incontinently then aſſēbled, but fewe yet came to ſee or behold, that lothſome carrion, before theſe women were deliuered, whiche haſtenyng to that place, ioiouſly honoured them, that by the death of the tyrāne, had deliuered their countrie. In the meane tyme, the people running in haſt to the palace, where the Queene, aduertiſed of the death of her houſebande, dreadyng muche that, whiche in déede inſued, lockte her ſelf vp in her cloſet ſecretly, where ſhe ſtrangeled herſelf, without the helpyng hande of any. Now had this tyranne twoo very faire doughters, bothe

of ripe yeres, and readie to bee married, whiche vnderſtādyng of the faule of their father, withdrewe theimſelues, in all haſte aparte, into their cabinette, whence thei incontinentely were drawen out, by force of the people, and diuers readie, violently, and without more to haue ſlaine theim, Megeſtena, with the reſte of the impriſoned women, ſkilfully appeaſed that their ragyng furie, heſechyng theim to abſtaine, from the yonge gentle women, conſideryng the tyranne (though other wiſe fell, and cruell) had neuer yet, thei all beyng his priſoners, imbrued hymſelf in the bloud of any one of thē. At the requeſt thē of theſe dames, eche weight was ſone appeaſed, whiche after cōſultation, reſolued on this poinct, that with their owne handes, thei ſhould doe themſelues to dye, chuſyng what death ſo euer, was to theim beſte likyng. Then were thei bothe ſhutte into a chamber togither, the elder neither in geſture, nor in woorde, ſhewyng any kinde of ſorrowe, tooke from her waſte, her girdle, faſtenyng it to a poaſte, and beyng readie therein to dye, exhorted her ſiſter, with manly courage to doe alſo the ſemblable: but the yongeſt then taking her ſiſter by the hande, beſought her moſte humblie, that ſhe might dye firſt, to whom the other aunſwered: euen as ſince our cradles, hauyng ſtill liued, and continued togither, I neuer yet denied you any your demaunde, ſo am I contented, to accorde you againe this your laſte, and fatall ſute, whiche is, that I liue vntill you bee dedde, although of all others, this aſſuredly will goe nigheſt me, to ſee thee myne owne ſiſter, to bee ſtrangled here before me. Now tooke then the youngeſt in hande her girdle, whiche with trēblyng fingers moſte pitifully ſhe knotted, the other aduiſyng her well, to faſten it aboute her necke, that ſhe more quickly, and more eaſily, might paie the tribute due vnto nature▪ which ſhe ſone after her fare well giuen to her ſiſter, dolefullie accompliſhed. When ſhe now was this paſte and gone, the other ſtretched foorthe her bodie, in moſte reuerent maner

poſſible, ſemblablie coueryng it, as appertaineth to the dedde. After which ſhe tourneth about to Megeſtena, moſte humblie intreatyng her, that after her death, ſhe would not permitte her bodie to lie naked on the yearth, whiche her requeſte, being eaſily graunted, ſhe tourning ſtrangleth herſelf, in the ſame girdle of her ſiſter.
            
            
               ¶ Why, and for what cauſes, men rarely aſpire, to the aſſured perfection of thynges in this life. Chapt. 9.
               
                  FIue principall thynges are there, that diſtourne manne from the ripe, and mature cognition of thynges in this life, whiche if he well knewe, he then might repute himſelf for perfecte, and wiſe. The firſte is the ignorauncie, or not knowyng, of his ende, to wette, his not knowyng, to what ende he is borne. For aſſuredly, if he well knewe it, he would no thyng leſſe pain hym ſelf, to attaine there vnto, then he preſently doeth, to aſpire to pompe, and honour, in whiche (appetite rulyng hym) his onely felicitie ſemeth to conſiſte. But in this caſe, I maie compare manne, to a kynges ſoonne in his infancie, of whom, if you will aſke, whiche he loueth better, the ſucceſſion of a kyngdome, or els an aple, or a cherie, whiche preſently you ſhall offer hym, it maie not bee doubted, but he will refuſe to bee kyng, to plaie with, or taſt of the aple, or cherie, and that; for that tofore, he percaſe thereof hath taſted: So fareth it with manne, who if he be demaunded, whiche he moſte affecteth, or riches, or learnyng, he at firſte will deſire, to be maiſter of money, ignoraunt, and leſſe wetyng, that the learned onely, and he alone is riche, and father, that it alſo is neceſſarie, that the ſage ſtill order, and gouerne his countrie, and that alſo without knowledge, honour is not honoured, but rather

becometh a note of ignominie, and ſlaūder, and that greate wealthe alſo without good letters, is the true pathe to ſenſlis brutalitie, the roote of preſumption, and accompliſhemente of ruſticitie: but the wiſe ſufficeth to directe hymſelf, and others, poſſeſte of theſe threaſures, that neuer maie faile hym. But this all happeneth vnto manne, for not knowyng, to what ende he is borne. The ſecond is, the immoderate vſe of pleaſures, of the minde, as well as alſo of the bodie, whiche bothe annoye, and droune, no leſſe the exteriour motions to vertue, then the interiour alſo, and theſe of the ſpirite. So that manne ſo folded in the filthe of this worlde, maie well bee reſembled, to the doughter of a Prince, faire, and beautifull, to whom alſo appertained after her father, the kyngdome, but for hauyng committed fornication, with a bond man deformed, and odious, is depriued thereof, to her eternall infamie. The thirde iſſueth of the euill diſpoſition in mā
                  nes bodie, whence manne, of learnyng, and good letters, for the moſte parte is incapable: and this ſome tymes is cauſed, by the place of his birthe, whence he taketh to be, of an imperfecte, and impure complexion, as in certaine countries in the Eaſt, where, as in partes of Africa, men are borne ſo ſenſlis, and beſtiall, by meane of the extremitie of heate in theſe ſoiles, that thei liue as brute beaſtes, incapable of reaſon: and on the other ſide, in the coū
                  tries Septentrionall, or Northe, in other ſome places, by extreame coldnes, are menne borne, ſo wilde, and ſauage that ſome of them refuſe not, to feede on mannes fleſhe, ſuche are the Gothes, and Oſtrogothes, with others. And theſe people maie be compared to an Egle, in whoſe foote there is faſtened a ſtone, of ſome waight, whiche letteth her, there to flie, where by nature ſhe deſireth, to wete, aboue the cloudes, in the ſupreme, and higheſte, region of the aire. The fowerth is the difficultie, and hardnes of the ſciences, for though man ſee, that in harte, and minde he deſire, to ſearche the truthe, and cauſes, of haute, and

profounde matters, yet findyng theim ſo labourous, and harde to vnderſtande, he vtterly giueth ouer his firſte attempte, and enterpriſe, and becometh like vnto an iye, whiche to looke on the Sunne, faſteneth it ſelf cloſely, whence iſſueth ſuche a pearſyng, and extreame brightenes, that it ſo eclipſeth, and troubleth the ſight, that it in no wiſe is able to looke thereon, or abide it. The laſte, and worſte of all the others is, a certaine affectiō, whiche manne hath conceiued in his youthe, eſpecially in theſe thynges, in whiche he hath been foſtered, and bredde vp, with long continuaunce afterwarde in theſame, for cuſtome eaſily conuerteth it ſelf into Nature, by occaſion whereof, there groweth in manne, a moſte aſſured deſire and ſinguler loue in theſe thynges, where vnto he hath been vſually accuſtomed, hatyng, and diſdainyng continually the contrary: and in this errour the whole worlde is this daie almoſte drouned. For ſee we not the ſame, in the yong children of the Turkes, which before thei come to be of iudgemente, or reaſon, abhorre, and deteſte all chriſtianitie, as doeth alſo the Iewe. Againe we ſee, that the peaſaunte, or countrie manne, for hauyng been nouriſhed, and accuſtomed to the countrie, dieted, and appareiled groſſely, as is their maner, flieth, and refuſeth the acquaintance, or companie of the courtier, as alſo of theſe others, that liue in well ordered, and ciuill citees: whēce A prouerbe among the Frenchmen. riſeth this prouerbe, vnhappie is that birde, that was bredde in an euill vale, for hauyng been foſtered, and ſtill kepte in theſame, ſhe can not at any tyme depart thence, and leaue it, though aſſured to bee els where better, and at more eaſe. Neither in this caſe onely, haue we experience here of, but farther our ſelues hate ſtraungers, and theſe of an other countrie, yea, though we neuer liued in their companie, or ſawe them, onely perchaunce, for that we haue heard euill of theim. In women alſo is this errour notorious, to whom ſo muche pleaſe theſe thynges, that thei haue accuſtomed, which though thei be in déede,

leſſe profitable, or honeſt, yet maie thei in no wiſe learne, or receiue the contrary. Finally this loue, of vſe, or cuſtome, with the diſlikyng of that wee knowe not, is almoſte generally ſeen, in all thynges of election. Wherefore we muſte baniſhe from vs, euery theſe impedimentes, to the ende we maie knowe (if it bée poſſible) perfectly to iudge, in caſes of difference: for in theſe thynges cō
                  ſiſteth the abſolute perfection in this worlde, the pathe alſo is it, to felicitie in the other: followyng the good huſbande manne, that well laboureth his ſoile, takyng from it firſt, all thiſtles, and euill weedes, and after beſtoweth in it, as order aſketh, good ſeede. So alſo the Phiſition that would reſtore to healthe, his ſicke, and weake patiente, pourgeth hym firſte, of all his corrupte, and ſuperfluous humours, for that in a matter euill, and ill diſpoſed, a newe forme eaſily, and at the firſte, is not induced. We then muſte indeuour by all meanes poſſible, for mā that is reaſonable, and yeldeth not vnto reaſon, but dwelleth ſtill, as wedded, to his owne fonde apetite, is as he that would ſaile, on the toppe of high mountaines, or builde hym houſes on the reſtles, and ſurgyng waues of the ſea, whiche bothe are leſſe aduiſed, and fruitleſſe immaginations.
            
            
               How vnlawfull a thing the cumbate is, and that princes ought not in any wiſe to permitte it. Chapt. 10.
               
                  AS by the colde charetie, and malice of men abuſe is creapte into all thinges in the worlde, ſo falleth it out in the cumbate, or fight of twoo, whiche in the beginnyng in ceirteine caſes and doubtes of greate controuerſie, whiche otherwiſe could not bee determined, or decided, was then by greate princes, when hoſtilitie, and war

firſt beganne to growe, vpon iuſt conſideration honorably receaued. But in this our age, it now is, ſo common, and ſo abuſed, that euery priuate, and meane Souldiour, for little cauſe, or ſmall matter is redie to attempte the cumbate againſt his aduerſarie. And that whiche geueth me greateſt cauſe of meruaile, is to ſée that Chriſtian princes, and none others admitte it, to whom, aboue all others it expreſly is, prohibited and denied, and yet groweth it ſtill, to be ſuche, and ſo common, that if God for his greate mearcies ſake extinguiſhe not the memorie thereof, I feare me, that prelates, and churche men, will not ſhame at the laſte as valiaunt champions to enter the liſtes among others. This kinde of fight is denied man, firſte, and eſpecially by gods worde, it alſo is denied hym by the Ciuile, and Canon lawe, it is denied, I ſaie, to the partie that demaundeth it, alſo to hym that permitteth, or aucthoriſeth it, and in fine to all ſuche as would looke on, or beholde it By Gods worde we proue it, in this ſorte to be denied. Euery acte by whiche GOD may bee tempted, is to a Chriſtian expreſly prohibited, for it is writen thou ſhalte not tempte thy Lorde, thy God. That God is tempted by this meanes, this make I it euident. To make proofe of theſe thinges, whiche by none other meanes, might be brought to good ende, but by the onely prouidence, and iuſtice of God, is no thinge els, but to proue, and tempte God, as is ſinne in caſes of purgation, wherit euermore is moſt plain, and euident, that accordyng vnto the order of nature, the ſtrongeſt, and moſt valiant ouertroweth the weaker: but the contrarie (whiche is that the leſſe able ſhoulde conquire the other) neuer chaunſeth but by miracle onely. To ſuche then in force and courage ſo different, enteryng the liſtes to fight the cumbate, the victory is lookte for at hys handes, that maintaineth the iuſte quarell, to the intent the truthe, might bee thence aperte, and manifeſt: this tempte we then God, willyng that he worke herein miraculouſly,

that whiche in dede, he ſhould doe, if the more valiaunt were ſubdued, by the timorus, and impotente, whiche were cleane contrarie, to the order, and lawe of nature. Againe we maie in like ſorte proue it by this argument: when the lawe inhibiteth any thing, it alſo inhiteth in any wiſe to doe that, by meanes of whiche a mā
                  maie committe the thinge inhibited, ſith then to vs, by God him ſelſelfe, murther is nenied, the cumbate is alſo by the ſame reaſon denied, for that therby is committed homicide. Or other wiſe againe it might bee ſaide in this ſorte: in holy wrete is forbidden euerie acte that accordeth not with charitie, whiche is the ſole grounde, and foundation of vertue, but the cumbate is an acte, that accordeth not with charitie, charitie beyng none other, but the loue of God, and our neighbour, therfore the cumbate in holy write is forbidden, for who ſo entereth the liſtes, thirſteth as is euident, the bloodde of his neighbour, traiterouſly rebellyng, and diſobaiyng the diuine maieſtie. Finally it alſo is forbiden by the Canon lawe, for that it followeth the rule of the Scriptures in all thinges: by that reaſon then that it is prohibeted in the one, it alſo is prohibited, and forbidden in the other. By the lawe of reaſon it alſo is prohibited, for whatſoeuer is contrarie, or repugnant to naturall equitie, is by the lawe of reaſon alſo prohibited, whiche reaſon ſtandeth grounded on naturall equitie: and natural equitie willeth, that the ſame that cōmitteth the crime, ſhould for the ſame crime alſo be puniſhed ye innocente not hurte, or annoied in any thing, but the contrarie is ofttymes ſéen and knowen in this caſe. Againe naturall reaſon, on whiche is grounded (as we haue ſaide the ſtaie of man) laboureth chifely for the preſeruation, and augmentation of man kinde: but by this policie, the deſtruction, and diminution of manne kinde is haſtened, this policie therefore exileth from naturall reaſon. And ſurely no thing, maie be farther of frō loue, or naturall reaſon, then is this vniuſt practiſe of the

cumbate, for therin are permitted men to murther each the other, for whom our ſauiour paide that ineſtimable price of his death, and bloodſhedde. Alſo in this ſorte may we argue againſte it, no man ought to purchaſe to hymſelfe honour, or profite, by the detriment of an other: or this, no man ought to wiſhe to an other, that whiche hée coulde not be contented, to wiſhe to hymſelfe: but in the cumbate is euident both the one, and the other, for that who ſo demaundeth it, ſearcheth his owne glorie, by the ignomious deprauation, and detrimente of an other, to wete of hym againſt whō he fighteth, his neighbour: and wiſheth alſo to hym, that whiche he, in déede, leſſe would to hymſelfe, I meane both to ſubdue, and kill hym. The cumbate is therefore vtterly to bee refuſed. Out of the Ciuill law, we alſo in this ſorte maie argue: the law prohibiteth euery acte, by which iuſtice either is, or maie bedenied to any, but in this caſe it eftſones is denied to the innocēt, for he falleth in the liſtes, & his aduerſary triumpheth, by the ſaide lawe therefore it cometh to be denied.
            
            
               Of the greate conſtancie of the Aritafila, with her honeſt policie, and deliuerie of her Countrie. Chap. 11.
               
                  THe conſtancie of the noble Aritafila, of Cyrena, meriteth to be ſpoken of in al tymes, and ages. The doughter was ſhe of Eglator, and wife to Fedim, whiche in nobleleſſe and wealth was reputed for one of the worthieſt in that Citie: ſhe alſo in beautie no leſſe excelled, then ſhe did in witte, with a merueilous facilitie, and ſwetnes in talke. It chaunſed nowe that Nicocrate, 
                  Some reade Nicocreon. cruelly, and tyrannouſly oppreſſing the countrie, had doen to death diuers honeſt Citiſens, and among others his execrable, and intollerable villanies, hee alſo executed Melnaipus Apollo his préeſte, to th' intente him ſelfe might vſurpe the office ſacerdotall. Shortly after

by diſhoneſte gyle, he did Fedim alſo to die, the huſeband of Aretafila, takyng her to wife by force, and againſt her will, not leauyng from tyme tyme, to abuſe the poore Citiſens, waxing euery daie more fell, and more cruel then other, ſo that on a time in his rage, and furie, he blooddely flewe a greate number in one inſtant, and for that the vſage was to burie theim without the Citie, was aduertiſed, that diuers liuyng, were noiſed to haue been of the nūber ſlaine, to the intent thei might be carted out of the towne among ye deade, ſo to eſkape his impacable malice, by meanes whereof he ſente a greate troope of his Souldiars, immediatly & in all haſte, to kepe the gates, which with long weapons, and péekes of Iron, redde hoate with the fire, punchte, and pearſte all that paſt theim in moſte vnreuerent maner, by that meanes to make proofe, whether any there liued or not. Theſe thinges diſpleaſed muche Aretafila his wife, whiche moued to greate compaſſion, through the loue ſhe bare to her countrie, beſides that ſhe hated hym, for his tyranny executed againſt her beſt beloued Fedim, determined, in fine, to haſſarde her life, to bereue the tyranne (if it were poſſible) of his. And although Nicocrate moſt ardently loued her, not leauing any paine to pleaſe, and contente her, yet coulde hee not for all that alter her honorable determination: ſo that when all the other Citiſens through the greate force of the tyranne, were all in diſpaire, of fréedome, or libertie, ſhe alone ſtill continued, in aſſured hope and confidence, by ſome meane to diſpatche him and to deliuer her countrie. For the more aſſured performance of this her determination, ſhe calleth to memorie the noble valiauncie of Ferea that renoumed Thebane, whoſe courage, & vertue ſhe determined in the accompliſhemēt of this ſo greate, and weaghtie a matter to imitate, and followe, and for that ſhe had none aſſiſtantes, as had the other many, ſhe reſolued to impoiſon hym, in cloaſe and ſecrette maner, by meanes whereof her ſelfe, was, in greate daunger of

death, as ſhall bee here after ſaide, for that ſhe eftſones failed, with ſuch conuenient oportunitie to miniſter her potions, as her ſelfe ſtill deſired, and at laſt ſuſpected and taken with the maner, was not able to excuſe her ſelfe, with manifeſte proofes, conuicted of that folly. Whence Caluia the mother of the tyranne, whiche more then fatally hated her, and as a woman of fell, and mearciles courage, perſwaded with her ſoonne to execute her in moſt ſhearpe, and cruell maner. But the greate loue that Nicocrate baere her, with her aſſured conſtancie, and valiant courage on the other ſide, aunſweryng ſo wiſely to euery her accuſers, cauſed that her death was not haſtely purſued: howbeit after long and many examinations, beyng moſte plainly, and apertly conuicted, not able to excuſe her ſelfe, but that ſhe had prouided it, in the preſence of the iudges, ſhe boldly ſaide this much. I confeſſe my Lorde, and huſebande, that this drincke by me was, and by none other prouided, of purpoſe to haue geuen, or beſtowed it on you, but not that I euer thought, or in any wiſe knew that it was either noiſome, or venemous, but continually I ſuppoſed it to be a confection amorous, for ſeyng that I was enuied of ſundrie Ladies, and gentlewemen, eſpecially for that it pleaſed you ſo well to thincke of me, as alſo for that they ſee me aduaunced in honour aboue theim, and doubtyng leaſte they might allure you, by ſome meanes alſo to fauour theim, I prouided this potion, to increaſe, and continue your good affection towardes me. Wherefore if I any thing haue herein offended, ſurely I ought not in trothe to bee puniſhed, for that onely loue, to attempte it, and no thing els hath moued me, and not as ſome would, or malice or rancour, and yet neuer the leſſe if I muſt be puniſhed, death haue I not deſerued as an impoiſoner, but as a woman that through to muche loue haue deuiſed inchauntmentes, or licours amatory, to force her huſebande no leſſe to loue her, then ſhe bothe hath, and doeth loue hym. Thus ſhe

with a ſober countenance, and like grace, in defence of her ſelfe, ſemed of parte to haue ſatiſfied, and contented the tyranne, wherefore, he would not that ſhe ſhould in any wiſe bee doone to death, but commaunded, that ſhe ſhould bee laide on the racke, where through tormente ſhe might aunſwere a truthe to eache demaunde. Caluia now prouided with diligence the rancke, doyng her to be tormented in moſte cruell maner, beſides that her ſelfe alſo in perſon leafte not to plaie her parte therein, vntill at the laſte ſhe was as werie, as was poſſible for her to be. How be it, Aretafilia confeſte no thing at all: by meanes whereof ſhe was in the ende deliuered, and receaued as inculpable, by the tyranne Nicocrate, which ſorrowed mearueilouſly, for that he had doone her in ſuche ſorte to betormented, and beyng vanquiſhed with loue, practiſed with giftes, and iuels, to reconcile her againe vnto hym. But ſhe as a wiſe, and prudent dame, fained that ſhe could not but loue hym continually, but hauyng laide vp in her boſome the memory of theſe tormētes, attended ye time onely, and place, to auenge her, and whilſte ſhe often tymes deuiſed with her ſelf how ſhe beſt might accō
                  pliſhe it, beholde this occaſion, in happie time offereth it ſelfe. She had by Fedim a doughter of rare, and excellent beautie, vertuous with the ſame, and verie well nurtered, as alſo Nicocrate a brother that hight Leander, yong, and diſſolute, hauntyng in euerie corner, the companie of women, whom notwithſtandyng to acquainte, with this her doughter, in ſecreate, & cloaſe meane ſhe labored continually, in ſuche ſorte that by inchauntmentes, and other pretie confections, whiche had been for the more ſpedie accompliſhment hereof taught her, ſhe eaſely conſtrained him to loue and like her, principallie for that the maide, was by her mother tofore inſtructed, to ſhew him what in her was, al notes of loue, and loialtie. After this, ſhe ſo wrought here in, tha Leander beſought his brother to geue him this maide for wife, and companion in 
                     •
                  ead,

whiche he eaſely obtained, by the conſente of Aretafila. This marriage now ſolemniſed, Leander that loued beyonde meaſure this yong dame, neuer had his fil, or was ſatiſffied in diſportyng with her: wherfore on a night by the counſell of her mother, ſhe perſwaded with hym to procure the death of his brother, to attempte and take in hande a matter ſo honorable, as was that by his death, to deliuer his coūtrie from tyranny. And farther ſhe added, that he might be aſſured, that the Citiſens in recompence thereof, would chuſe hym for their Kinge, beſides that, if he did it not, if happely his brother by ſome other meanes were ſlaine (which was impoſſible for him long to eſkape) that his life alſo then coulde not be but in haſſarde, laiyng euidently before him, by manifeſt exāples, the execrable, and barbarus crueltie of his brother, which onely depriued not the Citiſens of their libertie, but alſo him that was his naturall brother, and that this is true, ſaide ſhe, conſider that it was not in thy choiſe, to take to thee a wife, but that thou firſt muſt become, a long, and humble ſutor. Leander thē at the perſwaſion of his wife, at that inſtante reſolued to conſpire the tirannes death, eſpecially vnderſtandyng, that it well pleaſed Aretafila. Wherefore breakyng, and impartyng with Dannides, his moſte truſtie, and aſſured frende, did by his helpe, and aduiſe therein ſo muche, that he ſhortely after had ſlaine hym, hymſelfe crouned king, and Prince of the countrie, whence he ſtreight grewe, to be of ſuche puiſſant aucthority, that he by little, and little contemned Aretafila, and her coūſels, ſo that he rather made it euident vnto all the worlde, that he was an homicide, and murtherer of hys brother, and not a conſpirer of the death and fall of the tyranne, for continually he gouerned the people with iniuſtice, although hee yet againe afterwarde ſomwhat beganne to reuerence, and honour his mother in lawe. Wherfore preuely by letters, and meſſengers ſent him, ſhe perſwaded with Anabe a Lybian borne, a capitaine

couragious, and verie fortunate (ſeiyng that ſhe had not yet deliuered her countrie from tyranny, mindyng alſo to diſpatche hym as the other) to enter in armes on the territories of Leander, whiche he did, and being entered, with his whole armie, ſhe calleth Leander, and immediatly telleth him, that neither were his capitaines equall either in experience, or prowes to theſe of the ennimie, and that it ſhould alſo leſſe aduauntage hym, to muche to truſte, or affie in his people, not yet ſo ſurely planted, as he ſuppoſed, in that citie, wherefore her aduiſe was, that he ſhould by all meanes, labour to pacifie, and appeace the wroth of Anabe, promiſing that her ſelf would finde ſome waie for hym, gently, and quietly to conferre at ful with hym. This counſell of his mother in lawe pleaſed well Leander, by meanes where of ſhe laboured, to bring theim both together: howbeit, before the time of meting appointed, ſhe ſente certeine aſſured, and ſecreate meſſengers to Anabe, humbly intreatyng hym, that when Leander came to hym, that he either would kill hym, or at the leaſte retaine hym priſoner, promiſing to requite hym therefore, to his full contentation. Whervnto this Lybian accorded, promiſing moſt faithfully to accōpliſhe her demaund. But Leander of nature feareful (as cōmonly are all, & euerie theſe tyrauntes) differred, and prolonged from daie to daie this Parle: till at length through the earneſt inſtigatiō of Aretafila, who charged him both with inconſtancie, and cowardiſe, eſpecially for that her ſelfe woulde goe to the ennimie with hym, wente forth all vnarmed, at laſt to mete with Anabe, whom when he ſawe commyng with a certeine companie with hym, he arreſted hym ſaiyng that he would go no farther, but all amaſed with feare, woulde then ſende for his Garde. Whence ſhe ſome tymes incouraging hym, ſome tymes alſo with rough wordes reprouyng hym, did ſtill her buſie paine to puſhe, and thruſte him forwardes, and in fine tooke hym her ſelfe by the arme, as well to harden hym,

                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
as by force alſo to drawe hym, till in the ende ſhe waS come to Anabe with hym, into whoſe handes ſhe deliuered hym captiue, and priſoner, who curiouſly then, and ſafely kepte hym, vntill hee hadde receaued the whole ſumme of mony promiſed hym. After this ſhe returned into the Citie againe, where ſhe diſcloaſed (as is aboue ſaide) the whole order of this matter, vttering euery her polices practiſed for the deliuerie of her countrie. Which knowen, this mony was immediatly gaithered, and ſent as was promiſed, forth with to Anabe, whiche alſo deliuered Leander in chaines to hys mother in lawe, whom ſhe againe committed to the keepyng of the magiſtrate, by whoſe commaundement he was cloaſde vppe, into a greate ſacke of Leather, and caſt into the Sea, ſuch was his endyng: Caluia his mother was alſo burned. Now all the countrie came runnyng to Aretafila, and fallyng on their knees did her the greateſt honour that was in anie wiſe poſſible, eſpecially for that, with ſuch and ſo greate haſarde of her perſon, ſhe had deliuered her countrie out of the handes of two tyrantes: and farther in recōpence of theſe her demerites, they choſe her gouerneſſe (to bee aſſiſted with certeine others) of their countrie: whiche ſhe courtuouſly (as was her maner) and thāckfully accecepted, painyng her ſelf in the adminiſtration of iuſtice vntill all thinges were reduced in to perfect, and quiet ſtate, and afterwarde geuyng vppe her office in to the handes of the Senate, withdrewe her ſelfe in to a houſe of religion, among Noonnes, where ſhe liued in contemplation, and praier the reſidue of her life.
            
            The ende of the fowerth and Laſte Parte.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE OF AL THE MATTERS CONTAINED IN this booke, and firſte of the firste parte.
            
            
               
                  WHy in the firſt age menne liued longer, then in this our age preſent. Chap. 1. fol. 1. pag. 1.
               That the opinion of thoſe, that ſuppoſed the yeres of the former ages paſte, to haue been more ſhort then theſe of our tyme, is falſe. As alſo which was the firſte Citie of the worlde, and finally that oure Forefathers had more Children, then theſe that are remembered to vs in the Scriptures. Chap. 2. fol. 3. pag. 1.
               Of the excellencie of Secrettes, and in what ſorte a ſecrette ought to bee couered, with certaine Examples ſeruyng to that purpoſe. Chap. 3. fol. 5. pag. 2.
               Howe commendable a thing it is, to talke, or ſpeake fewe. Chap. 4. fol. 10. pag 1.
               Of the ſtraūge opinion of the Aegyptians, touching the tearme, or ende of mannes life: limiting the ſame by the proportion of his harte. Chap. 5. fol. 11. pag. 2.
               Of the firſt beginnyng, and ſpring of Warre: as who were they, that firſte inuaded ſtraunge Countries, with the inuentours of certaine Weapons, and Armes: who alſo firſt found out the vſe of Artillerie. cha. 6. fol. 13. pa. 1.
               For what cauſe manne goeth vpright: as alſo why faſting, then when hee hath eaten, he euermore is founde more weightie, and poiſante: and why in concluſion hee poyſeth more deade then liuyng, with others, ſutche not impleaſant accidents. Chap. 7. fol. 15. pag. 2.
               Of the excellencie of the heade, aboue all other members of the bodie, and that it is not good to haue a little heade, or ſtraite breaſte, as alſo whence it is, that we accompte it courteſie, to take of the Cappe, or Hatte, in ſaluting an other. Chap. 8. fol. 17. pag. 2.
               
                  
That mannes death is to be accompted fortunate, or leſſe fortunate, accordyng to the eſtate that hymſelf ſhall die in: with certaine example ſeruing to that purpoſe. Chap. 9. fol. 19. pag. 2.
               What ſpeach was vſed in the beginning of the world, and how firſt began the diuerſitie of languages. chap. 10. fol. 21. pag. 1.
               Of the diuiſion of ages, of the worlde, with a briefe diſcourſe of diuers Notable matters chaūced alſo in them, as alſo in fine, of the beginnyng of Realmes and Kyngdomes. Chap. 11. fol. 23. pag. 1.
               Of the ſtraunge life of Diogenes, ſurnamed Cinicus, as alſo of his Sentences, Propoſitions, and Anſweres. Chap. 12. fol. 28. pag. 2.
               Of the excellencie and commendation of trauaile, as alſo of the domages that growe of Idlenes. Chap. 13. fol. 32. pag. 1.
               How deteſtable a matter Crueltie is, with ſome examples ſeruing to that purpoſe. Chap. 14. fol. 37. pag. 2.
               How for the moſt parte, cruell kinges, and blouddy tyrantes are the Miniſters of God: and how notwithſtandyng they continually ende in ſtate moſt wretched, and extreame miſerie. Chap. 15. fol. 42. pag. 2.
               Of a ſtraunge caſe, which at two diuerſe times chaunced, after one and the ſame ſorte, vnto twoo Romaine Knightes of honorable Familie. Chap. 16. fol. 44. pag. 1.
               Of the diſtinction of the age of man, accordyng to the opinion of moſt Aſtrologians. Chap. 17. fol. 45. pag. 1.
               Of certaine yeres in mans life, whiche the learned in tymes paſte iudged aboue the others to bee merueilous daungerous, as alſo for what cauſe thei eſtéemed it to bee ſo. Chap. 18. fol. 49. pag. 1.
            
         
         
            THE TABLE O
                  •
                
               the ſeconde parte.
            
            
               
               
                  WWhat daunger it is to murmer againſt princes, as alſo what commendation thei gaine by clemencie. Chap. 1. fol. 50. pag. 2.
               Of what countrie Pilate was, and how he died, as alſo of a riuer ſo called, and of the propertie of the ſame, and finally, of a certaine caue, or denne in Dalmacia. Chap. 2. fol. 52. pag. 1
               In what degrees, and at what age a man and woman ſhould marrie. Chap. 3. fol. 54. pag. 1.
               Of the cordiall and hartie loue, that ſhould be in marriage, with diuers examples ſeruyng to that purpoſe. Chap. 4. fol. 59. pag. 1.
               Of the ſtraunge cuſtomes obſerued by oure elders in mariage. Chap. 5. fol. 61. pag. 2
               Of the excellencie of paintyng. Chap. 6. fol. 64. pag. 2.
               Of that excellent Painter Apelles, as alſo of Protogines another in his tyme. Chap. 7. fol. 66. pag. 2.
               Of a ſtraunge maner of exile vſed in Athens, by meanes of whiche the moſte honorable and worthieſt perſonages were oftentimes baniſhed, without any offence, or faulte at all commited. Chap. 8. fol. 69, pag. 2.
               Of ſundrie excellent perſonages, whiche by the ingra. titude of ther Countrie, haue vnkindly been baniſhed. Chap. 9. fol. 72. pag. 2.
               Of a ſtrauge aduenture betide a certaine priſoner, and how after his weary impriſonment, hée was in the ende made free and deliuered. Chap. 10. fol. 75. pag. 1.
               That the bloodde of a Bulle cauſeth theim to die that drinke therof at any tyme, as alſo, who firſt brought the Bull to the yoke. Chap. 11. fol. 76. pag. 2.
               Now neceſſary water is in all the vſes of mans life, of the excellencie of this element, and how to finde or trie, the beſt water from the other. Chap. 12. fol. 78. pag. 1.
               By what policie wee may drawe freſhe water out of the Sea: and why colde water in fallyng maketh greater noiſe then it would doe, if it wer warme: finally why

a ſhippe on the ſalte water, beareth greter weight then on the freaſhe. Chap. 13. fol. 81. pag. 2.
               Of the renoumed and greate Tamburlaine, of the kingdomes and countries that he ſubdued, and finally of hys practiſe, and maner in warre Chap. 14. fol. 82. pag. 2.
               Of many Lakes, and fountaines, the waters of which haue many ſtraunge properties. Chap. 15. fol. 87. pag. 2.
               Of diuers ſtraunge thinges, whiche hapened at the birth and death of our Sauiour Chriſt, recited by ſundry famous, and learned hiſtorians, beſides theſe that are recorded by the Euaugeliſtes in the ſcriptures. Chap. 16. fol. 92. pag. 1.
               Of many places aleaged by ſundry good authers, making mention of chriſte, and of his life. Cha. 17. fol. 95. p. 1. That men borne of baſe condition, ſhoulde not leaue, by all meanes poſſible, to attempte to reache, and aſpire vnto honour, with certaine examples ſeruyng to that purpoſe. Chap. 18. fol. 99. pag. 1.
               Of the opinion that the olde Romaines, and other auncient countries had of fortune, and how they plaſt her in the number of their Gods: in what forme or figure they alſo depainted her: and finally that there is no fortune at all among the Chriſtians, attributyng the cauſe of all thinges vnto God. Chap. 19. fol. 102. pag. 2.
               That ſundrie beaſtes, by ſome priuie naturall inſtinct, haue foreknowleage of thinges to come: as alſo of many countries, by the onely force of little wormes, brought to be deſolate, and forſaken. Chap. 20. fol. 106. p. 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
         
         
            
               THE TABLE OF the thirde parte.
            
               
                  HOw profitable a thinge the inuention of letters was, who firſt founde or inuented theim, as alſo how the Hebrue Characters ſignifie ſome thing

of theim ſelues, that whiche is incident to no other kind of letters, of what ſorte or kind ſo euer. cha. 1. fol. 104. p. 2.
               Where on our elders wrote before the inuention of Paper, and with what kinde of inſtrument, how Paper, and Parchement were firſte founde out. Who firſte inuented the maner or ſkille of Printing, as alſo what ineſtimable profite thence riſeth, and in fine by what meane a blinde man maie write. Chap. 2. fol. 111. Pag. 1.
               Of the firſte Libraries that euer were in the worlde, and how the men, of that time vſed, to haue the Images or purtraites of the learned in theim. Cha. 3. fol. 113. pag. 2.
               Of the amitie and enmitie of ſundrie thinges, iſſuyng by priuie, hidden, and ſecrete proprieties. C. 4. fol. 116. P. 1.
               By what meanes bothe amitie and enmitie procede from the Heauenly, and Celeſtiall influence: and why a man hateth or loueth an other. Cha. 5. fol. 119. Pag. 2.
               That the memorie maie bee hurte, and that it alſo by arte, and by pollicie maie be fortified. Cha. 6. fol. 121. Pa. 1.
               In what honour, and reputation, Philoſophers, Poetes, and all others, in what Arte, or Science, ſoeuer they were learned, liued with Emperous, Kinges, and Princes, in tymes paſt. Cha. 7. fol. 123. Pag 2
               That learnyng is neceſſarie as well vnto Princes as alſo to all Capitaines, that liue at any tyme in armes. Cha. 8. fol. 127. Pag. 1.
               Of a ſtraunge medicine, where with Fauſtine the wife of M. Aurelius was cured, languiſhyng, and conſumyng with infinite, and extreame paſſions, of vnchaſte, and diſloial loue, as olſo of ſome thinges remediyng the ſaide paſſions. Cha. 9. fol. 130. Pag. 1.
               Who firſte did ſette or plante the Vine, who alſo did firſt to drinke water in wine, to whom alſo, and how the Romaines firſt of all forbad, the vſe of wine, with ſome other thinges conſernyng this purpoſe. Cha. 10. fol. 131. Pag. 2.
               Of infinite diſcommodities, whiche take their ſpring

of wine immoderatly vſed, as alſo what Phiſicians they were, that thought it good, and medicinable, ſome times to be dronke. Cha. 11. fol. 134. Pag. 1.
               Of certaine greate Perſonages, whiche died, called hence by thoſe, whiche before them ſelues, vniuſtly had cauſed to be executed, euen in the inſtante, and tyme to theim aſſigned, as alſo ſome what of the Archebiſhoppe of Magonce or Ments. Cha. 12. fol. 136. Pag. 1.
               Of a certaine guile practiſed by a vertuous, and good Quéene, towardes her houſebande, by meanes whereof, James King of Aragon was begotten, and of his birthe, and death. Cha. 13. fol. 138. Pag. 2.
               Of an auncient and ſtraunge cuſtome, obſerued by the inhabitantes, of the Prouince of Carinthia, at the coronation of their Prince: as alſo how they ſharply puniſhed thieues. Cha. 14. fol. 140. Pag. 1.
               In what parte of the Zodiacke the Sunne, and the Moone, as alſo the other Planettes were in the creation of the worlde, and when thei firſte were made, of the beginnyng alſo of yeres, and tymes. Cha. 15. fol. 141. Pag. 2.
               That man maie take example of Birdes, Wormes, and other creatures, to liue a iuſt, and a vertuous life. Cha. 16. fol. 145. Pag. 2.
               Why triumphes were firſt vſed in Rome, as againe how many they were, that there alſo triumphed, what a Triumphe is, and that there is twoo ſortes of theim Cha. 17. fol. 148. Pag. 2.
               What names the Romaine Capitaines gained by their victories. Cha. 18. fol. 154. Pag. 1.
            
         
         
            
               THE TABLE OF THE fowerth and laste parte.
            
               
                  OF the ſeuen meruailes, or wonders of the world. Cha. 1. fol. 156. Pag. 1.
               What maner of women the Sibylles were,

how manie in number and of their prophecies, but eſpecially of thoſe that concerned Chriſte, and his commyng. Cha. 2. fol. 163. Pag. 2.
               Wherfore ſléepe by nature was geuen vnto man, and that to ſléepe to muche is both noiſome, and domageable. Cha. 3. fol. 167. Pag. 2.
               Of thrée ſundrie doubtes, whiche the auncient Philoſophers were neuer able to reſolue, with the cauſes why Chap. 4. fol. 165. Pag. 1.
               What Ceremonies the Romaines vſed before they denounced warre to any prince or countrie. Cha. 5. fol. 167. Pag. 1.
               That it profiteth a Prince muche to be faire and well fewtered. Chap 6. fol. 174. Pag. 1.
               Of the horrible tyranny of Ariſtotimes, a matter or ſubiecte not leſſe fittyng for a tragedie. Cha. 8. fol. 177. p. 1.
               Why and for what cauſes, men rarely aſpire, to the aſſured perfection of thinges in this life. Chap. 9. fol. 181. Pag. 2.
               How vnlawfull a thing the cumbate is, and that princes ought not in any wiſe to permitte it. Cha. 10. fol. 183. Pag. 1.
               Of the greate conſtancie of the renoumed Aretafila, with her honeſt policie, and deliuerie of her Countrie. Cha. 11. fo. 184. Pag. 2.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Imprinted at London by Ihon Kingſton, for VVilliam Iones, and are to be ſoulde at his newe long Shoppe at the Weſte ende of Poules.
            
         
      
   