
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A short and faythful
Instruction, gathered out of holy Scripture,
composed in Questions and Answeres,
for the edifyeng and comfort
of the symple Christianes; whych
intende worthely to receyue
the holy Supper of the
Lorde.
            
               1. Corin. xi.
               ¶Who so euer shall eate of thys Bread
& drinke of the Cuppe of the Lorde
vnworthely, shalbe gylty of
the body and bloud
of the Lorde.
               2. Corin. 4.
               
                  ¶I beleue, and therfore I speake.
                  ¶To the faythful congregacion of the
Dutch Churche at London. Grace
and peace from God the father,
and from our Lorde
Jesus Christe.
               
            
            FOrasmuche as our Lorde Jesus
Christ hath cōmaunded all true
Christiās to obserue, holde and
vse hys holy Supper in remembraunce of hym tyl his cōmyng
agayne: & seyng also that al they whiche

accordyng to the rule of holy scripture
neither do examyn, trye nor proue them
selues ryghtly before ye recept of the sayd
holy supper, neither yet do truly iudge &
discerne the difference of it frō other prophane
bankettes, are gyltie of the body &
bloude of Christ: and seyng also that no
man can accordyngly other trye & proue
hymselfe, or ryghtly iudge & discerne the
body of the Lorde, except he first knowe
and vnderstande the foūdacion & groūde
of the christen fayth and religion: Therfore
haue we (as they whych are carefull
for the health of your soules) wryttē this
brefe & shorte sūmary of the moste nedefull
and principall partes of the christen
religion, to your moste profytable instruction
& comforte to thentent that no mā
other through ignoraunce shulde despise
that cōmaundement of Christ: or els thorough
stubburnes shuld 
                  〈◊〉
                not regarde
the recepte of that holy 
                  •
               upper, or
in any wyse slaunderously or vnworthely
abuse it. In consideracion wherof we
humbly beseche you of charitie and for
Christ Jesus sake, that you wyll thankfully
take thys my labour, and wyth all
diligēce imbrace it, to the further aūce of
your owne saluaciō, and our ioye in the
daye of the Lorde. Gyuen in London by

your welwyllyng Minister. Marten
Micron. 8. Decemb. 1552.
            
               Question. Welbeloued brother or syster N.
seyng that thou intēdest to receaue with
vs the holy Supper of the Lorde Jesus
Christe, so before all thynges (yf otherwyse
thou wylt not make thy selfe gyltie
of hys bodye and bloud) thou muste be a
christian: therfore we aske of thee.
            Wherby knowest thou, that thou arte a
Christian.
            
               Answere,
               Rom. 8. 2. Cor. 1. Two maner of wayes: Fyrste
bycause the holy ghost by the witnesse of
fayth certifieth me in myne herte & sealeth
my conscience, that I am the chylde
of God alonly through the merite of Jesus
Christe. Secondarely, because that
I thorowe the same spirite (as touching
the inwarde man) am moued wyllyngly
and gladly to the due obedience of goddes
holy cōmaundementes.
            
               Question. Whych are the cōmaūdemētes?
            
               Answere. Those whych God hymselfe cō
               maūded,
& Moses in the .xx. Cha. of Exo.
wrote, in maner and forme folowyng.
            
               ¶The. ten cōmaundementes.
               I Am the Lorde thy God, which brought
the out of the lande of Egypte
out of the house of bondage:
Thou shalte haue none other Goddes
but me.
               
                  
                  
                     commandment 2 Thou shalt not make vnto thy selfe any
grauen ymage, nor the lykenesse of any
thinge that is in heauen aboue, or in the
earth beneth, nor in the water vnder the
earth, thou shalt not bowe downe to thē
nor worship them: For I the Lorde thy
God am a gelouse God, and viset the sinnes
of the fathers vpon the chyldren vnto
the thyrd & fourth generacion of them
that hate me, & shewe mercy vnto thousandes
in them that loue me and kepe
my commaundementes.
               
                  
                     commandment 3 ¶Thou shalte not take the name of the
Lorde thy God in vayne. For the Lorde
wyll not holde hym gyltlesse that taketh
hys name in vayne.
               
                  
                     commandment 4 ¶Remember that thou kepe holy ye Sabboth
daye. Sixe dayes shalt thou labour
and do all that thou haste to do, but-the
seuenth daye is the sabboth of the Lorde
thy God. In it thou shalt do no maner of
worke, thou and thy sonne, & thy doughter,
thy man seruaunt and thy mayd seruaunt,
thy cattel, and the straunger that
is wythin thy gates, for in syxe dayes the
Lorde made heauen and earthe, the Sea
and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth
daye. Wherfore the Lorde blessed
the seuenth daye, and halowed it.
               
                  
                     commandment 5 ¶Honour thy father & thy mother, that
thy dayes maye be longe in the lande,

whych the Lorde thy God gyueth the.
               ¶Thou shalt do no murther.
                     commandment 6
               
               ¶Thou shalt not cōmitte adultery.
                     commandment 7
               
               ¶Thou shalt not steale.
                     commandment 8
               
               ¶Thou shalt not beare false wytnesse agaynst 
                     commandment 9
thy neyghbour.
               ¶Thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours 
                     commandment 10
house, yu shalt not couet thy neyghbours
wyfe, nor hys seruaunt, nor hys mayde,
nor hys Oxe, nor his Asse, nor any thing
that is hys.
               
                  Question. Howe are these cōmaundementes
deuyded?
               
                  Answere.
                  Ex. 23. 34 Into two tables, wherof the first
pertayneth to God,Deute. 9. and the other to oure
neyghbour.
               
                  Question. What learnest thou in the foure
fyrst cōmaundementes whyche belonge
alonly vnto God?
               
                  Answere.
                  Esa. 44. That I shall set my fayth, truste
and confidence vpon no creature,Psal. 115. but vp
on God alone.Mat. 15. And hym,Exo. 25. not wyth ymage
seruice or any other counterfayt worshippyng,
1. Reg. 15. but alone in spirite and truthe
shall worship and serue,Ioh. 4. & shall also daylye
prayse hys holye uame,Esa. 48
                        •
                     . and exercyse
my selfe diligently not onely in hearyng
hys holy worde,Ephe. 5. but also in the vse of his
Sacramentes,Luk. 8. 10.
               
               
                  Question. What learnest thou in the sixe cō
                  maundementes
folowynge, whyche belonge

to our neyghbour?
               
                  Answere. That I shalbe obediēt vnto thē,
whome God hathe set ouer me, and that
I shal by no maner of meanes be hurtfull
to my neyghbour in hys body, wyfe
famylie, goodes, honour, name, fame, or
estimacion, no not so muche as wt any
euel luit, but in al godly and honest thinges
shalbe to hym an helpe & furtherāce.
               
                  Question. Haste thou these cōmaundementes
in all pointes so perfytlye fulfylled,
that yu art able to stande in the iudgemēt?
               
                  Answere. Och naye: for seyng that y• lawe
is spiritual, and I am carnal, I can not
but confesse my selfe in many thynges agaynst
that holy lawe to haue offended,
not onlye in leauyng vndone that that is
therin cōmaunded, but also-in doynge
that,Deute. 27. that is therin forbydden.
               
                  Question.
                  Gala. 3. Seyng that man because of one
synne by the sentence of the lawe is condemned
and excluded out of the kyngdōe
of God,Iaco. 2. howe shalt thou then be saued,
for asmuche as in many thynges thou
haste synned, and because that no man
can entre into Goddes kyngdom vnlesse
he be cleane from all synne?
               
                  Answere. My saluacion dependeth onely
of mere mercy and grace thorow Jesus
Christ, whyche wythout al my deseruing
hath taken and accepted me for one of

hys members, & also hath made me partaker
of all hys gracious merites & good
dedes, because wyth a repentaunt herte
I beleue vndoutedly to be saued thorow
hym.
               
                  Question, Seyng the grounde of thy fayth
is set alone vpō Jesus Christe, wylt thou
shortlye declare, what thou beleuest on
Christe?Rom. 1. 9.
               
               
                  Answere.
                  Ioh. 1. 3. I beleue that Jesus Christ in one
persone is very God of God:1. Ioh. 2, & very mā
of man:1. Tim. 2. and also that he is my only mediatour,
Heb. 7. 8. aduocate, intercessour, hyghe
Preest,Deute. 18. Kynge and Prophete, whyche
hath taken vpon hym my curse and condempnacion,
Act. 3. 7. and hath to me agayne rerestored
frely hys holynes and righteousnes,
Gala. 3. as it is moste briefly comprysed in
the chiefe articles of our Christen fayth.Roma. 8.
               
               
                  Question. Whyche are the chief articles of
the Christen fayth?
               
                  Answere.
¶I beleue in God the father almyghty,
maker of heauen and earth. &c.
               
                  Question. What vnderstādest thou by that
worde (I beleue) as thou confessest sayeng:
I beleue in God the Father: I beleue in
God the Sonne: I beleue in God the holy
Ghost.
               
                  Answere. I meane thys, that I set all my
fayth, truste and confidence in God the
Father, who hathe made me and all the

worlde: In God the Sonne, who hathe
redemed me and all mankynde: and in
God the holy Ghost, who sanctifieth me
and all the chosen people of God.
               
                  Question. Beleuest thou then, that God the
father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost are
one true God?
               
                  Answere. Yea moste surely, for so all the
holy scripture teacheth vs, and therof are
we admonyshed in our baptyme wherin
we are baptysed in the name of ye father
and of the sonne, and of the holy Ghoste.
               
                  Question. Hathe Christe ordened no sure
outward exercises and certaine markes
and tokens wherby hys congregacion
maye be knowen and discerned from all
other churches and sectes?
               
                  Answere, Yes doutles, and that because of
oure weaknesse, that we thorowe them
maye be exercysed and strengthened in a
sure fayth, & also by the due administracion
of them may so muche the better be
styrred vp to the due obedience of the forsayd
cōmaundementes of God.
            
            
               ¶Sure markes and tokens of
Christes true Churche.
               
                  Question. What are ye sure exercises, markes
& tokēs, of the true church of Christ?
               
                  
                  Answere. The fyrst is, the syncere preachyng
of Goddes holy worde.
               
                   The seconde is, the ryght vse of the Sacramentes

instituted and ordeyned of
Christe.
               And the thyrde is, the christen correcciō
                  
of the congregacion. In whych thre thinges
all true christianes ordenarely with
all diligence and obedience ought to exercyse
them selues, wherby also they are
seperated & disseuered frō al other sectes.
               
                  Question. Wherin standeth the syncere
preachyng of the holy worde of God.
               
                  Answere. In the ryght declarynge of the
lawe, and of the holy gospel, wherof hytherto
I haue made my confession.
            
            
               ¶Of the Sacramentes.
               
                  Question. What are the Sacramentes?
               
                  Answere. They are holy exercises, seales &
effectuall tokens of remembraunce, ordeyned
of the Lorde him selfe for the comforte
of his congregacion. In whych exercyses
the free forgeuenesse of synnes
in and by Christ Jesus, before our eyes,
and that moste clearly and euidentlye is
set out and sealed. And besyde that, we
are therby admonyshed of our duty both
towardes God, and to our neyghbour.
               
                  Question. Howe many suche Sacramentes
are there?
               
                  Answere. Two, that is: Baptyme. And the
holy Supper of the Lorde.
            
            
               ¶Of Baptyme.
               
                  Question. What is Baptyme?
               
                  
                  Answere. It is an holy ordinaūce of Christ
in the recept wherof all the membres of
hys congregacion (in whych yonge children
are conteyned also) are baptysed wc
water in the name of the Father, and of
the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost.
               
                  Question. What comforte hast thou of thy
Baptyme?
               
                  Answere. Great cōforte. For albeit of nature
I am vncleane & the child of wrath,
yet neuerthelesse by fayth in the promyses
of mercy am I fully persuaded,
                     
                        •
                     ala. 3. that
thorowe Jesus Christe I am assuredly &
certeynlye accepted and taken into the
grace and fauour of God, as my body in
the recept of baptyme is besprenkled and
wasshed wyth water.
               
                  Question. What more comforte haste thou
of Baptyme?
               
                  Answere. Forsoth thys: that I may all my
lyfe longe haue a continuall forgeuenes
of my synnes, into the whych thorow the
deuels temptacion & myne owne weaknes
and fraylnes I maye chaunce to
fall: whensoeuer I wyth a repētant hert
in spirite and fayth thorow Jesus Christ
do praye and aske pardon and forgeuenesse
of the same.
               
                  Question. Wherof moreouer arte thou admonished
in thy baptyme?
               
                  Answere. Truly, that I shal al my lyfe lōge

forsake the deuell, the worlde, and all the
fylthy lustes of my fleshe, and wyth al diligence
continually walke in a new and
godly lyfe.
            
            
               ¶Of Christes holy Supper.
               
                  Question. What is the holy Supper of the
Lorde?
               
                  Answere. It is an holy soule banket,Math. 26. ordened
of Jesus Christe,1. Cor. 10. for an effectuall remembraūce
of hys death,He. 7. 10. especially that
he vpon the crosse once for all offered vp
hys innocent bodye, and there also shed
hys moste precious bloude for the forgeuenes
of synnes.
               
                  Question. Wherfore intendest thou to receyne
the holy Supper of our Lorde Jesus
Christe?
               
                  Auswere.
                  Math. 28. Because my Lorde and Maister
Jesus Christe hath wylled,Mar. 14. ordeined and
cōmaunded it to be receyued in remembraunce
of hys death,1. Cor. 11. for the synguler cō
                  forte,
profyt and cōmoditie of me, and of
all the worthy receyuers of it.
               
                  Question. What profyt and comforte fyndest
thou in the due and worthye recepte
therof.
               
                  Answere. Truely, in the ryght ministracion
therof, it is lyuely and effectually set
out to me myserable synner as it were
before myne eyes, beaten into my remē
                  braunce,
yea wytnessed and sealed to my

feble conscience through the holy Ghost,
that Christ hath once for al vpō the crosse
made an euerlastyng full and parfyte oblacion
and sacrifice for my synnes,Heb. 7. 10. and
that I also beleuynge in hym haue thorough
hys death and oblaciō once made,
forgyuenes of my synnes wyth comfort
and full truste of euerlastynge lyfe as verely,
truly and certeinlye as I at hys table
eate of the breade broken and drinke
of the cuppe of the Lorde, whyche (after
the vse of holy scripture & maner of Sacramentes)
he calleth his body & bloude.
               
                  Question. What fourme, maner, and propertie
of speakyng vseth the holy scripture
in all Sacramentes?
               
                  Answere. Uerely, that the outwarde partes
or matter of the Sacramentes in the
holy scripture are decked, bewtifyed and
adourned wyth the names of the mysteries
and hyd thynges, whych they signifye:
to thentent it myght be knowē wher
vnto they were ꝓperly ordeined, & wherfore
they shulde be receyued.Gen. 17. As circumcision
is called the Couenaunt of God:Exo. 12. the
Paschlambe is intitled the Passeouer or
passe by:Tit. 3. Baptyme is named ye wasshing
awaye of synne or bath of the new byrth.Actu. 22.
Euen so the holy Supper is called the body
of Christ broken for vs,1. Pet. 3. and his bloud
shedde for vs.1. Cot. 10. and, 11.
               
               
                  
                  Questi. Is y• very natural body & bloud of
Christ necessarely present here vpō erth,
so that in ye supper it may be eatē & drōkē.
               
                  Answere. Nay truely: For fyrst it were vtterly
contrary to the nature & propertie
of al Sacramentes.1. Syxe reasons agaynst the 2 corporal presens of Christ in the supper 1, Cor. 10. Againe, the opinion
of corporal presence obscureth the spiritual
eating & drinkyng of the body and
bloud of Christ, whych al the old fathers
(as S. Paul sayeth) dyd: whych spiritual
eatyng and drynkyug alone in holy scripture
is required vnto saluaciō. Besyde
that, it defaceth and in a maner blotteth 
out the verye true nature & propertie of
Christes body, whyche was made of the
substance of the virgine Mary hys mother,
and not of breade. Further it maketh
the preestly office of Christe of none 
effecte, or at the least vnsufficient. For in
that office he once for all offred hys body
and shed hys bloud for our redempcion,
and doth not yet dayly seperate & diuide
his bloud from his glorified body again
Moreouer, thys corporal presence is contrary
to the article of hys ascencion, and 
our continuall lokynge for hys returne
at the laste daye. Finally, this fond ymaginacion
of Christes bodely presence setteth 
out & describeth to vs suche a Christ
as in the wrytynges of the ꝓrophetes &
apostles is vtterly vnknowen.
               
                  
                  Question. Wherof els art thou admonished
in the vse of Christes holy Supper?
               
                  Answere. Truly, that I wt all myne herte
shall thanke my Lorde Jesus Christ for
thys great benefite of my redempcion.
And thys thankefulnesse by hys gracious
fauoure, wyth pacience, loue, mortificacion
of carnall desyres, sobernesse of
lyfe and conuersacion, and finally wyth
a continual and free cōfession of hys holy
name, shal I signifye and declare vnto
my lyues ende.
            
            
               ¶Of Christen correccion.
               
                  Question. Where is the correccion of the
Churche commaunded of Christ?
               
                  Answere. Uerely in the .18. tha. of S. Mat.
gospel vnder these wordes:Math. 18. yf thy brother
trespase against the. Go & tel hī hys faut
betwene hym & thee alone. Yf he heare
the, thou hast wonne thy brother. But yf
he heare the not, then take yet with thee
one or two, that in the mouthe of two or
thre wytnesses euery matter may be stablyshed.
Yf he heare not them: tel it vnto
the congregracion. Yf he heare not the cō
                  gregacion,
let hym be vnto the as an heathen
man, & as a publican. Uerely I say
vnto you: what so euer ye bynd on earth
shalbe bounde in heauen: and what so euer,
ye lose on earth, shalbe losed in heauen.

Thys ordinaunce of Christ S. Paul
also confirmeth & putteth in vse as appeareth
in the .i. epistle vnto the Corinthes.1. Cor. 5.
               
               
                  Question. What is the correccion of the
Churche of Christ.
               
                  Answere.
                  Math. 18. It is an ordinaunce of Christ,
through which euery christian is bound
orderly after the worde of God,Luke. 17. louingly
to admonishe hys brother of hys faute:Rom. 15. &
also agayne willingly & gladly to receiue
and take admonicion,Collo. 3. warnyng & charitable
rebukes for the same.Heb. 3. 12. Or els yf he
refuse and vtterly despyse all suche godly
admoniciōs and warnynges (so that accordynge
vnto Christes rule they be orderly
done) then by the authoritie of goddes
worde he ought to be excōmunicated
& put out of the cōgregacion & delyuered
to sathan:Iaco. 5. and as an heythen & publican
to be estemed,1. Cor. 5. reputed & taken,1. Thes. 5. vnto such
a tyme he returne, amēde & recōcile himselfe
agayne vnto the congregacion.
               
                  Question.
                  1. Petri. 5. Seyng that subtile sathā seketh
alwayes & meanes to pluck awaye man
from hys fayth and obedience to Jesus
Christ, how shalt thou thē be able to stāde
in thy profession?
               
                  Answere.
                  Mar. 13. By the only grace of God & such
meanes as he hath ordeined,Ephe. 6. which are:
watchyng,Iaco. 4. resistyng and prayeng. &c.
               
                  Question. To whom prayest thou? & howe?
               
                  
                  Answere. To God onely thorowe Jesus
Christ, in spirite and truthe.
               
                  Question. For what thynge prayest thou?
               
                  Answere. I praye fyrste for those thynges
 that are to the preferrement and aduancement
of goddes glory & our owne soules
 health. And then for suche thinges as
are profytable and necessary for the susteynyng
of thys lyfe, but so as they agre
and stande wyth the wyl and pleasure of
God: And finally, that it may please god
 to delyuer and defende vs from all thynges
that are to the hynderaūce of his glorye
& to the decay of the health of our soules.
Al whych thynges are cōprised in the
praier which Christ taught his disciples:
which is: Our father which art in he. &c.
               
                  Question. Wylt thou accordyng to this cō
                  fession
of thy fayth lyue: And wyth al diligēce
obserue the discipline of the church,
and bond of charitie: & also (al enuie, malice
& hatred of herte set aparte) wilt thou
reconcile thy selfe & be at one withal mē
wyth whome thou arte at variaunce?
               
                  Answere. Yea by the grace of God, so farre
as is possible to thys myne infirmitie &
weaknes, ye whych I shal earnestly pray
vnto God to strengthen me dayly more
and more. Amen.
               ¶Translated out of Dutch into
Englyshe, By T. C.
               
            
         
      
   