
      
         
            
            
            
               Luthers Predecessours:
OR AN
ANSWERE
TO
THE QVESTION
OF THE PAPISTS:
            Where was your Church before Luther?
            
            LONDON,
Imprinted by Felix Kingston for George
Winder, and are to be sold at his shop in
Saint Dunstons Church-yard in Fleet-street.
1624.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Luthers Predecessours:
OR,
AN ANSWERE
TO THE QVESTION
OF THE PAPISTS:
Where was your Church before Luther?
            
               AMongst all those Creatures that yeeld
an vnpleasant sound, none are so clamorous
and obstreperous, as Frogs,
and Locusts; these by land, the other
by water, saluting each passenger with
an vnwelcome note: the iust picture
and resemblance of popish Priests, and Iesuites, which
certainly are the Frogs which S. Iohn saw to come forth
of the mouth of the Beast, and the false prophet; whose
croaking and vnwelcome noise doth nor a little trouble
each Christian passenger: Amongst other harsh notes
of theirs, this question hath his place: for what musicke
can there be in it? Where was your Church before Luther?
To what end is this question mooued, except it bee to
trouble men? for, what if wee could not prooue, that
our English Church was before Luther? must it needs

follow, that the doctrine we hold is vntrue? or shall the
doctrine of the Church of Rome be euer the truer, because
of onely antiquity? what if Arrius or Nestorius
could haue deduced the Patrons of their opinions from
Adam, should they for that haue beene orthodoxall?
No certainly: and why not? Because the Church must
be prooued and allowed by the doctrine, and not the
doctrine authorized by the Church, which the Papists
(a people wise in their generation) well knowing, haue
ouerturned the course of nature, & will haue the Scripture
and all doctrine to hang vpon the determination
of the Church: and vpon this ground it is, that they
proceede to such questions as these, hoping that if they
haue once amazed any one with the name of the
Church, and shall haue driuen him from title and interest
to the Church before Luthers time, they shall easily
make him call in question the whole frame of doctrine
of the reformed Churches.
            Vnto this question answers haue beene made, arguments
alledged to prooue that the doctrine of the Protestant
Religion hath had his being in the world long
before the dayes of Luther: That argument of the worthy
Doctor Featly cannot by any Iesuite be answered,
who concludeth, that the doctrine of the reformed
Churches must needs haue Professours in all ages, because
it is eternall: for eternity must needes haue a perpetuall
duration without interruption.
            The argument of Induction▪ is that which better pleaseth
the Iesuite, but by no meanes will hee suffer our enumeration
to begin with Christ and his Apostles; for
then what shifts, what cauils and tergiuisations they
haue, may easily appeare by the proceedings of the late
conference betwixt D. White, and D. Featly, against

               Fisher, and Sweet: Wherefore, to answer a foole, according
to his folly, I haue indeuoured to draw the argument
of Induction à posteriore, beginning with the ages
next before Luther; the which is not so hard a taske as
commonly is imagined: But first, we must agree vpon
the termes of this question, Where was your Church, &c?
where wee must first know what is meant by your, and
what by Church.
            
            For, if by your, they meane the Church of our Nation,
that is, Where was your English reformed Church?
Then are we to answer out of our own Chronicles, and
so shall we be able to name the fewer in all ages, and in
some ages perhaps none; not that there were none, but
that the Euidences are lost: But I suppose they doe not
by the termes, your Church, vnderstand a Nationall or
Prouinciall Church, because then must they prooue,
that the Church of the New Testament is tyed to a
place: so that where it once hath beene planted, there it
should continue, which is contrary to all experience:
besides, had they meant so, they would haue rather named
Tyndall, or some other Englishman, then Luther a
German. By your Church, they meane then those men
in what Country soeuer, which confessed and maintained
the same doctrine.
            Then, for the meaning of the word Church, wee demand
whether they mean a visible constituted Church,
which might haue beene knowne by the distinction and
succession of Bishops, Elders, Deacons, &c. or whether
they meane generally any company of men, holding
and professing those truths and doctrines which
we maintaine?
            For, if they will tye vs to the former, I say still, the
taske is vnequall, because the Records are wanting, but

especially, because they cannot prooue that the Church
must alwayes bee in such manner visible: for in Elias
time there were 7000. vnknowne to him, much more to
Ahab. In the time of Christs passion some of the Papists
say, that the Church rested onely in Marie; and all doe
vsually compare the Church to the Moone, which is alwayes
lasting, but not alwaies in the Full.
            But, if they meant the latter, namely, a company of
men professing the same faith which wee doe; then wee
further propound to them two questions.
            The first is, Whether the persecuting of any defacto,
doe hinder the iustifying of them deiure, which they
must needs denie, except they will beg the question: and
then, though we finde such, and such, in former ages to
haue beene condemned, yet if deiure, they ought not,
and that we can iustifie their Tenents, we shall proceed
more easily in challenging them for ours. But if they
would haue vs to name men vncondemned, liuing in
peace, free from persecution, they must then prooue,
that persecution doth take away the priuiledge of the
Church; that those men shall not be of the Church, because
persecuted: which if they goe about, they must
wipe out the whole infancy of the Church for the first
300. yeeres; but they shall neuer be able to prooue it:
for the woman in Reuel. 12. was constrained to flie into
the wildernesse for feare of the Dragon.
            The second is, What those doctrines are, which we
must prooue, those whom wee seeke for to haue held:
for, if they meane the fundamentall poynts of Religion,
contained in the Creed for matters of faith, in the
Decalogue for matter of practice, and in the Lords Praier
for matter of praier, they themselues shall be our spokesmen,
for they and wee hold these in common; but if

they meane those points of doctrine wherein we dissent
from the present Church of Rome (which they must do
if they vnderstand themselues in the question) then we
further desire to know whether they will not allow vs to
challenge those for ours, who held the most, and mainest,
for which they suffered as well as wee; although
(perhaps) in some other points they dissented from vs
in our generall Tenents: for, if they will allow vs onely
such, who both in doctrine and discipline did in all
points agree, they are too narrow for any dispute; besides,
they must prooue that there hath beene alwaies
such an vnity of words and doctrine, that in no point
the professours haue or may dissent, and yet remaine
members of the Church: a taske that will neuer fadge
well, especially with them in their mutinous multitude
and rabble of religious orders; yea, let them then call
to minde how weakely Harding hath defended his answere
of Bishop Iewels challenge; or, let them answere
Perkins Problem, and prooue where their Church was
before the Trent Councell; for it will asmuch trouble
them to name a company of men in all points professing
the Trent faith, as vs, to finde a company of men
professing in all points the doctrine of the reformed religion:
But if they giue vs liberty to make challenge to
them, who in the most and greatest points haue agreed
with vs (which is but reasonable) then in the next place
we desire to grow to a point, and agree vpon the maine
points of difference betwixt vs and them: All which in
generall do concerne either the offices of Christ, or the
fruites of his office, the which by their doctrine are ouerthrowne.
            For first, the kingly office of Christ is ouerthrowne
by the supremacy of the Pope, which draweth with it

the pride of the Clergy, and exaltation of them aboue
the temporall power.
            Secondly, the Propheticall office is ouerthrowne by
their silencing the Scripture, and by giuing such liberty
to the Church, yea, and to the Pope, to frame articles
of faith.
            Thirdly, the Priestly office is ouerthrowne in the
worke of satisfaction, by Merits, Indulgences, Purgatory,
&c. In the worke of Application, by their abuses
thrust into the Sacraments, especially Transubstantiation,
reall Presence, Exorcismes, &c. & by their false sacraments,
which were neuer appointed by Christ, as
meanes of application. In the worke of Intercession, by
Angels, Saints, Images, whom they haue made their
mediators of intercession.
            Lastly, the fruites of Christs office, redounding to
vs by the mediation of Christ, is our Iustification before
God, which doctrine they haue laboured to ouerthrow.
            Now to the point, this our taske wee are to shew
forth the names of such men, who haue consented with
vs in the opposition of the Supremacy, exemption of
the Clergy from Ciuill iurisdiction, in the authority of
the Scriptures, and in the communicating of them to
the people, in condemning Merits, Indulgences, Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, reall presence, intercession
of Saints, and Angels, Image worship, Pilgrimage; in
the doctrine of our free iustification by faith, and such
other points, which are controuerted betwixt vs, and
the Church of Rome. And this wee will doe first in
the instance of our owne▪ Countrimen, and then proceed
to others.
            Know all men therefore by these presents, that about

the yeere of Grace 1370. in the time of Edward
the third, King of England, at what time all the world
was in most desperate and vile estate, and that lamentable
ignorance and darkenesse of Gods truth, had ouer-shaddowed
the Church most; Iohn Wickliffe, who
almost 200. yeeres before Luther, by the especiall prouidence
of God, was raised vp here in England, to detect
more fully and amply, the poison of the Popes doctrine,
and to purge Religion from those dregs and filthinesse,
with which it was defiled; a Professor of Diuinitie
was he in Oxford, a man of note in his time, and
of famous memory in the ages following: For after hee
had begunne to publish some conclusions touching the
Doctrine of the Sacrament, and other abuses of the
Church, (which boyle and sore could not be touched,
without the great paine and griefe of the world) hee
was much infested with the Monkes and Friers, who
like Hornets, did assaile the good man on euery side:
After them, the Priests tooke the matter in hand, and
Symon Sudbery, Archbishop, depriued him of his Benefice
in Oxford; yet by the friendly and fauourable assistance
of Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, and Henry
Percy, Earle Marshal, (being also befriēded of the King,
who had heretofore made vse of him in an Ambassage)
he bore out the malice of the Friers, and of the Archbishop,
all the dayes of Edward the third, and of Pope
Vrban; who being busied in suppressing his aduersary,
Clement the seuenth, could not spare any time to deale
with Wickliffe: and so it came to passe, by Gods prouidence,
that the truth began to take some place and
roote in mens hearts.
            Afterward in the beginning of Richard the 2. and of
Gregory the eleuenth, his aduersaries espied their time,

and incensed the Pope against him, who sendeth foorth
his Bull to the Vniuersity of Oxford, and an Epistle
to the King, with diuers Letters to the Bishops, dated
all 11. kal. of Iune, in the seuenth yeere of his Pontificality
1378. By which it appeareth, that Wicklife was
a man of note, and that these things were not done in
a corner, but that his preaching had taken effect: So
that the Bishops had neede of the Popes owne helpe to
suppresse him and his abettors; the which although they
attempted, yet could they not bring to passe: his commendation
testified by the Vniuersitie is this: That hee
behaued himselfe as a stout Champion of the Faith,
neither was hee conuict of any heresie: and God forbid
(saith the Testimoniall) that our Prelates should haue
condemned a man of such honesty, of heresie.
            His bookes were many, and spred abroade, not only
throughout England, but also by occasion of Queene
Anne, wife to Richard the second, sister to Wenceslaus
King of Bohemia, carried into Bohemia, whence Iohn
Husse learned the beginnings of his knowledge. Thus
was this man a most worthy instrument in the Church
of God, like a bright Starre shining farre and neere.
            Now for his conclusions which are recorded for his;
they are many, & gathered by his aduersaries, and therefore
if in all points they sound not so well as we could
desire, yet certainely wee may beleeue that they were
not so bad as some of them are deliuered.
            Wee finde that in a Conuention at London 1382.
May 17. they proceeded to the condemnation of his articles,
some as hereticall, some as erroneous: The which
also were afterward presented to the Councell of Constance,
with diuers others to the number of 45. in all,
and by the same Councell condemned; the which for

breuitie sake I haue collected vnto their seuerall
heads.
            1. Touching the supremacy, hee held that it is not
necessary to saluation, to beleeue that the Church of
Rome is supreme head of all Churches: That the
Church of Rome is the Synagogue of Satan; Neither
is the Pope immediately the Vicar of Christ, nor his
Apostles, and that the Excommunication of the Pope
and his Prelates is not to bee feared, because it is the
censure of Antichrist.
            2. Concerning religious orders (which are the
tayle of Antichrist) he taught, That those holy men, as
Francis, Dominick, Benedict, &c▪
                which haue instituted
priuate religions whatsoeuer they be, in so doing, haue
grieuously offended; And such who do found Monasteries,
doe offend and sin; so all such who enter into such
religions, are thereby vnable to keepe the commandements
of God, as also to attaine to the Kingdome of
heauen, except they returne from the same: yea, that
religious men being in their priuate religion, are not
of the Christian Religion, but are members of the
Diuell.
            3. Concerning the Authoritie of the Church, his
doctrine was, that whatsoeuer the Pope and his Cardinals
can deduce cleerely out of the Scriptures, that only
is to bee beleeued, or to bee done at their admonition;
and that whatsoeuer else they command, is to bee
condemned as hereticall; As for the decretals of the
Pope, they are Apocrypha, and seduce men from the
faith of Christ; and the Clergy that studie them, are
fooles.
            4. As touching preaching and hearing the Word,
which is the execution of Christs Propheticall Office,

hee taught; That it is lawfull for any man either Priest
or Deacon, to preach the Word of God, without the
authoritie of the Apostolike Sea, or any other of his
Catholikes; and that all such, who doe leaue preaching
or hearing the Word, for feare of their excommunication,
they are already excommunicated, and in
the Day of iudgement, shalbe counted traitors against
God.
            5. Hee opposed also the selling of Prayers, Pardons,
Indulgences, and such Popish trash, by which
the satisfaction of Christ is weakened; affirming, that it
was but a folly to beleeue the Popes Pardons. Item,
that all such, as bee hired for temporall liuing to pray
for other, doe offend and sinne in Simony.
            6. In the doctrine of the Sacraments, which are
the instruments of Christ, to apply to vs the work of his
satisfaction, he laboureth much to reforme the abuses.
            1. In Baptisme, hee found fault with their doctrine
of necessity; teaching, that they which doe affirme, that
the infants of the faithfull departing without the Sacrament
of Baptisme, are not saued, are presumptuous
and fooles in so affirming.
            2. In the Supper of the Lord, hee opposed the reall
presence, and transubstantiation, teaching, that
Christ is not really in the Sacrament of the Altar, in
his proper and corporall person, but only figuratiuely;
That without all doubt it is a figuratiue speech to say,
This is my body. Item, that the substance of materiall
bread and wine, euen bread in his owne substance,
doth remaine in the Sacrament of the Altar, and ceaseth
not to be bread still. That the Accidents do not remain
without the Subiect in the same Sacrament, after the
consecration. So also hee taught; That it is not found,

or established by the Gospell, that Christ did ordaine
Masse.
            3. As for the other fiue, which we count bastard-sacraments,
some he did doubt of, as, Extreame Vnction:
for this is one article, if corporall vnction, or anneyling,
were a Sacrament as it is faigned to be, Christ and his
Apostles would not haue left the ordinance thereof vntouched.
So also for Shrift: if a man be duely and truely
contrite and penitent, all outward confession is superfluous
and vnprofitable.
            Other Sacraments he complained of, as being abused;
hallowing of Churches, (saith hee) confirmation
of children, and the Sacrament of Orders, be reserued
to the Pope and Bishops onely, for the respect of temporall
lucre. So also concerning Matrimony, he held,
that the causes of diuorcement, of consanguinity, or affinity,
be not founded in the Scripture, but are onely
the ordinances of men, and humane inuentions.
            7. Lastly, concerning the power of the Keyes, and
the Churches censures, his positions are; That no Prelate
ought to excommunicate any man, except he know
him first to be excommunicate of God: and that he that
doth excommunicate any other man, is thereby himselfe
either an hereticke, or excommunicate. Item, that
a Prelate excommunicating any man of the Clergy,
which hath appealed to the King, or to the Councell,
is thereby himselfe a traitour to the King and Realme.
            This in effect is the summe of his doctrine, wherein
howsoeuer there may be, some few small slips, or harsh
phrases, yet no pernicious errours, much lesse, damnable
heresie; but for the substance, it is sound and good,
and agreeable to the Canon of the World. Wherefore,
howsoeuer the Synod of London, and the Councell of

               Constance, haue agreed to condemne these Articles and
his Books, yea, & his bones also to the fire (41. yeeres after
his death) yet since de iure they ought not so to haue
done, and that we are able to iustifie his doctrine, we are
bold to challēge him as a fit instance to answer the question
proposed; and doe conclude, that our Church had
a being, and the doctrine of the reformed Churches
had professors, long before the dayes of Luther.
            
            But goe to, let vs goe on, and see what other can be
named; one Swallow maketh no Summer, nor one
professor a Church. True: and therefore except we can
draw downe the profession of this doctrine successiuely
from Wickcliffe, to the dayes of Luther, let vs lose all
this labour: wherefore we are to know, that both together
with Wickcliffe, and after him, arose a multitude
in the Church of England, maintaining the same doctrine,
and spreading it abroad among the people, labouring
with might and maine to defend it. Such were
Lau. Redman, Master of Arts, Dau. Sawtree, Diuine, Iohn
Aschwarby, Vicar of S. Maries Church in Oxford, William
Iones, an excellent young-man well learned, Th. Brightwell,
Will. Haulam a Ciuilian, Ralph Grenhurst, Io. Scut,
Ph. Norrice, who being excommunicate by Pope Eugenius
the fourth, appealed to a generall Councell; Peter
Paine, Lord Cobham, with diuers others, whose names
are mentioned in the Kings writ, sent to the Sheriffe of
Northampton, giuen at the Mannor of Langly, March 8.
in the 12. of Richard the second: so also, for confirmation
of their multitudes, the words of the Statute made Anno
5. of Richard 2.
            About this time W. Courtny Archbishop, being in his
Visitation at Leicester, conuented diuers before him, as
Dexter, Tailor, Wagstaffe, Scriuener, Smith, Henry, Parchmeanar,

Goldsmith; these, with other moe, were accused
to the Archbishop, for holding the opinion of the sacrament
of the Altar, auricular confession, and other sacraments,
contrary to that which the Church of Rome
did teach: The which persons, because being cited
they came not in, were solemnely accursed as hereticks
with bell, booke, and candle; yea, and by the same
Archbishop was the whole Towne of Leicester interdicted,
so long as any of these excommunicate persons
should remaine in it. There was also one Matilda an
Anchoresse accused of the same opinions: all this happened
in 1387. in the 10. yeere of Richard 2. About the
same time Peter Pateshall an Austen Frier, hauing obtained
leaue of the Pope to change his coate and religion,
hearing the doctrine of Wickliffe, and others of the
same sort, began to preach openly, and to detect the vices
of his Couent, preaching in London, & by the Londoners
graciously entertained and vpheld against the
turbulent Friers, who sought to molest him. Thus by
the preaching of Wickliffe, and others, the Gospell began
to fructifie and spread abroad in London, and other
places of the Realme, and more would haue done, had
not the Prelates set themselues so forcibly with might
and maine to gaine-stand the course thereof.
            1389. William Swinderby a worthy defender of the
faith, with Wickliffe, was accused to the Bishop of Lincolne,
of certaine Articles, both vntruely collected and
cruelly exhibited against him by the Friers, & by their
vehemency was vrged to reuoke: afterward he remoouing
into the Diocesse of Hereford, was there also molested
and troubled vnder Iohn Tresnant Bishop of Hereford,
vpon the same Articles; the which Articles as they
were giuen in by the Friers, and how answered by

               Swinderby in his protestation, hangeth vpon record, and
out of the Registers in the same old English in which it
was written, is by M. Fox transcribed into his History
of the Church: By the reading of which protestation,
wee may note a notable piece of knauery in his accusers,
viz. not to deliuer his assertions faithfully, as he
did deliuer them, but as they supposed to make him
most odious in the defence of them; and by that we may
well guesse, that these points in Wickliffe, which seeme
rough and harsh, met with such vnhandsome workmen.
The processe against this Swinderby, his declaration vpon
certaine conclusions touching the Sacrament of the
Altar, Confession, Indulgences, and touching Antichrist,
his appeale to the King, his letter to the Parliament,
doe sufficiently confirme his worth and sufficiency
in the cause.
            1391. Walter Brute a man of sufficient learning,
though no Priest, was conuented before the Bishop of
Worcester, and accused of the same Articles with Swinderbies:
admirable it is to reade his storie, especially in it,
his learned declarations concerning Antichrist, the
Popes vsurped power, the power of the Keyes, free iustification
by faith onely, auricular confession, absolution,
the matter of the Sacrament, Transubstantiation, Idolatry,
Exorcising, priestly blessing, buying and selling
of prayers, and other Romish dregs, the lawfull vse of
an oath; in which hee also prooueth that the City of
Rome is Babylon. What could hee haue done more in
our cause, had he liued since Luther? Out of his declarations
may be taken a sufficient Commentary and Exposition
of those Articles, which as they are ascribed vnto
Wickliffe, seeme something harsh. Furthermore, the
Bull of Pope Boniface the 9. dated the 15. Kal. Oct. in

the 6. yeere of his Popedome, directed to King Richard
the 2. and to the Bishop of Hereford, doth confesse, that
these Christians whom the common people called Lollards,
did daily grow and increase, and preuaile against
their Diocesans, for which cause the Pope stirreth vp the
King against them, who therupon directed forth a commission
to the Bishops, to proceed with greater authority
against William Swinderby, Stephen Bell, Walter Brute,
and others of the same opinions: By which meanes the
growth of the Gospell was nipped, and a little kept in,
but afterward it brake forth with more effectualnesse, as
may appeare by the booke of conclusions exhibited to
the Parliament holden at London, in the 18. of Richard
the 2.
            1395. Touching the abuses of the Church, Popish
priest-hood, single life of Priests, the fained miracle of
Transubstantiation, Exorcismes, and Priestly blessings,
Masses for the dead, Pilgrimages, and oblations to Reliques
and Images, Confession, Nunnes and Widdowes
vowing single life, in all which, a reformation
was desired in the said Bill, the copy whereof is to bee
seene in Archiuis Regijs: so also the Kings dealing with
certaine of his Lords, as namely, Richard Sturie, Lewis
Clifford, Tho. Latimer, Io. Mountacute, &c. whom he did
sharpely rebuke and threaten terribly, for that he heard
them to be fauourers of that side. Adde to this the complaints
of the Bishops against the Londoners, occasioned
by another brawle; but certainely the maine matter
was, because the Londoners were fauourers of Wickliffes
doctrine, as in the story of S. Albons is to be seene,
vpon which occasion the King remoued the Courts and
Termes to be kept at Yorke, to the great decay of the
City, which happened An. 1393. All these things laid

together, doe plainely and demonstratiuely tell vs, that
there was more then one or two knowne to be infected,
else what need such adoo with Letters, Epistles, Bulls,
Mandates, Commissions to roote out the proceeding
of a few. No doubt therefore but there were many worthy
witnesses and confessors of the truth of the Gospell.
            1400. After the deposing of Richard 2. when Henrie
4. had gotten the Crowne, the next yeere hee called a
Parliament, in which one W. Sawtree, a good man, and
faithfull Priest, inflamed with the zeale of true Religion,
required he might be heard for the commodity of
the whole Realme. But the matter being smelt out by
the Bishops, they obtained that it might be referred to
the Conuocation; before whom being conuented & examined
of diuers▪ Articles of Religion, agreeable to
Wickliffes doctrine, for that hee stood constantly in the
defence of the truth, was by them condemned, degraded,
and lastly burned. And this was the first Martyr
that suffered for Religion, since the renuing of it by
Wickliffe: for howsoeuer the Bishops had obtained the
Statute de comburendo, in the daies of Rich. 2. yet in all
his time none suffered death for that cause. But when
Henry 4. came to the Crowne, hee willing to keepe in
with the Clergy, which in those daies was a strong faction,
put the Statute in execution, first vpon this Sawtree,
and after him followed many moe, some whereof
are recorded, but certainely the names of many are lost
and forgotten. See the words of the Statute made in
the second yeere of Henry the fourth, mentioning a
good company of such Preachers, whom that age called
hereticall.
            1407. The storie of William Thorpe is famous, written
by his owne hand, contayning his accusation and examination

before Archbishop Arundell; his answere,
his commendation of VVickliffe, and defence of his doctrine,
he taught against the Sacrament of the Altar,
Masse, Images, Pilgrimages, pride of Priest, confession,
&c. A constant Professour hee was of the Truth, and
questionlesse continued to the end, howsoeuer his end
is vnknowne: in all likely-hoode he dyed in prison. The
like end befell to Iohn Ashton, another of Wickliffes followers,
who for the same Doctrine of the Sacrament,
was condemned by the Bishops, and because he would
not recant, was committed to perpetuall prison, wherein
the good man continued vntill his death. Somewhat
before Thorps trouble, happened the trouble of Iohn Puruey,
who, as Waldensis writeth, was the Library of the
Lollards, and a glosse vpon Wickliffe. This Puruey, together
with Harford, a Doct. of Diuinity, were grieuously
tormented and punished in the Castle of Saltwood,
at length recanted at Pauls Crosse, afterward, againe
hee was imprisoned vnder Archbishop Chichely, in the
yeere 1421. his Articles which he taught, were touching
transubstantiation, confession, Power of the keyes,
vowes of chastity, the charge of Priests; he said that
Innocent the third, and the 600. Bishops, and all the rest
of the Clergy which in the Councell of Lateran determined
the doctrine of transubstantiation and confession,
were fooles and blockheads, seducers of the people,
Heretickes, and blasphemers: he wrote diuers bookes,
as touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, of penance,
orders, the power of the Keyes, the preaching of
the Gospell, of marriages, vowes, possessions, correction
of the Clergy, of the lawes and decrees of the
Church, of the state and condition of the Pope and
Clergy.
            
               
1409. Iohn Badly first, molested and condemned by
the Bishop of Worcester, was afterwards accused before
Archbishop Arundel, and other his Assistants, for
being vnsound in the doctrine of the Sacrament, as denying
the reall presence, and transubstantiation: and
being demanded whether he would renounce and forsake
his opinions, and adhere to the Doctrine of the
Catholike Church, hee confessed, That he had both said
and maintained the same, and would adhere and stand
to these his opinions, and while he liued, would neuer
retract the same; for which hee was condemned,
and in Smithfield burned.
            After this, the Prelates not contenting themselues
with this, that now they had the power of the secular
arme to assist them in the punishment of Heretikes, and
hauing a King to their mind, ready to serue their turne
in al points, at the Parliamēt thē held, procured the Statute
ex Officio, the sequell whereof cost many a man his
life: at the same time also came foorth diuers constitutions
of Archbishop Arundell, forbidding to preach
or teach any thing contrary to the Determination of
the Church in the points of the Sacrament of the Altar,
Matrimony Confession, or other Sacraments, or other
Articles of faith. Item, that no Schoolemasters should,
in teaching the Sciences, intermingle any thing concerning
the Sacraments, contrary to the determination
of the Church. That none of Wickliffes bookes should
bee read, those onely excepted which the Vniuersitie
of Oxford had allowed. Item, That none should translate
any Text of Scripture into English. Item, That diligent
inquisition should bee made by euery Prouost,
Principall, and Master of euery Colledge in Oxford, among
the Schollers, for persons defamed of heresie.

Now let all men iudge, whether these constitutions giuen
at Oxford in this manner, do not plainely declare,
that there was a great company of these men who professed
and taught such points, which these constitutions
did condemne. Againe, is it any wonder, that after such
strength and force, such policy and practices vsed to
supplant the doctine of Wickliffe, and his followers, it
should bee almost extinguished? The Bishops and Clergy
hauing the King on their side, armed with Lawes,
Statutes, Punishments, Imprisonments, Fire, Faggot,
Sword, and the like, what wonder is it, if they beare all
before them? Is it equall to challenge vs to shew foorth
our Church, to require a visibility of it, when these
who are our aduersaries, hauing the sword in their
hand, did labour so abundantly to suppresse the memoriall
of them? And yet by the goodnesse of God it came
to passe, as may appeare by the Registers, that those
persons whom they condemned and detested as Heretikes,
calling them Lollards, did increase daily in diuers
countries, especially at London, in Lincolne-shire,
Norfolke, Hereford, Shrewsbury, and in Calice, and other
quarters, in the Prouince of Canterbury, with
whom Archbishop Arundel had much adoe, as by his
Registers doth appeare.
            1413. Henry the fourth beeing dead, succeeded Henry
the fifth, crowned on Passion Sunday, presently after began
a Parliament to be called and holden after Easter,
at Westminster; at which time also was holden a Synod
at London vnder Archbishop Arundel: The
chiefe cause of assembling thereof, was, to represse the
growing of the Gospell; and especially to withstand
the noble and worthy Lord Cobham, who was then
noted to be a principall fauourer, receiuer, and maintainer

of them, whom the Clergy called Lollards, especially
in the diocesse of London, Hereford, and Rochester,
setting them vp to preach, whom the Bishops
had not licensed: hee was also accused to bee farre otherwise
in the beliefe of the Sacraments of the Altar,
of Penance, of Pilgrimage, Image-worship, and of ecclesiasticall
power, then the holy Church of Rome
had taught for many yeeres before; his examination,
confession, and declaration of his Christian beliefe, his
godly answers, and reasons, his constancy in the truth is
worth the reading. Finally, he was also condemned, and
committed to the Tower, out of which hee made an
escape, peraduenture not without the helpe of Sir Roger
Acton, who himselfe, whatsoeuer hee was otherwise,
certaine it is that hee was alwaies of a contrary minde
and opinion to the Romish Bishops and Clergy, for
which he was greatly hated of thē: his friendly helpe to
the Lord Cobham, is thought to haue bin the cause why
hee was apprehended, and brought into trouble; and in
the end came to his death, some three yeres before the
Lord Cohbam; and with him I. Browne, and I. Bouerly a
preacher, suffered the same kind of death in S. Giles
fields, with other moe, to the number of 36. as the stories
doe report: all which are said to haue bin hanged
and burned in the moneth of Ianuary 1413. The which
death also the Lord Cobham suffred some foure yeeres
after his escape, being betrayed and brought in by the
Lord Powes, either for the hatred of the religion, and
true Doctrine of Iesus Christ, or else for greedinesse of
the reward promised by the King to them that could
bring in the Lord Cobham aliue or dead: for being thus
taken, he was adiudged to be hanged vpon the new gallows
in S. Giles field, and burned hanging: for you must

know that the Prelates (the better to suppresse this doctrine)
had gotten an Act passed, which condemned the
Lollards and followers of Wickliffe, decreeing, that they
should be accounted as traitors to the King and Realme,
and so should suffer double punishment, viz. to be burnt
as heretikes, and hanged as traitors to the King; testified
by Polydore Virgil, and by Waldensis.
            
            1415. After Th. Arundel, succeeded Archbishop Chichely,
before whom was conuented Iohn Claydon, who for
the space of 20. yeeres before had beene suspected of Lollardy;
He was accused to haue diuers bookes in English,
out of which his Aduersaries collected 15. Articles, which
they condemned as hereticall and erronious; for which
cause he was condemned, and shortly after, together with
Rich. Turning, burned in Smithfield. Shortly after, the
Archbishop, with the rest of the Clergy, made other constitutions against the Lollards: After the setting forth of
which constitutions, great inquisition followed in England,
and many good men, whose hearts began to fauour
the Gospell, were brought to much vexation and trouble,
and caused outwardly to abiure. Thus while Christ had
the inward hearts of men, Antichrist would needs possesse
the outward body, and make them sing his song: In the
number of whom were I. Taylor, W. Iames, I. Dwerfe, Iohn
Iourdly, M. Roberts, Parson of Hegly, W. Henry, I. Gall, Bart.
Cornmonger, N. Hooper, Th. Granter; so also Ralph Mongin
Priest, was condemned to perpetuall prison. After this
followed the Recantation of Ric. Monke, and of Edmund
Frith, besides many more recorded in the same Register,
who likewise for their faith and Religion were much vexed
and troubled. The names of 16. are set downe in the
processe of the Archbishop, directed forth against the
same persons, whereof some whole housholds, both men
and women, were driuen to forsake their houses & townes

for danger of persecution: yea, so cruelly was the Romish
Clergy bent against them, and so grieued to see the poore
flocke of Christ to multiply, that Henry Chichely stirred
vp the Pope against them; alledging that there were so
many infected with the doctrine of Wickliffe and Husse
here in England, that without force of an army they could
not be suppressed.
            1422. Henry 5. being dead, his Sonne Henry 6. a child
of nine moneths old succeeded; In the first yeere of whose
raigne was W. Taylor accused, conuicted, condemned, &
afterward in Smithfield with Christian constancy, after
long imprisonment did consummate his martyrdome. Others
there were that professed the same truth, but for
feare durst not be so bold; so that it appeareth by the Registers
of Norwich in that Diocesse within the space of 3.
yeeres, viz. from 1428. to 1431. about the number of 120.
men and women were examined, and much vexed for the
profession of the Christian faith; of whom three suffered
death, viz. Father Abraham of Colchester, W. White, and
I. Waddon, Priests; the rest sustained such cruell penance
as pleased the Bishop & his Chancellor to lay vpon them,
which howsoeuer, through the hard dealing of the times,
they were constrained to recant, and many of them to abiure
their opinions, yet their good will to the truth is manifest:
and it is fit to preserue the memory of their names,
if it be but to stop the mouth of such malignant aduersaries,
who following blind affection rather then true knowledge
of times and antiquities, through ignorance blame
they know not what, accusing the true doctrine of the
Gospell to be nouelty, and the Preachers thereof to bee
Nouelists, whereas this doctrine lacking none antiquity,
hath from time to time burst forth, and preuailed in many
places, though in the most through tyranny it hath beene
suppressed, as by these good men of Norfolk & Suffolk may

appeare, who if they had had the liberty which we haue,
and authority to back them, it would haue well appeared
how old this doctrine is, so that all men would haue acknowledged,
that this our Church was long before Luther.
            
            1430. Shortly after the solemne Coronation of Hen. 6.
which was in the 8. yeere of his raigne, was Richard Houedon,
a Londoner, crowned with martyrdome. The next
yeere Th. Bagly a Priest, and Paul Craw a Bohemian, both
valiant defenders of Wickliffes doctrine, were condemned
and burned. Not long after, about the yeere 1439. which
was the 18. of Henry 6. was Ri. Wiche burned for heresie, as
then they counted it. So much the more famous was his
martyrdome, because the fame was, that before his death
he spake as prophesying, that the Posterne of the Tower
should sinke, which came to passe; vpon which hee was
counted an holy man. Many came to the place where he
was burnt, and there made their oblations, till by the
commandement of the King they were forbid, and some
punished.
            After Chichely, in the See of Canterbury succeeded Stafford,
Kempe, and then Burscher, in whose time fell out the
trouble of Reynold Peacock, Bishop of Chichester, who after
the death of Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, his Patron, was
molested by the Archbishop in the yeere 1457. because
he taught against the reall presence, the infallibility of the
Councels, the locall dissention into hell: That the Church
may erre in matter of faith: That the literall sence of the
Scripture is onely to be held: He was at length inforced
to giue way; for, what with blustering threats to terrifie
him, as also with faire promises to allure him, they left no
stone vnrolled, till they brought him to recantation at
Pauls crosse, where also his bookes were burnt, yet for all
this, himselfe (belike he was suspected) was kept in his own
house during his naturall life.
            
               
1473. King Henry 6. being deposed, Edward 4. got the
Crowne; In the time of whose raigne, a godly and constant
seruant of Christ, named Iohn Goose, alias Husse, was
vniustly condemned and burnt at the Tower hill.
            1485. Henry 7. comming to the Crowne, mention is
made in the Registers of Couentry and Lichfield, of 9. persons
persecuted in that Diocesse, whose names are set
downe to be I. Blomston, Rich. Hegham, Robert Crowther, I.
Smith, Rob. Browne, Th. Butler, I. Falkes. R. Hilman. The
heresies, of which they were accused, were, for opposing
Pilgrimages, Images, Merits, Purgatory, Shrift, Transubstantiation,
and the like.
            After these, in the ninth yeere of Henry 7. was burned
an old woman of 80. yeeres, loane Boughton by name, who
held eight of Wickliffes opinions so stiffely, that all the Doctours
in London could not turne her: she was burned in
Smithfield shortly after in Anno 1497. Some for feare recanted
at Pauls Crosse, and in the next yeere, an old man
and a Priest, and one Babram were burned. 1506. William
Tilsworth was burned for his Religion in Amersham, at
which time, Ioane Clarke the said Tilsworths daughter, was
constrained to put fire to her Father, at whose burning, about
60. other were enioyned to beare fagots, of whom
diuers were commanded to beare and weare fagots at
Lincolne the space of 7. yeeres after, some at one time,
some at another. A little after was Father Roberts a Miller
of Missenden burned at Buckingham, and 20. other bare
fagots, and did penance. About 2. or 3. yeres after, at Amersham
was burned Th. Barnard, & la. Mordon in one fire, and
Father Rogers, and Father Reeue was burned in the cheeke.
So also was W. Littlepage, and 30. more were burned in the
right cheeke, and bare fagots at the same time. The manner
of their burning in the cheeke was this: Their neckes
being tyed fast to a poste with towels, and their hands

holden that they might not stirre, they were marked with
a hot iron; The cause of those mens trouble was, because
they talked against superstition, and idolatry, and were desirous
to heare and reade the holy Scriptures.
            
               Thomas Chase condemned by the Bishop of Lincolne,
William Smith, and cast into prison, was there murthered,
and after slandered to haue made away himselfe. Thomas
Norrice for the profession of Christs Gospel was burned at
Norwich 1507. Elizabeth Samson accused to speake against
Pilgrimages, adoration of Images, and against the Sacrament
of the Altar, was compelled to abiure before William
Horsey, Chancellor at London 1508. Laurence Ghest,
two yeeres in prison at Salisbury, was afterward put to
death for his religion: so also was there martyred another
poore woman, whose death so greedily sought by the
Chancellor Whittington, was presently reuenged by the
enraged Bul, which running through the prease of people,
came to the Chancellor, and gored him thorow with his
hornes, carrying his guts along the streets, to the great
admiration and wonder of all them that saw it.
            1509. H. 7. hauing finished his course, after him followed
H. 8. in whose dayes hapned much stir and contention about
religion, as in the History of the Church doth appeare:
In the Regist. of Fitz-Iames, B. of London, are cōtained
the names of diuers, to the number of 40. persecuted
in the Diocesse of London, betweene the yeere 1509. and
1527. of whom, some, after they had shewed their weaknes
in recanting, did afterwards returne to their former profession,
and cleauing fast to it, were for it martyred, as W.
Sweeting, & I. Bruster burned in Smithfield 1511. & I. Browne
burned in Ashford, about the 4. yere of H. 8. about which
time also fell out the trouble of Rich. Hunne, whom after
his death they condemned of Heresie.
            But now the numbers of Confessors and Martyrs arise

to such multitudes, that a long discourse, and a large treatise
would hardly suffice to set them downe; wherefore I
passe ouer the story of I. Stilman, Tho. Man, Rob. Cosin, Chri.
Shomaker, Martyrs; As also diuers Confessors, to the number
of 35. abiured about the yeere 1520. for speaking against
worshipping of Saints, Pilgrimage, Inuocation of
the Virgin, the Sacrament of the Lords body, and for hauing
bookes in English, as the 4. Euangelists, the Epistles
of Paul, Peter, and Iames, the Book of the Reuelation,
a Booke of Antichrist, of the 10. Commandements, and
Wickliffes Wicket, Bookes no doubt wonderfully stuft
with heresies, & doctrine vnmeet for Christians to know,
and vnderstand. Oh the subtilty of those Romish Foxes!
How many men and women were persecuted in the Diocesse
of Lincolne, vnder Bishop Longland, anno 1521.
for opposing, or not consenting to the Romish doctrine
of pilgrimage, Image-worship, Transubstantiation,
reall presence. Their arguments they collected out of the
Scripture, the Shepheards Calender, Wickliffes Wicket,
and such other bookes as they had amongst them, and
notwithstanding they had not with them any learned
man to ground them in the doctrine, yet they conferring
together, did conuert one another, the Lords hand working
among them maruelously. After the great abiuration
which was vnder Bishop Smith, they were termed amongst
themselues Knowne men, or iust fast men; not much
vnlike to the present name of Protestants: Amongst
whom, to see their trauels, their earnest seeking, burning
zeale, their readings, watchings, sweete assemblies, loue,
and concord, godly liuing, faithfull meaning, may make
vs, now in these our dayes of free profession, to be ashamed.
            From all which duely considered, we may easily gather,
what would haue bin the number of Professors, had the

world looked friendly vpon them; For if when the Temporall
Magistrate tooke hand with the Ecclesiasticall to suppresse
them, and roote them out; if when all men of note
and learning, either for hope of preferment, or feare of
trouble, turned their studies otherwaies; if when the Scripture,
and English bookes were forbidden; if when bookes
were so rare, and deare, and so hard to come by (as before
the Science of printing was inuented they were) if notwithstanding
all these hinderances, the Truth of God did
so multiply amongst them, what would it haue done, had
they had multitude of bookes, or those cheape, the Scripture
in English, had they had learned men to guide them,
had they liued in a peaceable time, had they had the Magistrate
either for them, or at least not against them: for
why was the increase of the Gospell in Bohemia by the
preaching of I. Husse, more remarkable and further spred,
then here in England, but that the Magistrate with his
sword was not so seuere against them? Whence was it that
Luther preuailed more then Wickliffe, but that hee had a
supporter (the Duke of Saxony) which Wickliffe wanted?
Amongst vs at this day, doe we not all know, that Arminianisme
would haue more preuailed, and infected further
then yet it doth, if the Kings Maiesty were either for
it, or not against it?
            Wherefore all men may easily see, that they are much
deceiued, who cōdemne this our doctrine of nouelty, and
insultingly demand, Where was your Church before Luther?
            
            To whom wee answere out of this demonstration hitherto
made, That euer since the dayes of Wickliffe, almost
200. yeeres before Luther, the doctrine of the reformed
Churches, that is, those points wherein they differ from
the church of Rome, and in which the reformation doth
consist, these points (I say) were held and professed: for
whence came those persecutions? or vvho vvere they that

thus were persecuted? If of the same profession with them,
then is their cruelty vnreasonable, to persecute their ovvn
fraternity: if they were othervvise; how then is the doctrine
of the reformed Churches so new, or the Professours
thereof so lately start vp, as our aduersaries pretend
they be? But this is the fruit of ignorance and carelesnesse
to read the Histories of the Church, and the records of
antiquity heretofore: For then might men easily see, that
the Church of England hath not wanted multitudes of
well-disposed hearts; howsoeuer the publike authority
then lacked, to maintaine the open preaching of the Gospell.
            Now whilst our aduersaries bethinke themselues what
to say to this part of the Induction, concerning the estate
of the Church in our owne country of England, in the ages
next before Luther, I wil passe ouer into Germany, and
see what successe the Gospell had there, especially in Bohemia,
by the preaching of Iohn Husse and others, who liued
in the same age with Wickliffe: Afterwards will I proceede
to prosecute the argument of the Induction,
by the demonstration of History in the ages
before Wickliffe, and Husse, if it shall
be thought conuenient.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   