
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     Ane
FRVITFVL
AND COMFORTABLE
Exhortatioun anent
Death.
                  
                  
                     Gif thou wald lead a godly life,
                     Think daylie thou man die:
                     Gif thou wald die a blessed dead,
                     Liue weill I counsell thee.
                  
                  EDINBVRGH
PRINTED BY RObert
Walde-graue, Printer
to the Kings Maiestie.
Anno Do. 1597.
Cum Priuilegio Regio.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
AND HIS DEARE
Brother in the death of the Lord
Iesus, IAMES LVMMISDEN of
Airdrie, Grace and peace, &c.
            
               MY Bed-fellow, best beloued,
being visited with ane extreame
Fever, so that I saw
nothing in her but evident
takens of death: I set my
selfe (Right Honorable, and
deare Brother in the Lord Iesus) to seeke out
sik comforts as might best confirm me against
sik ane assault, and prepare me for the patient
behalding of that spectacle quhilk I looked
shortly to haue seene, and ease mee of that importable
sorrowe, quhilk soone might haue insewed
vpon that dulefull departure. So casting
over my scrolles, I fell vpon the minutes of
a certaine Sermon, quhilk sometime comfortablie

God hath vttered be the mouth of me
his simple servand, in the hearing of ane honourable
and frequent Auditorie, of the
quhilk, that honorable man of speciall account
in the eyes and hearts of all the gude men,
quhair he remaines, for vnfenzeit godlines
and earnest care in all gude vvarkes, Sir
GEORGE DOVVGLAS of Elenehill
Knight, and your selfe gif I bee richtlie remembred
was ane pairt: And the quhilk
as I vnderstude of you and him both, thairefter
was the first motion of our coniunction and
affection in Christ. The quhilk quhen I had
found, I recognosced the heads of the samin,
and fostered a peece of meditation vpon the
pointes thairof at certaine dayes to my great
comfort, and of the persone afflicted, vvith
quhome I communicated also. The pleasure
quhair of, mooued me to employe my pen, and
set them downe in some order, with sik affections
as the present constitution furnished, flowing
alwayes from that fountaine of al consolation,
the haly speiches of the spreit set furth in
sacred Scripture. Nowe because of the estate of
your disease, I daylie langed and purposed
quhiles ye wer heir at home, to come and spend

some peece of time with you, and to bestowe as
it suld please the Lord to giue, some spirituall
gift by conference, for your strengthning in
the truth, and that ready resolution to dye in
Christ, quhilk I haue often reioyced in sa gude
a measure to be graunted vnto you: But being
from day to day empeshed & stayed, till I hard
ye had transported your selfe to that maist noble
Towne and Kirk of all this Realme; howbeit
I knewe yee had then na neede of ony sik
thing from me, hauing there at hand sik store
and aboundance of all: yet it behoued mee for
testifying of my affection towards you. And
supplying some part of the inlack of my promised
Christian dewty, in visiting of you, to send
you a copy of the saide Sermon, with a little historie
of the departure of Iean d'Albret,
vmquhile Mother to this present King of
France, for a plaine and comfortable example
and practise thairof, and all for furthering
of that gude wark, where about I wot ye
are maist occupied; that is, after a reformed
and sanctified life, to make a gude and godlie
end. How farre thir litle things may serue for
so great a wark, I remit that to the chiefe Master
of the warke, the haly Ghaist. Certaine I

am be a peece of experience in my selfe, that
sum thing they may serue by his grace, for
howbeit they be farre from the faire stuffe yee
haue there at hand; yet now and then, it may
be, ye finde them feat for pinnings and wages:
vse them therfore as ye think thay may deme.
It is aneuch for mee, that I haue testified in
some sort my affectionat remembrance of you
in the tender bowels of his loue, quha hes dyed
once for vs, to make vs liue with him for
ever, quha mote perfite and crowne the wark
of his grace in you.
            
               From Anstruther,
                  the 17. of December 1596.
               
               Yours dearly in Christ,
I. M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A FRVITFVLL AND
comfortable Exhortatioun
anent Death.
            
               APOC. 14. 13.
               Blessed ar they that die in the Lord, yea
say is the Spirit, for they rest from their
labours.
            
            
               THis sentence was sounded
from the Heavens,
in the hearing of IOHN
the beloued Apostle of
Christ, confirmed be
the asseueration of the
Spirit, and commanded to be registrat in
writ: that it might the mair grauelie be
considered and imprented in the hearts
of all the faithfull children of God, for
strenthning of their faith, and framing of
their willes to the obedience of the calling
of God be death, with cheerefull
contentment, being assured it sall turne

to their euerlasting life ane weilfare.
            Anent death, there is twa things even
amongst Christians to be marueyled at;
First, that many liues sa secure and dissolutelie,
as though thay suld neuer die,
quhilk is a wonder, in respect that nature
it selfe teachis all, that thay man die: and
daily experience tries, that we man leaue
the things of the world, and they vs, with
how great a lust and pleasure soeuer we
be caryed after them.
            The vther is, that when death approches,
we are sa greatlie troubled; & when
it befals, we mourne and lament, quhilk
also is strange among professed Christians,
seeing haly Scripture preachis sa
highlie the profit of death; the godlie
Fathers sa pleasandlie hes died before vs;
the Saints oftentimes wished for death;
and that quhilk is greeuous of all, seeing
this is the chiefe poynt of our Christian
faith, that IESVS CHRIST our Lord
and Sauiour hath for vs be death tryumphed
ouer death, nether is there any
vther way to life and immortall felicitie,
but be the death to tryumph and be victorious

pertakers with him of his crown
and kingdome.
            For remedie of the first, let vs alwaies
remember the penaltie, inflicted to vs all
in person of our first Father for his transgression;
Thou shalt die the death, (sayis the
Lord) Thou was taken of the earth, & to the
earth thou sall returne. Remember the fragility
of our nature be the saying of IOB;
Man that is borne of a woman is of short
life, repleat with miseries: as the flower of the
field how soone it is sprung vp, it is cut down.
And that of the 144. Psal. preatilie paraphrased
be the Prince of Christian
Poets.
            
               O rerum genitor quantulus est homo,
               Hac quam prosequeris munificentia?
               Et curas patria solicitudine
               Figmentum fragilis luti,
               Quo nec bulla levis vanior est, ne que
               Quae mentes agitant somnia turbidas.
               Nec rerum fugiens vmbra crepusculum,
               Nec fumi volucris vapor.
               That is:
            
            
               O Great begetter of the world,
               How small a thing are we:
               Whom so with graces manifold,
               Thou tenders fatherlie:
               
                  
A canne of brukkle clay, or like
               A bubble in a dub,
               Or as a dream quhilk we may call
               a trattle of a tub,
               Or as a shaddow when the Sunne,
               Is set dois clean decay,
               Or like a smoke ascending vp,
               And wearing soone awaie.
            
            Let vs then ever thinke, we haue that
dette of nature to paye, when it likes
the author of nature to craue it: and that
wee can neither tell when, quhere, nor
how. The heauens dailie reclayming the
saule wherefra it descended, and the
earth the bodie, whereof it was taken;
On this condition wer we borne that we
suld die, and to this ende our maker continuis
the vse of this life, that wee sulde
learne rightlie to die.
            Death is called the way of al the earth,
1. Reg. 2. and that way is wounderfull, for
as sayling on the Sea, whither we sleepe
or wake, we hasten to the Hauen; And
that quhilk is stranger, we can na wayes
erres from the course: for whither so euer

wee direct, we tend towards death. In
this way entred ADAM first, and continued
930. yeares, and yet died: So did
METHVSALEM, and continued 969.
yeares, and yet died: And so did the rest
of the Fathers of the first age, euery one
many hundreth yeares & yet died. And
so in all ages after to this houre, neither
haue they passed another way, neyther
yet can any nor that way of death. One
Generatioun commeth, (saith the Preacher)
and an other goeth, but the Earth
standeth still: euen as a skaffold or stage
whereon euery man hes his part to play
for a short space, & so to laie of his maske
and leauing the vanities of this warlde,
retire him selfe to his dust.
            We suld neuer theirfore bee vnder the
commoun and danger of time: saying,
wald to God I had yet ane yeare, ane
oulke, ane day or ane houre to liue, for
wishing heir will not availe: but at all
times be in readines to doe that, quhilk
anes thou man do, weil thou wald doe,
and when least thou wald do, maist may
be vrged to doe.
            
               
Weil hath ane counselled and saide:
He wha euerie day putis ane end to his life, hes
no neid of time: therefore, thinke to liue
but for ane daie, and esteeme euerie daie
a new life: For there is nathing lyker the
course of our life, than the dailie course
of the Sun rysing in the morning, ascending
to the noone, and declyning to the
evening. No like thing to the graue then
our bedds, to the winding-sheit, then the
shiets to the wormes, nor the punneasses
or flees to the sound of the Archangels
trumpet, nor the Cock or morning
wackner. Theresore, let vs everie hour of
the daie remember sa mekel of our life to
be spent, every evening remēber death,
everie night goe to bedde as we wald to
graue: lap vs in our sheits as in our winding-
sheits and rest, attending for that
wackner that sal summound vs to judgement.
            We haue no permanent Cittie, heritage,
nor dwelling house heir, wee sit on
an vther mans ground, and occupies ane
vther mans house, without few-ferme,
yea, without ane houres tack: therfore

we suld bee euer readie to flit, seeing flit
man wee of necessitie, whensoeuer that
officiar death warnes vs, chopping at the
doore of this house of mudde: or rather
clayming wherein the saul for a season is
enclosed; Of nathing then, sa often and
sa mekil suld we think of, as of the time,
place and manner of our death, and migration
from this life: in sik sort, that gif
it were possible, the whole moments that
wee passe of the life, suld bee no vther
thing, but a learning or reckning ouer
some new lesson of death.
            This mooved IOSEPH of Arimathea
that noble and honest Counseller, and
faithfull Disciple of Christ, to prepare
for him a Sepulcher in a Garden, after
the auncient custome of the people of
God; at the quhilk dailie he might meditate
of death. The quhilk had the honour
to ressaue the bodie of the victorious
Dantoner of death.
            This mooved the noble men of AEthiopia
(after as appeares) they had received
the Gospell, be the ministrie of
Queene Candaces Eunuch, to keip this

custome, that whensoever they went
foorth to the fielde for pourmeneying
them selues: they caused carrie before
them a golden Basen full of earth,
togeither with the signe of the Crosse,
to remember them that they were earth,
and suld turne to earth: and that onelie
in the death of Christ Crucified, they
had comfort against death, ane assured
hope of life. This moved PHILLIP of
Macedon, to commaunde his chalmer
child euerie morning oft times to crye
thrise in his ear; remēber Ppillip that thou
art but a mortall man. This mooved also
the auncient Aegyptians at all their bankets,
to haue placed in a clew and open
place: right in the sight of all their banketters,
the Image and picture of death,
to make them in the middest of their
pleasure to remember their ende, and sa
to moderate themselues from falling in
sik vices, that easilie aryseth of intemperance
of banketting.
            And finallie, this same mooved the
godly Father Ierome, whether he eate or
drank, or whatsoever hee was occupied

about, strongly to imagine the hearing
of the sound of that Trumpet summonning
to judgement.
            And therefore that warning that the
wise man gevis to the youth, that thinks
their lustie age will never be spent: and
therefore giues thame selues to all licentious
sensualitie:ought to bee weill remembred
of all: for, For all these things
(sayis the Preacher, Eccles. 12.) God vvill
bring thee to Iudgment. Remember thy Creator
(sayis he) in the dayis of thy youth, whiles
the evill dayes are not come, &c. The yeares
quhairin thou sall saye, I haue na pleasure in
them, whiles the Sunne is not darkned, nor the
Light, nor the Moone, nor the Starres, &c.
And after a long figuratiue and very artificious
description of the decripped,
weake, and sicklie auld age, he comes to
this remembrance of death, whereabout
wee are in these wordes: Whiles the silver
corde is not lengthened, nor the golden round
broken, nor the pitcher broken at the vvell,
nor the wheele broken at the Cisterne, & dust
returne to earth as it was, and the Spirit to
God that gaue it.
            
            
               
But let vs aboue all, giue heid to the
wholesome warninges of our Maister
Christ, and imagine with Ierome the samin
to be alwaies sounding in our eares.
Matth. 24. Watch (sayis he) for zee knowe
not quhat houre zour Maister vvill come:
Of this be sure, that gif the Gude-man of the
house knewe at vvhat watch the Theefe wald
cum, hee wald surely watch, and not suffer his
house to be digged throwe. Therfore, be ye redie
alwayes, for in the houre that ye think not,
the Sunne of man will cum: Take heede therfore
(sayis he againe) to your selfes, lest that
at any time, zour hearts be oppressed with surfet,
or drunkennes and cares of this life, lest
that day cum vpon you at vnawares, for it sall
cum as a snare: vvatch therefore, and praye
continually, that ye may be counted vvorthie
to escape, so that yee may stand before the Son
of man. Luc 21. To this same effect serues
the Parables of the Talents, and ten Virgins:
for that quhilk is insisted into be
our Maister anent this point of watching
for his comming, hes the same vse
and weight for every ane in particular,
when Christ sall call them to their severall

judgement, as it hes for all in generall,
when he sall appeir to the common
and last.
            Nowe in this continuall meditation
of death, we suld remember, that it is the
wages of sinne (as sayis the Apostle) and
therefore the meditation thereof, suld
strike our heart with a terror of sin, make
vs earnestlie to repent all our sinnes, and
redeme the time that God spares vs, with
a richt amendement of our life, and gredelie
to gripe at the remeid, the mercies
of God plentifully offered in the merits
and death of the Lord Iesus; lest that after
the death temporall, wee die and perish
eternallie.
            Next, this vile brickle weak estate of
our life is to be weyed, to make vs eschue
pride, ambition, lecherie, drunkennes,
gluttonie, delicate feeding, pampering,
and decking of this filthie claye, and sik
vther vices of the flesh.
            Thirdly, in that as wee brought nothing
with vs into this life, so wee are to
carry nothing away with vs at our death;
but as we cam naked from our Mothers

wombe, so ar we naked to be laid againe
in our common mothers bellie. Let vs
learne to eschue avarice, greedines of
landes and geare, vsurie, oppression, and
all vther vnlawfull meanes customablie
vsed, for attaining to ritches and honors
in this warld; but as the Apostle counsells,
having meate and rayment be content,
and so passe throw thir things temporall,
that by them wee tyne not the
things eternall. It is easie (sayis one) to
that man, to contemne all the things of
this life, quha setledly thinkes that hee
must die.
            Fourthlie, let vs lay as it were before
our eyes, a dead carkesse putrified, and
worme eaten, and of the foule smell and
vglie sicht of every ane of the members,
Let vs learne to eschue the vices, quhairof
they are commonly instruments: as
to refraine the tongue and lippes from
blasphemie, swearing, lying, flattering,
and filthy talk: the eies from wantonnes,
and vnchast looks; the whole face from
f
                  •
               rding and false shewes: the hands from
blud-shed, oppression, theft: and finally,

the feet and whole body from entering,
going fordward, and continuing in evill
wayes, against God, our neighbour, and
our selues; without remorse and true repentance;
lest a mair horrible spirituall
spectacle be seene on the miserable saul,
demayned in the hells be these spirituall
Adders and Snakes, the Devils.
            And last, in sa farre as death, with equall
fute choppes as weill at the gates
of Princelie pallaces, as at the doores of
puir cottages; & taks plesure to wound
as weill the flurishing youth, as the hairy
languishing age: shuiting his darts continuallie,
and never missing be Land, be
Sea; be day, be night; at home, or a field:
Let all estates at all times, in every place,
learne to be ready. And this meikill for
remeid of forgetfulnes of death & louse-living.
            Now followis for comfort aganis the
feare and force of death when he strikes.
For this purpose, wee haue often and
weightilie to considder, what a change
and cosse wee sall make, when wee sall
exchange this miserable and painefull

pilgrimage, with that pleasand and happie
habitation. For sen God first for the
sinne of ADAM, enjoyned to him his penaltie
in these tearmes. The Earth sall be
cursed for thy cause, vvith sorrowe sall thou
eate thy bread all the dayes of thy life, & with
the sweat of thy browe sall thou feede, till thou
returne to the Earth. Behold the estate of
this brickle body heir, a booth of all sicknesses
and diseases: so that no Apothecary
hes his shop so plesant with drugs,
vnguents, and salues; as the body of man
is with dregges, corrupt humors, vennoms
and sares, subject to all injuries of
fortune; that is, of sik miseries and mischiefes,
as God by his providence sends
and sowes athort the warlde for sinne
whose death the whole Elements he
                  •
               
dight, and to whose destruction and cutting
off, innumerable enemies hes conspired:
howe many wilde beasts? how
                  •
               
many creeping Serpents? howe many
fleeing waspes? howe many sowmin
                  •
               
monsters? yea, how many men and women
in shape and name, but indeede fo
                  •
               
crueltie, Tygers; for craftines, Foxes; fo
                  •
               
               
malitiousnes vnder a flattering fashion,
Crocodiles; for vennome, Vipers; and
finally, for all mischiefe against their
owne kind, the greatest monsters in nature:
and yet the most dangerous enemy
of all against thy selfe, is thy selfe; be thy
follies, thy fantasies, thy vanities, thy surfettings
& excesse, thy lustes, thy anger,
and the rest of thy affections, whereof
within thy breist, thou fosters a Forrest
full: as of all kinde of vndantoned and
raging beastes, ravenous fowles, and venemous
Adders; justly thereby procuring
at the hande of God and man, the
wrack of the miserable body.
            Syne see whereabout this life is occupied:
how vainely, how dangerously,
howe painefully, howe grievouslie, in
what company: as DAVID often complained
in his dayes, of Lyons, of Dragons,
of Dogs, of Swine, hungrie Foxes,
Aspes, and Scorpions, devouring vs, deceiving
vs, incensing vs, traducing vs, biting,
scratching, barking, and pudling vs
in sik sort, that oftentimes there is greater
securitie, and ease to be found among

these evill beastes, nor amongst many
men, with whome wee must liue in thi
                  •
               
warld.
            And what estate I praye thee can thy
puir saul ly intill, in the midst of sik bale
full busines of the bodye, within th
                  •
               
quhilk, it is inclosed as ane Addercop, it
the midst of her webbe; set a floght with
the smallest twitch thereof: as a Mous
                  •
               
trapped in a fal, with the quhilk the children
takes their pastime, or rather as DANIEL
in the den of Lyons, SIDRACH
MESACH in the fierie Oven, or IONAH
groaning in the Whales bellie, overgone
with the waues and surges o
                  •
               
the raging Sea; sobbing like a Doue
chattering as a Crane, and mourning a
                  •
               
ane bewayling his Mother: What feare
                  •
               
what care, what grief, what sadnes, wha
                  •
               
sorrowe, what indignation, what vexation,
and wanrest? No, it is in vaine to
prease to expresse the infinite cogitations
and commotions of the mind, in respect
of that, quhilk daylie experience
may make vs to conceiue.
            Nowe, the onely rest and reliefe from

all this, is in and be death: whereby wee
sall change these diseases in health; these
dangers, in safetie; these paines, in pleasures;
this fighting and labour amongst
deadlie enemies, in singing and honour
among heavenly Angels: And finally,
this wicked & evill company, with that
most happy societie of the glorious and
blessed God of the holy Trinitie, the Father,
Sonne and Spirit, of the whole triumphant
Kirks, Patriarches, Prophets,
Apostles, Martyrs, and of the sweete fellowship
of all these perfited spirits of the
just and faithfull that hes gone before vs,
even of sik as was most neere and deere
to vs in the Lorde Iesus in this life: the
want whereof, may mooue vs to like the
worse of this world, and the mair earnestlie
to desire to be dissolved, and to be
with them in the Heavens: Therefore
was it, that from thir heavens as it were,
the noyse and sounding of this blessed
company, that that voice came downe,
quhilk the beloved Apostle of Christ
heard, saying: Blessed are thay quhilk dyes in
the Lord, for that rest from thair labours.
            
            
               
But go to mair particularlie, and run
throwe the ages and occupations of this
life, quhilk when the Philosophers had
done, they thought it worthier of the
name of Death than Life: and so hath a
godly learned mā vttered after the sense
and feeling of his soule.
            Vita mihi haec mors est, mors haec mihi vita perennis:
            In vita exilium, patria est in morte propinqua. That is▪
               
            
            This life to me is death, but death to mee is
life but blame:
            This life to me in bannishment, but death
returnes me hame.
            Howe soone the Infant comes into
the world hee greets, and bewailes his
cace: when he comes to barne-head, he
is vnder whippes and roddes of Schoolmaisters
and craftis-men: In his youth-heid
driven in a hundred conceits, by
his vnsetled braine, raging in his lust and
ryotous excesse, ready to cast himselfe
blind-folde every day in a newe sorte of
danger and shame; wherin he is not able
to be ruled, but be sik rigorous, maisters

of fooles; as povertie, imprisonement,
sicknes, and sik vther.
            Meanes he to treade the way of vertue?
it is rough stay, painefull and sweatie;
hee man passe the mercie of the stormie
sea, of the sworde of enemies, of the
fire, and of the water, and of a thousand
sortes of dangers; yea, of very deathes:
or he can taste of the sweit fruite thereof
in any honor or ease? throgh the quhilk,
gif he fall happen to escape and come to
man-heid, then is he moved to marriage,
esteemed of all at the first, merrie age, but
soone after, myred age, and at last cleane
marred: for then vnbesets at once squadrons
of cares for house, for moyen of
life, for wife, for children, for honestie in
the world: thereabout are pleyis, feides,
quarrells, contentions, running, ryding,
sayling, fighting, flyting without ease or
end: whereby dolorous deathes, murders,
burnings, heirships, shipwracks, pilleries;
and sik like falles out every daye:
wherewith the perfite age of man is consumed
in vanitie, vexation, mourning,
and mischiefe; till heavie and burdensome

age overtake him, wherein hee can
haue pleasure of nothing, wherein the
puir conscience is bitten & pyned with
remembrance and remorse of the bypast
sinnes, and all the stresses and surfets of
his bypast travels, with the lead of degenering
humors to corruption, so vnbesettis
the carkas, that there is nothing
but hosting in the bowels, yaking in the
bones, ytch in the flesh, gout, gravell, paralise,
and infinite maladies, as so many
scourges & Burreaues tormenting him,
till the miserable life in end be pyned away
and expelled.
            SOLOMON sought out carefullie
quhatsoeuer seemed profitable, pleasant,
or might bring any comfort or contentment
to the mind of man in this life: so
that none culd be able sensyne to match
him, to let be to go beyound him, in that
inquisition, in respect of his moyen and
wisdome incomparable, whereby hee
searched out, not onely the three greate
continents of the warld Asia, Africk,
and Europe: but also these falslie supposed
to be new fund lands, to the quhilk

his ships passed from three year to three:
for sa long was the voyage; and brought
Gold, Apes, Papingoes, Spyces, Odours
and al vther pretious thinges in great abundance,
and yet he found nathing but
vanitie and vexation of spirit.
            Quhat vanitie, vexation, paine and fasherie
is in everie estate of life, trade and
occupation, by this ane thing is most evident,
that none is content with their
awin estate: but everie one esteems his
neighbours better: because he knawis it
not so weil as his awin, and conferres ay
the fasherie and bitternes of his, with the
pleasures and commodities of his neighbours;
so that the only ignorāce of things
of the warld, maks the estimatiō of them:
but when they are proven by experience
as SOLOMON assayed, they are found
to be nothing lesse, than they were supposed:
so that how meikil the mair men
lusted after them, so meikil the sooner do
they loth them, and man confesse in the
ende, all to bee but vanitie, labour and
griefe.
            Therefore hath experience plainelie

paynted foorth the miseries of this life
by diuers similitudes, and the happines
of the exchange thereof, with the blessed
death in the Lord, the quhilk addeth on
(In the Lord) is alwais to be remembred,
for who doubts, but it is better to liue in
the most painesull estate of life: that is,
than to burne in Hel fire for euer: onelie
than tak heed, that thou die in the Lord:
that is, in the mercie and fauour of thy
God throgh IESVS CHRIST, stedfastlie
beleeving according to the trueth
of the worde of God; that death is swallowed
vp, and devoured by the death of
CHRIST, who therefore by the mouth
of his Prophet, insults over death, saying
O death, I shall be thy death. For seeing the
sting of death is sinne, and the force of
sinne (as speaks the Apostle) is the lawe;
certainelie CHRIST fulfilling the law
for vs, and satisfieng by his suffering for
all the transgressions theirof, hee hes so
now plucked awaie that sting, that it
canne no waies hurt vs: as also he hes
broken the force of sinne, that it canne
haue no power to condemne vs. And

how be it, the decree of God be, that all
man die and turne to the dust, yet properlie
to speake; this death in the Lorde
Iesus, is not to be tearmed death; but as
the Scripture calleth it, a sleepe. And as
Christ said to his Disciples, that LAZARVS
sleeped: And the Apostle speaking
of them that were departed this
life, vsed this form, Concerning them (sayis
he) that are a sleepe, &c. This ground then
being layde, that thou die in the Lorde
be certaine, then thou hes made a happy
change, from miserie temporall, to everlasting
felicitie.
            For in this mortallife, wee are alwaies
in Prison and bands, with the stinck and
filth whereof, we are infected and defyled,
pyned with hunger and thirst, dammished
with darknesse, and demayned
with dolours: but by death the bandes
are loosed, the prison made patent, wherout
of freelie wee flie vnto Heavens,
wherein wee are receiued, cleane and
pure washen by the laver of that Lambs
bloud: and beeing cled with his white
garment of jnnocencie, wee are filled

with delights, and findes the fruition of
the light inaccessable. The consideration
whereof, made the Apostle PAVLL
to exclayme; O miserable man that I am,
who sall deliuer me from this body of death.
Rom. 7. And earnestlie desire to be loosed,
and be with Christ. In like manner
DAVID, in the difficulties of this prison,
vttered these voyces; As the heart
brayes for the streams of Water: so doeth my
soule breath for thee ô God: my saul thirsteth
for thee ô God, even for the living God: O
when sall I go and appeir in the sight of God!
Psal. 42. But againe, Psal. 17. he sweitlie
comforts him selfe in the ende of ane vther
Psalme, with an assurance of the jnjoying
of the blessed light, as our Poet
hes expressed the sam in these verses.
            
               Puritas vitae mihi te tueri,
               Corporis vinclis tribuet soluto
               Illa lux vere faciet me ab omni,
               Parte beatum.
            
            
               Lux voluptatum cumulata cunctis
               Gaudijs, cum se sone nube menti,
               Pura majestas dabit in tuendam
               Lumine puro.
            
            The quhilks, for their pleasand comfort,

are maire largelie paraphrased in this
Dixiane following.
            Cleanes of life sal mak me to behold,
            Thy schyning face, when lousd ar bodies bands;
            That happines be no toung can be told:
            Quhilk all perfite, into thy presence stands
            That loue-some light, out throw those plesand lands,
            Spreds out her beams of ioy abundātly:
            Whereby the mind that clearely vnderstands:
            But mist or cloud sall see thy maiestie,
            In glistring gloir, ay glancing with sik light:
            As dois obscure the face of Phoebus bright.
            This life is but a bannishment, and we
are strangers and Pilgrims therein, as testifieth
DAVID Psal. 39.
            Lord heir my sute and gif gude heed,
            Regard my tears that fall:
            I soiourne like a stranger heir,
            As did my fathers all.
            Heaven is our true Countrie, and
dead the returning therto; for our sauls
send from the Heavens, are put in these
earthly Tabernacles & tents, to sojourne
heir for a season, and syne, to returne

when this messenger death is sent to call
them hame to that heavenly Tabernacle,
made without hands. This is verie
plane and full of consolation: the 2. Cor. 5
For we know (sayis the Apostle,) that gif
the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed,
we haue a building given of God: an house
not made with handes, but eternall in the
heavens: for therfore we sigh, desiring to bee
clothed with our house quhilk is in heaven,
because that gif we be clothed, we sall not bee
found naked. But indeid, we that are in this
Tabernacle, sigh and are burdened, because
we walde not bee vnclothed, but wald bee
clothed vppon, that mortalitie might bee
swallowed vp of life: And hee that hath
created vs for this thing is GOD, wha
hes given vs the earnest of the spirit: wherefore
wee are alwaies bold, thoght we know that
while we are hame at in the bodie, we are absēt
from the Lorde: for we walk by faith, and not
by sight: Neverthelesse wee are bolde, and
loue rather to remooue out of the bodie, and
to dwell with the Lorde: Wherefore also
we covet, that both dwelling at hame, and
r
                     •
                  mooving from hame, we may be acceptable

to him. And that to the Hebrews 13. Wee
haue not a permanent Cittie heir, but looke for
ane to come. The quhilk effect also the
same our godlie Poet, hes moste pleasandlie
and sweitlie sung to the glorie of
God, and comfort of all the faithfull, in
these verses.
            O magne Rector orbis, indulgentiae
            Munera terra, fretum sentit & astra, tuae:
            Quaecun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                caelum amplectitur, parentia
            Legibus orta vigent, lapsa cadunt
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuis.
            Modus aequitatis & tuae sapientiae,
            Cuncta
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                quae fecit, cuncta
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                sacta regit▪
            
            Longè niuosis montium fastigijs
            Altior est, vasti gurgitibus
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                freti:
            Humana gens hinc haurit auram & Spiritum:
            Nec pecudes curam praeteriere tuam.
            Hinc cuncta vitae suppetunt nobis bona,
            Dum mens corporeo carcere vincta latet.
            Foetus sub alis volueris vt tegit suis.
            Praesidij fugimus spe mala cuncta tui.
            At exul animus morte libor patrum
            Cum repetet lunen sideream
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                donum.
            Illic egestas & dolores exulant
            Nemo feret votis non potiora suis,
            Passim voluptas, pura passim gaudia:
            Delicias largo flumine rivus agit.
            Illic perenni vita fonte profluit,
            Vita, gravis fati non r
                  •••
               anda manu:
            Illinc fatiscent mentium caligines,
            Quae modo sub tenebris pactora nostra premunt:
            Vultu
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                radius purus 
                  〈…〉
               ,
            Lumine nos purae faelici
                  ••
               tis alit.
            
               
Translated thus to the tune of the CX. Psalme.
            
               Great gouernour of al the world so wide,
               The gudlie graces of thine indulgence:
               Ar felt in th'earth & Seas at everie tyde:
               And in the starnis heauens influence.
            
            
               Quhat ever the life so large dois comprehend,
               Dois rander to thy lawes obedience:
               When they grow vp, & when they feal in end,
               They waxe and wayne vnto thy reverence.
            
            
               The measure of thy sapience divyne,
               And of thy righteous constant equitie:
               Dois rightlie rewl and dresse vnto their fyne,
               What ever thou made, & what is found to be.
            
            
               The snawie toppes of hilles so huge and hie,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   groundlesse, gulfes of the Ocean,
               Ar not so heigh as thy benignitie,
               Nor deipas is thy gudnes soverane.
            
            
               Both mā & beast heir of dois draw their breth,
               Their life, their fude and sustentation:
               Th
                     •
                  ir g
                     •
                  ding, & their safetie from the death.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   evill and danger, preseruation.
            
            
               
                  Even as the foule dois foster tenderlie,
               
                  Hir hale golberts sitting on their nest:
               
                  
Sik is thy care ô father verilie,
               Of al thy children whom thou lovis best.
            
            
               What ever neidful for this life is found,
               Flowis out from this to vs abundantlie,
               So lang as saul lyes in this body bound,
               As captiue in a prison heavilie.
            
            
               But when the saul exyled sall returne,
               Vnto her kyndlie cuntreys heavinlie house,
               Deliuered by the death quhilk men do murne,
               But cause, for his reliefe so precious.
            
            
               All want and dolour there ar far exyld,
               No man sal mis mair then his hart can wis,
               In everie place ar pleasures vndefyld,
               Sweet melodie in heavenly ioye and blis.
            
            
               There riuers runnes on spate with delicats,
               And fountans flowis with water there of lyfe:
               Abundant store of fresh and freand meats.
               There Angels fud, sweit Manna wonder ryfe.
            
            
               Therewith a constant course dois flow, but end
               That everlasting life in perfit ioy:
               Quhilk dreadful destenies cannot offend:
               Nor duleful death in any wise anoy.
            
            
               
               The drowsie darknesse, terrors and the feares,
               And melancholik cogitations,
               All heavines, all sorrowes, griefs & teares
               Ar banished from these heavenly mansions.
            
            
               Their blessed beams effunded from that face,
               Wheirin alone wil be our whole delyt:
               Sal make in vs that happie warke of grace,
               In everie poynt for ever mair perfyte.
            
            
               Now grant vs father so to liue in Christ,
               That we in Christ may end our miserie:
               Ay watching for his comming to that trist,
               And go with him to this felicitie.
            
            We are plying in this life ane dangerous
voyage, sayling throw a stormy and
tempestuous sea, in ane vntight barge,
evell accoutred, ever fearing shalds,
craigs, or sum fore-land, where we may
make shipwrack: in cōtinual peril of Pirats,
the diuel, the world & sin, ever occupyed,
ether rowing or pumping, spycing
or skayring, wynding or howing sayl,
weying or letting anker fall: with intollerable
travell and danger. But death is
the calme and chiereful herberie, the reliefe

of all these labours and paynes, and
halie cittie of the Saints, setled in safetie
and ease. There is no thing but pleasure
rest and merrines.
            We wander heir in a wearisome way,
throw wood and wildernesse, mosse and
myre, throw rough craigs and burning
sand, ever in danger of limmers and wild
beasts, pined with hote and cald, hunger
and thirst, creazed, crucked, brused and
tyred, wil-some, in mist and darknes, ether
gald and mangeid, like Mules with
the weight and burden of the pelfe and
dirt of this earth, or then stressed with the
want of things neidfull for the necessity
of our life. But be death wee put end to
our jouruey, and rest from our travel: entering
in the house of our heavenly Father,
where there is many mansions, weil
prepared and furnished in all things, according
to the promise of our CHRIST.
            This life is a perrelous and painefull
weirfare, wherein wee haue many sore
combats; not only carnall fighting with
men, and striving with the worlde, & the
fasheries of this life: but spirituall, with

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
principalities, powers, Lords of the
world, rulers of darknes and spirituall euils;
from high places, as witnesseth the
Apostle; meaning against Beelzebub &
legions of his vncleane spirits, most frequent,
forceable, craftie and walk-riffe
enemies. The quhilks the surest haldes,
and best fortified places cannot hald out.
And from whose assaults and invasions,
no place nor time is free: Seeing we carrie
the most dangerous friends of them,
to wit, our affections about with vs in
our bosomes, so long as we are in this bodie
of sinne, by that we find them before
vs wheresoever wee go, and what soever
about we be occupied; with these are we
daylie wounded, chast, traquheld, overthrawne,
and led away captiues: But by
death reporting the last victorye in Iesus
Christ, wee honourablie triumph ouer
all, and obtaines the fruition of that
peace of God that passeth all vnderstanding
for ever.
            And finallie, this world is a man-mil,
a stane barrowe, a place of fair labour vnder
rigorous maisters of wark, constraining

vs daylie to pay ane vnpardonable
exaction of taske: even as in AEgypt,
where the people of God were compelled
by that spiritual Pharaoh, to worke
tyle in great quantitie and number, and
yet to gather strawe and stubble themselues,
or then to be scourged & demayned,
till wee sigh and cry vnto God, and
he send this death and his Moses for our
deliverance: wherby, bringing vs out of
the house of labour and bondage, hee
sets vs downe in the libertie of his kingdome,
even in that promised Canaā
                with
Ioshua and Caleb, to feede with these on
the plenteous fatnes thereof, overflowing
with milke and hony.
            Nowe then, by recapitulation to abridge
the comparisons of the exchange
of this life, with that vther quhilk is effectuate
by death; wee may weill say with
Salomon, Better is the Daie of our Death,
then the daie of our byrth: For man is
borne of a woman in travell, to liue in
miserie, but hee dieth through Christ in
ease to liue in foelicitie; incontinent after
he comes in the world, with cries he

vttereth his miserable estate: incontinent
after his departure, with songs hee
praiseth God for ever. He is yet scarselie
in his cradell, when a number of deadly
enemies assailes him: after his death, no
enemie can annoy him: while he is here
he displeaseth God: when he is dead, he
pleaseth him perfitlie: In this life, he dyeth
through sinne: in that to come, he liueth
through righteousnes: Be many tribulations
here he mortifieth sinne: with
infinite joyes there hee liues in holines:
heere he dieth every houre, there hee liueth
continuallie: heere is hatred, there
is loue: heere paine, there pleasure: heere
mourning, there melodie: heere corruption,
there immortalitie: here time, there
aeternitie: heere miserie, there felicitie:
and finallie, here can we see nothing but
vanitie, but there sall we see the Majestie
of our God: with triumphand and vnspeakable
joy and glory everlasting.
            Is death then to be detested? suld it be
abhorred? or suld men immoderatelie
mourne for it? or rather suld it not bee
imbraced, welcommed and kissed? Sall

we lament without let, when God calles
our neerest and deerest by death to his
life? or contrariwise, haue wee not occasion
as the Thracians, with feasting and
gladnes to congratulate. For gif any euill
be befalling therein, it is to vs, and
not to them: But so it is, as ane Ethnick
weill reasons, to bewaile our incommodities,
and to be heavilie grieved for any
evill betyding to vs, it is selfe-loue, and
not the loue of a friend: and so to be sad
for the safetie of a friend, it is rather the
parte of ane enuyous persone, than of a
Brother or favorer: and gif so the Ethnicks
hes ressoned, what suld become vs,
Christians? Sall we contravene that rule
of Christian duetie, lamenting for them
that laughes, & mourning for them that
singes: fasting for them that feasts: hurte
our health, for them that are perfitelie
whole: weare the black doole for them,
quha clothed in white garments does
accompanie the Lamb with joy wheresoever
hee goes? For them, who are alwaies
singing with the Angels. Holy, holy,
holy, Lorde God of Hostes: Sall we with

impatient clamours and plaintes repyne
against the will of God? And finally, for
sik as hes the blessed fruition of the companie
of the Father, Sonne, and holye
Ghost; of the holy Angels, Patriarches,
Prophets, Evangelists, Apostles, Martyrs,
and of all the just and righteous,
who hes beene gathered before to that
triumphant Kirk: Sall wee run like warwolfes
to solitarie holes and corners, flying
the societie of the faithfull, and comfort
with the congregatiō of Gods people,
quhilk they haue in their holy meetings;
namely, for spirituall exercises of
godlines, hearing of the word of consolation,
and presenting of prayers & praises
vnto God, quhilk sort of exercise and
conversation, approches neerest to the
holy occupation of them that are gone
before vs to the heavens? Na God forbid.
But rather, howbeit by the example
of Abraham and vthers, some thing bee
granted vnto nature to satisfie the weaknes,
and bewaile the frailty therof: shewing,
that we are not stocks nor stanes, but
touched with a feeling of the common

miserie of mankinde: namely, because
vtherwise we are so hard harted, that we
cannot so earnestly as we ought be commoued
for our sinnes: we may weill finding
our heartes mollified at sik occasions,
intertaine that constitution for the
exercise of vnfayned repentance. Yet
neverthelesse, we ought therewithall to
rejoyce, and praise God with gladnes of
spreit; quha hes vouchsafed in mercie
happilie and weill to direct the course of
sik persons liues, and giue them ane happie
end; praying him instantly of his inestimable
grace, so to deale with vs also,
that following the gude example of sik
as hes tread that path before vs; wee may
go fordward rightlie and constantlie, till
wee be gathered with them to that rest,
where all together in end, we may glorifie
our God and Father eternallie.
            Now it rests to satisfie such, who fears
their great losse and hurt by death; and
first them who heavily regrates the want
of their Parents, husbands, wiues, children,
brethren, sisters, speciall friendes,
and sik vthers: Let sik first considder that

quhilk hes beene clearly declared; that
they haue no cause to lament for them,
that are taken so to their rest in respect of
their estate; vnlesse they wald shew them
selues envious of their weilfare, and to
preferre our pleasure to thair so greate
profite, or to make mair of doing of our
turnes here, nor of their termeles felicitie
there; it were to shewe vs altogether addicted
to the loue of our selues, without
consideration of the weilfare of them to
whome we wish most weill vnto. Wald
thou desire for thy cause, and it were to
effectuate never so good a turne to thee;
that ane whome thou lovest best suld lye
in Prison, liue in banishment, enter in a
barrowis, in a perrelous voyage, in a dangerous
journey, in a pyneful thraldome,
and shamefull slaverie? Nay, thou dare
not say it, lest thou wald bewray thy self-loue,
and testifie that thou caredst not
what became of him, so that thy turne
were done. Or gif thou wilt say, I wish
him no worse nor my selfe; there is yet
no token of loue: For gif thou thy selfe
were in miserie and continuall danger,

or in worse estate than ill ynough, wald
thou so shewe thy affection, by wishing
thy friend partaker thereof? gif sik bee
thy affection, very fewe wald be faine of
it. Loue wisheth the weill, and not the
woe of the person beloved: yea, gif it be
in sorrowe, it findes the samin doubled,
to see thy friend involved in the samin estate
with it.
            But now I pray thee, quha hes done
this to thee? Is it not God that workes
and dois all this? Yes certainly, be whatsoever
Instrument hee works the samin.
Dois thou not daylie pray, that his will
be done? Why art thou than grieved because
thou hes obtained thy prayer? Or
thinks thou indeed that he is thy Father
to whome thou hes prayed? and yet hes
done thee that hurt and wrong? Then
man he be in thy judgment ane vnnaturall
and vnloving Father. Or esteemes
thou thy selfe, to wit better what is gude
for thee, nor he dois that hes made and
redeemed thee? Oh beleeues thou him
not to be al-sufficient, that can be to thee
in steed of all, and furnish thee whatsoeuer

thou wants? Or suspects thou his fidelitie
and honestie in keeping his promises?
Certainly ane or all of thir man
be, or than thou art not in thy right wit,
but is transported with ignorance, infidelitie,
follie, and blinde affections; like
vnto a beast, a babe, a foole, or a phrenetick.
Therefore, learne to take vppe and
amend thy selfe, and turne againe vnto
the faithfull tread; enter into the Lords
Sanctuarie, cast vp the buke of wisdome,
learne thereof and be wise; and thou sall
cleirlie see the Almightie hes wroght it
and rightlie: he hes done his good will,
and for thy weill: he hes played the Father
in great favour: hee hes wrought
wisely, and thou art fond quha cannot
persaue it, in taking from thee thy leaning
stocks that withheld thee fra him,
that thou may leane to him allanerlie,
and find in him whatsoever thou wants:
he hes taken on him to be a Father to the
fatherlesse, the husband to the widdow,
the friend to the faithfull, the brother &
sister of them that heares his worde and
dois it: Father and mother may leaue

thee, but he will not leaue thee, hee will
not forsake thee: The mother may forget
the fruit of her wombe, the husband
the wife, the Father the son, the brother
the sister; but the Lord will never forget
his awin: either sall hee stirre vppe
meanes for thy comfort, and make of
fremd men, fathers and friends, and vnkend
women, mothers, wiues, sisters, &c.
gif thou be faithfull and patient; or then
sall hee worke, and perfite the worke of
his mercie in thee, and make thy saule
with full contentment to say, Thou finds
thy selfe satisfied by his al-sufficiencie, so
that thou wald wish na mair, no nor neuer
could haue looked for sa meikill.
            Now the doubt quhilk remaines behinde,
dois furnish vs the greatest consolation
of all. It wald appeare, that not
without cause suld we feare, for the dissolving
of nature; and separation of the
saul from the bodie, and justlie lament
the losse of our bodies; quhilk by death
seems to bee destroyed and brought to
nought: and thereby either to be made
meat to the worms of the earth, foode to

the fishes of the Sea, and foules of the
aire; ar turned by the fearefull fire, in
ashes and smokie aire. Let vs then consider
the losse, but meikle mair, estima
                  •
               
and view the commoditie and comfor
                  •
               
that redownd; to vs thereby.
            Certainelie, gif wee looke rightlie to
the matter, we sall finde na losse at all, vnlesse
thou wald esteeme the losse of thine
enemie to be losse: for indeed, that olde
man of sinne by death is destroyed, and
alluterlie mortified and vndone. That
poyson is put awaie, & that canker consumed,
whereof fainest thou wald haue
been free, gif thou be the free childe o
                  •
               
Cod; and for the quhilk cause, inspecial
death ought to be embraced as thy best
friend, and dearelie esteemed of, for defacing
and slaying of thy deadly enemy.
Of whom, by no vther meanes thou can
be cleane quite but by death: for Christ
our king, by the death ouercome and
dantoned death, and made our greatest
enemie, to become our special friend; even
as the fire to eate out the fire of the
scalded hand: The Scorpion to heal the

Scorpions sting, & the Theryack made
of the flesh of the Viper, to abolish the
deadly venome thereof: What losse is
there in the vre cast in the fornace, when
be the fire out of the moules of the earth
thou gathers silver and gold? What losse
in the casting of the seede in the ground
and scattering in abroade, when for ane
thou resaues ten? The same losse, is in
the laying off of this mortall body in the
graue: wherefra, againe be the vertue of
Christs resurrection, we sall resaue it immortall,
cleane, and free from the seede
of sinne, and so from all sorrowe, meet to
bee joyned with the immortall saules, to
haue the fruition of the face and light of
the countenance of the God of immortalitie.
            Then let vs repose vpon thir twa chief
grounds of consolation against the feare
of death; to wit, the immortalitie of the
saull, and resurrection of the bodies, warranted
to our faith, be the most clear and
comfortable passages of the Scriptures
of God. As touching the immortalitie
of the saule, the Philosophers, Ethnicks,

yea, the very American Cannibals this day
doubts nothing off. But lo, wee haue a
stronger consolation, in the blessed hope
of the resurrection of our bodies, and
ioyning of them with the saule in a glorious
immortall, and perfite estate, to the
stedfast standing of that wark of grace, in
our whole man, body and saule for ever.
Anent the quhilk, we man speak at mair
length; because of the large and accomplished
comfort arising therevpon.
            Of innumerable things in nature, the
reparation of the body of man in the resurrection
may bee easilie beleeved: for
any may easilie obserue, how of the auld
and dead grashopper, bee shaking off of
her slouch, the young dois lowpe out
fresh and able: of the swear and decrepit
cale-worme inclosed all the winter in a
sorte of shell, to flye out a faire painted
Butterflie in the Sommer. Or as the learned
obserues, of nature hath left in writ:
of the seary Emmets, become winged
flyes: of the carion of a Calfe, the honie
Bees: the silk wormes lies deade all the
winter, and quickens again in the spring

time: the Phoenix reviving out of her
owne ashes. Quha is hee that espies not
the pleasant Spring-time, and the gracious
vicissitude of the returning newe
yeare: wherein all herbs, trees, birds, and
beasts, begins to shewe a newe force of
nature; and brings foorth sik newe lustie
and goodly shapes, as no naturall witte
can giue the reason thereof. Seing then,
that nature produces daylye so many
things, whereof the minde of man can
conceiue no cause: quha can denie, but
the workeman of the whole world may
raise vppe againe the bodies of men, in a
mair bewtiful forme, nor ever they were
in: seeing his hande that made nature,
workes the like dailye, in nurishing and
drawing out the putrified and corrupt
seede, and making the samin to growe
vp in a pleasant herb, or a faire and great
trie; and sik like the seede of man and
beast; liquid and hin in it selfe to growe
in flesh, blude, hyde, haire; yea, in harde
sennowes and bones.
            And so Cyprian dois illustrat the truth
of the Resurrection, be the Apostles Example

of the seede. 1. Corinth. 15. Gif any
(sayis he) wald mixe together divers sortes
of seedes, and syne sowe or scatter them on the
Earth: dois not every seede in a competent
time, according to the kinde of the awin nature,
bring foorth the blade, floure, and fruite
thereof, for the reparation of the whole substance
and bewtie of that bodye that perished
of before: So also, the substance of the fleshe of
man, albeit it be diverslie deiected; vvhen it
sall please God, it sall be brought againe to life;
in that same shape, quhilk death defaced; so
that every saule, sall haue restored to it, not 
                     〈◊〉
                   
confused, sought out, or strange body, but the
very awin selfe bodye in substance quhilk it
had before, onely far altered for the better in
qualities. Wherefore, the Apostle could
not chuse a mair fit and neere figure to
represent the resurrection, than the similitude
of the seede sowen in the furrows
of the Land: For as in nature the seede is
cast in the furrowes; so in Christian burials,
is the body laid in the graue: and as
the seed after it is corrupt and rotten, begins
againe to sprout and growe vp in a
stalke, or Tree, flourishing and bringing

forth fruite: so dois the bodie fresh and
vigorious rise againe from corruption to
life: a body subject to putrefaction is laid
in the graue; but raised againe, free from
all frailtie: it is laide downe, expond to
wrack and destruction; but it is raised againe,
cheerfull, quick, liuelie; cleane &
pure, fyned from all drosse of earthlie or
elementall alteration: a little assay wherof,
may bee ordinarlie remarked in sicknesse;
quhilk is the fore-runner, and messenger
of death: for when with a feuer,
ane is heavilie vexed, his colour growes
pale, his body is heavie, his strength is
gone; and of an able man, is turned in a
lazie lump of clay; liker to a carion, than
a living creature: but in some processe of
time, by help of nature, meanes of medicine,
and restoratiue foode, hee reviues,
and becomes lustie, gude-like, and maire
plesant and able, than before his sicknes.
So in the Resurrection, the same bodie
arises againe; but so purged, so fyned, so
strengthened and trimmed, that no blemish
nor wamb of the auld corruption
or weaknes may be espyed.
            
               
So then, this separation for a time is
no losse at all; but be the contrary, to the
great gude of both the partes of man: for
the body is laid at rest, free from all danger;
not onely of sinne and al miseries arising
therevpon; but also from all temptations,
peaceable sleeping in the graue,
till that pleasant morning of the joyfull
Resurrection. For howbeit, it appeare
voide of life, in so farre as the saule being
separate, carries with it all sense and mouing;
so that at last, it is putrified and turned
to dust: yet notwithstanding, for s
                  •
               
meikle as the power and spirite of God
that quickens all things, leaues it not, i
                  •
               
cannot be esteemed altogether separate
from life; but as the Apostle speaks, Rom
8. Gif the spirit of him that raised Iesus from
the dead dwells in you, hee that raised Christ
from the dead, sall quicken your mortall bodies,
by the spirit that dwells in you: As also
in the former similitude of the seede is euident;
the quhilk howbeit it appeare to
be dead, yet hath it life in it selfe before
thou sowe it, and being sowne, it seemes
to be slaine and buried; but it comes contrary

wise to passe: for out of very rottennesse,
it springs vp mair pleasant than
it was: so that it is certaine, it had life in
it, both before it was sowne, and in the
midst of the corruption thereof. And
when the Lord in his Lawe, calles himselfe
the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and
Iacob; saying, hee is not the God of the
dead, but of the living: as our Maister
vses the samin against the Sadduces for
the Resurrection: he meanes not onely
of the sauls of these his servants that wer
living with him in the heavens, but also
of their bodies, quhilk the Lord had laid
vp in the earth, with the awin sort of life
furnished thereto, by his power that
quickens all creatures, even as the seede
lying vnder the furrowes.
            Mairover, we being by faith joyned
& coupled with Christ as these fathers,
not onely in saule for the life and safetie
thereof; but also in body, that quickning
force of his life, whereby hee raised our
nature from the death, never leaveth the
bodies of the faithfull, but with a hid,
fectful efficacie, lurkes for a while, as the

seede vnder the clod, till it spring out in
the awin tyme. And this is the grace of
God that ever accompanies it, even in
the midst of corruption, be the vertue of
that everlasting covenant, quhilk is as a
certaine spring and vaine of life, not to
the saules onely, but to the bodies also
in the midst of the very graue: For according
to that ground of our text, They
that dyes in the Lorde, are pronounced
blessed: Nowe, the saule is not properlie
esteemed to die, but the bodye; so that
this blessing man be on the body: but so
it is, that no blessing can be without life,
it followes then of necessitie, that the bodie
is not destitute alluterlie of life, but
hes in it, the awin sort and condition of
life, even in the midst of death: and althogh
through the corruption, it shews
no token of life; yet retaines it thereof a
certaine seede and vertue, quhilk in the
day of the Resurrection it shawis forth,
when the spirite of God sall put out his
infinite power, to quicken these bodies,
and raise them from the dust, to be decored
with that glory promised to his elect.
            
               
Death then affrayes the godlie, but as a
bowgle that feares bairnes: as a mother
that wald put on a Maske to feare her
childe; the child behalding her so disguised,
cryes and flyes awaie: but how soone
the maske is remooved, and the mother
shewis her selfe as she is: then turnes the
childe againe with joye, and embraces
and kisses her. So is it indeed with the
death, quhilk in respect of the new life it
brings, may be called our mother, as IOB
said to the graue: Thou art my father, and
to corruption, thou art my mother: when we
looke on it, as it is masked with the lawe
and rigour of Gods justice and wrath,
for the transgression theirof, then is it
most terrible and feareful; But when that
maske is shaken off, and it presence the
selfe vnto vs, as it is becum to be in verie
deede in Christ: than may we run to it
and meet it, and embrace it as our mother,
to be brought out therby vnto the
estate of a blessed life: sa that there is no
losse by it, but great gaine: for like as on
that ane part, wee can never bee free of
the thraldome and vexation of sinne,

but by death, so are we never throughly
put in possession of the ritch graces of
Christ; but be ye samin, for we liue heir
vnder hope: and that quhilk is seene, is

                  •
               ot hoped for: but that quhilk we looke
to see and enioy, when by death we depart
from this vale of miserie, vnto that
Paradise of all pleasure: Namelie, after
the joyfull resurrection of the just, when
that worke of Gods grace in vs is fullie
perfited: We are heir vnder tutorie, but
there sal be free inheritors: here as Prentises
and schollers, but then sall be free
men and maisters; And as the damsell
vnder the discipline of her dame, reioyces
meikle, & whē she heares of the treatie
of her mariage: but mair when she is
contracted, and most of all, in the day of
her marriage, when she beginns to haue
the ful enjoying of all, quhilk she langed
for: so we in this life, be the Gospel preached,
heares of that marriage, & beleeuing
of the samin, ar firmely hand-fasted;
But the full fruition sall we not haue, till
be death wee be turned to dust, and be
the glorious resurrection, renued again,

and presented to our husband in the
heavens, perfit and comelie in body and
saul: at quhilk time our mariage is solemnized
in the sight of God, his Angels,
and all the glorified Saints, with whom
we sall enter in the wedding chamber, to
enioy the perfection of vnspeakeable
pleasures for ever: our beautifull bridegrome
inviting vs with these wordes.
Arise my loue, my faire one; Behold the winter
is past, the rayne is changed and gone away,
the flowers appeir in the earth, the time of the
singing of Birds is cum, and the voyce of the
Turtle is heard in our land: the Fig-tree hath
brought foorth her young figs, and the vynes
with their small grapes hath cast a sauour.
Arise my loue, my faire one, and come awaye
&c. Cant. 2. Then sall bee accomplished
the prophecie of the spirit; They who sawis
in sorrow, sal shear with ioy; he wha carying
his happer went mourning, sall returne
carying his sheaues with dancing.
            Let vs then stedfastlie repose on Christ
Iesus, who in nothing did shew forth
the powe and glorie of his God-head,
fo meikel as in rysing againe from the

dead; and tryvmphing over the power
of the graue: for the same without question,
is to be effectuat in al his members,
any of the quhilk, gif he suld leaue vnperfited,
be that resurrection, hee could
not be a perfit Christ and Saviour. Let
vs therefore certaiuelie beleeue the Apostle,
Phil. 3. and looke for the comming
of our Saviour from the Heavens
at the last daie: at quhilk time, he sall
transforme our humble and mortall bodies,
and mak them conform to his glorious
bodie, be that power, whereby he
is able to subdue all thinges: and let vs
marke the exhortation and consolation
of the same Apostle. 1. Thes. 4. I will not
haue you to be ignorant brethren, concerning
them quhilk are a sleepe: that ye be not sorrowfull,
as those who hes no hope. For gif we beleeue
that Iesus is dead and rysen againe, even
so them quhilk sleepe iu Iesus, will God bring
with him; for this say we vnto you by the word
of the Lord, that they quhilk liue and are remayning
in the cumming of the Lord, sal not
preuent them quhilk sleepe: for the Lord himselfe
sal discend from heaven, with a shout &

with the voyce of the Archangel, & with the
Trumpet of God: and the dead in Christ sall
ryse first. Then sall they quhilk liue and remaine,
bee caught vp with them also in the
clouds, to meete the Lord in the ayre, and sall
be ever with the Lorde: wherefore, comfort
your selfe (sayis the Apostle) one ane vther
with these words.
            
            The reason then, wherefore they that
sleepes in the Lord, suld not bee immoderatlie
lamēted, is, because they ar to be
raysed againe, (be the word of God,) to
haue the fruitiō of the ages that ends never:
As Christ himself hes assured: Ioh. 5.
The houre sall cum, when they that are in the
graues, sall heir his voyce, and they sall cum
foorth: they that hes done gude to the resurrection
of life: but they that hes done evill, to
the resurrection of condemnation. Now this
gude doing, is beleeving in him, & shewing
of the fruits theirof, in loue and obedience:
as he himselfe answered to the
Iewes, in the saxt Chapter theirafter,
when they asked him▪ 
               What sal we do, that
we may work the works of God? This is the
worke of God, (saies or Maister) that ye beleeue

in him whom he hes sent. This is the
will of the Father that sent me, that none of
those that hee hath giuen mee should perish:
But that I suld rayse them vp in the last daie;
This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever
knowis the Sonne, and beleeuis in him,
sall haue eternall life, and I sall rayse him vp
at the latter daie. Whereby our sweet Saviour
brings solid consolation, vnto all
his elect and faithfull: to saue them from
succumbing in these heavie tentations:
wherewith Sathan seeks by distrust and
infidelity, grieuously to afflict & deiect
the minds of Gods children. Like as hee
left nothing vnassayd against IOB the paterne
of patience: and that in the midst
of all the righteous servands of God,
strenthened be his spirit: comforted him
selfe in the assured hope of this resurrection,
saying: O that my words wer now writtin,
ô that they were written even in a buike,
and graven with an Iron pen, in Lead or in
stone for ever: for I am sure that my redeemer
liveth, and he sall stand the last on the earth,
and thoght after my skinne, wormes destroye
the bodie; yet sall I see God in my flesh, whom I

my selfe sall see, and mine eies sal behold, and
none vther for me, though my reynes be consumed
within me. Seeing then that all the
hope and assurance of salvation, and all
consolation, in the vtter extremitie, is
in this beleefe, of the blessed resurrection:
let vs speciallie open this vn
                  •
               o all the
assaults and terrours, wherby Sathan and
his foule spirits, seeks to subvert our
minds, dash vs with distrust, and cast vs
in most dangerous dispaire: and let vs
haue ane fixed faith, and vnshaken hope
in him, wha is the author and purchaser
to vs of this last & greatest benefit, quhilk
crownes and perfytes all the rest, the resurrection
of our bodies, to the life everlasting.
            Now, gif we wald know farther anent
the suertie and maner of the resurrection,
& what sort of bodies sal be brought
thereby from the dust, meet and able to
jnioy that spirituall kingdome of glorie:
Let vs for the assurance of our faith, and
full instruction and comfort hear it out
of the plaine wordes of the Apostle, out
of the fifteenth Chapter, of the first

Epistle to the Corinthians.
            But some men will say, how are the dead raysed
vp? and with what body, cum they foorth?
O foole, that quhilk thou sawest is not quickened
except it die: and that quhilk thou sawest,
thou sawest not that body quhilk sall be, but
bare corne: As it falleth of wheat or of some
vther; but God giueth it a body at his pleasure,
even to every seede his awin body. All flesh
is not the same flesh; but there is one flesh of
of men, and an other flesh of beastes, and another
of fishes, and another of birds, there are
also heavenlie bodies, and earthly bodies: but
the glorie of the heavenlie is one, and of the
earthly an other. Ther is another glory of the
Sunne, and an other of the Moone, and another
of the Starrs: and ane star differeth from
an other in glorie; Sa also is the resurrection
of the dead: the body is sawin in corruption, &
is raised in incorruptiō, it is sawin in dishonour
and raysed in glorie, it is sawin in weaknesse
and raysed in power: It is sawin an naturall
body, and raysed ane spirituall bodie. There is
a naturall body, and there is a spirituall body:
as it it also written. The first man ADAM, was
made a liuing saul: & the last ADAM was made

quickning Spirit: how be it, that was not first,
quhilk is spirituall, but that quhilk is naturall:
and afterward that quhilk is spirituall.
The first man is of the earth earthlie: the second
man, is of the Lord from heven: as is the
earthlie, sik are they that are earthly, and
as is the heavenlie, sik are they also that are
heavenlie. And as we haue borne the Image
of the earthly, so sall we beare the Image of the
heavenlie. This say I brethren, that flesh and
bloud cannot inherit the kingdome of God, nether
doth corruption, inherit incorruption.
Behold I shew you a secret thing: wee sall not
al sleep, but we sal al be changed in a moment,
in the twinckling of an eie, at the last trumpet:
for the trumpet sall blow, and the dead sal be
raysed vp incorruptible, & we sal be changed:
for this corruptible, must put on incorruption:
and this mortal, must put on immortalitie. So
when this corruptible, hes put on incorruption,
and this mortall, hes put on immortalitie,
then sal this saying, that is written be brought
to passe, Death is swallowed vp in victory, ô
death where is thy sting! ô graue where is thy
victorie! The sting of deatb is sinne, and the
strength of sinne is the law: but thanks be to

God, who hes giuen victory through our Lord
Iesus Christ. Therefore my beloved brethren,
be ye stedfast and vnmoueable, abound alwaies
in the work of the Lord: for as meikle as ye
know, that your labour is not in vaine in the
Lord.
            Then to conclude, the veritie of this
resurrection of Christ hes wrought this
farre, that thereby the victorie and tryumph
obtayned, over death, in the verie
darke and strongest dungeon theirof,
the graue; no Christian suld doubt of
perfit salvation of bodie and saull; but
may haue a firme and vnshaken hope,
that all sall be perfited in him, quhilk are
expressed and done by his Christ, for his
sake. So heere is the stay and solid foundation
of our faith, grounded vpon the
death & resurrection of our Lorde Iesus:
whereby he hath destroyed the force of
death, and plucked away the sting thereof:
quhilk turned vs awaie from God,
and cast vs awaie from vtter danger of
wrack & destruction. Sen we haue therefore
obtayned so great and so sure felicitie,
be the death and resurrection of our

Saviour. Let vs not suffer our selues to
be carryed awaie with any doubting, or
wandring error: but let vs with all our
maine prease, to injoy the vse and fruits
of so great a gude: and let vs fixe the eyes
of our faith vpon hie, wha hes promised
vs all this in Christ: wha is loving,
trew, eternall, and almightie: and therefore,
neither can nor will disappoynt vs,
seeing that of his singular fauour & mercie,
be his Christ, raysed from the dead:
he hes regenerated vs in a liuely hope, &
hes restored vs to a life, free from all danger
of death, and hath consigned to vs an
inheritance immortall: forgiving vs all
our sinnes; and blotting awaie all handwrits
and obligatories theirof, that was
against vs.
            The remembraunce theirof, suld alwaies
walk before the eies of our minds;
namelie, when we are to enter into this
last conflict & battel: wherein detesting
all the sinnes of our by-past life: Let vs
open to Sathan, death, sinne, and hel, the
infinit mercy of God the Father, by faith
in the Lord Iesus Christ: whereby salvation

certainely prepared, is set before vs
with stretched out armes, to meet & imbrace
vs. So this faith and assurance of
the promised mercie and life: infused in
our hearts, be the haly spirit, is to be cherished
and stirred vp in vs be all meanes,
that throw the merit of the perfit mediatour,
we may confidently call vpon him,
Abba deere Father. Feeling that spirit of
adoption, alwaies assuring our spirit, that
he is our Father in Christ, and we are his
deerely redeemed Children, be that ransome
of his pretious bloud: and that this
our father hes given vs to his Christ, s
                  •
               
that no power is able to take vs out of his
hand, or stoppe vs from entring into his
rest: perswading vs, that neither life nor
death, principalitie nor power: heigh,
nor lowe, thing present, nor to come:
nor na vther, is able to separate vs from
the loue of our gratious father in Iesus:
So this spirit, is the earnest of our inheritance,
putting vs even presently in possession
therof: be an assured & vnshaken
hope: thereby, lifting vs vp, and conforting
vs, hee remooues all trembling and

terror from our conscience, & makes vs
to embrace the favour and merciful presence
of our God, for the certain receaving
of that redemption & reconciliatiō,
offered alwaies be him vnto vs in Christ
Iesus; whome hee hes proponed, a sure
propitiation and attonement bee faith
in his bloud: whereby, being justified,
we finde rest and a pacified conscience;
a quiet and secure minde, in sik sort, that
all diffidence and desperation being shaken
off, we conceiue an assured hope of
the resurrection, and glorious immortalitie:
And doubting nathing of that perfit
joye and salvation purchased, we gladly
resolue, and are weil contented to remooue
and flit from this miserie, to that
felicitie everlasting, and earnestly desire
with all our hearts, to change this wandring
Pilgrimage: with that heavenlie
and eternall habitation, where wee sall
finde the vnchangeable fruition of euerstanding
pleasures: in the glorious kingdome
of our Christ, who hes prepared
it for vs, gone and tane possession theirof
in our name and nature before vs, and

sall send his blessed Angels, to transport
and take vs thereto. Come Lord Iesus;
Even cum Lord Iesus, hasten Lord
and tarrie not.
            
            
               
                  Nomb. 23. 10.
               Let me die the death of the righteous,
and let my latter end be like his.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            COME LORD IESVS.
            
               COme Christ our king, come we thee pray,
               Without in any mair delay,
               We lang to see thee on that daie
               appeir in maiesty.
               When all before thee sall compeir,
               That live'd on earth, baith far and neir,
               Or sall be fund remaining heir
               when all deid, sall thee sie.
            
            
               Send furth thy trumpetters to sound,
               Our lands allarum, that may wound,
               Thy haters harts, and sik confound:
               As wald thee never know.
               
                  
And gather hame, thine awin elect,
               That na contagion theme infect,
               Mak ioyfullie in all respect,
               That day for theme to dawe
            
            
               That man of sinne is manifest,
               That nowe thy Kirk hes long opprest,
               Wilt thou not haist to giue her rest,
               From cruell violence.
               Sall aye the proude blaspheme thy name,
               And put thy Gospell vnto shame,
               Come Lord and render vnto thame,
               Eternall recompence.
            
            
               And then when thou sall come in glore,
               And thine Archangell thee before,
               Thins awin Elect for to decore,
               With everlasting ioye.
               When thou our Bridegrome sall appeir,
               Convoyed vvith thy friends sa deir,
               And vvith these Virgins wise and cleir,
               That ever sall enioy.
            
            
               The prefence of thy shining face,
               And drink the living streames of grace,
               That flowis through that pleasand place,
               Of heavenly Paradise.
               
                  
Mak vs our Spouse to be prepart,
               Into the Lampis of our hart,
               With that maist precious oyle insart,
               Of Faith as Virgins wise.
            
            
               Array vs vvith that comely weid,
               our vvedding Garment woonder guid,
               Thy Iustice conqueist be thy bluid,
               And merites every way.
               That vve may meete thee gratious,
               Our Bridegrome and our heavenly Spous,
               And in thy Chalmer glorious,
               With thee may rest for ay.
            
            
               Where all kinde dainties deirly dight,
               All pleasure ioy and seemely sight,
               Thy countenance that schines sa bright,
               As na toung can record.
               Where thy Redeemd makes melodie,
               Thy Martyrs ane sweit harmonie,
               Where Angels sings continuallie,
               To thee all praise O Lord.
            
            Even so, Come Lord Iesus.
         
         
            
            THE MANNER OF THE
sicknesse and departure, of IEAN
D' ALBRET Queen of NAVARR, wherin
every Christian may see and learne the practise of
the former doctrine, that is, the plaine and plesant passage,
from this miserie to the life everlasting.
            Translated out of French in Scettes.
            
               IN the yeare of God, 1572.
The peace the third time
being sworne and concluded
betweene Charles the
nynt, King of France, and
the Protestāts, for the mair
sure confirmation thereof, that bluddie
marriage was appointed to bee, betwixt
the Kings sister, and the King of Navarr.
After the peace sworne, and all agreed
vpon concerning the marriage: In the
beginning of May, King Charles prayed
Iean D' Albret Queene of Navarr,
and mother to the young King that was
to be married to come to Paris, to advise

and provide for sik things, as were necessarie
for the marriage, according to
the dignitie and greatnes of the matter:
The quhilk she yeelded vnto, and taking
journey about the sixt of May, shee arriued
at Paris the 15. of the same Moneth,
and began to make divers walkes to and
fro, throughout the Cittie, to the houses
and booths of the Merchants and craftismen,
to finde out sik things as were
meete for the day of the solemnitie; als
weil concerning the wedding garments,
and sik things as shee purposed to propyne,
as vther things proper and needefull.
            The Queene, Mother of FRANCE,
KATHERINE de Medices, seeing a great
fish fanged in her net, wald not slip the
occasioun: Shee hated extremely the
Queene of Navarr, for she had knowne
long before her notable spirit, and what
a Mother she had beene among the Protestants:
so shee thought gif, she suld let
her liue, after that all the rest were massacred,
she could not eschewe a newe hinder
of her interprise; and to slay her among

the rest that were to be murdered
thereafter, vnder pretence of the quarrel
betwixt the house of Guise and Chastillion,
she sawe not a sufficient cause to lay
the fault on the Guisians, quha had no
thing to do with the Queene of Navarr:
Also she was out of all hope to make the
King of Navar her sonne in law, so long
as his Mother lived: quha being wise &
of a gude spirit culd perceiue her craft,
and make all to turne in smoke: wherefore
she hes recourse to ane Maister Renney,
her intertained poysoner, vppon set
pension and wages; quha had anes of
before presēted to the vmquhile Prince
of Condie, a perfumed impoysoned apple,
quhilk was discovered to bee so, be
the experience proven of a dogge, and
be the danger that the Princes Chirurgion
was into, be smelling of the apple
over neir. This Renney, selling his drugs
and perfumed collours, and vther wares
to the Queene of Navarr; fand the moyen,
finely to impoyson her be a paire of
perfumed gloues, quhilk the Queene
caught for her awin present vse, So manifest

it was, that the same Renney vaunted
himselfe thereafter of his vassaledge,
and durst very weill say, that he held the
same Pageant to playe to three or foure
mo, that feared litle sik fashions. So then
on wednesday, the 4. of Iune, shee falles
downe sick in her bed of a continuall feuer;
the cause whereof, as Mediciners
meined it, was a corruption in her pulmons,
whereof be processe of tyme, a
postume had sprung; the quhilks being
moved and irritat be the great heate that
then was, and extraordinarie travell that
she tooke, kendled vp in her that fever,
wherof in fiue daies thereafter she dyed,
to the great regrate of them of the Religion,
and joy of the secret bludy counsell:
yet in very deede, the cause of her
deadly disease was in her beane, wroght
by the force of the poyson, drawne in by
her smelling. Nowe because that in her
sicknes and death, she declared by what
spirit she was guided; we haue thought
good to set down a short discourse therof,
quhilk may bee a patterne and example
to all good Christians to follow; that

they may happelie ende this miserable
pilgrimage, and enter into that heavenly
habitation.
            So then the saide Queene of Navarr,
finding her selfe pressed with the evill, &
that so meikle the mair as the Mediciners
were diligent to releeue her, with
the quhilks, the Queene mother wanted
not her secreet dealing: shee perceived
that it behoved her to go into another
Cuntrie; and therefore she prepared her
selfe to receiue glaidly at the handes of
God, what it pleased him to dispone, &
so resolved her selfe constantly to die,
craving ever instantly, that shee suld not
be left destitute of that, quhilk all her life
tyme she had esteemed most precious; to
wit, the consolatiō of the word of God,
with continuall prayer; conform to that
quhilk Iames commaunds, that the sick
suld call for the Elders of the Kirk, to the
end, they might pray to God for them;
seeing the prayer of the just is of greate
force and effect.
            Following this advertisement, they
ceased not thereafter to solist her, to take

good courage; and to put inteirlie her
trust & assurance in God, as in him quha
was the author of her life, and had power
to preserue the samin. But namely, on
a certaine daye, the minister quhilk cam
to comfort her, declared to her, be many
testimonies of scripture, that it behoued
Christians in all things to conforme
themselues to the will of God; because
he is the Father of the faithfull: and for
that cause, crosses and chastisements suld
be suffered patiently; seeing they ar laid
on by their Father for their weill and saluation:
howbeit, at some times, the rigour
of afflictions, appeareth to the flesh
to be sik; that we imagine na vther thing,
but God to bee enarmed against vs in
wrath vtterlie to destroy vs: yet we man
considder, that as he is just, hee dois nothing
in that but justlie: and being our
Father, he hes special respect to our weilfare:
that he is nothing like the Tyrants,
that takes pleasure in tormenting and
troubling their subjects without reason;
but makes all to serue for the comforte
and edification of his Elect: wherevnto

she answered, that shee tooke all things
from the hand of God, whome shee acknowledged
to be her Father; declaring
mairover, that she never feared the dead,
so farre was shee from murmuring or
grudging against God: notwithstanding
the paines quhilk she indured, knowing
that hee dois nothing but that quhilk is
good and right; so that she was certainly
perswaded, that al suld work for her weil
and comfort.
            The Minister continuing his purpose,
adjoyned; that it behoved to search out
the cause of sicknes some vther way than
the Mediciners are accustomed to doe;
quhilk ever respects, either the corruption
of the humors, the hurt or offence of
the noble partes of the body, or some vther
naturall cause: for albeit the ordinarie
grounds of sicknesses be there, and sik
be the second causes of them; yet wee
man go fordward to the first cause, even
toward God, quha dispones vppon his
creatures according to his good plesure;
quha by striking makes the wounde, and
syne applies the plaister thereto: Therefore

it was, he to whom she suld addresse
her selfe by prayer to finde reliefe of her
sicknes and perfite deliverance, to whom
it were an easie matter to restore her to
health againe, gif so it were his good
pleasure.
            To this she made answer, that she depended
on nathing, saue on his onely
providence, and that she knew very wel,
that it appertained to him allanerlie, to
dispose on all things; and therefore shee
earnestly desired his Majestie, that hee
wald grant her sa farre as he knewe to be
good and necessary for her, as well anent
her bodily health, as her salvation: and
neverthelesse sayis she, This present life
for just causes, is very noysome to me; for
the miseries that I haue susteined in it
sen my young age, and namly, because I
liue not without offending my dear Father
daylie, with whome I wish to bee
with all my heart.
            The minister replied, that the Pagans
had taken consolation in death, in that it
was a moyen to bee delivered from the
evils of this world, but Christians ought

to go farther: to wit, in consideration
that by death, we are not onely exemed
from thir present miseries, but also that
thereby, wee begin to enter in possession
of a better life, quhilk is the life eternall;
where God hes prepared for vs ane vnspeakeable
felicitie, by Iesus Christ, his
Sonne: even as he himselfe had taught
saying: That it is the will of the Father, that
whosoever beleeues in the Sonne, suld haue eternall
life: and neverthelesse, lang life for
as miserable as it is, ceases not to bee a
blessing of God, seeing he had promised
it as a testimonie of his favour, to the
keepers of his law, and maireover, in sa
farre as we serue in this life, to his glorie:
it suld be a singular honour, and taken of
his gude will, to haue it continued: as in
him, whom a Prince wald a lang time
employ in his service: because hee had
fund him faithfull, not for a day or twa,
but for many yers. For this cause, she suld
pray him instantly, that gif it were his
will to employ her farther in this life, for
the furtherance and increase of his truth:
and it wald please him to accompanie

her with health and good disposition; to
the end, that recovering new forces, she
might incourage her selfe to go forward
to the end in her course, meikle mair vertuouslie
then ever of before.
            Where vpon she protested, that her
life was of small avayll in her eyes, for any
particular respect of hir awin: in so
far as shee ceased not continvallie to offend
God in this flesh: But she regarded
chiefely the comforts, weilfare, of the
Kirk of God vppon earth: Wherevnto
gif hir life may serue, she wald esteeme it
some-what worth the lasting. Also, that
she had some regard vnto the tender age
of her children, quhilk God had given
vnto her; fearing to see them want her
presence, in their so base age: yet nevertheles
(sayis she,) I am assured that God
wil steir vp gude instrumēts, for the weil
and comfort of his kirke: and will also be
a father & protector to my Children, as
he hes beene vnto mee in my greatest afflictions;
in sik sort, that I remit it wholly
to his providence to see therevnto.
            The Minister said vnto her, that hee

praised God to see her so assured and resolved
in his providence; praying her to
continue therein, as a thing quhilk was
a good and assured mark of her faith, and
that the good Patriarches in tymes past
had done so, leaving the speciall care of
their posteritie in the handes of God, as
might be seene in Abraham, Isaak, and
Iacob; and the blessing quhilk they wished
to their awin: alwaies it was very requisit
that she suld chuse some persones
of good life and doctrine, quhilk might
continue in these yong Princes, the seed
of Pietie, quhilk shee had sawin in them
with so great travell and cares, hoping
that her faith and constancie in the true
service of God, suld be vnto them an example
of perpetuall recommendation,
to followe and imitate all the dayes of
their life: like as also it was not liklie, yea
almost incredible, but that they suld ever
haue a feeling remembrance of these
good and halie instructions, quhilk they
had so often heard, as weill of her awin
mouth, as of these whome shee had imployed
to fashion and accustome them

to followe honestie and vertue.
            And because that thereafter shee declared
that she had na feare of death; saying,
it was a passage, through the quhilk
all flesh suld resolue themselues to go.
The Minister proposed vnto her, that so
farre suld it bee from Christians to feare
death, that they suld be assured never to
dye, in respect of the saying of Christ,
Whosoever beleeveth in me sall liue eternally.
In sa meikle as death, is not properly a
death vnto the faithfull, but a sleep; as it
is often tymes sa tearmed in Scripture.
Seeing Iesus Christ for them hes conquessed
it, and led it in triumph, so that
wee may crye out with Saint P A V L, O
Death, where is thy sting? O Graue, vvhere
is thy victory? She was also often admonished
by him, to acknowledge and confesse
her faults before God; telling her,
that sicknes was the way to death, and
death was the reward of sinne: therefore
this chastisement suld teach her in earnest,
howe farre she was detfull to Gods
justice; not onely by the fall of the first
man, in the quhilk she was involved with

vthers; but also by her owne proper of
sinne, seeing the best in the warld is but
a pure miserable sinner; and that gif God
wald punish vs according to our sinnes,
we culd look for nothing but death and
everlasting condemnation.
            At this purpose, shee began to lift vp
her hands, joyne them together, & look
stedfastly with her eies toward the Heauen:
saying, she confessed in very trueth,
that she had committed offences without
number; yea, and moe then ane culd
expresse; but shee hoped that God suld
be mercifull to her, through her Saviour
Iesus Christ, quha had suffered for her
sinnes, and risen againe for her justification;
in whome shee had reposed her
whole confidence for salvation.
            This gaue occasion to the Minister,
to discourse at greater length, vpon the
assurance quhilk she suld haue to obtain
the effect of the mercie of God, seeing
that Iesus Christ had come in the world
to saue such, as acknowledge themselues
sinners, as hee himselfe had sufficiently
protested; saying, that he did as the mediciners,

quha goes not to visit the whol,
as not having neede of his helpe, but the
sick and diseased: and in like maner, that
he was presented and offered with al his
goodnes and benefites to them, that acknowledged
themselues empty & voide
of all goodnes: of the quhilk thing, shee
suld sa meikle the mair be assured, as she
had ane inward testimonie of the spirite
in her conscience, causing her to cry Abba,
deir Father; as also her faith was no
vther thing, but ane assurance of the fauour
and good will of God, manifested
to her in his Sonne Iesus Christ; so that
she might say with the Apostle, I am perswaded,
that neither death nor life, nor Angels,
principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor heigh, nor deepe,
nor na vther creature, suld be able to separate
vs from the loue of God, quhilk is in Christ
Iesus the Lord.
            
            Now because, that after this, the Minister
keeped silence, fearing to annoy
her with over long discourse, because the
Mediciners had not thoght it good that
she suld speak meikle; she on the contrary,

prayed him earnestlie to insist in talking
to her of salvation and the life eternall,
adding therevnto, that sen she came
to Paris, she had been negligent ynough
of her duetie, in hearing of the worde of
God, for the quhilk she was grieved: yet
for the present, sayis she, I finde my selfe
greatly eased & comforted be the same,
in this great extremitie.
            Vpon the quhilk desire, the Minister
set forth the felicitie of these happie people,
quha in the hevens enjoyed the presence
of their God, and of all good everlasting:
the quhilk was so greatly excellent,
that the Scripture willing to painte
it forth vnto vs, saith: That the eye hath not
seene, nor the eare heard, neither could it enter
into the heart of man, to considder what God
hath laid vp for his owne. There he added
therevnto this similitude, that even as a
potent and magnifick rich King, willing
to honor gretly some stranger, he shewes
him his Court, his Princes, his Estates,
his store-houses, and his most precious
Iewels, he intertaines him delicately, he
feedes his eies with pleasant spectacles,

his eares with sweet musick, his taste and
smelling with fragrant odours, &c. Even
so, God wald some day display and laye
open his Glory and Majestie; yea, even
all his treasures vnto his Elect and Faithfull:
even then, when he sall retyre them
from this miserie vnto himself, in his heuenlie
Kingdome of glory; where he sall
highlie honour them, and decore them
with Light, incorruption, and immortalitie.
Wherefore, seeing that sik was the
felicitie of the happie and glorified, shee
suld not greatly care to quyte the warld,
in sa far, as for ane earthly Realm, quhilk
she left, she suld inherit the Kingdome of
Heaven: and for goods and ritches corruptible,
shee suld enjoye for ever sik, as
culd not wither nor passe away: & thereafter
he addressed himselfe particularlie
to her, demaunding of her, gif she beleeued
that Iesus Christ was her Saviour,
quha had by his bluid made a purgation
for all her sinnes.
            To the quhilk she answered; Yes verely,
I certainly beleeue, that hee is my
onely Saviour and Mediator, and hopes

for help no where else, but only by him:
knowing that he hes satisfied for my sins
abundantlie; and I am assured, that God
will be mercifull vnto me, for my Christ
his sake, according to his promises.
            Behold a pairt of the good and holie
purposes, quhilk shee did vse a three or
foure daies of her sicknes: the quhilk also
both before and thereafter, she ceased
not continually to vtter; sometimes with
great sighes and sobbes, in a most affectionate
and mooving manner; testifying
the great desire and hope that she had to
go to the Lord: saying oftentimes these
words, O my God and Father, deliver mee
from this body of sinne, and from the miseries
of this life, that I offend thee no mair; and
that I may enioy the felicitie quhilk thou hes
promised.
            
            Now not onely did she daily declare
the godlinesse of her heart, be sa gude
purposes: but also therewithall, did shew
a face and countenance, resolved, assured,
and joyfull, according as the rigour
of her sicknesse might suffer, quhilk testified
sufficiently, that the feare of death

did no wise shake or brangill the firmnesse
of her faith. At the ende of all the
conferences for consolation, they were
ever accustomed to make a Prayer to
God, that it walde please his Maiesty to
accompanie him with a constant patience,
and to shew his mercie and trueth
vpon her; of the quhilk prayer, it is not
by purpose to insert, heir the summe.
            O Lord our Cod, wee acknowledge
before thy face, that we are vnworthie
of thy great mercie, because of our jniquities:
and yet we merit not onely not
to be heard, but also to be cast away from
thy face in vtter confusion: nevertheles,
seeing thou hes promised to heare vs:
wee humbly beseech thee to forgiue vs
freelie all our sinnes, & to cloath vs with
the obedience and justice of thy Sonne
our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, that
in him, wee may bee acceptable in thy
sight. O Lord, we acknowledge, that all
our afflictions cum fra thine hand, wha
art a righteous Iudge, and whome wee
haue continvallie provoked to wrath, by
infinit vices, and rebellious, quhilk ar in

vs: whose life answers nawise to the perfit
obedience, quhilk thou requires of
vs, be the right of the law, the quhilk, alas
we cease not alwaies to transgresse:
And this is it, quhilk makes vs to caste
downe our selues at this present, to bee
humbled before thy maiestie, and to acknowledge
in earnest, from the very bottom
of our hearts, our perverse miserie:
and that all the evill, quhilk we indure in
this vale of sorrow, proceeds of this
spring; that we haue not given vnto thee
a right and true obedience: but hes gone
astray from thy pathes; Yet so it is Lord,
that ther is mercy with thee, seeing thou
art our father: and that thou wilt not the
death of a sinner: but that he suld turne
to thee and liue. This is the cause, why
we present our selues, before the throne
of thy grace: with confidence to obtaine
this great mercie: whereof, thou hes at
all times made promise to our fathers,
that it may please thee to accept the merit
of Iesus Christ, thy Sonne our Lord,
for entire and perfit satisfaction of our
iniquities: and thou thereby, beeing appeased,

we may finde some reliefe of our
evills. The quhilk request, as thou art
God of all mercy and compassion, wee
make speciallie, for them that are vnder
the correction of thy wand, assaulted
with diuers calamities; and namely, for
the Queene here present, strucken with a
very great Maladie: to the intent, that as
it hes pleased thee to afflict hir justlie for
her faults, as she dois acknowledge with
vs: sa it wald please thee, in forgiueing
the same to her, for the loue of thy beloved
Sonne Iesus Christ: to make this
chastisement profitable for her amendement
and ours: Aboue all, to giue vnto
her a tast and certaine assurance of these
heauenly gudis: to the end she may mair
easilie beare and indure the bitternesse
of that cup, quhilk thou hes powred out
to her: and that we onelie desire thy presence
may swallow vp all the torments
of this miserie: and make her to forget all
the greatnesse and magnificence of the
world: knowing that they are nothing
in respect of these, quhilk thou hes prepared
for her. In the meane time, giue hir

patience in her sicknesse, in sa far as thou
knowis: that howbeit, the spirit be ready,
yet the flesh is heauie, fragill, and full
of incredulitie, to the end, that she receiving
it, as from the hande of her Father,
she may the mair cherafullie, conforme
her selfe to thy holy will. And for sameikle,
Lord, as thou hes vsed hir hither-tils,
for the advancement of thy glorie, and
for the defence of thy pure people, wee
earnestly beseik thee to restore her again
to her former helth: to the intēt, that by
this default, the warke, that thou hes sa
excellentlie begunne be her, remayne
not vnperfited: but that this deliverance
may make hir heereafter to take newe
courage, & imploy her selfe in the samin
better, especially, for the education and
instruction of the Children, quhilk thou
hes given hir. But Lord, gif so it sal please
thee to call vppon her, wee will not repine
against thy haly will: but wee praye
thee to confirme her mair and mair, in
the knawledge and profession of thy halie
Evangell: and of the assurance of that
salvation, quhilk thou hes giuen her, be

faith in Iesus Christ, shewing the samin
be the in-calling and sanctifying of thy
haly name, vnto her last birth. And as to
vs that ar heare about hir in health, make
vs to vnderstand the shortnes and incertude
of this life: to the end, we may look
as becoms vs, in this mirror: and see how
the greatest in this worlde, are subiect to
the same calamities, that the pure-anis ar
to the end, that hereafter we may bestow
the rest of our daies, on nothing else, but
on thy honour & service: knawing that
nothing remayns stedfast saue only that,
& the recompence quhilk thou in mercy
hes bestowed therevpon: and that
through the onely merits, death, & Passion
of thy Sonne, Iesus Christ, our Advocate
and Mediatour. Amen.
            Now, this is almost the summe of the
Prayer: the time whereof, while it was
directed to God, she ceased not to lift vp
her eies firmelie to the heavens: joyning
some times her hands togeither, and oftentimes
sighing: Namely, when mension
made of the mercy of God, through
Iesus Christ, shewen to poore sinners; in

sik sorte, that there was none present, but
might perceiue plainly, that she followed
in her heart, the words quhilk weare
pronounced in her hearing. And sa did
constantlie continue in this resolution,
to go to God al the time that she lay bedfast:
taking great pleasure in the haly and
Christian declaration, quhilk was ordinarily
made before her, be many godlie
men, quhilk came to visit her, giuing a
manifest and solemne testification of the
assurance to come, and hope quhilk shee
had to bee saved: and that be the gude &
haly purposes, quhilk she did often hald
and interteine, quhilk for shortnes sake
are omitted.
            And albeit, the dolours quhilk shee
felt were vehement: yet so was it, that
none ever heard an vnpatient worde escape
out of her mouth: yea, not sa
meikle, as be the maner of a complaynt:
like as, beside and attowre her domestickes,
the Queene mother her selfe, the
Mounsieur, and Madame, the brother
and sister of the King, quhilk came somtime
to visit her, can beare witnesse.
            
               
Now, gif God in the middest of her
greatest travels & paines, had made her
to feele an new life: as there is no maladie
so cruell, quhilk hes not some intermission
and vexation: she gaue plainelie
to vnderstande, that shee was not vnwilling
to recover her former health, gif it
wald please God to grant it. Refused nothing
that the mediciners appoynted hir
to take for that effect: and againe, when
her sicknesse did increase, shee brake no
thing off of her courage, but shewed her
self to be armed with an invincible constancy,
to sustayne the proofe of the last
combat, in preparing her selfe joyfullie
to the death.
            And when shee saw her women, and
and mayden-servants weiping about her
bed, shee rebuked them incontinent,
shewing them that they suld not mourn
nor lament for her, but thank God, wha
was calling her to a better life: & to that
heaven of health and salvation, whervnto
shee had contended: onely regarding
that shee had no time to recompence
them, & many others of her domestikes,

that had awayted faithfully, and weil on
her seruice: excusing her selfe at their
hands thereanent, that it was not for lack
of gude will, but for want of time, being
taken from them in that Maladie, yet neverthelesse,
she sulde take the best order
therewith, that she might.
            As to the rest, it were lang to recite,
al the good & haly advertisemēts, instructions,
& admonitions, quhilk shee gaue
to her Dame of honour, Governour to
Madam the Princesse: that shee suld repeate
the samin againe to hir, and hald
her in remembrance thereof, when shee
suld come to age, exhorting her by the
sayd Dame of honour, to shew her selfe
firme and constant, in the true service of
God; and that she suld insist with her vncessantly
for the samin effect, taking
heed to the gude Counsell of Mounsieur
the Prince of Navarre hir brother, as also
of the woman quhilk she had appoynted
for her governour: And to follow the
gude examples and instructions, quhilk
had been giuen her in time bypast, committing,
& resigning her over in the protection

of God: with many informatiōs
quhilk needs not be extēded any farther
            In the ende, feeling her selfe growen
weak, she caused make her last testament
and latter will: in the quhilk, she recommended
aboue all things vnto her Children,
the feare and honour of God, exhorting
them to persevere constantly in
the profession of the Evangell, in the
quhilk they were instructed from their
birth. Appointing namely, that Madame
the Princes hir daughter, suld bee ever
nurished and instructed in the samin: by
the foure Dames quhilk she had appoynted
hir for this effect; And that into the
Country of Bearne, till she cumming to
age; God suld raise vp some Prince of the
samin Religion, to take her in Marriage,
and that be the Counsell and conduct of
Mounsieur, the Cardinall of Bourbone,&
Mounsieur GASPAR Count of Colignie,
Admirall of Fraunce: the quhilk she nominated
& established executors of hir
said testament, This Testament received
by the notars, and red over twise before
her, on Sunday the 8. of Iune, quhilk was

the day before her death; a little after she
caused the Minister be called to her, and
having mair viuely apprehēded the feeling
of death, then of before, shee commanded
him to speake at length, of the
tentations, be the quhilk Sathan is accustomed
to assault the faith of the chosen
of God, at the extreamitie of death. So
then the Minister began & shew, that in
verye deede, that was the houre in the
quhilk Sathan the adversarie of mans
salvation, layis to the moste rude and vehement
assaults: but even then, and at
that time, inspecial dois the Lord increse
and redouble the vertue and force of his
Spirit in his awin, to mak thē victorious
in that combat: and as to the tentations
wherby he preases to bring them in dispayre,
hee layes before their eyes the innumerable
multitude of their sins committed,
and presents the samin discovered
before them, that they may see the
turpitude, filthines and pollution quhilk
is therein. And on the vther part, he sets
the justice of God, before the quhilk na
thing can stand that is spoted or vnclean;

wherof he inferres, that there is nathing
to be looked for be the sinner, but a horrible
judgement and condemnation, but
therevnto shee suld oppone in the first
part, even as DAVID dois in the 51. Psal.
In the multitude of Gods mercies and
compassions, quhilk in number exceeds
far the multitude of our sins. And howbeit,
in respect of his justice, and the rygorous
tryall of the samin: wee confesse
that no Creature defiled with sinne, can
suffer the samin, gif he sall be called to an
account; Yet he knowes, that God will
not enter into judgement with them
quhilk beleues in his Son: but imputes
and allowes vnto them the justice and obedience,
perfited and accomplished be
him, the quhilk onely is able to answere
to his justice-Court: therefore also, in the
samin only, his elect hopes to stand befor
his face: and not be their awin dignitie
or merit; For gif they sulde compeir before
the throne of God, to receiue the
judgement deserved, they suld haue no
occasiō, but wholilie to be swallowed vp
in dispaire, so oft as they looked to the

justice of God: but when they cast their
eye on him, wha beeing the eternall Son
of God, tooke the nature of man vppon
him: and the same buir the paine quhilk
was due to vs: and to discharge and free
vs therefra; then the justice of God not
onelie affrayes vs nothing, but rather
comforts and assures vs; by this certaine
reason, that seeing God is just, he wil not
receiue nor craue the paynes of an debt
twise: wherefore having received a perfit
satisfaction of him, wha became our
cautioner and debter, and wha hes made
full payment for all our faults: he can no-wise
of his justice require the samin fra
vs of new againe; and for the strenthening
of her faith therin, she suld remember
thir sentences▪ 
               Esa. 53. That Christs hes
borne our sicknesse and dolours, that the correction
of our peace was layd on him, that by
his wounds, we haue health: we haue erred &
fayled: but the Lorde hes layd on him the iniquitie
of vs all. That he hes payed that quhilk
he tooke not: that he is our peace and appoyntment
towards God: that hee is that Lamb of
God, that takes awaie the sinnes of the worlde.
               
And many vther sentences quhilk the
Ministers added heere vnto; continving
the purpose lang ynough, for satisfying
of the sayd victorious Princesse demand,
& craving strength against the tentation
of Sathan, wherby he preasses in time of
extremity to bring & turne vpside-down
the faith of the faithful: and in the end he
concluded, that the justice of God suld
no wise bee fearefull, to sik to whome
Christ is made be God, justice, sanctification
and redemption, & wha acknowledges
the same Iesus Christ, wha knew
no sinne, was made sinne: that is to saye,
an oblation for sin for vs, that wee might
be the righteousnesse of God in him.
            He added therevnto, that these things
were not spoken of all men jndifferently,
but of them only wha beleeued in the
Sonne of God, wha reposes themselues
wholie on the merit of his death, vnto
whome the merit is sufficient, for all the
meane of their salvation; And wha contented
them selues with that onely. And
vpon that he asked her, gif shee had altogether
her confidence reposed on Iesus

Christ, Crucified for her sinnes, & raysed
againe for her justification. To the
quhilk, the Princesse having aunswered,
that she looked not for health, justice or
life, by any vther way or meane: but allanerlie,
by her saviour Iesus Christ: and
was assured that his merit was aboundantlie
sufficient for the satisfaction and
ransome of her sins: although they were
innumerable. The Minister there assured
her that she could not enter in condemnation:
but was already passed from
death to life; and tooke occasion therof,
to enter againe on that purpose, that she
had no cause now to feare the throne of
of Gods justice, quhilk was become to
her a throne of grace and mercy: & that
the hour of death suld be greatumly wissed
and desired be her, seeing in culd be
no vther thing vnto her, but an entresse
of a better life: and the houre wherin the
Lorde stretching out his armes, suld embrace
her with the samin, that shee suld
continuallie meditate this excellent saying.
Blessed are thay that dyes in the Lorde, so
sayis the spirit, for they rest from their labours
               
That that was the houre wherevnto she
suld enjoy the visible societie of Christ
her spouse, and suld be in company with
the Angels & heavenly spirits: with the
haly Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
with our godlie brethren, friends,
and acquayntance: with whom she had
comfort and joy in her life time, to posses
with them the same felicitie & glory.
            Yet the Minister going forward, and
willing yet to sound nearer, gif shee was
willing to leaue this life without grudge
or regrate: He spake thir words vnto her,
weil then Madame, gif it sall please God
to put an end by this siknesse, vnto your
earthlie Pilgrimage, and call you vnto
himselfe, as there is greate appearance,
wald ye not gladlie goe to him. To the
quhilk, this excellent Princesse, with
great courage and magnanimitie: but any
astonishment, answered; yea that I assure
you: The Minister then said, looke
vp then Madame, with the eyes of fayth,
on Iesus Christ, the great Saviour, that
sitting at the right hande of the Father,
stretching forth his arme to receiue you

thither: Will you not go vnto him? Yes
I assure you (sayis she) with a very gude
wil: and a farre better then ever I remayned
in the worlde; wherein I haue seene
nothing but vanitie. The Minister continued,
not that purpose any langer, but
demanded on that, if she wald that prayer
suld be made, that many good folkes
quhilk were there, might conjoyne their
Prayers with hers: She answered, do so,
& God strēthen me to continue in praier
with you to the last breath. The Minister
then continved the Prayer lang
ynough: all the quhilk space, this Noble
godlie Princesse, declared a burning &
vehement affection & service in calling
to God.
            Wherfore, the Minister after the praier,
said vnto her; that seing in her so many
good and sure testimonies of Repentance
and displeasure, quhilk she had of
the offences committed by her against
God, togither with the assurance she had
of his mercy in Christ Iesus: he as Minister
of the Evangell, and Ambassadour
of the Sonne of God, in the name and

authoritie of him, quha had put in his
mouth the word of reconciliation, assured
her, that her sinnes were forgiven by
God, that she had obtained free pardone
of them all from him, and that they suld
never come againe in count and reckoning
before his judgment seate; whereof
she needed na mair to doubt, then gif the
Son of God present in his awin person
said vnto her, Daughter thy sinnes are forgiuen
thee: And for to rander in this case,
the puir affrayed cōscience mair assured,
Christ had given to the Ministers of his
word that authoritie, that vnto all them
to whom they suld forgiue sinnes in the
Earth, they suld be forgiuen in the Heauens;
and where they suld lowse heir belowe,
it suld be lowsed aboue; and that
because the worde whereby they vtter
the samin, is not the word of man, but of
God; having the same force, as if he had
pronounced it himselfe: for so Christ
had said, They vvho heares you, heares me:
wherevpon he demanded the Princesse,
gif she resaved gladlie this so gratious a
message of remission of al her sinnes, and

perfite reconciliation quhilk he brought
vnto her from God? Yea, sayis she, with
all my heart and saull I assure you; so that
I find na hink nor doubt thereof in my
cōscience, my gracious father be thāked
quha sa hes wroght in me by his gude
spirite. A little after these exhortations,
the Admiral being come to visit her, and
with him ane vther Minister, shee heard
also this vther a space lang ynough, the
Exhortation wherof, tended to the same
mark with the former, who also at the
end of his Exhortation joyned a prayer,
the quhilk also she heard with great zeal
and affection, and requested the said twa
Ministers to remaine with her all that
night in the Chamber, and not to go away
from her. The greatest part of that
night was spent in comfortable remembrances,
incouragements, and consolations,
quhilk was made be these twa Ministers
ane after ane vther: after the quhilk,
she commanded to reade vnto her some
good and comfortable places of Scripture:
Ane of the twa Ministers reade vnto
her, from the 14. Chapter of IOHN, to the

18. That being done, the prayer was
made; after the quhilk, the Queene desired
to repose a litle, but incontinēt thereafter,
she commanded againe to read. So
the vther Minister red the 8. to the Romans.
1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 4. chap. vers. 16.
to the 11. verse of the 5. Chapter, and
Psalmes, 3. 16. 17. 18. 23. 25. 31. 39. 143.
and last, 142. with vther comfortable,
& ardent prayers, meet for the affliction
wherein the Princesse was: And hauing
at last red the 31. Psalme, where DAVID
commended his spirit in the handes of
God, protesting the assurance quhilk he
had, to bee redeemed by the most true
God; she commanded vpon that to make
the praier; and so she passed as is said, the
greatest part of the night: during all the
quhilk tyme, and purposes, there culd
none perceiue, that shee had any regrate
of this life: And that quhilk is mair, howbeit
some dayes before she fell sick, shee
had beene very earnest to prepare some
pompes and magnificences to the Marriage
of the King of Navarr her sonne,
sik as she esteemed meet and proper for

the greatnes of that allyance, whereinto
she was entring: yet nevertheles, (quhilk
is a thing marvelous) fra the time that she
fel sick, vnto the houre of her death; God
made her so to forget sik things, that shee
never appeared anes to meane and declare
any thought or care of sik matters.
This night being sa imployed and spent,
by this godly Princesse; on the Morne,
having alwaies persevered to shewe and
vtter notable signes of godlines and ardent
faith, she passed from this miserie to
the life eternall; randring most sweetlie
her spirit in the hand of the Lord Iesus,
betwixt aucht and nyne houres in the
morning, the 9. of Iune, the yeare. 1572.
In the 44. yeare of her age, the 6. day after
she took sicknesse: She spake very intelligiblie
to the vtter hour of her death,
and shewed not onely in these thinges
quhilk concerned the salvation of her
saull, but also in all vther affayres, a spirit
and courage as whole as ever she
had in her life time.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               CHRISTIANVS EGO.
               Non ego sum mens, at Christi sum corpore servus▪
               
               Atque animo; seu fas vivere, sive moti.
               Vitam morte sua mihi dat; mea crimina delens:
               Et levat hostili libera colla jugo.
               Servat ita, vt pilus haud pereat sine Patre volente;
               Nil obsit, prosint omnia; vt inde salus
               Stet mihi certa, Dei sic dictat Spiritus vltro,
               Illi hinc dulce mihi vivere, dulce mori.
               
                  A. M.
               
            
            
               The comfort of a Christian.
               I Am not mine, but I am Christs, in body and in spreit,
               Gif that I liue, or that I dye, his mercy thinks it meit:
               For by his death he giues me life, and dois my sinnes deface,
               And frees my neck from bondage yoke, of al my foes by grace:
               He keeps me sa, that neuer a hayre, can perish by his will,
               That nathing hurts, but all dois helpe, and sa in safetie still
               I stand full sure: this dytes he spreit of God into my hart,
               Therefore in Christ I sweetly liue, and sweetly sall depart.
               
                  I. M.
               
            
         
         
            The xxiij. Psalme to the tune of Solsequium.
            
               THE Lord most high, I know will be, ane hird to me,
               I cannot long haue stresse, nor stand in neede:
               He makes my leare, in fields sa feare, that I but ceare,
               Repose and at my pleasure safely feede.
               He sweetly me convoyes, to pleasant Springs,
               
                  
Where na thing me annoyes, but pleasure brings:
               He giues my minde, peace in sik kinde
               That feare of foes, nor force, cannot me reaue,
               By him I am lead, in perfite tread,
               And for his name, he will me never leaue.
            
            
               Though I suld stray, even day be day▪ in deadly way,
               Yet wald I be aslurd, and feare none ill.
               For why thy grace, in every place, dois me imbrace,
               Thy rodde and Sheep hirds cruik, comforts me still.
               In despite of my foe, my table growes▪
               
               Thou balmes my head with joye, my cup overflowes▪
               
               Kindnes and grace, mercy and peace,
               Sall followe me, for all my wretched dayes
               Then endles joy, sall me convoy,
               To heaven where I with thee sall be alwayes.
            
            
               I. M.
            
         
         
            The Cxxi. Psalme paraphrased.
            
               WHen I behold, These Montaines cold, Can I be bold,
               To take my journey through this wildernes,
               Wherein dois stand, on either hand, a bludy band.
               To cut one off, with cruell craftines:
               Here subtill Sathans slight, dois me assaill,
               There his proud warldly might, thinks to prevaill:
               In every place, with pleasant face,
               The snares of sinne besets me round about,
               With poyson sweit, to slay the spreit▪
               
               Conspyrit all to take my life but doubt.
            
            
               Bot God is he, will succour me, and let me see,
               His sauing health, ay ready at command:
               Even IEHOVA, that create a, both great and sma,
               In Heaven and Air, and in the sea and Land,
               Frette not then fearefull heart, my breist within,
               This God will take thy part, thy course to rinne:
               
                  
He will thee guide, Thou sall not slide,
               Thy feet sall stedfast stand in the right way,
               He will thee keepe, he will not sleepe:
               Nor suffer foes to catch thee as a pray.
            
            
               The Lord dois keep, Israell his sheep, and will not sleep,
               Beneath his shadowe, thou sall safelie ly,
               Right sure and ferme, with his right arme, saue thee from harme,
               He sall, and all thy fearefull foes defy:
               The day hot, Sunnes offence, sall not thee grieue,
               Nor cold Moones influence, by night thee mieue:
               God of his grace, from his high place,
               Sall saue thee from all ill. In every way,
               Thou goes about, baith in and out,
               He sall thee blesse, and prosper now and ay.
            
            
               I. M.
            
         
         
            A Sonnet sounding a warning to die well.
            SEN sa it is, that quhasoever tuik life,
            Man be the death vnto the same put end:
            To passe thy course, out through this vale of strife
            In holines▪. O Christian contend,
            Stand still in awe, thy God for till offend.
            Clieaue to thy Christ, with faith vnfainedly.
            Repent thy sinnes, thy wicked life amend,
            And daylie think on death. That thou man dy.
            Set not thy heart on worldlie vanitie.
            Whose pleasures are with paine sa dearly bought,
            Yet presse to play thy part with honestie,
            And vse this warld, as gif thou vsde it nought.
            Let ay this precept be thy Preacher plaine,
            Liue heir to die, and die to liue againe.
            
               I. M.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   