
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A Proclamation agreed vpon by the Iuſtices of Peace of this Countie of Bedford, at a generall Seſsions holden at Bedford, the nineteenth day of Aprill, in the xxvii. yere of the Queenes moſt gracious Raigne, For the reſtraint of Wandering Roges and Vacabounds.
            
               WHereas at a generall quarter Seſſions holden at Bedford the xix. day of Aprill, in the xxvii. yere of the Queenes Maieſties raigne that nowe is, for the auoyding of Idleneſſe, and for the reformation of idle euill diſpoſed Roges, Vacabonds and other lewde perſons within the Countie of Bedford, the nomber whereof now of late haue greatly abounded, and daily more and more doe encreaſe, to the great diſpleaſure of Almightie God, breach of the Queenes Maieſties Lawes, trouble of her louing Subiects, and great hinderance to the impotent poore, whoſe reliefe thereby is taken away, which thing cheifly groweth for want of a conuenient place and meanes to ſet the ſaid Roges and Vacabonds on worke, and to correct them for their diſorders: whereby they may not onely be forced to labour for their owne liuing: but alſo be kept from their wicked and vngodly courſe and trade of their wandering licencious and abominable life.
            It was agreed and fully concluded by the right Honorable Henrie. Earle of Kent, Henrie, Lord Cheney of Tuddington, Thomas Snag, Sericant at the lawe, Lewes Diue Cſquire, and other the Queenes Maieſties Juſtices of Peace of this Countie of Bedford, then aſſembled, that according to the intent & meaning of the ſtatutes made in the xiiii. and xviii. yeeres of the Queenes Maieſties raigne a houſe of Correction and Stockes of Wares to ſet the Idle on worke, and officers and workmen, both to inſtruct them in worke, and to rule and guide them in good order, ſhould with all conuenient ſpeede be prouided within this Countie, for which purpoſe there is appointed three Juſtices of Peace of this ſhire, to take vppon them the chardge and care to prouide a conuenient houſe for that purpoſe, and put the ſame in order, and to prouide ſtockes of Wares and other things neceſſarie for the correction, inſtructing, ruling, ordering, and ſetting on worke of al ſuch perſons as ſhould be cōmitted into the ſame houſe by any of her Maieſties Juſtices of Peace in this Countie. And to that end it was then alſo agreed, that a taxation ſhould be made within this Countie, according to the ſtatute in that caſe prouided. Whereupon aſſeſments be made and taxed by the ſaid Juſtices of Peace thorowe all the Hundreds and parts of this ſhire, vpon perſons moſt meete to contribute thereunto, for a conuenient ſumme of money to be leuied for the ſayde houſe, and other the good purpoſes aforeſayd. The ſayd Juſtices of Peace haue thought it good, meete and conuenient, aſwell for the furtherance of this good purpoſe aforeſayd, as for the better ſatiſfying of them which be contributors to the ſame, to giue notice and knowledge to all the inhabitaunts of this Countie, that the ſaid houſe is at Bedford ſeen and vewed by three of the ſayd Juſtices of Peace, to be in all reſpects apt and fit for the purpoſe aforeſayd, which houſe is appointed to be (by Gods fauour) vpon the next comming, fully prepared and made readie to receiue, correct, order, rule, and ſet on worke al ſuch vagrant Roges, Vagabonds, and other diſordred perſons, as ſhall be ſent thither by any Juſtice of Peace of this Countie, and that the Conſtable. Tythingman, Hedburroughs, or other Officer, bringing by the warrant of any Juſtice of Peace of this Countie, any ſuch Vagabound, Roge, or other diſordred perſon, ſhall receiue at the ſayd houſe of correction of the Keeper of the ſayd houſe, a Penny for euery myle betweene the place where the Juſtices warrant is made, and the ſayd houſe of Correction, as ſhalbe expreſſed in the ſayd Warrant, towards his charges and paynes in bringing of the ſame Roge. And the ſayd Juſtices doe alſo giue notice and knowledge hereby, to all ſuch perſons, as being aſſeſſed to contribute to this good worke, and doe refuſe or delay to pay forthwith to the high Conſtables or other perſons appointed to receiue the ſummes vppon them taxed, that then the ſayd Juſtices wil forthwith proceede againſt ſuch refuſers, according to the ſeueritie of the lawes for ſuch penalties and forfaitures, as by their defaults in that behalfe ſhalbe loſt and forfaited, that is to ſay, for the double value of the ſummes vpon them ſeuerally taxed, to be leuied vppon their Lands by diſtreſſe or of their goods by ſaile thereof. And laſtly, they alſo do notifie and make it knowen vnto all the inhabitants of this Countie, that that euery Towne, Village and Hamlet, through all parts of this Countie there ſhal be a ſtrong Watch and Warde kept from Sunne ſetting, vntill next day at night, and withall a generall and diligent ſearche made the ſayd day at night, and the next day following it ſhalbe made and continued. In which Searche, Watch and ward, ſo many Roges, vagabonds, beggers, and other ſuſpicious and vnknowen perſons as ſhalbe found, ſhall be apprehended and brought before the next Juſtice of Peace, and vpon examination, to be by him committed to her Maieſties Gaile, or to the ſayd houſe of correction at his diſcretion, as the caſe ſhall require. And for the better preſeruing of this Countrie after that tyme, clearly from Roges and Vagabonds, the ſayd Juſtices haue likewiſe thought good to admoniſh all Conſtables, pettie Conſtables, Tythingmen, and other Officers and inhabitaunts within this Countie, to whom it appertaineth not onely diligently and duely to continue and keepe euery night their Watches from the ſayd next comming, vntill the feaſt of Saint Michael next following, in euery Towne, Village and Hamlet, according to the ſtatute of Wincheſter, vpon the paine therein limitted. But alſo that there doe no Roge, Vagabond nor Begger after the ſayd paſſe by Day or by night throught any Towne, Village or Hamlet, vnarreſted or vnbrought before a Juſtice of Peace, vpon the paynes limited in the ſtatute in that behalfe lately prouided, that is to ſay, vi. s. viii. d. for euery default, the ſame to be leuied by diſtreſſe vppon their Lands, or by ſale of their goods of euerie Conſtable, Tithingman or Officer offending in that behalfe. And likewiſe no perſon being an Inhabitaunt within this Countie, after the ſaide next, doe releeue any Roge, Vagabond, or wandering begger vnlicenſed, vpon the paine of xx. s. for euery default, to be leuied vpon his Lands or goods, according to the ſtatute in maner and forme aforeſaid, which paines and forfaitures certainly ſhalbe leuied vpon the goods of euerie offender in that behalfe, without mittigation. And for the auoyding of all excuſes touching the reprehenſion of Roges, vagabonds and beggers, the ſaid Juſtices do further giue knowledge to al ſuch poore perſons, as haue licenſes to collect the charitable almes of others in any Hundreds or parts of this Countie, yet vnexpired and ſtanding in force (except ſuch as haue lycenſes to beg for their houſes burnt with Fire) and ſuch as haue lycenſes vnder the great Seale of England, that they forthwith ſeuerally repaire to the Juſtices of the Limmits wherein they doe ſeuerally dwell, who will make other conuenient prouiſion for their reliefe, without wandering abrode any more.
            God ſaue the Queene.
         
      
   