
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Sermon exhorting to pitie the poore. Preached the .xv. of Nouember. Anno. 1571. at Chriſtes Churche in London. By Henry Bedel Vicar there, which treatiſe may well be called THE MOVTH of the poore.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Awdely.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               VVHere as ſome for the trial of their wyttes, and proofe of knowledge, are mooued to pen their ſtudies & trauels, which they do moſt exquiſitely, and others for the benefit of their country, ſome tyme of their own labours ſet forth bookes, and ſome of other mens workes in our mother toung do open the meanyng, and all I truſt to Gods glory, and the furtherance of knowledge: Euen ſo I, not of my ſelfe moued, by any worthynes I know in my ſelfe, neither to purchaſe prayſe of men (for this my dede is nothing praiſe worthy to me, for if ought be fauty, that is to me due, and if any thing be to purpoſe, that was & is Gods worke in me) haue laboured as farre as memorie might teache, neither addyng nor deminiſhing to or from the wordes I ſpake in the pulpet, to write and pen ſomwhat for rhe help of the poore. VVhich the rather I haue done, for that then I was requyred by my friend ſo to do. VVhich purpoſe or ſum of matter, though of an other it might be more excellently done, then of me it is in this treatiſe done: yet thinking that all men wil conſider

my god hart and well meaning to the poore, it made me the more bolde to enterpriſe thys matter, to further their poore eſtate that want, and ſo to put in print thoſe rude wordes that then by preaching I ſpake.
            And thus hopyng that al men wyll accept my ſylly good wyll in this my labour, vnto which I may ſpeake as Ouid did, Vade ſed in cultus, I leaue the ſucces vnto God of this paynes I haue taken, as wel touching my ſelfe, as alſo for the poore for whom I haue ſpoken.
            
               H. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A Sermon preached in Chriſtes Hoſpitall at London.
            
               PSALME .XLI.
               ¶Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poore and needy, the Lord ſhall deliuer hym in the tyme of trouble.
            
            
               FOr as muche as God hath placed hys Children here in thys world for the triall of their patience, and proofe of fayth: and for thys cauſe hath mixed the poore with the ritch, placing ſome in pouerty, not that he could not make them ritche, but geuing them pouerty to trye their pacience, & enritching other ſome, not that they ſhould truſt in their ritches, as by hys Prophet he ſaith: If ritches riſe, ſet not thy hart theron,Pſa. lxiij but geuyng them ritches to trye their fayth whether they wyll ſerus God through and by faith that woorketh by loue, or els ſerue Mammon, by keeping of him in ſecret, knowingMat. vi. alſo the iuſtifiyng faith as S. Paul ſayth,Gala. v is that that worketh by loue. Which loue is eſpecially expreſſed in miniſtering to the neceſſity of the Saints, and our poore brethrenRom. xij as the ſame Paule affirmeth. Therefore alſo

doth Dauid, for his part by theſe wordes as much as he can, trauel to bring vs to that purpoſe of faith, to ſhaw our loue to the poore when in theſe wordes he ſaith: Bleſſed is he that conſidereth the poore and the needy.
            As the tree is knowen to be good or bad byMat. vij none other waies then by his fruites: ſo the faithfull, not by his wordes, but by his exerciſes is knowen, in beleuing and woorkyng the thinges that belong to faith. Therefore our Sauiour ſaith: Not al that ſay Lord, but they that do the wyl of my Father, who willethMat. vij amongſt many thinges that this ſhould be one, namely to conſider the poore and the néedy. For us the vnſauery ſalte that looſeth his ſaltnes, is not fyt to ſeaſon, but to be caſtMark. ix as reprobate and nought in the hye wayes, to be trode vnder foote: ſo is that faith dead, that hath no exerciſes in the way of loue, to remēber the poore, as James ſaith: Faith if it haue not her exerciſes in her ſelf, the is dead.Jacob. ij
            
            I ſpeake not this, as if a man ſhould ſuppoſe, that he that wanting faith that teacheth to worke cannot be iuſtified, hauing the ſame faith now geuen, that hereafter wold work, as we ſee in children that haue not wrought, yet iuſtified by faith that is lyuely in them, and would haue wrought if they had lyued.

As alſo in the théefe that neuer wrought, be cauſe he wanted that faith by which now he is iuſtified, wherby he would haue wrought if he had lyued. Therefore doth faith onely iuſtifie in them that are preuented, that they cannot worke according to the ſame, & therefore Grace maketh them frée. But to others that haue time, and therin alſo the iuſtifiyng fayth, they haue the frutes of the ſame.
            Neither do I ſpeake thus, as if God nedeth our workes or giftes, who geueth vnto vs firſt, and that with plenty, and caſteth no mā in the téeth, nor I ſpeake not to the end that we ſhould ſo worke, as to thinke our ſelues iuſtified therin, beyng as our Maiſter ſayth, vnprofitable ſeruantes, when we haue doneLuk. vij all we can do, geuing out nothing, but what we haue receiued, as S. Paul ſaith. But this exerciſe of faith to geue to the poore, is required of vs to ſatiſfie our bounden deutye, not for merite, but in dutie, becauſe the poore are left amongſt vs for this cauſe as Chriſt ſaith: Ye ſhall haue the poore alwayes with you.John. xij Which poore for vs, as the ritch for them are left, wherof S. Auguſtine faith: Propter diuites
               De verbis domini ſer. 26. 
               ſunt pauperes, that is, the poore are for the ritch mans ſake, which are to be conſidered as poore and needye, euen as Dauid deth

teach vs well.
            But to ariue to my purpoſe, theſe wordes of the Prophet contain two profitable notes The firſt to teach vs to reſpect the poore and needy, as becommeth the faithfull. Secondly to conſider the promiſe that is annexed therto. And of theſe I wyl ſpeake by Gods grace ſeuerally.
            Firſt, concernyng the reſpect and care of the poore, al be it that Dauid doth note it wel in this Pſalme, yet to the better ſatiſfying of ſo neceſſarye a deutye, that by the mouth of many witneſſes we maye the more ſpéedely be brought to the credite of the ſame, let vs heare the courſe of the ſcriptures, and learne our dutye forth of them.
            How earneſtlye doth God call vpon vs to remēber the poore by his ſeruant Salomen, as we reade in the Prouerbes wher he ſaith He that deſpyſeth his neyghbour, ſynneth againſtPro. xiiij hys Maker, but he that hath pyty on the poore, hee ſhall be bleſſed. He woulde not haue vs hard harted agaynſte the poore & our fellow ſeruauntes, to ſaye to them: Go thy way thou ſtraunger, God ſend thee thou ſtraunger meate, drinke and clothing as Syra
                  ••
               e ſaith. Nor 
                  •
               e would not haue vs to be diſquieted with the crye of the poore, to ſtop

our eares againſt them, and therefore ſayth: He that ſtoppeth his eare at the crye of theProu. xij, poore, ſhall cry him ſelfe and not be hearde. Nor he ſuffreth vs not to be careles of theirLuk. vi, ſtate, being at eaſe our ſelues, as that Glutton was mētioned in the Goſpel, but as Dauid his father willeth the poore to be conſidered, ſo he concludeth ſaying: the bread of theEccle, 34 poore is in the waies of the ritch, he that keepeth it from them, is a man of bloud.
            Toby being a good inſtrument of God, and in this matter worthye to be beleued in hys counſell, who as he wel conſidered the poore in feeding of the liuing, and burying the dead with his own labour and coſt, ſo he teacheth others the ſame practiſe of duty whē he ſaithTobi. iiij Be mercyfull after thy power, if thou haue much, geue plenteouſlye, if thou haue lyttle, do thy diligence gladly to geue of that little. For as God needeth not the gift, but requireth the dutye: ſo Toby, not for the qualitie of the gift to be wayed, but in the quality of the minde of him that geueth, teacheth vs to geue ſomewhat, be it little or much, euen as S Ambroſe alſo teacheth: Non ſolum queritur
               Ambro. in. 1. Cor 
               quantum datur, ſed de quanto & quanto animo. That is: It is not onelye required how much is geuē, but out of how much and

with what mynde, not to be prayſed for the greatnes, in that we geue not ſo much as we receiued, for what geueſt thou that thou haſt not receaued? Nor for the aboundance, becauſei, Cor, iiij we haue more then néedeth, but for duty requiring the ſame, we muſt of neceſſitie geue. And therfore as in ſubſtance God hath bleſſed vs with the moſt, ſo we muſt ſtudy to geue the more, not that God is pleaſed with ſummes, as though therby we ſhould thinke our ſelues iuſtified, but to diſcharge our ſtuardſhips of that we haue receiued, accordyng to the ſaying of ſ. Paul writing to Timothe, Charge them that ar ritch in this world, thati, Tim, vi they be ready to gyue, and glad to diſtribute, laying vp in ſtore a good foūdation for them ſelues againſt y• time to come, that they may attaine eternall life. Vnto whoſe wordes we may fitly for our comfort and erudition ioyn Sirackes ſaying: Reach forth thy hand vnto the poore, that thy mercy and bleſſing mayEccle, vij be made perfect.
            Alſo the Prophet Eſay ſpeaking vnto vs in the word of the Lord, amongſt many wholeſome and neceſſary leſſons forgetteth not to put vs in mynde of our duty to the poore, becauſe it is a pleaſant thing to the Lord, and a fruit of our faith, and a token of Chriſtianty.

Therefore firſt he ſaith: When thou ſeeſtEſai. lviij a naked man, couer him, and ſee thou deſpiſe not thine own fleſh. And after in the ſame place he ſaith: Breake thy bread vnto the hū
               gry, and neuer turn thy face from any poore man, and ſo the face of the Lord ſhall not be turned from thee. And againe a litle after in the ſame chapter he ſaith: Sée the nedy and the ſtraūger brought into thy houſe. Surely in deede howſoeuer wilful affection & vaine pleaſure leadeth vs, we ought not to be vnmindful of our brethren the poore members of Chriſt, ſeing that beſides our duty, euen our exceſſe would content their néede, & our waſt ſerue their lack. So that if at any time God hath geuen vnto vs aboūdantly, which we waſte in ſuperfluitie, that ſhould be the portion of the poore. And for this cauſe we do not ſo, Baſil chargeth vs with waſt that we ſhal ſurely anſwer. He ſaith: Nonne ſpoliatores qui diſpenſanda ſuſcepiſti tanquā propria reputādo? Eſt enim panis famelici quem tu tenes, nudi tunica quem in cōclaui reſeras, diſcalſiati calcei que penes te ma rceſcunt, in digentis aurum quod tu poſſides in humatū. That is to ſay: Art not thou a ſpoyler in taking to diſpence an other mans ſubſtaunce, and then to recken it as thine own? For it is

the bread of the hūgry which thou retaineſt, the coate of the naked that thou lockeſt in thy wardrope, the ſhooes of the barefoote that lie m
                  •
               wloyng and drying by thee, the néedyes g
                  •
               ld that lyeth cankred and buried by thee. Which ſentencs of Baſill, as it teacheth the liberalitie that is due for the poore, ſo it blameth the careles that accompt al to be their own, keping to them ſelues more then ſufficient. That at the laſt day the Mite in the croms, the Mothes in the garments, and the ruſt in the gold maye freate them lyke cankers, as James doth proteſt.Jacob. v.
            
            Therfore the hard harted ritch that reſpect not the poore, and yet wyl be accompted the louers of God, ar reproued by the Apoſtle ſ. John, who ſaith: He that hath this worldesi. John. iij ritches, and ſeeth his brother to haue neede, and yet ſhutteth vp the bowels of mercy frō him, how doth the loue of God dwel in him? And therfore they that bragge of the loue of God, who they neuer ſaw with bodely eyes, let them ſhew ſome compaſſion to the néedy members of Chriſt, whom dayly they ſee. Other wiſe ſuch careles may boaſt of Chriſtian
                  ••
               ie, but the fruites therof he hath not. He may brag of 
                  •
               aith, but he wāteth that which worketh by loue. For the amendemēt wher

of let all that haue and may well ſpare, not reſpecting their fanſies, but cōſt dering their duty, harken to the wordes of Syrache: LetEccl. vij. euery man dele according to compaſſion and mercy with his brother. For be it knowen to all, that as to ſteale from them that rightly poſſes their goodes, is criminal, and a matter gilty before God, reputed to be ſinne: ſo it is no leſſe but equal ſynne, to keepe from them that lack, being poore and nedy, as Ambroſe ſaith wel: Non minoris eſt criminis habenti tollere, quam cum poſsis indigentibus denegare. It is no leſſe ſynne (ſaith he) to take from him that rightly poſſeſſeth, then not to geue to him that lacketh, when thou art able For the right ritch man that dulye deſerueth that name, is not knowen by his poſſeſſion, his gorgeous fare and coſtly houſe, his great palace, his Jewels and gold, but by confidering the poore and needy, wherof S Au
                  ••
               ineAuguſt. homelia. 15. ſaith thus: Diuites aliorum paupertate probantur. That is to ſay: the ritch are proued by the pouerty of others. So that ſtyll and alwaies the ſcriptures & Fathers preſcribe not an indifferancie, but a neceſſitie, not at pleaſure, but vpon dutye, that the poore and needy ſhould be conſidered.
            Where is that large liberalitie that in our

Fathers was ſene much, though to an euyll purpoſe then applied, as therby ſeeking their ſaluation, may now be beſtowed to a better vſe, that is, to foſter and fede the poore members of chriſt. The world is as great as euer it was, the people as ritch, but not ſo liberal, our knowledge more, but in thys poynt we be wylful ignorant. For looke what waſtfully our fathers as fooles did lay forth and beſtow vpon ſhameles friers that neuer were full, and fat bellyed Moonkes whoſe bellyes were their gods, that now our Nigards can not lay foorth, diſtruſtyng their ſtates, leaſt they ſhould beg (ſay they) before we dye, diſtruſting the prouidence of God, that bleſſeth their ſtore. Wheras in dede as Seneca ſaith Nemo tam pauper viuit, quā naſcitur & mo
               Seneca de Iuditijs. 
               ritur. That is: No man lyueth ſo poore, as he his borne, and ſhall dye. The extorcioner can ſpare nought to the poore, for ioynyng houſe to houſe, with a curſi
                  •
                to the ſame, as Eſay ſaith, doing no good to the poore, exceptEaſy. v, it be to caſt them forth a doores. The pride of apparel maketh vs forget the patched poore, and our dainty ſoft lodgyng, their hard couc
                  •
               es and ſtraw.
            Where is the plentye of gold that garniſhed y• erronious church, the ſiluer & iewels

that ſo largely was geuen forth to ſtockes & ſtones, the cloth that cloathed the Pylgrime god that felt no colde, the ſtocke that bought the candels to ſet before them, that had eyes and yet ſaw nought? Were ye ſo plentifull about ſuch pel
                  •
               e, and wil ye geue nothing to poore Jeſus Chriſt? Well, ye make a ſcorne of the poore & needy, the poore now periſheth by the ritch, and no man conſidereth it. Is this the life of Chriſtians? Is this the fruite of our Goſpell? Is this the mercye that we learne by the woord?
            Well then awake from your ſléepy ſecuritie, conſider your duties towards the poore, ſtretch forth your niggard handes that preſſeth downe your mucke, and harken to Syrache, who lyke a good Father teacheth thée as hys ſonne ſaying: My ſonne, ſuffer notEccle, x
                     •
                  . the poore to want the thinges neceſſary for to ſuſtaine hys lyfe, and be not thou hard againſt the poore. Contemne not the hungry, and greue not the pore in his pouerty. Adde not affliction to the afflicted in hart, and deferrs not to confer thy benefite on the poore. Refuſe not the voyce of the ſelly and ſimple, and turne not thy face from the poore. Caſt not thyne eye
                  •
                from the miſerable, leaſt he haue cauſe to accuſe thee.
            
               Thus at length doth Syraehe counſell, but we are negligent to heare the ſame. Heare we may, but credite thereto is ſmall.
            Then cōſider, as the benefit is great wher with God recompenceth the mercyfull, ſo is the iuſtice very ſharpe in condempnyng the hard harted, as in that concluſion the ſame Syrache ſaith: For if thou be careles of theEccle, iiij, poore, ſaint and needy poore that calleth on thee, he that made him ſhal heare his praier whē with a troubled hart he ſha
                  •
                accuſe thée.
            Then geue, and geue gladly, geue and geue largelye, for the bread that is geuen wyth a grudgiug hart, is called ſtony bread, as Seneca ſaith, reporting the wordes of Fabius Verecoſus,
               Seneca lid. 2. de beneficijs. 
               which are theſe: Beneficium ab homine duro aſpere datum, panis lapidoſus eſt Eſurienti accipere cum ſit neceſſariū eſt tamen acerbus panis. That is to ſay: the benefite hardly geuen of a harde man, is ſtony breade, being then neceſſary for the poore to take it, becauſe of his hunger, yet notwithſtanding it is but ſower bread. Such a geuer in my counſel is next couſin to Sathan, for be gaue Chriſt ſtones in ſtoode of bread, but this man geueth the Chriſtian ſtony bread,
            Therfore ye that haue it, be not vnmyndful of the poore I pray you, and agayne geue

eare to Syrach, for thus he doth teach: LayEccle, 29 vp thy almes in the handes of the poore, and know that what thou keepeſt, in the end thouEccl, xvij ſhalt onelye leeſe, but that that thou geueſt, ſhalbe as a purs about thy necke, as the ſame wiſe man ſaith: For as this life waxeth oldProu. xj, and our daies paſſe away, ſo ſhal this vayne pelfe paſſe away from vs, neither ſhal riches helpe in the daye of vengeaunce, but the corruption abideth which freateth like a canker. Then what ſhal it profit to get all the world? and when the world forſaketh vs, that ſhall be moſt againſt vs, that beſt we loued being in the world. Then in ſatiſfiyng our duty to geue to the poore, is better then to kéepe to our ſelues the flitting mucke, euen as Lactanſius
               Lactanſ. lib. 7. cap 27. doth teach vs: Vnuſquiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   potiorem animam ſuam inducet, quam bona iſta fallacia quorum incerta & caduca eſt poſſeſſio migrant enim multo velocius quam intrauerant & licet vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad vltimum hijs frui liceat alijs tamen relinquende ſunt. That is to ſay: Let euery man perſwade him ſelfe, that his ſoule is better then theſe ſubtill ritches, the peſſeſſion whereof is variable and vncertaine, for they paſſe from vs muche more ſwiftl y, then they came to vs, and albeit we haue the vſe of them euen til the laſt day, yet at the length

we muſt leaue them to others. Then I pray thee ay them forth for the profit of your brethren. Learne to forſake them, before they forſake you. Learne the wiſe counſell of our Sauiour Chriſt: Make thee friendes of the wicked Mammon.Luk. xvi,
            
            It is maruail to heare how plentifully the Scriptures commaund vs to be mindfull of the poore, beſides that that already hath bene alledged. As in the Prouerbes the wiſe man ſaith: Hee that hath pity on the poors, leandethProu, xix Pſa. xviij to the Lord. And Dauid in the Pſalme deſireth to delyuer the needy from the hand of the ſynner. And Chriſt ſaith: I was hungry,Mat. xxv and ye gaue me meate. &c. But how ſlacke all ſtates are in ſatiſfiyng this duty, with griefe I ſpeake it, & with dread for their negligence they ſhall heare and ſeele it, when it ſhall be to late for men to diſſemble their ſtate.
            Yet ye geue not, and why ſo? Not becauſe ye haue not wherof ye may geue, but becauſe ye wil not let go from you that you may well ſpare. Power wanteth good wyll that ſhould be adioyned vnto him. The purs is able, but the hart is not franke. Needy niggardy cauſeth many to profes ſuch a needeles neceſſity, that that is kept from the poore, that profuſe prodigality wilfully doth waſte. Many are

good to the poore, as we commonly ſaye, but they will geue them nought, then I ſay great boaſt, and ſmall roaſt maketh vnſauerye mouthes. Yet if wordes wil do any good, they ſhall not want. For it coſteth vs nothing to ſay: alas good ſoule God helpe thée, God comfort thée, I would we were able to helpe thée. So that they wiſh well to them ſelues in wiſhing them able, but of ſuch wiſhing, and for ſuch wiſhers I ſay as the Begger to the Byſhop is reported to ſay, that if their wyſhings were worth a halfpeny, I doubt they woulde not be ſo liberall. Therefore let them leaue wyſhyng, and fall to ſome doyng. Ye locke vp and wil not looſe, ye gather together euen the deuill and all, and why? becauſe ye wyll hatch the Cockatrice egge. Ye nurſe vp a canker for your ſelues, ye keepe the packe that ſhall trouble your vyage to God as Chriſt ſayth: O how hard ſhal it be for a ritch man to comeMat. xix, to heauen, it ſhall be eaſier for a Camell to go thorow a needels eye. He ſaith not ſo becauſe no ritche man ſhall be ſaued, but becauſe the mercyles ritch man ſhal be damned.
            And wil ye know the cauſe and what letteth that ſome geue not: Hee geueth not to the poore becauſe hee is not reputed in the pariſh: he withdraweth his hand becauſe he is

not ſet vp in the church higher, proud hartes and Beggers purſſes, but where is that rule and condition preſcribed? He pleadeth pouerty, and yet ſticketh not to bet, pricke, and play at this marke, and that game in wylful expence, with loſſe of time, twiſe ſo much as might wel ſerue the néede of the poore, and ſo at length falleth to néede him ſelfe, and therfore robbeth the poore in déede of the portion to them due, which by Gods prouidence are made poore. Another ſwylleth exceſſiuelye his body with drinke, abuſing nature, but forgetteth the thriſty and faint harted ſoule, making hys own body a den of dronken Diueis, but others want hys exceſſe. Hee turneth away in rollyng of tymber both his thrift and pittie that is commaunded, thereby making both wife and chyldren beggers. Some in chambering and wantonnes (ye know what I meane) waſteth his body plaged with diſeaſes, and his goods, but no peny for the poore. He caſteth to Dogs, that which by nature is created for man, ſo that al order and honeſty, vertue and pietie cleane ſet aſide, euery man followeth his pleaſure and fil
                  •
               hynes gredely, ſatiſfiyng the Prouerbe, euery man for hym ſelfe. But in the meane whyle the ſtocke of the poore is cleane forgotten. Which thing

vnles it be mended, I let you to wyt the poore ſhall cry, and their voyce ſhall be heard: theyr diſtreſſe conſidered, and our vengeaunce ſhall be wrought. I tell you truth in Jeſus Chriſt euen as Dauid ſayth in the .xiii. Pſalme: ThePſa, xxxiij poore crieth vnto the Lord, and he hath heard them. Waxe aſhamed therefore of this vnthryftynes, of this waſte and exceſſiue ryot. Open your eares, if not to man, yet to Chriſt in his Goſpel ſpeaking, who very plentifully calleth vpon vs to geue and beſtow vpon theLuke .vi. poore and néedy. Geue, and it ſhall bee geuen you, ſaith he, by ſ. Luke, and that none ſhould thinke them ſelues ſo low that they owe no part to the poore, he bryngeth not onelye the ritch, that of their great aboundance did caſtMark. xij, into the treaſure of the poore, but hee ſetteth forth before vs the poore widdowes mite, to teach vs as Paule ſaith to geue gladly. Euen ſo he reaſoneth wyth the craftye ritch man, that would know what to do to attaine eternal lyfe. He ſayd: Go ſell all that thou haſt,Math. xix and geue to the poore, not that it is neceſſary for euery man ſo to do, or that a man cannot be ſaued except he ſo do, but thereby teaching him particularly to lothe the world, ſo thereby vniuerſally ſheweth vnto all men the care they owe to the poore. And for this cauſe the

holy Apoſtle preſcribeth thye collecting for the poore as a neceſſary buſines, and the Sabothes labour. Not on the Saboth to ſpend and conſume all that the wéeke hath before gotten, nor by vnlawful games to prophanat the Sabboth, by hunting of tauerne and alehouſe to diſhonour the Lord of the Sabboth, but as becommeth good Chriſtians to make collection for the poore S. Paule willeth ſaying: Of the gathering for the ſaints as I hauei, Cor, xvi, ordained in the congregatiōs of Galatia, euē ſo do ye vpon ſome Sunday, let euery one of you put a ſide at home, and laye vp whatſoeuer he thinketh meete. He ſaith not, let euery man waſte and ſpende what he lyſt, but laye vp for the poore that that is meete. For if the ritch would once become liberall, there is ſuperflueus inough to helpe the poore and néedy, for nature is ſoone pleaſed. I woulde therefore wyſh, and with my hart I pray, that the hartes of the proſperous myght be opened toward the miſerable, it is an eaſye matter, for there wanteth but good wyll, and good vſe. Then let the proud leaue his cuts, hys pownces, his gardes, and embrothery, and geue nature euen inough to ſuffiſe, and hee ſhall geue the pore a good portion. Let the Glutton ſerue nature to ſuffiſe, and leaue hys ſurfet, then

ſhall the poore bee fed with that, that hee often times either vomiteth forth, or worketh as a meanes to deſtroy his lyfe. Let the whooremonger leaue his daliance, it ſhall be good for his body, and better for his ſoule, and his pur
                  •
                ſhalbe the heauier to helpe the poore. Let the Artificer ſyt faſt by his calling, then ſhall hée profit the common wealth by his trauel, and he ſhall haue ſome what to ſpare to helpe the poore, euen as to this purpoſe S. Paule exhortethEphe, iiij. the Epheſians, that eche of them labour with their handes, to obtayne thereby that they may geue to him that hath néede, becauſe wee are not borne to our ſelues, but to our Country, to our Parentes, our brethren and friendes, to do good to all, but ſpeciallye to theGalat, vi. houſhold of faith. For amongeſt all the ſacrifices which now the Church vſeth, as prayſe and thankes geuing to God is the chiefeſt, ſo the next is to diſtribute to the néedy Saintes, as the ſame Paule teacheth the Hebrues ſaying: To doo good and diſtribute forget not,Hebr, xiij, for with ſuch ſacrifices God is pleaſed. Surely of that goods that we keepe in ſtore, we are anſwerable, but of that we geue to the poore, we are diſcharged. That that we kéepe, the ruſt wil freate like a Canker, as James ſaith,Jacob .v. but that that is layde vp in the boſome of the

poore, that is diſcharged, as our Maiſter hath commaunded. That that wee leaue behynde vs, the wicked may conſume in prodigalitie, but that we geue in the way of Chriſtian liberalitie, ſhall be rewarded as it is written. Opera eorum ſequentur eos, that is, theirApo, xiiij▪
                workes follow them.
            Then trauell not after ritches to get eſtimation, for thou broughteſt nothing into this world, nor ſet not thine hart vpon vnrighteous Mammon, leaſt thou fall into the temptations
                  
                     •
                  , Tim, vi and ſnares of the Deuil, but be mercifull to the poore indifferentlye without reſpect of perſons. For God as Auguſtine ſaith, ſhal crowne his giftes in thee. Let the Begger be wicked, thou ſhallt haue the prayſe. Though ſome make an occupation of it, and accompt of their vales, yet as Paule doth bid thee eſpecially remēber the houſhold of faith, ſo be doth not deny thee to do good to all.
            Feede not your equales, nor the like his like, franke not your ſelues to fatte to feede the woormes, for as Eſay ſaith: Your pride ſhallEſay. xxvi Amos, iij, be pluckt to hell, your fat carkaſes ſhall fall in the end, the Moth ſhall freate thée, and the worme and the duſte ſhall couer thee. But when ye may ſpare to ſpend and banket your ſelues, to make your hartes glad, as Chriſt

ſaith in the Goſpel by S. Luke. Then cal theLuk, xiiij poore and impotent, the halt and the blind. &c Let Herod in his daliaunce remember hys priſoner John: Nay rather as good and wiſe men followe thoſe wyſe men that preſented poore Chriſt that was layde in the maunger in pouertye and néede, wyth their golde. When Diues hath diued, let Lazarus haue the crooms.
            Surely it is a ſhame to ſée and knowe the contempt of the poore, eſpecially nowe in the time of the Goſpel, when faith ſhuld ſo ſpr
                  •
               d her ſelfe in our hartes: faith I ſay that is exerciſed in loue, that bragging much of faith in wordes, do not correſpondantly aunſwer the ſame in déede. Wle can looke vpon the quauering carkas that lieth ful cold, and we ſay, God helpe thee, and ſende thee warmth, but where is our helpe? Yet they are our fleſh, ſo that in contemning them we leaue our dutyJacob, ij, vndon, and verifie James in his ſaying: If a brother or ſiſter be naked and in neede, wanting their dayly foods, and ſome of you ſhall ſay to them, go thy way in peace, God ſende you warmth and clothing, meate and drink, and ſhall not geue them the thinges that are neceſſary for their bodies, what ſhal it profit them? Surely a good faith that onely is foūd

in the good Chriſtian, it alwaies is exerciſed, but euery trée that bringeth not foorth good fruit, is cut down and caſt into the fire. It is not enough onelye to beare leaues, but we muſt alſo bring forth our fygs, or els the lord Jeſus ſhall curſie vs.
            Then this is to be learned, that none contemne or diſpiſe the poore, but that euery mā according to his ability helpe them, and conſider of them as Dauid ſayth. So that neyther the ritch in defiyng the poore ſay, away with this Begger, go whip me this ſlaue, this ſtincking raſcal, this louſy wretch, being his own image: neither on the other ſyde none ſay I am ſo poore I cannot help, I néede help my ſelfe, for God loueth glad hartes & cherefuli, Cor, ix, geuers. For except it be the poore in déede to whom we muſt geue, ther is no ſuch want but that they may geue ſomwhat as FulgentiusEulgentius Sermone de confeſſo ribus. ſaith: Dare elimoſinam omnibus eſt poſſibile, ſi adſit bona voluntas: Omnibus facile, ſi non adſit dira cupid
                     •
                  tas, omnibus ſalubre ſi ferueat charitas cunctis debet eſſe commune vt omnibus detur eterna felicitas. He ſayth: It is poſſible for all men to geue almes, if all men haue good wil therunto. He ſaith it is an eaſy thing for all men to do, if cruel conetouſnes be not preſent. He ſaith it is wholeſome

for all men, if charity be feruent, and he ſaith it ſhould be common to al men, that al might obtaine eternal felicitie, not in reſpect of the gift, as I haue ſaid before, but for the promis ſake, as Chriſt ſaith by S. Mathe w: He thatMath .x. Mark, ix ſhall geue to one of theſe lyttle ones a cuppe of cold water in my name, he ſhall not looſe his rewarde.
            Geue we muſt to ſatiſfie Gods ordinance, wherto he hath ordained vs, as the ſame Fulgence
               Fulgentius de confeſſo ribus. ſaith: for God hath ordained Quod de mus, cur demus, & quibus demus, that is: He hath ordained the thing that we muſt geue, a cauſe why we ſhuld geue, and his creatures to whom we ſhould geue. Therefore in reſpect of the firſt that he hath ordained things to geue, that muſt néedes be applyed to the ordinance wherfore it was made, or els we commit ſynne in abuſing Gods ordinaunce. Then ſecondly in that there is cauſe to geue, euen the wyll of God preſcribing the ſame, Gods ordaining wyl muſt be ſatiſfied, or els we commit ſynne. Laſt of al for that he hath ordayned to whom wee ſhould geue beſides fauour, that riſeth by loue, in dutye we are bound to geue them ye portion that God hath appointed for them, ordayning thinges for them, and ordaining them alſo to enioy thoſe

thinges, as ordaining ritches and ritch men, to helpe the poore in their pouertie.
            Which were an eaſy matter, if ther were a forward good wyll and readynes: For the number of the poore he nothing comperable to the number of the ritch and wealthy. So that in this concourſe of people, if euery one would do but a litle, it might be an eaſy matter to helpe the poore. An eaſy matter I ſay, if we folow Chriſoſtomes counſel, who ſaith thus: Gratia Dei centum millia hominum
               Chryſo. homeli. 87. in ca. Mat. 26. 
               huc cōuenere opinor, quorum ſinguli ſi vnū panem quotidie paupertate offerrent, omnes certe pauperes abbundarent: ſi vnum quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   obulum ſolummodo, nemo penitus indigeret. Whoſe woordes in Engliſh are theſe: I ſuppoſe, that by the grace of God, there is reſorted to this place one hundred thouſand men, of which number if euerye one would daylye geue but one péece of bread, all the poore might abound: if euerys man woulde geue but one halfepeny, no man ſhuld want.
            And may not I ſay ſo to you my countrye men, as Chryſoſtome did to his? Is ther not as great multitudes and concourſe of people now, as euer was then? The matter being ſo ſmall that is required, me thineke it is great impietie if it be denied. If ye be moued

to geue more, God bleſſe that motion, & moue ye ſo ſtil: if not, yet geue this ſmall requeſt. Rule thy peny I pray thée, let it not rule thée for one of theſe twoo offices muſt it needes haue, either ſubiection or gouerment, as the Poet. Horace ſaith: Inperat aut ſeruit collecta
               Horace. 
               pecunia cui
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , That is to ſay.
            The mony that greedely is gathered together. Either ruleth or is ruled I know not wel whither
            Then I ſay once againe, geue, that it may be knowen that ye gouerne, and do not obey, for in kéeping ye ſéeme moſt manifeſtly to be gouerned. Againe, leaſt thou go from thy ritches before thou haſt done good with them, ſo heape together I pray thee, that thou mayeſt well ſcatter, and ſo poſſes I beſéech thee, that thou know to geue forth. For the time muſt come, that thou muſt leaue al, whē thou haſt caught and ſcraped together what thou canſt as Martial in his verſe doth truly ſay: Rape,
               Martial. 
               congere, aufer, poſſide, relinquendum eſt, 1.
            
            
               Catch and heape vp, filch and poſſes: 
               yet muſt thou forſake Mammon remediles.
            
            But what ſhould I ſpeake of Chriſoſtomes counſell, or vſe mine own perſwaſion, or infer the verſes of Peets, when as there are

good and godly lawes appointed for the ſame in this Realme of England? as ceaſments in pariſhes, and Colectors for the ſame, forfaits for abſence from the pariſh church, and Side men for the ſame, and ſuch others ordayned by authoritie for the comfort of the poore. But how looſely this is looked vnto, it appeareth in the treſure of the poore, for euery mā plucketh his neck out of the yoke, and no man aſked why ſo: the forfaites is neuer aſked, be abſent who wyl. Thus conſcience is careles and lyeth a ſleepe, regarding neither duty towardes the poore, nor vow towardes God, neither wordly ſhame and improofe for their negligēce, nor the anſwer they haue to make for the poore: neyther the crye of them that liue for a time, nor the iudgement of him that lyueth for euer. And this is the cauſe of the want of the poore.
            Yea & more then that (ſuch is their remediles eare) the ritch as Amos ſaith, make hauock of the poore, in bying them for old ſhoesAmos, ij, Nay they will buy them and ſel them out of doores. They are good to the poore as they ſay, but they wil geue them nothing, & thus the poore are robbed, God amend the euyll.
            I might apply hiſtories, the reportes of good & godly men yt wer merueilous beneficial to

the poore, but what ſhould Chriſtians in the time of the exhorting and commaūding Goſpel vſe the councell of ſtories to teache them that which God in his woord commaundeth them, which might be eaſly ſatiſfied if Diues woulde leaue his daintye diſhes, and leaue to be Epicurus fellow. If pride would looke vpon pouerty, if Venus would not ſo couple her ſelf with Seres and Baccus, if godly piety and pitye might once enter into our ſtonye mindes, if liberality might once kil couetous if ritch men could commaunde the peny that commaūdeth them, which God once graunt.
            Surely amongeſt al the exerciſes of Chriſtianitie, ther is none more fit for a Chrſtian nor more ſéemelye, then large liberalitye towards al, and pure pitie towardes the poore. And therefore the ſtoryes reporte of HelenaFlores hiſtor. lib. 1 Queene of the Albanes, a moſt memorable report, that is this, that ſhe being called to ye faith of Chriſt, and ſo baptiſed in the raygne of Cladius Ceſar, the .x. yeare, great famine oppreſſing ye people in Syria, ſhe of her own coſt prepared great ſtore of corne, and ſent to them. A notable example to mooue Chriſtians in neceſſitie to pity the poore. But Helena is dead and Ioſes, who was called Barſabas, be is alſo gone.
            
               Conſider their néede ye wealthye worldlinges, that would be content with hungrye chaps to chaw, and with ſanke bellies to deuour that that ye waſtefully neglect, beyng ordayned for the poore, & not to be caſt either to the Dog or dungbil. Regard their trauel, their ſlauiſh ſeruice and drudgery, thinke on their toile, and comfort them. Let Chriſtians learne a leſſon of the Heathen Orator Tully who ſaith thus: Multa vilia & ſcruilia negotia liberos homines ac ingenuos paupertas agere
               Ciceroex appellation
                     •
                   cōtra Eubulidē
                
               cogit, ob que potius miſericordiam quā interitum demerentur. Pouertie (ſaith he) compelleth many a good and honeſt man to ſake in hand vile and ſlauiſhe buſineſſes, for which cauſe they deſerue mercy and ſuccour, rather then deſtruction. O thinke if ye were in their poore ſtate, how glad ye woulde be of a ſmal refreſhing, which nowe to them full ſlackly ye do ſhew.
            Therfore let me entreate you with Dauid the prophete, O ye ritch men, conſider your duty, remember the poore, and of your ſatiety all their emptines: Ye that eate til ye blow, and feede 
                  •
               il your eyes ſwel with fatnes, that taſte firſt your courſe meates, and then fal to your fine, that drinke the colde drinkes for your ſtomackes that are hot, a cup of claret

wine, ſome ale or béere to laye a foundation, then eate till to much make vs blow, & then a good carowſe to make good diſgeſtion, a cup of ſack for the ſtomacke that is cold, it is good at midlemeale ſay ſome, this & that ye haue, and I know not what the prodigal waſter licenſiouſly doth ſpend, which with thankeſgeuing vnto ſatiety God hath created for you. Ye I ſay that liue in this exceſſe with ſuperfluity, haue ſome remorſe to the poore in their miſery, that God maye bleſſe ye as Dauid ſaith, which he ſhal ſurely do, as the text doth ſhew, for ſuch ſhall be deliuered in the time of trouble, that ſo ſhall do. And thus much of the firſt part.
            Now muſt I ſpeake a little of the ſecond, which I ſhal not néede to ſtande long about, becauſe the ſcriptures plentifully teache the ſame, & experience doth proue it. But what ſhall we haue for helping the poore? Surely bleſſing in this world, honor and diliuerance from trouble, as Dauid ſaith, and retributiō
               Apo, xiiij in the life to come, and their workes ſhal follow them. Yea and Dauid in thys Pſalme, enlarging the benefits by ennumeration declareth them ſaying: The Lord ſhall preſerue him and kéepe him a liue, that he mayePſal. x
                     •
                  j, be bleſſed, and deliuer not thou hym into the

handes of his enemies.
            Againe, our Prophet expreſſeth well the promis graūted to the man that conſidereth the poore and néedy, ſaying: He hath diſperſed abroad, and geuen to the poore, his righteouſnesPſal. cxij. remaineth for euer, his horne ſhall be exalted with glory. Which wordes Snoigodane interpreting ſayth thus: Diſperſit
               Snoigodan. in Pſal. 112. 
               amore Dei non theſauriſauit ſibi: Dedit pauperibus non hiſtrionibus aut adulatoribus: Iuſtitia eius & merces miſericordie manet in ſeculum ſeculi, quia praemium erit eternum. Which wordes engliſhed are thus: He hath geuen to the poore, not vnto wicked rakehels and flatterers, his righteouſnes, and the reward of his mercye remaineth for euer, becauſe the reward is eternall in heauen. By which words Snoig
                  •
               dane teacheth wel vpō whom we ſhall beſtow that we may ſpare, and who ought not to haue. Then it remaineth that we ſpend not vpō Dogs & Beares as ſome do, to ſatiſfie their mercyleſſe pleaſure, to ſée two cruel creatures teare one the other: not vpon cardes and dice as ſome others do: not vpon exceſſe of apparel and fare as ſome do: not vpon fenſing and dauncing to pleaſe the fleſh: not vpon varlets and paraſites, thoſe fawning dogs, the Catterpillers

of the poore, but vpon the godly and the vertuous poore, for that is the gift that hath the promiſe of reward annexed vnto it.
            The wordes of Tobias whom I haue propoſed to be a maiſter of mercy and pity, may alſo be applied in this matter, to teſtify vnto you the reward that followeth the ſame, as he writeth in theſe woordes ſaying: ThoſeTobi. xij. that exerciſe almes and righteouſnes, ſhal be filled with lyfe. So that if they haue not a long raſe here on the earth, yet ſhal they ſurely liue with God for euer in a far better life.
            Then O deare Chriſtians count it not loſt that is geuen to the poore, as ſome do, ſuppoſſing it is caſt away that is geuē to thoſe ſtinking raſcals, but rather thinke and knowe that it is the portion that of all thy goodes is beſt beſtowed. For looke what thou kéepeſt, thou ſhalt looſe, but that the poore hath, thou kéepeſt for thy ſelf. Remember the good captaine Cornelius, whoſe memory is regiſtred in the Actes, to whom the Angel appearing in a viſion ſaid thus: Cornelius, thy prayerActes .x. and thine almes is come vp before God. Loe here the reward, and alſo of whom thou ſhalt be rewarded.
            Beleue therfore and know ye that be ritch, God willeth ye to lay forth nothing for hym

which he will not recompence: and as ye beleus ſo practiſe to geue to the poore, for ye ſhal haue neuer the leſſe, your baſket neuer the emptier, nor your ſtore the poorer. Looke vpon the widdow of Sarepta, litle was her prouiſion God knoweth, and ſmal was her ſtore when the poore Prophet came to her to aſke her bread. To whom ſhe ſaid, I haue nothing1. Reg. 17 but a litle flower in a barel, and a litle oyle in a cruiſe, which notwithſtandyng ſhee beſtowed vpon him. And what folowed then? forſooth her barrel was filled with flower, and her pot with oyle. Surely, the plentye that commeth by the poore is much, as Auguſtine ſaith: Fecundus eſt ager pauperum cito redit
               Auguſt. in Pſal. 
               donantibus fructum, that is: The fielde of the poore is fruitful, it ſurrendreth againe the fruit with ſpede to them that geue ought, yea if it be but a cup of cold water, ſayth our SauiourMark. x, Jeſus Chriſt.
            The bleſſed Apoſtle ſ. Paule ſpecifieth the promiſe annexed to the exerciſe of almes, in his Epiſtle to the Hebrues, ſaying thus: GodHebr, vi, is not vnrighteous that he wyll forget your workes of loue, which ye haue ſhewed to the Saintes for his names ſake, which haue miniſtred to the ſaintes, & yet do miniſter. The confirmation wherof Chriſt in theſe wordes

expreſſeth ſaying: Bleſſed are the mercyfull,Math. v, for they ſhall obtayne mercy.
            To conclude, how many bleſſinges in ſundry ſort promiſed (which he can and will performe that hath promiſed them) are ſet down for them that are pitiful to the poore, the ſcriptures do teſtifie, which ſhoulde bee to long to recite. Yea and nature in fleſh and bloud is not able to reache to the knowledge of them, for that they be celeſtiall in the kingdome, according to the promiſe infallible, which by expreſſe words are declared in ſ. Mathews Goſpel in theſe words: I was hungry, & ye gaueMat. xxv▪
                me meate, thirſty, and ye gaue me drinke▪ &c. Therefore enter into the kyngdome prepared for ye from the beginning of the worlde. So then that not onely many ſorreſtriall benefites to enritch vs here are promiſed in recompence, but thoſe, that as I cannot repeate them, ſo vnworthely we haue them promyſed for any thing we do, but becauſe our gratious God hath promiſed, we ſhal ſurely enioy them. The multitude wherof, the height & depth whereof, the price and beuty whereof, the ſame and dignitie wherof no toung hath ſpoken, no more can mine: no pen hath written, therfore muſt I ſtay mine: no hart hath conceiued, yet may we beleue, ſuch glory hath

our gratious Maiſter prepared for his faithful Stuardes in that his kingdome that our Chriſt ſpeaketh of. Vnto which kingdome God the Father, by the mediation of Jeſus Chriſt bring vs al, to whom with the holy Ghoſt be all glory and honour now and euer.
            AMEN
         
         
            ¶ A praier which the ſame Henrye Bedell vſeth euerye Sunday and Holy day after his Sermons, in the ſaid Chriſtes Church.
            
            
               O Deare GOD our heauenly Father, heare our praiers for Chriſtes ſake, & ſay not our ſyns to our charge to puniſh them, and to take vengannce on them, but rather in the bloude of Jeſus Chriſt vlot them forth. We haue deſerued thine anger, we cōfes, but yet in Chriſtes bloud we know thou art wel pleaſed, in whoſe name we cry vnto thée, O ſaue vs from our enemies, that ſeeke vs and our bloud for thy Goſpels ſake. O let not the wicked ſay, where is now their God? but let vs rather ſay, the Lordes right hand hath brought mightye thinges to paſſe,

our God ſhall laugh our enemies to ſcorne. Therefore heare vs deare GOD, and for thy mercies ſake ſaue thy worthy ſeruaunt Elizabeth our moſt gratious Quéene. Graūt her we praye thée peace and ſafetie from all her enemies, geue her the bleſſings of peace, and a royal courage, whereby through thine aſſiſtance ſhe may confound all her foes, and not to feare what man can do vnto her. Let her be comforted with thy ſwéete mercies, lay not our ſynnes vnto her charge, nor ſuffer not her life to be plaged for our ſynnes and wickednes, but keepe her (O Lord) to be thine own, and bleſſe her wyth long lyfe and happy dayes. Make her an old mother of this cōmon wealth, and graunt her a long and proſperous raigne ouer vs in thy godly peace. Remember (O Lord) her gratious Councellers, and behold them with thy fatherly eye. Geue them thy feare, to ſet forth thy will, and graunt them the ſpirit of wyſdome, and the counſels of peace. The Biſhops and Paſtors O Lord, direct and make them faythfull in gathering thy harueſt, to breake the bread of lyfe in time conuenient, that thy Church may be builded of lyuely ſtones. And bleſſe thy people O Father of might, open their hartes to receiue the dewe

of grace, that the ſeede of thy word may ſtnck into them. Geue them O Lord, the ſpirit of obedience and true humility towardes thy word, and their Prince. Caſt downe thyne eye frō thy thorne aboue, behold our Realme and country, and preſerue it by thy myght, from ciuill foes, and from forayne myght, from Turke and Pope, and al popiſh power, that all the world may ſee and knowe that thou art our GOD. Finally we pray thee, at thy good wyll, in thy appointed time, open the eyes of the blinde, and conuert the hard harted, that they may come to thy truth and be ſaued. Teach them to know thy woord, that once we may be one flocke, in one pure faith, vnto one Chriſt. Confound Sathan & his members, Antichriſt and hys religion, geue thy Goſpell a ioyfull and frée paſſage, geue all thy people the freedome of conſcience and peace in Chriſt: through the ſame Jeſus Chriſt our. Lord.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by John Awdely, dwelling in lytle Britaine ſtreete, without Alderſgate. 1573
         
      
   