
      
         
            
            
            THE
LEGEND
OF HVMPHREY
DVKE OF GLOCESTER.
            
            By Chr: Middleton.
            
            LONDON
Printed by E. A. for Nicholas Ling, and are
to be ſolde at his ſhop at the weſt doore of
S. Paules Church. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE RIGHT VVOORshipfull,
Sir Iaruis Clifton
Knight.
            
               SIR, the ancient ememy to learning
(ignorance) hath left off his old liuerye,
ruſſet Ierkins & leather hoſe,
& to deceiue the world (like Eſops
Aſſe in a Lions skin) thruſts in him
ſelfe ſometimes like a Gentleman, ſometime, like
a ſouldiour, & ſometimes like a Lawyer, and like
Catterpillers at the ſpringe, bites off bloſſomes of
Trees and corruptes the buddes of flowers; And
although the young fruites of my labours grewe
not by the banks of Hellicon, nor were euer watred
at Aganippies welles; yet (ſimple as they are)
loath I was a greate while, to turne them abroad
into the world, without armour againſt this enemy,
and almoſt in diſpaire: I was by a Gentleman
your Woorſhips wel-willer and my very good
freind, perſwaded to ſhrowde theſe ſimple lynes

vnder your ſhadow, who being your ſelfe dayly
conuerſant in the hiſtories of ancient times, are
alwayes willing & ready to countenance & ſupport
the poore remnants of depreſſed learning
that are left for our times, would like the ſeauen
folde ſhield of Aiax retort ſuch dartes to them,
that throw them, whereupon I am bolde to preſume
vpon your Wor. fauour for my defence,
which I doubt not but to find, and when more
leaſure, giues liberty to my penne, I will indeuour
painfully to requite this curteſie which ſo
impudently I now craue.
            
               Your Wo in all duty to command
Chr. Middleton.
            
         
         
            
            Ad Chriſtopherum Middletonum
Hexaſtichon.
            Illuſtri Humphredi genio tua muſa parentās,
            Vera refert, generoſa canit, memoranda reuoluit
            Virtuti, et laudi ſtatuam dans, dat ſimul ipſ
                  •
               .
            Non opus eſt vestrae muſae, tum, carmine noſtro,
            Nec opis eſt noſtroe, radijs inuoluere Phoebum;
            Quid ſatis ornatam muſ am phalerare iuuabit?
            
               Rob: Allott.
            
         
         
            To his friend, Maſter Chr. M. his Booke.
            LIke as a man, on ſome aduenture bound
            His honeſt friendes, their kindnes to expreſſe,
            T'incourage him of whome the maine is own'd;
            Some venture more, and ſome aduenture leſſe,
            That if the voyage (happily) be good:
            They his good fortune freely may pertake;
            If otherwiſe it perriſh in the flood,
            Yet like good freinds theirs periſh'd for his ſake,
            On thy returne I put this little forth,
            My chaunce with thine indifferently to proue,
            Which though (I knowe) not fitting with thy worth,
            Accept it yet ſince it proceedes from loue;
            And if thy fortune proſper, I may ſee
            I haue ſome ſhare, though moſt returne to thee.
            
               Mich: Drayton.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Author. &c.
            OFT haue I ſeene in ſome ſeign'd Hiſtorie,
            Of loftie Knights, or lowly ſhepheards writ,
            Whereas Inuention runnes at libertie;
            Arte, iudgement, reading, ſpirit ſhow'n and wit.
            Yet in a Legend like Duke Humphreys knowne
            Where wittes inuiron'd in with veritie,
            Sildome haue ſeen more art or iudgment ſhowne
            More reading ſpirit, wit, and Poetrie.
            But Orpheus with his harpe melodicall
            In Canzonets: and heauens azure frame,
            For heau'ns hiſtorie moſt hermonicall,
            In Spheres ſweet muſicke ſings yet of thy name.
            Thē heu'ns & him I wrong, thei'l giue thee merit
            For iudgement, wit, for reading, art & ſpirit.
         
         
            Another of the ſame,
To Duke Humphreyes attendants.
            YEE dayly wayters on Duke Humphreys table,
            And hourly walkers by D. Humphreys ſhrine
            If that for meager famine yee be able
            Right to peruſe a wel-pend wittye line;
            Wait, walk no more, on's table, by his ſhrine,
            But with D. Humphreys Legēd (Gentles) dine
            
               Iohn Weeuer.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Legend of Humphrey Duke
of Gloceſter.
            
               1
               YE powers Diuine directors of our wits,
               Send ſome ſmall current from thoſe ſiluer ſprings
               By whoſe faire banks the heauen-borne muſes ſits,
               And to the bubling ſtreames ſweet Ditties ſinges:
               Following whoſe courſe my meanor Muſe may ſee,
               How ſhe ſhall write this famous Hiſtory.
            
            
               2
               Doe not direct her in thoſe muddy ſtreames,
               Where now ſwims many wits, whoſe worth affoords
               Sinfull foule ſubiects, deteſtable theames,
               Set foorth in worſe and more deteſted words.
               Whoſe ſound euen ſinfull men refuſe to heare,
               As obiectes farre vnfit for any eare.
            
            
               3
               But in a better vaine direct my verſe,
               Obſcure not her intent, with ſuch a blot,
               Since ſhe indeuours truely to rehearſe
               A ſtory of times paſt, now neere forgot.
               Grace her with words, then of no meaner worth,
               Then was the man, whoſe ſtory ſhe ſets foorth.
            
            
               
               4
               So ſhall his name by your aſſiſtance, rays'd
               From darke obliuion, ſhew it ſelfe againe,
               As one deſeruing better to be prays'd
               Then ſome, whoſe liues recorded now remaine.
               For meaner vertues mightily renown'd,
               Whilſt his great workes in ruyne are nye drown'd.
            
            
               5
               What time this land diſquieted with broyles,
               Wearied with wars and ſpent for want of reſt,
               Sawe her adioyning neighbours free fromth'ſpoyles,
               Wherewith her ſelfe, her ſelfe had diſpoſeſt
               Of peace and plenty, which men moſt deſire,
               And in their ſteeds brought famine, ſword and fire.
            
            
               6
               Labouring now to reſtore her great decayes,
               Like to a ſea-beate Barke new com'd to ſhoare,
               Seekes for a quiet harbour, where they may
               Mend and repayre, what they had loſt before:
               So fares it with this land that thus diſtreſt,
               Was almoſt left vn-peopled, vnpoſſeſt.
            
            
               7
               But that the fortunes of a bleſſed King,
               Embalm'd and cur'd the woundes it had fuſtain'd,
               As when the ſonne accompaning the ſpring,
               Brings life to the dead earth in which remain'd
               No hope of ſummer, for in killing froſt
               Were all her powers decayd, her vertues loſt.
            
            
               8
               
                  Henry the firſt-borne to his countryes good,
               After he had relieu'd this ruin'd ſtate,
               Fighting againſt the French, that had withſtood,
               The right his Aunceſtors had wone of late.
               Cropt in his chiefeſt time, dyes this faire King,
               Preuenting th'harueſt of ſo ſweet a ſpring.
            
            
               
               9
               And in his Kingdome now growne great againe,
               Almoſt too mighty for to be controwlde
               By a young King, that did retayne the name
               Of his dead Father, yet ſcarſe twelue months olde.
               Too heauy was (God knowes) for ſuch a hand
               The Scepter that did ſway this head-ſtrong land.
            
            
               10
               But yet ſupported by his vncles care,
               
                  Humfrey, Gloſters Duke (for ſo they call him,)
               To ryper yeares ſprung vp our kingdomes heyre,
               Protected from all harmes that might befall him.
               During his nonage, by the carefull heed
               Of watchfull Gloſter, borne for this good deed.
            
            
               11
               Whoſe holy life, good workes, and vertuous deedes,
               I leaue as ſubiects fit for greater wits:
               For greater are the vertues that proceedes
               From Kings, then meaner men: and better fits
               A loftier ſtile, whoſe wit and iudgement ripe,
               Then an vnlearned Shepheards oaten Pipe.
            
            
               12
               O were my penne, but able to ſet downe
               Great Gloſters vertues (as indeed they were)
               How would the world bewitch'd with his renowne,
               In immitation, ſtriue for to come neere
               His worthy deedes, whereof who were poſſeſt,
               Themſelues might iuſtly thinke were haply bleſt.
            
            
               13
               Looke as the ſtarres, when as the worlds great light,
               Rowſes him from his mleancholie bed:
               Drawing the duskie Curtaines of the night,
               Wherein the earth lay ſadly mantelled,
               Pluckes in their pale heads as aſham'd, and ſorry
               He ſhould ſo farre exceede themſelues in glory.
            
            
               
               14
               So did the world (wherein this worthy was)
               Admire the more then common gifts he had,
               Wondring how ſuch a worke ſhould come to paſſe,
               And with aboundant mellancholie ſad
               Frets out their liues, in enuy and diſpaire,
               For with his life, no life could ere compare.
            
            
               15
               And had he not been royall in his birth,
               Yet had his matchleſſe learning and his wit
               From meanor rootes, as fayre a branch brought foorth:
               For King-borne blouds, to ſhrowd them vnder it.
               For Wit and Learning are two Angels wings,
               By which meane men ſoares vp to mighty things.
            
            
               16
               Ah woe the while our age neglects that ſame.
               Would our great men would immitate his courſe:
               Then ſhould their vertues adde vnto their name
               More nobleneſſe, and after death, inforce
               A new liues date: whoſe lymits ſhould extend
               Beyond all ages after time ſhall end.
            
            
               17
               His youth not vainely ſpent in idle ſports,
               Such as be-witches young mens fantaſies:
               But ſeriouſly attending the reſorts
               Of learned Councellors, men of great degrees
               Made him an Atlas, abler to ſuſtaine
               The heauy burden of his Couſens Raigne.
            
            
               18
               By how much ſtraighter ſprings the new-ſet Pine,
               By ſo much hope men of a fayre encreaſe:
               But way-ward plants that crookedly decline,
               That they ſhould prooue good trees, all men ſurceaſe
               The hope they haue of any further good,
               And lets them dye regardleſſe in the wood.
            
            
               
               19
               So when the impes that ſprings from Royall ſtockes,
               Keepes a ſtraight paſſage through their vertuous youth:
               O how that ſhew all mens deſires prouokes,
               That ſhould increaſe ſtill to a fairer growth:
               Vntill it prooue a goodly broad-ſpred tree,
               To ſhade poore ſhrubs from wrongs and iniury.
            
            
               20
               So had mens hopes in him their full effect,
               His godly youth ſprung to a vertuous age:
               Whoſe matchfull care, was ſpent in the reſpect
               Of Countries welfare: and he did ingage
               His ſubſtance and himſelfe, to doe much good
               To th'poore, and ſuch as moſt in daunger ſtood.
            
            
               21
               And happy was the King, whoſe infancy
               Was guided, by ſo good a mans direction;
               Whoſe care was not his owne commodity,
               Nor for to ſatiſfie priuate affection.
               But to performe the charge he had in hand,
               Protect the King, for th'quiet of the land.
            
            
               22
               Then was not iuſtice collour'd with deceipt,
               Kept downe by might, wrought vnto great mens wils:
               Nor was her Schooles peiſ'd down with golden waights
               And ſhee that ſhould correct, colour mens ills.
               But who did well, by him were well regarded,
               And wicked men with their deſerts rewarded.
            
            
               23
               Then Ruffling pride as light as vanity,
               Rouz'd from her ſoft ſecure luxurious bed;
               Baniſht from hence, liu'd in obſcurity,
               As on exilde, from whence ſhe firſt was bred.
               And what ſinnes elſe were great, were all defac't,
               And in their ſteeds, religious vertues plac't.
            
            
               
               24
               But ſee to what a ftaylty we are borne,
               When as our beſt eſtate is ſooh'ſt declyn'd?
               Fayre dayes haue end, and their delights out-worne,
               Succeeeds darke nights, cold ſtormes, & bluſtring wind.
               Few men there were, that had, or ere ſhal haue
               Fortune continue conſtant to their graue.
            
            
               25
               As ſtormes of hayle fal's on the rypen'd corne,
               All vnexpected to the husbandman,
               And ſhakes the full-fraught eares, that had out-worne
               Colde, heate, drought, wet, and what ſoeuer can
               Decay the earths increaſe, and now did ſtand
               Expecting but the gladſome Reapers hand:
            
            
               26
               So fares it with this Duke, whoſe young dayes ſpent
               In vertuous ſtudies, and true holines,
               Sets downe himſelfe, now with a full intent,
               To ſpend his weary age in quietneſſe.
               Thinking his holy life ſhould this haue found,
               Peace, tending on his body to the ground.
            
            
               27
               But ô ſad times where nought but miſery.
               Stands ready to make pray on each eſtate,
               Sometime ſhe tends them from their infancy,
               Vntill ſhe ſees their whole life ruinate.
               Other men lets ſhe grow, to th'top of all,
               Intending ſo to worke their greater fall.
            
            
               28
               So Pompey in the midſt of victory,
               All vnexpected hapned on his end:
               And Caeſar in his greateſt maieſty,
               Vntimely murthred by his neereſt friend.
               Such are mens beſt eſtates, more wretched they:
               In greateſt pompe moſt ſubiect to decay.
            
            
               
               29
               And did the troubles of this world but tend
               On wicked men, it were a iuſter doome:
               But ſooneſt doe their iniuries extend
               To holy liues, that hindering too ſoone
               The courſe of vertue, fore it grew too great,
               They may themſelues eſtabliſh in her ſeate.
            
            
               30
               And had it not been ſo with this great man,
               In what a glorious current had he runne?
               Euen from the Royall ſpring where he began,
               Downe to the Sea of honour: nor there doone.
               Had turn'd the ſtrong tydes by his vertues force,
               And made them ſtriue to follow on his courſe.
            
            
               31
               Why doth my labouring Muſe ſo far proceede,
               Exemplyfying of his worthy life,
               And numbring his good gifts? becauſe indeed
               She's loath, to enter into ſuch a ſtrife
               As ſhe muſt doe, comparing but the ruth
               Of his ſad age, with th'onor of his youth.
            
            
               23
               Theſe were the younger ſort, but grauer men,
               Whoſe plots and drifts ſorts not to their effect,
               With falſe ſurmizes ſlyly ſettles them,
               To draw the Kings minde into ſome neglect
               Of the Dukes rule, and by that enterpriſe,
               Intiſe his youth to follow their aduiſe.
            
            
               33
               And ſince the worlds firſt age, what age was ſeen
               Wherein ſome fury rowz'd from th'deepeſt hell:
               Poſſeſt not mens conceipts? and ſtill hath been
               Ready to plot and practiſe any ill.
               Nor euer ſhall there be an age ſo cleare:
               But in her ſmooth face ſhall ſome faults appeare.
            
            
               
               34
               For as the brighteſt flame hath darkeſt ſmoake,
               Bodyes their ſhadowes, cleareſt ſprings theyr mud:
               Whoſe enuious quallityes, oft times prouoke
               Them to be ill, who elſe would ſtill be good.
               Mud ſpoiles the ſpring, ſmoake oft obſcures the flame,
               And vitious men enxies at vertues name.
            
            
               35
               And which is more admir'd, euen twixt two friends,
               Riſes ſad diſcord, I, and ſuch as were
               Link'd in the bonds of blood, whoſe deedes ſhould tend
               To mutuall friendſhip, and ſhould eleaue as neere
               As twin-borne bretheren, whil'ſt they are intoombe,
               Within the compaſſe of their mothers wombe.
            
            
               36
               Great Henry Bewfoord Biſhop of Wincheſter,
               Neerely ally'd both to the Duke and King,
               A man ambitious, haughty, not ſincere
               And hollily affected, ſeekes to bring
               By bad deuiſes, vnderneath his hand,
               The King, the Nobles, th'commons of the land.
            
            
               37
               And hauing now inricht himſelfe, with ſtore
               Of what was needfull for his great attempt:
               As money, friends, authority and power
               Of men, that nothing could his will preuent
               His great intendments, what ſo ere they were,
               But Gloſters fore-ſight in his dayly care
            
            
               38
               Kindles the firſt fire of that wofull age.
               Whoſe flames coupling themſelues with new allyes,
               Which many after times could not aſwage,
               But ſtill freſh fewell brought it new ſupplyes,
               Till this poore country ſpent with ciuill iarres:
               Want brings at length a weake end to their warres.
            
            
               
               39
               Now Lyon-like he forrages the land,
               And being Lord Chaunc'ler, practizes his will,
               Keeps lawes and gouernment at his commaund,
               And commaundes all, for no man would rebell
               Againſt his edicts, nor durſt be ſo bold,
               But liue content to be by him controwld.
            
            
               40
               Whoſe tyranny, when Gloſter once eſpies,
               Like a good ſubiect, labours to preuent
               The further miſchiefe that might elſe ariſe,
               And in an open Court of Parlament,
               Drawes articles; wherein he had expreſt
               The Biſhops wrongs, which all would haue red reſt.
            
            
               41
               Now like the winde and tyde when they doe meete,
               With enuious oppoſitions doe affright
               The leſſer ſtreames, running for to regreet
               The Ocean Empire, ſo doe theſe two fight.
               One labours to bring all things to his will,
               The others care, workes to preuent that ill.
            
            
               42
               The Biſhop like the proude inſulting winde,
               Diſturbes the quiet ſtreame where Gloſter runnes:
               Gloſter as fitting ſuch a royall minde,
               Defends himſelfe againſt intruding wrongs.
               The meaner ſort of men whilſt things thus are,
               Diſmayde and trembling, hides their heads for feare.
            
            
               43
               And whilſt in this ſtate did this land remaine,
               New quarrels twixt their men did ſtill ariſe,
               Wherein were great harmes done, many were ſlaine,
               Nor was there any man that could deuiſe
               Meanes to preuent the miſchiefes, that thus falles
               Vpon their heads in theſe vnciuill braules.
            
            
               
               44
               Ah what a woe was this, to ſee thoſe dayes
               When they that ſhould keep peace, is meanes tis broken,
               Whilſt guiders ſtriue, their gouernment decayes.
               Some thought this ſtrife, was but a fatall token
               Of thoſe ſad times, which preſently inſu'd;
               Whoſe woes, a many after ages rew'd,
            
            
               45
               Yet Gloſter thou wert guiltleſſe of that wrong,
               Thou ſtoodſt for thy defence, he ſtroue to'ffend,
               Medled with nothing, but what did belong
               Vnto thy office, whilſt he did contend
               To keep downe the young King, to diſplace thee
               And bring this land to ſeruile villany.
            
            
               46
               And hadſt thou borne with this his foule offence,
               What a ſoule-killing miſchiefe had it bin?
               Who ſuffers ſuch vilde deedes, and doth diſpence
               With the bad dooers, cheriſhes the ſinne:
               For errors left vnpuniſht, are profeſt,
               And being not defended, is depreſt.
            
            
               47
               But anncient Bedford whoſe deep piercing ſight,
               Perceiues the iſſue of this kindling fire,
               How both ſides dayly gathers to them might,
               Whoſe flames ere long, were likely to aſpire
               Vnto their higheſt buildings, and pull downe
               The royall worke that yet was ſcarſe begun:
            
            
               48
               He labours with the King to make a peace,
               Now when their infant warres were ſcarſe begun,
               The cauſe once gone, th'effects thereof ſurceaſe,
               And miſchiefes being preuented whilſt they are young,
               Cannot braunch foorth themſelues to doe that hurt,
               That time, their natures, and bad men would worke.
            
            
               
               49
               Great King quoth he, the pole whereon our world
               Is mooued, and by whom we ſayle our courſe,
               Forgiue my tongues preſumption that growes bold,
               Heere in thy ſacred preſence, to rehearſe
               In this vnſeemely manner that I doe,
               Th'clog of my minde and th'ſubiect of my woe.
            
            
               50
               It is a ſtory full of griefe and ruth,
               An vnexpected, ſad, and harſh diſcourſe:
               Of home-borne troubles, which I know for truth,
               By gentle ſuffrance will grow dayly worſe,
               The force of fire, and water not contrould,
               Would mercileſſe conſume and drowne the world.
            
            
               51
               Euer ſince that vnlucky diſmall houre,
               In which your Royall Father left this life,
               Haue I been Regent of your forraigne power,
               And know th'euent of wars and th'end of ſtrife,
               And therefore feare, leaſt that ill hap ſhould chance
               To vs, that warres haue brought to wofull Fraunce.
            
            
               52
               And you great Lords, Gloſter and Wincheſter,
               To whome I am bound in kindred and in loue:
               Heere before God, the King and you, I ſweare
               It is no partiall grudge or hate, doth mooue
               My minde to this, but care of Countries peace,
               That whilſt we warre abroad, home broyles may ceaſe.
            
            
               53
               It is the ſtrife and hatred twixt you two,
               That my loue labours now to reconſile:
               And tis the oath I made and th'due I owe,
               Vnto my Soueraigne, that thus makes me toyle.
               To keep this furious ſtreame within her bound,
               Leaſt breaking forth, her neighb'ring friends be drown'd
            
            
               
               54
               And the great reaſon why I mooue it heere,
               Rather then to your ſelues, is, for I know
               The Lyons count'nance, better keeps in feare
               The meaner creatures, and to him they bow
               Their dutious knees, content with his decree,
               Who elſe betwixt themſelues would nere agree.
            
            
               55
               Now doe I turne me to your ſacred ſeate,
               Where all the vertues haue their reſidence,
               And on my aged knees with teares intreate,
               A gracious fauourable audience,
               It is a worke of charity God knowes,
               The reconſilement of two mortall foes.
            
            
               56
               A deadly hatred's growne betwixt theſe two,
               But from what roote it ſprings I cannot tell,
               Nor can I learne, but I ſuſpect it now,
               And for't be long I feare ſhall know too well:
               Tis from ſome priuate quarrell of their owne,
               That all this publike quarrell is now growne.
            
            
               57
               Which to repreſſe, put to thy ſacred hand
               Vnto theſe ſeuer'd branches of thy kinde:
               The powerfull words of Kings may more commaund,
               Then the affections of a ſubiects minde.
               I know great King, they both will be content,
               If thou but ſpeak'ſt, to ſurceaſe and relent.
            
            
               58
               The King lookes on them with a ſad aſpect,
               And thus begins, in care and griefe of ſoule:
               Deare Vncles, am I vrged to correct
               My ſubiects faults, and muſt at length controule
               Their ſinnes with iudgements ſuch as they deſerue:
               When words and good perſwations will not ſerue?
            
            
               
               59
               Such is my minde, that I could hartly wiſh
               There were no lawes, ſo no man would offend,
               O what a world were that of ioy and bliſſe,
               When to doe well all creatures would contend!
               Good Princes ſorrow more in puniſhing,
               Then euill ſubiects in committing ſinne.
            
            
               60
               But ſince our firſt creation, we haue ſtill
               Beene ſubiects vnto ſinne, therefore the law
               Was firſt ordain'd, and giuen to keep our will
               From following ſinfull luſts, to liue in awe,
               That thoſe bad men whom no good meanes could mend
               For terror of the law, might feare t'offend.
            
            
               61
               Then for the honour of our auncientry,
               Whoſe happy ſoules in fayre Elizium,
               Repos'd in reſt, liues to eternity,
               Whether ere it be long we all ſhall come:
               Let not my time be ſtain'd, with ſuch a ſinne
               As th'vengance-crauing diſcord of my kinne.
            
            
               62
               With that ſpeakes reuerend Gloſter, whoſe gray hayres
               The auncient ſignes of honour, did preſage
               A guiltleſſe ſoule, in humble words declares
               What he ſuppos'd, incens'd the Biſhops rage,
               And how himſelfe had patiently outborne
               His iniuries, diſdainfull words and ſcorne.
            
            
               63
               Great King quoth he, heere at thy Princely feete,
               Doe I throw downe myſelfe and my good cauſe,
               And of thy ſacred Maieſty intreate,
               If I be guilty, or haue broke the lawes
               Of God, or thee, drkmſ-man-like affect'on,
               Let me be puniſht by my foes direct'on.
            
            
               
               64
               The Articles I gaue in th'parlament,
               Containing many wrongs that crau'd redreſſe,
               So help me God, was not with an intent
               To preiudice his perſon, or poſſeſſe
               Your Princely minde with any wrong conceipt,
               But to redreſſe thoſe wrongs the world thought meete.
            
            
               65
               And had he not been wilfull ſtubborne,
               Againſt my priuate exhortations,
               Glad had I then been, I might haue forborne,
               Thoſe publike kindes of exclamations.
               For well he knowes oft haue I priuately,
               Perſwaded him to more humility.
            
            
               66
               With that the Biſhop ſwelling with diſdaine,
               His workes ſhould come in queſtion like darke skies,
               Whoſe mallancholy ſhow, preſages raine
               And boyſtrous ſtormes; in angry words replyes.
               For his aſpiring minde could not ſuſtaine
               Reproofe, but held th'reproouers in diſdaine.
            
            
               67
               Eternall time quoth he, why haſt thou chang'd
               Thy golden progreſſe, for a leaden way?
               Why haue dayes, nights, and houres, thy ſeruants rang'd
               Through theſe deep myry ſteps, and ſtill doe ſtray
               In this bad world, whoſe rude vnmembred forme
               Begot by time, was too vntimely borne
            
            
               68
               On nature the great mother of vs all,
               Who in abortiue birth brought foorth our age;
               And looking on her childe, fore-ſaw t'wold fall
               To this diſordred, and vnnat'rall rage
               Of brother-hood, and therefore would not ſtand,
               To ſet it into parts, head, foote and hand.
            
            
               
               69
               But left it out of order, like a Beare
               That brings deformed creatures to the light,
               So bore ſhe vs, and loath ſhe was to reare
               The frame in order, leaſt it ſhould in ſpight
               Of time, and her, the father, and the Mother,
               In ciuill diſcords one vndoe another.
            
            
               70
               But Fortune the commaunder of all kindes,
               Although our parents, thought they ſhould preuent
               This fatall miſchiefe, yet this Empreſſe mindes
               Nothing ſhall hinder her in her intent,
               But takes th'aduantage of our formeleſſe courſe,
               And makes our miſchiefes by ſo much the worſe.
            
            
               71
               For had our limmes been in their ſeuerall places,
               Brought into order, then the face had ſtood
               Without th'controulment, and the baſe diſgraces
               Of meaner parts, in louely brother-hood.
               And the poore feete had been content to tread,
               Thoſe paths they were directed by the head.
            
            
               72
               I haue done nothing but what I might doe,
               What th'holy Church commaunds, you eſteeme wrongs
               In times fore-paſt, well wot I t'was not ſo:
               And times to come ſhall teach you, what belongs
               Vnto your dutyes better then you doe,
               Or fret your ſtubborne hearts away with woe.
            
            
               73
               With that good Gloſter, who no more could heare
               Of theſe proude braues, anſweres the Biſhop thus:
               I would the times were eyther as they were,
               When as our late dead King raign'd ouer vs,
               Or he that doth his royaltyes inherite,
               Had but his Fathers yeeres and lofty ſpirit.
            
            
               
               74
               How wold he ſtop theſe ſowle words down thy throate
               That thus defil'ſt the ſtocke from whence we came?
               Thou ſing'ſt a Rauens harſh vntuned note,
               Vnlike an Eagles bird: And without ſhame
               Compar'ſt our roote, and th'branches thence brought foorth,
               To a miſhapen, foule, vntimely birth.
            
            
               75
               Which makes me thinke, that from our Royall neſt
               Some fatall night-crow, ſtole away a bird,
               And in his place vnluckily poſſeſt
               Some of her owne foule, blacke, and hel-borne brood:
               How otherwiſe ſhould ſuch a deede be done,
               Parents ſo good, ſhould haue ſo bad a ſonne?
            
            
               76
               From the ſweet Roſe ſprings not foule ſtinking flowers.
               Nor doth the ſpreading Vine bring foorth blacke ſlowes.
               Like things from like proceede in ſhape and power.
               The Kingly Eagle hatches not fowle crowes.
               Thy Royall Mother nere brought thee to light,
               But ſome ill-boading, fierce, and vgly ſpright.
            
            
               77
               Forgiue me King that I dare be ſo bolde,
               Heere in thy preſence: for I muſt confeſſe,
               Patience is angers ſubiect, and contrould
               With euery fury, which men would redreſſe
               But cannot do't; for ſhe is gentle, mylde,
               Ore-com,d, and kept downe, like a ſtrengthleſſe childe.
            
            
               78
               Whereas thou vrgeſt me, that I neglect
               My duety to the Church, and that I grudge
               Her holly lawes ſhould be of ſuch reſpect:
               For that his ſacred Maieſty be iudge,
               How I haue euer ſtroue with all my might,
               To keep religion and the Churches right.
            
            
               
               79
               But againſt thee, a bad vnworthy guide,
               For ſuch a thing of worth am I ſo ſtoute:
               And God defend leaſt thy vnruly pride,
               Bring her in perrill, if not roote her out.
               So ſtrong-built ſhips in careleſſe maſters hands,
               Are ſplit and beate a ſunder on the ſands.
            
            
               80
               When he had done, the King prolongs his ſpeach,
               Sorry I am my Raigne ſhould thus begin
               With ciuill diſcords, and the hatefull breach
               Of kinſmens loue: then which, a deadlyer ſinne
               Was neuer bred. What peace is like to be,
               When kindred with their kindred diſagree?
            
            
               81
               Be rul'd by me, let not offences grow
               Mongſt meaner men, exampled by your liues;
               Forget your griefes, and doe not further ſow
               Theſe ſeedes of diſcord: whoſoeuer ſtriues
               For troubles, he gaines nothing in this life
               But woes, diſquietnes, hatred and ſtrife.
            
            
               82
               With theſe and ſuch like motions, they were brought
               At length to compremit theyr iniuries,
               Which Gloſter truely ment, but th'other ſought
               To ouer-reach him with his ſubtiltyes:
               And ſo he did at length, but ſtill pretends
               All ſhould be quiet, and they two be friends.
            
            
               83
               Then harmleſſe Gloſter glad of theſe good dayes,
               For he (good man) wiſht not the Biſhops ill,
               Goes forward in his office, and aſſayes
               To roote vp other weedes, that were as ill,
               Though not ſo mighty; ſo the weedes being dead,
               The flow'rs might ſooner grow and better ſpread.
            
            
               
               84
               So rau'nous Woolues oft in diſguiſed skins,
               When in their owne ſhapes they dare not be ſeene:
               Deceiues the harmeles ſheep, and often wins
               Great conqueſts, from good men, that haue not been
               Inur'd to ſubtilties and deep deceipts,
               Catch'd in ſilke nets, nor poyſoned with ſweet baytes.
            
            
               85
               And thus conſorts his auncient enemies,
               Enuious Wincheſter, and many more,
               The Duke of Suffolke, and a company
               Of hell-borne villaines, ſuch as he before
               Nere knew, nor nere offended, but tis ſo,
               Whom men ſuſpect leaſt, breeds them oft moſt woe.
            
            
               86
               O that good gifts, plac't in ſo good a creature,
               Should both be ſubiects, vnto ſuch as they!
               Or that iniurious wrongs ſhould worke by nature,
               To bring honeſt true dealing to decay!
               But ſo it is, fayre colours ſooneſt ſoyle,
               Things of beſt priſe, are ſubiect moſt to ſpoyle.
            
            
               87
               And for on him, their worke cannot preuaile,
               They change their plot, and goe another way,
               To grieue his aged minde; and doe aſſaile
               Him in an other kinde: for oft they ſay,
               The wrongs that men haue done vnto their friends,
               Vnto their ſubſtance, and themſelues extends.
            
            
               88
               But more then to his friend, th'accuſe his wife,
               A vertuous Lady, one of good account:
               Layes treaſons to her charge, ſeekes for her life,
               Sayes her conſpiracies, doe farre ſurmount
               The common faults of men, and ſhe hath been
               A traytor vnto God, and to the King.
            
            
               
               89
               They charge her that ſhe did maintaine and feede,
               Soul-killing witches, and conuers'd with deuils.
               Had conference with ſprits, who ſhould ſucceede
               The King; and by their meanes, had wrought ſome euill
               Againſt his royall perſon; and had ſought
               To end his life, and bring the ſtate to nought.
            
            
               90
               Vpon ſurmiſes thus ſhe was arraygn'd,
               Witnes ſuborn'd, and ſhe condemn'd for it:
               And from her husband cloſely is detain'd,
               And that their doings, might ſucceed, more fit
               To their deſires, it is mongſt them thought meete,
               Shee ſhould doe open pennance in the ſtreete.
            
            
               91
               And after that perform'd, be baniſht hence,
               Into the Iſle of Man, and there ſhould liue,
               A guiltleſſe exile, for a ſmall offence
               Or none at all: and who ſo ere did giue
               That vniuſt ſentence, hath ere this his doome,
               Amongſt th'condemn'd, where comfort nere ſhall come.
            
            
               92
               All this her husband ſaw, but could not mend,
               Saw his Sun-ſetting in a dusky cloude,
               That did preſage, a darke and lowring end
               Of his olde dayes, and he diſdain'd to ſhroud
               His head in meaner ſhades, whoſe vſurp'd power
               Might driue away that imminent foule ſhower.
            
            
               93
               Yet hopes he, that the King will not forget,
               What his deſerts had wonne, and what he was,
               Or at the leaſt, his honour would not let
               His deare friends, and his neere allyance, paſſe
               Through ſuch a hell, of vndeſerued woes,
               That nere deſeru'd the penalties of lawes.
            
            
               
               94
               And thus he mooues it whilſt the flouds of grieſe
               Did Nilus-like oreflow the Di'mond ſhoare
               Of his wet eyes, whoſe hope was not reliefe
               Of their ſad caſe, but rather wiſht for more
               Aboundant ſorrow, by which they might be
               Drown'd in darke pitchy gulfes, and nere more ſee.
            
            
               95
               Men rather faſt to death, then they will take
               A poyſoned nutriment: a ſicke mans heart
               Deſires death, rather then his health ſhould make
               Way for a worſe diſeaſe, whoſe bitter ſmart
               Would worke his greater griefe; euen they doe ſo
               Wiſh blindneſſe before ſight, to ſee more woe.
            
            
               96
               If pitty quoth he, ſit in Princes hearts
               As it ſhould doe, or mercy haue her ſeate
               By iudgements ſide, to mittigate the ſmart
               Of puniſhment, too heauy and too great,
               Let theſe two gentle Gods looke then on mee,
               That aske their help, with teares in miſery.
            
            
               97
               Hatefull oppreſſion hath vſurpt (great King)
               Thy place, and wrung out of thy Royall hand
               The ſwoord of Iuſtice, and ſtands mennacing
               Of cruell puniſhments vnto this land,
               Whoſe guiltleſſe eyes, were nere open'd to ſee,
               (Since thou wert King) the face of tyranny.
            
            
               98
               Tis not thy fault, for thou art iuſt and kinde,
               Witnes my ſelfe that doe complaine of wrongs.
               I am oppreſt (great King,) and yet I finde
               That thou art guiltleſſe, and doſt what belongs
               Vnto a guiltleſſe ſoule, wiſh all were right,
               But wiſhing helps not wrongs, nor reſiſts might.
            
            
               
               99
               Remooue the Pillars, on whoſe baſe doth ſtand
               A mighty building, and all comes to thrall:
               Take out the ſtaffe from an olde mans weake hand,
               And then his aged body muſt needs fall.
               Take ſteeridge from a ſhip, or do not guide it,
               And on ſome Rocke the ſilly barke will ſplit.
            
            
               100
               The baſe whereon my aged frame hath ſtood,
               The ſtaffe whereon I ſtay'd my trembling arme,
               The rudder that did guide me, and with good
               And wholſome counſell kept my age from harme,
               Is gone, what then may I ſuſpect to haue,
               But ſo daine fall, to an vntimely graue?
            
            
               101
               Where would I were in peace, for heere is none,
               And leſſe I feare will be, which makes my minde
               Thinke, happy are our Fathers that are gone,
               Where ſure they ſhall a better kingdome finde.
               Truely ſaid Ouid, that no man ſhould ſay
               His life was bleſt, before his lateſt day.
            
            
               102
               Againſt my wife (God knowes) a guiltleſſe ſoule,
               Is paſt a heauy iudgement vndeſeru'd:
               Which yet thy Royall power may controule,
               And by that meanes, their liues may be preſeru'd,
               That liues to doe thee good, who, were they gone,
               I prophecie thy quiet raigne were done.
            
            
               103
               Pitty ſpeakes to thee for her guiltleſſe caſe:
               And mercy ſayes, the doome is all too great:
               Iudgement it ſelfe would be content to ceaſe,
               If but thy ſacred tongue vouchſafe t'intreate,
               For tis moſt fit (ſay they) we ſhould diſpence,
               With thoſe that haue committed no offence.
            
            
               
               104
               For lawes were made to puniſh euill men,
               And cheriſh vp the good, ſuch as liue well.
               This being ſo true as tis: why doe they then
               Make equall iuſtice, gainſt her ſelfe rebell?
               Keep it in order (King,) for all men ſay,
               That things brought out of courſe, will ſoone decay.
            
            
               105
               The King heauy to heare this ſad diſcourſe,
               Deſcends his royall throane, whereon he ſate,
               Takes vp his vncle, and to make reſtraint
               Of his increaſing griefe, gins to intreate
               Him with good words, and his deſire is
               He could but doe that good, which he doth wiſh.
            
            
               106
               My Noble Aunte quoth he, ſuffers theſe ills,
               Without my priuity, and they haue got
               Such ſtrong Commiſſions, for to worke their wils,
               Vnder out ſeales, that rightly can I not
               Recall the worke, nor will they licence me
               To pardon her pretended traytory.
            
            
               107
               Good vncle well you know, I haue giuen ouer
               All gouernment, and haue diſcharg'd my ſoule
               Of worldly cares, and cannot well recouer
               That right againe, and if I ſhould controule
               What they haue done, t'wold ſure ſtir vp their wrath,
               To execute my ruyne, and your death.
            
            
               108
               Gloſter with this amaz'd, that he ſhould heare
               His Kingly Couſin giue him no reliefe:
               What he would gladly ſpeake, he doth for-beare,
               His mouth is lockt, and the grim porter griefe,
               Keeps in the ſad words that he faine would ſpeake,
               Controules his tongue, & makes her powers too weake.
            
            
               
               109
               Thus the King ſorry he cannot releeue him,
               Comforts his griefe with teares, and ſo they part:
               The woes that Gloſter hath, doe no leſſe grieue him
               Then the good Duke, and cleaues as neere his heart.
               True friends haue ſeeling of each others woe,
               And when ones heart is ſad, all theirs is ſo.
            
            
               110
               The Duke lookt vp, and ſaw the King was gone,
               And the roome empty, time and place affoords,
               A fit occaſion for a man to moane,
               And quiet ſilence licenſes his words,
               To talke to woode, and ſtones, and empty ayre,
               For to his plaints, no man would lend his eare.
            
            
               111
               For want (quoth he) of witnes, I muſt make
               You ſenceleſſe things recorders of my woe:
               Friends and acquaintance flye, and will not ſeeke
               Redreſſe for wrongs; the lawes are altered ſo,
               That men which of all creatures ſhould liue beſt,
               Are of all law, and iuſtice, diſpoſſeſt.
            
            
               112
               Would you (quoth he) could vtter what I ſay;
               That the remembrance of my teares, might laſt
               To vn-borne ages, and when you decay;
               You could tell your ſucceſſion what hath paſt
               In theſe ill times: then would I tell a tale
               Of ſo much ruth, that flint and ſteele ſhould waile.
            
            
               113
               I prophecy a time ſhall ſhortly be,
               And well is me, I ſhall not ſee the day,
               When all too late, with ſorrow they ſhall ſee
               What tis to doe iniuſtice, and to ſway
               The ſwoord awry: for next to tyranny,
               Comes warres, diſſentions, ciuill mutiny.
            
            
               
               114
               Once did Aſtrea leaue the world before,
               Becauſe the world grew weary to doe well:
               Once gone againe, I feare ſhee'l nere come more,
               Nor ſet her helping hand, for to refell
               Theſe growing miſchiefes, but let them increaſe,
               Till men haue quite forgot the name of peace.
            
            
               115
               When as the Sunne forſakes his criſtal ſpheare,
               How darke and vgly is the gloomy skye?
               And in his place ther's nothing will appeare,
               But clowdes that in his glorious circuite flye.
               So when a King forſakes his royall place,
               There ſtill ſucceedes oblique and darke diſgrace.
            
            
               116
               Let not the ayre be moou'd and t'will infect:
               Let not the water runne and it will ſtinke:
               Diſturbe the courſe of Iuſtice by neglect,
               And the poore world corrupts: and I doe thinke,
               The want of right, to vs like plague will bring;
               For not to rule, is not to be a King.
            
            
               117
               And where there is no guide, the people perriſh,
               As pruning to the vines, lopping to th'trees,
               Weeding to th'corne, corne, vines, and trees doe cheriſh,
               So ſhould Kings rule inferiour degrees,
               Leaſt ſtinking weedes and bryers themſelues do nouriſh,
               In that good ground where better hearbs ſhould floriſh.
            
            
               118
               Forgiue me heauens, that I doe not amend
               Th'abuſed youth of this well meaning King,
               It is my charge; yet can I not defend
               Him from theſe daungers he is falling in;
               But frowne on them great God, his youth that leade
               In paths of ſorrow ſo miſordered.
            
            
               
               119
               And gracious time tell to the world to come,
               By whom, his royall youth was thus miſled,
               Leaſt ignorant of it, I be by ſome
               Condemn'd, for doing of ſo bad a deed.
               For well I know, with ſuch a foule offence,
               Nor God, nor mortall men, will ere diſpence.
            
            
               120
               With that, a ſeruant of his comes and ſayes,
               How that his wife had gone through London ſtreete,
               In publike pennance, and was led away
               By Sir John Stanley, whom if he would meete,
               He muſt make haſt, or elſe (quoth he) ſhe is gone
               In wofull exile, her hard hap to moane.
            
            
               121
               Hereat the Duke awakt, as from a ſleep,
               Or as one riſing from a colde dead ſwound,
               For-beares his further words, and's faine to keep
               What elſe he would haue ſaid, till he haue found
               So fit a time againe; for he muſt goe,
               To ſee his wife, and comfort her in woe.
            
            
               122
               And ouer-takes her euen at that ſame ſhoare,
               That bounds this Iſland from the Oceans force:
               A place whereas they neuer met before;
               Vpon whoſe bankes, paſſ'd ſuch a ſad diuorce
               Betwixt theſe two, as neuer ſince hath been,
               Nor th'ſunne that all doth ſee, had euer ſeene.
            
            
               123
               There like two ſtreames that parted at their ſpring,
               Runnes in two ſeuerall channels all their way,
               And at the laſt, theyr twin-borne currents bring
               Into one bed, where long they cannot ſtay,
               To greet each other, fore that time perforce
               Driues them downe to the ſea, and ends their courſe.
            
            
               
               124
               So meetes theſe two, euen where they may not bide
               To feede their ſorrowes with ſad tales of woe,
               For they were ſubiects, to the time and tyde
               That tarried but their parting, ſhe muſt goe
               To wayle her woes vpon a forraigne ſhoare,
               He ſtay behinde (poore man) to ſuffer more.
            
            
               125
               Good Ellinor (quoth he) for thou retain'ſt
               That tytle ſtill, though ignominious wrongs
               Haue ceaz'd vpon thy fortune, and deſtaines
               Thy vertues, and leaues nothing that belongs
               To ſuch a Lady, but thy poore bare name,
               And that diſgrac't too, with reproach and ſhame.
            
            
               126
               Although the Sunne be oft Eclipſt in cloudes,
               Yet that vale drawne, he ſhewes himſelfe againe:
               Oft miſty fogges, the heau'ns great glory ſhroudes,
               But they deſolue, and the faire ſtarres remaine:
               The chriſtall ſtreames are oft defilde in mud,
               But cleares againe, and makes their waters good.
            
            
               127
               So are we ſubiect to the ruſt of times,
               Diſhonors, and diſgraces, but they fade,
               And we ſhal one day ſhake them off, and clime
               Vp to our owne eſtates, for we are made
               Reprochfull, that of our ſelues are not ſo,
               And therefore ſhall we liue, t'out-liue this woe.
            
            
               128
               The melancholie ſeaes, will giue thee leaue,
               To mourne thy fortunes, whilſt Orion-like
               The deep ſtring'd ſighes and teares, ſhall quite bereaue
               The Ocean of her people, and ſhall ſtrike
               Them with remorſe, who being all gath'red there,
               Reaſonleſſe things ſhall pitty what they heare.
            
            
               
               129
               And I will leaue mens companies a while,
               And vnder Cipres ſhades, to beaſtes and birds,
               Trees, ſtones and riuers, ſit and there beguile
               Conſuming time, till to my wofull words
               They frame lamenting notes; whoſe heauy ditty
               Shall alwaies end, their mournefull ſtops in pitty.
            
            
               130
               So lands and ſeas, poore fiſhes, beaſtes and birds,
               Hard ſtones, ſtrong trees, and ſiluer-running ſtreames,
               Shall ſimpathize our woes, greeue at our words,
               And wiſh that they our ſorrows might redeeme;
               Whilſt wicked men, that wrought our miſery,
               Feeles not the ſting of hard extreamity.
            
            
               131
               As for the heauens they haue ſeene our wrongs,
               And in their good time will reuenge this deed;
               There iuſtice ſits, and renders what belongs
               To mens deſerts, and what is there decreed
               She executes on earth they will not bliſſe
               Thoſe bloudy hands, bad mindes that wrought vs this.
            
            
               132
               When ere I ſleep, my dreames ſhall be of thee,
               And when I eate, how bitter is the bread
               Which I muſt taſte without thy company?
               And waking, if I ſee not thee I am dead.
               Thus ſleeping, waking, eating, all I doe,
               Without thee, doe all agrauate my woe.
            
            
               133
               With that he ſtopt, for teares commaundes his tongue
               To ceaſe, whilſt they ſucceeding in their courſe,
               Perfect his griefe, for theſe two parts belong
               Vnto true ſorrow; wordes, and teares, haue force
               To moue compaſſion, in the ſauage mindes
               Of brutiſh people, reaſon-wanting kindes.
            
            
               
               134
               Great Duke (quoth ſhe) depreſſed by my fall,
               Tis not eternall baniſhment from hence,
               Me ought diſmayes, but that hard hap withall,
               That exiles me from thee, ſo one offence
               Or rather none, and I that neuer ment
               To doe them wrong, haue double puniſhment.
            
            
               135
               Forget thou to lament, and let me grieue,
               For if we ſorrow both, we both ſhall dye:
               T'were good that one, endeuour'd to relieue
               With chearefull words, the others miſery.
               Leaue thou to mourne, and I ſhall better ſee
               A hopefull time, of my recouerye.
            
            
               136
               It were no reaſon thou ſhouldſt beare the weight,
               Of my miſdeeds; but I my ſelfe alone
               Will vndergoe the burden, tis my right,
               Let it then goe with me, leaſt when I am gone,
               The enuious mindes of enemies repine,
               This land ſhall harbour any thing thats mine.
            
            
               137
               Who liues in Egipt muſt ſay blacke is white,
               Becauſe their beauty is a Sun-burnt skinne:
               So muſt thou change thy minde, and in diſpite
               Of vertue, teach thy olde tongue to begin
               An vnus'd note, for who ſo hath to doe
               With deep deſemblers, muſt deſemble too.
            
            
               138
               If thou'lt doe ought for me, this leſſon learne,
               So ſhall good Gloſter liue in better eaſe:
               For if the enuious eyes of foes, diſcerne
               Thou grieueſt at my exile, it will diſpleaſe
               Theyr humours, and ſet them a worke to ſee,
               How they may hurt thee, as they haue iniur'd me.
            
            
               
               139
               But fooliſh as I am, why doe I ſtriue,
               Teaching a riuer to aſcend a hill?
               To turne the courſe of nature, and to driue
               The ſpheares of heauen, backe againſt their will?
               To teach thy tongue that neuer ſtept awry,
               Now in thine age, to flatter, fawne, and lye?
            
            
               240
               My reaſon is, becauſe I would preſerue
               Thy life from the danger it ſcarſe can miſſe:
               Men are not meaſured now as they deſerue,
               But as the bad conceipts of tyrants is.
               From whoſe vnrighteous doome, faire heau'ns defend
               Thy holy life, that hopes the better end.
            
            
               141
               With that Sir Thomas Stanley (her ſad guide)
               Breakes off their intermiſſiue pittious teares:
               Lady (quoth he) the due obſeruant tyde,
               Hath fil'd the hollow vaſt, and empty ſhoares
               Of this our hauen, and his ſwift foote courſe,
               Bends backe vnto the ſea his matchleſſe force.
            
            
               142
               Full loath (God knowes) am I to be the man,
               Appointed to diſſolue ſo ſtrong a bond,
               As linkes true loue: yet will I what I can
               Labour to keep it ſtill, except commaund,
               (That ouer-rules good meaning) make a way
               To bring it to a ſodainer decay.
            
            
               143
               Call but to minde Sir Thomas (ſayes the Duke)
               What tis to part true friends, and thou ſhalt ſee,
               Tis ſuch a ſinne as gentle kinde rebuke
               Forſakes, and ſayes tis worthier to be
               Reſerued for puniſhment, we cannot giue
               Eternall fire, whoſe furies euer liue,
            
            
               
               144
               Yet I confeſſe I doe thee wrong good knight,
               Thou art commaunded to conuey her hence:
               And being a ſubiect, muſt obey the might
               Of mighty mens commaunds, though the offence
               To God and all good men: for all men ſay,
               Kings were made to commaund, ſubiects t'obey.
            
            
               145
               Yet vſe her well to quallifie the deed,
               Smooth oyles deſolues hard ſtones, faire words inforce
               Pitty in flinty hearts, there will proceede
               From thy kinde vſage, reaſons of remorſe,
               To mooue the heauens to forgiue this ſinne,
               And to remooue the plagues tho'art falling in.
            
            
               146
               With that they parted, for they might not ſtand
               On longer tearmes, nor would their ſorrows let
               Their wordes dilate their griefes, but doth commaund
               Their dutious tongues to ſilence, and they ſet
               Milde, quiet, patience, before theyr eyes,
               And to her ſhrine doe ſolemne ſacrifice.
            
            
               147
               Now wheres the dolefull muſes; that ſhould play
               In tragick ſceanes, the parting of theſe two?
               Will none aſſiſt me? then well may I ſay,
               It is indeede a ſtory of ſuch woe,
               As if but tongues, and pennes, ſhould ſtriue t'expreſſe
               Their paines, would make the ſorrow but ſeeme leſſe.
            
            
               148
               Then as we wonder at the countleſſe ſtarres,
               Numberleſſe ſands, the infinite increaſe
               Of men, birds, beaſtes, and all things that inferres
               An admiration: ſo let our tongues ceaſe
               To talke, of what we cannot comprehend,
               As wondrous things, whoſe numbers haue no end.
            
            
               
               149
               This done, the Duke repayres to th'Court againe,
               Performes his office, labours to forget
               Theſe ſorrows: but alas the growing paine
               Of this deep feſtred wound, will neuer let
               His thoughts, or deeds, or life, haue any peace,
               Till thoughts, and deeds, and life, and all ſhall ceaſe.
            
            
               150
               Then ſought the Nobles for to match their King,
               In marriage with ſome Prince of his eſtate:
               So that from him more royall ſeede might ſpring,
               To weare the Engliſh Crowne, and prop agate
               The Common wealth, for ſubiects moſt deſires
               A royall iſſue to ſucceed their ſyres.
            
            
               151
               And he by priuate meanes, without th'conſent
               Of his Protector Gloſter, willing is
               To marry, and withall was well content,
               That William Duke of Suffolke, one that was
               His vncles foe, ſhould betroth in his name,
               One borne vnto ſmal wealth, and to leſſe fame,
            
            
               152
               
                  Margaret daughter to Reynard Naples King,
               Inriched by this match, who elſe was poore:
               A king onely in name, without the thing
               That makes men mighty, and in ſteed of dowre,
               They buy her of her Father, with more ſtore
               Of lands, and goods, then ere he had before.
            
            
               153
               Looke as great Cynthia, in her ſiluer Carre
               Rides in her Progreſſe round about her ſpheare,
               Whoſe tendance, is the fayre eye-dazling ſtarres,
               Trouping about her Chariot, that with cleare
               And glorious ſhewes, makes euery eye delight,
               To gaze vpon the beauty of the night.
            
            
               
               154
               Or as the ſpring comes to regreete the earth,
               Clad and attended with the worlds delight:
               So is the Queene in Maieſty brought foorth,
               Tended with Princes, that a fayrer ſight
               This land of ours, a long time had not ſeene,
               And well't had been for them, had that not been.
            
            
               155
               And though the Duke vnwilling was to haue,
               His Kingly Couſen marry with this Queene:
               Yet ſince t'was done, it was too late to craue
               Aſſiſtance to diſioyne them; that had been
               But labour loſt, a toyle vnto no end:
               Wiſe men let faults ore-paſſe they cannot mend.
            
            
               156
               And what his duety and his ſeruice ought her,
               That he perform'd, and euer was content
               To doe her good, and his endeuour brought her
               More friends, who elſe in greeuous diſcontent,
               Had put on armes againſt her, but that they
               Saw him content, and for his ſake they obey.
            
            
               157
               But as moſt women elſe, euen ſo was ſhe
               Vnconſtant, and that wauering power did guide
               Her fickle thoughts, that nothing could agree
               With her conceipt, but new deuiſes, pride
               And womens toyes, who children-like affected
               Loues trifles, whilſt good things are quite neglected.
            
            
               158
               Good Duke to what miſfortune wert thou borne?
               How was the heauens conioyned at thy birth?
               Thy yonger times, might better haue out-worne
               Theſe troubles that thy latter yeares brought foorth.
               But ſubtill fortune, turn'd her fatall hand
               Againſt thine age, not able to withſtand.
            
            
               
               159
               But whether t'were the fortune of the place,
               (Th'Duke-dome of Gloſter), that thus croſt thy bliſſe,
               I know not, but I geſſe, for all the race
               Almoſt of Dukes, that were inſtal'd in this
               Vnlucky Duke-dome, made an end like thee,
               By hard and vnexpected caſualty.
            
            
               160
               
                  Thomas of Woodſtocke, and Hugh Spenſers thrall,
               (May be great reaſons to perſwade this thing)
               And thine, and after thee an others fall,
               That was once Duke there, though he dyed a King,
               
                  Richard the third, yet was his life ſo bad,
               That he deſeru'd a worſe death then he had.
            
            
               161
               Yet let thy ſoule forgiue this ſinne of mine,
               That puts thee in amongſt a company
               Of wicked men, whoſe liues were worſe then thine,
               Though death amongſt you all dealt equally,
               For he's vnpartiall, and with one ſelfe hand
               Cuts off both good and bad, none can withſtand.
            
            
               162
               The Queene that now had lent her youthfull eares,
               To the vaine pleaſures of theſe fooliſh times,
               To be imploy'd, conſidered not the cares
               That troubles grauer heades, whoſe wiſedome climes
               To higher ſteps of iudgement, and nere ceaſe
               Striuing to keep, their idle liues in peace.
            
            
               163
               The droane ſhould dye, did not the toyleſome Bee
               Worke to ſupply her need: the ſilly ſnake
               Had ſtaru'd in colde, had he not bin ſet free
               From the congealed froſt, whoſe force did make
               Paſſage for death in his friends boſome warmed,
               From froſt and ſnow, and killing winter armed,
            
            
               
               164
               Yet ſee how theſe kinde fauours haue an end,
               The Drone ſtarues the poore Bee, that got her meate:
               The venom'd ſnake requites his carefull friend,
               By ſtinging him that did procure the heate
               That preſeru'd her: ſo did the Queene requite
               The Dukes kinde deeds, with mallice, wrath, and ſpite.
            
            
               165
               For whilſt he laboured in the common-wealth,
               And ſought their good, by gouerning the King:
               Incroaching danger comes on him by ſtealth,
               And ere he wiſt had ſlyly drawne him in.
               Such is the manner of bad minded men,
               They worke their hurt that ſeekes to preſerue them.
            
            
               166
               Now holde they ſecret counſels to inuent,
               How the Dukes perſon might be brought in daunger,
               Perſwade the King againſt him, with intent
               Sooner to ſpoyle him, but he now no ſtranger
               To their deuiſes, ſeekes in what he may,
               To keep himſelfe from falling to their pray.
            
            
               167
               To plead his guilt leſſe caſe it was no boote,
               They knew it well enough, but would not know it,
               That all men were his foes, was out of doubt,
               Yet the King lou'd him well, but durſt not ſhew it.
               Ther's almoſt none dare come to him to cheare him,
               And euen his ſeruants feared to come neere him.
            
            
               168
               And that his honour might the ſooner fall,
               They tooke away his office, for ſay they
               The King's at age, and needs no help at all
               Of a Protector, but himſelfe ſhall ſway
               The Scepter: nor was it conuenient
               He ſhould liue vnder others gouernment.
            
            
               
               169
               With this the Duke as willing to reſigne,
               As they were to deſire it, on his knees
               Yeeldes vp his charge, and though he did deuine
               Some ill enſuing miſcheefe, and he ſees
               All men looke ſadly on him, yet he reſts
               Contented, and turnes all things to the beſt.
            
            
               170
               Great King (quoth he) that from thine infant ſpring,
               Thorow the channell of thy youthfull time:
               Haſt runne ſecurely without daungering,
               The hope of manly yeares, and now canſt climbe
               Vp to thy throane thy ſelfe without my hand,
               And there hold all things at thine owne command:
            
            
               171
               Heere doe I yeeld mine office, which God graunt
               Thy Princely hand may holde euen to thy graue,
               But ſore I feare me, ſome will ſeeke to ſcant,
               The royall power ſuch a King ſhould haue.
               And greedy of that gaine, without all ſhame
               Keep from thy hands, all thine, ſaue thy bare name.
            
            
               172
               Yet hope I thou ſhalt haue a fayrer Raigne,
               For me thinkes that this royall name of thine,
               No meaner bounds or lymits ſhould containe,
               Then all this Weſterne world: how long a time
               Hath victory been ſeated on thy throane,
               And ſtayes thine aunſwere ere ſhe will be gone?
            
            
               173
               Let times to come that talkes of thy renowne,
               Speake no leſſe good of thee then of thy Syre.
               And as tho'art heyre vnto his land and crowne,
               Be ſo vnto his vertues, let th'deſire
               Of honor, conqueſt, time-conſuming fame,
               Aduaunce another Worthy, of that name.
            
            
               
               174
               Whoſe memory, when ſtones and toombes of braſſe,
               Deep grauen Epitaphs, and hollow graues
               Shall quite conſume, and their memoriall paſſe
               Downe to the ſhady groues, and darkſome caues
               Where dead obliuion dwels, in whoſe blacke breſt
               Lyes buried, all that former times poſſeſt.
            
            
               175
               Thy name, like to the ſtill induring Sunne,
               Shall out-liue all, and be the worlds great wonder,
               I, and when Sunne, and Moone, and Starres, haue done,
               And their concordant Spheares broken a ſunder,
               Thy light ſucceed their lights, and as now we
               Admire their glory, ſo they may doe thee.
            
            
               176
               I ſee no reaſon why thou ſhouldſt not flouriſh,
               As thy great Grand-ſire did, and be as good,
               For that ſame clime, and earth, and ayte doth nouriſh
               Thee, that fed them, the iſſue of their bloud
               Thou art, ah why then ſhould we feare,
               That thou ſhouldſt be leſſe famous then they were?
            
            
               177
               There is no reaſon, for after that th'ſpring,
               Ther's no man doubts, but harueſt comes of courſe,
               When as the dusky morning doth begin,
               To breake the nights thicke fogges, and by his force
               Deſolue the ſhady cloudes, the night out-worne,
               We're certaine of a faire ſucceeding morne.
            
            
               178
               But I ſhall neuer ſee that happy day,
               For leane-fac'd death, tended with painefull houres,
               Hangs on my weary limmes, and makes his way
               Through hollow bloodles vaines, whoſe weakned powers,
               Scarſe able to ſupport this carefull head,
               Sayes (fore that day) old Gloſter ſhall be dead.
            
            
               
               179
               And he fore-tolde his end, for t'was not long,
               Ere many ſeu'rall treaſons were pretended
               Againſt him, and by fierce iniutious wrong,
               He's charged with offence, that nere offended.
               Yet this his hope is, heauen will harbour them
               That are vniuſtly puniſht heere mongſt men.
            
            
               180
               That they accuſe him of, is, he deuiſed
               New puniſhments for ſuch as did offend;
               Such as our lawes inflict not, and he prized
               Before them other lawes, which in the end
               Say they, will ouer-turne our ſettled ſtate,
               And leaue this now-good Kingdome ruynate.
            
            
               181
               Of theſe he is accuſed, for theſe arreſted,
               Committed to the Tower, there layde in priſon,
               And though with teares, and prayers he oft requeſted
               He might but know his fault, for law and reaſon
               Play both the aduocates vpon his ſide,
               But their requeſts is lawleſly deny'd.
            
            
               182
               For griefe of which hard dealings (ſome men ſay)
               The good Duke dyed there, but ſome others geſſe,
               His auncient enemies deuis'd a way.
               There to cut off his dayes, and diſpoſſes
               The world of her chiefe good, ô times accurſt
               That ſpoyles the beſt things, to preſerue the worſt!
            
            
               183
               Like to a morne, whoſe euening ſhuts in cloudes,
               Making a darke end of a glorious day:
               Falles this good Duke, and in his ending ſhrouds
               The beauty of his youth, yet all men ſay
               His Sun-bright vertues, ſhewed through this dark vayle
               And poyſoned enuies, deadly ayme did faile.
            
            
               
               184
               For he lyes buried in famous Regeſtry,
               Where (ſaue himſelfe) ſcarce any are retained:
               Other great men haue writ their memory,
               On walles and ſtones, and yet their names remained
               Nothing like his, whoſe Epitaph is plac't
               In mens conceipts, that neuer ſhall be rac't.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   