
      
         
            
            
            Certaine briefe, and speciall Instructions for Gentlemen, merchants, students, souldiers, marriners, &c. Employed in seruices abrode, or anie way occasioned to conuerse in the kingdomes, and gouernementes of forren Princes.
            LONDON, Printed by Iohn Woolfe, 1589.
         
         
            
            
            To the most valiant, and renowned Knight, Sir Francis Drake, the ornament of his Country, the terror of the enimie, the Achilles of this age, P. I. wisheth, in al his honorable actions, the continuance of Gods former blessings, and in his now intended seruice the best successe.
            
               SIr, my hap was of late, ouerlocking a large Librarie, to light vpon a small, but sweete booke of Method, for men intending their profite and honor by the experience of the world, and accesse to externe and remote parts, by that meanes to inrole themselues in the Cataloge of Homer his 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . seers of many Regions, and of the manners of many Nations, as Vlisses was, and your selfe more then Vlisses. This Methode, was composed by one M. Albertus Meier, at the command, direction, and charge of the honorable Henry Ranzou, now lord of Bredenberge, Counsailer and deputie to Christiern, the young King of Denmark in his Dukedoms of Sleswike, Holst, Stormare, and Dithmarsen, a man of singular wisdome learning, and zeale, both to his countrie, and the vtilitie and furtherance of vertuous minds in generall.
            My resolution was at the first to accommodate the same to my priuate vse, and therby to square my selfe fit for an occasion, whensoeuer the pleasure of God, conuenient time, and good company (which I euermore wished) should draw me to trauell: But considering that excellēt Moral of Tullie, in his golden Offices deriued from the Stoikes:
                  Officiorum 
                        〈◊〉
                      titul. de Iustit.
                
               Homines hominū causa esse generatos, vt ipsi inter se alii aliis prodesse possēt,

& communes vtilitates in medium afferre:
               that men are borne for men, one to do for another, and to communicate al common helps with those that want them:
& withall, seeing how coherent the argument hereof is, with the occurrents of this yeare, not so myraculous to the Astronomer, as parturient to al mē of spirit, wherin for military & marine matters, as expeditions, plantings, discoueries, & voyages of the largest compasse, there is growne so vniuersall a consent and disposition in this triumphant kingdome, that all Christianitie stands now at the gaze, attending from vs some notable effect & consequence; for these respects, I haue deemed it a better duety both towards nature & my countrie, by reducing the same into our vulgar language, and so committing it to the presse, to benefite many thē one, more then my self only, as knowing,
that (according to the 
                  Aristoteles▪ bonum quo communius, eo melius.
                prince of Philosophers)
a good and profitable thing, the more common it is, the better it is.
And whether this methode may iustly be receiued into the number of things of that opinion, yea or no: I appeale to no other iudge thā to your self: a iudge in this matter so sufficient, as that this Realme, nay many realmes (I speake that which is impudēcy to deny) cannot produce an equal. There is no man, although but of meane and ordinary insight in the state of things, that is ignorant of the great necessity and commoditie of Methods, and directions to men of all qualities: insomuch, that whosoeuer vndertaketh any course or profession without it, is like to the foolish youth, that would needs prooue a Latinist without his Grammer, or to the mad Architect, which went about to set vp a house without his rule and compasse, both whose beginnings were confused, and their conclusions ridiculous.
            I haue heard speech of a wise Gentleman of Naples, who sometime for a triall dismissed his son, and gaue him libertie to trauell to certaine other Citties, and territories of Italy,
               
but without instructions, and vpon his returne, he made report that he had seene men, women, wals, houses, woods, and medowes, but of the state, manners, lawes, gouernement and natures of the people, his simple wit could make no reasonable answere. Many of our owne Nation haue beene taken tardy and tripping in this grosenesse: as diuers Gentlemen verie studious in cases of pollicie, and nauigation, by questions and examinations haue found. In whom the ancient complaint of the Poet hath beene too truely and fully verified.
            
               Coelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt,
               Some by passing the seas, change ayres but not mindes, returning with brains nothing bettered, & spirits nothing quickned with the varieties of the world.
I doubt not, but that if our men will vouchsafe the reading, portage, and practise of this pamphlet of notes, (a soueraigne Antidotum, or preseruatiue against the poyson of that disease) the thicke mistes of ignorance, and harde conception will soone be scattered, and the same conuerted into a quicke sight, and illumination of the senses, so that the traueller (although in that course a Nouice) after his ranginges and peregrinations, shall retyre him selfe a man of skill, and bring more to his home from ouer-seas, than the seruant did to his Maister from Paules crosse, which peraduenture was a hat and a cloke, but no profite by doctrine.
            For the patronage of this discourse, as it is the custome, or rather by custome the habite in men of industry, to cōmende their labours to persons of countenance and iudgement, and for the most part to such as by their owne experience are able to speake of that argument, which the worke presented to thē doth principally prosecute, if either I regarde your selfe, or your present busines, I can not sort & single out a man more fit to whō the same may be offered. The matter is respectiue to trauell, and who in that course this day liuing is your superior?

And by reason of that peerelesnesse, who in the appurtenances, & circumstances thereof, can giue a sounder iudgment, or better censure? And as for the men of seruice that are at this instant to be imployed vnder your charge and gouernement what precepts are more conuenient for their negotiation and vse? So that although it may seeme a fault & error, that I (as yet vnknowen) haue in this sort pressed vpon your selfe: yet the loue I beare by duty to my coūtrie, the care I carrie (according to my standing) to further my countrimen, & the sincere affection (which abounds in me) towards your intended attempt (which the Lord of Hostes blesse and prosper) may iustly excuse me, and mooue you to accept this poore paynes. I confesse, that although my propension was alwaies to indeuor somthing for the inlargemēt of your name and honour, hauing so well deserued of this commonwealth, and of euery particular thereof, yet I was motioned to remē
               ber your self in the impressiō of this Method, by my very good and learned friend, M. Richard Hackluit, a man of incredible deuotion towarde your selfe, and of speciall carefulnesse for the good of our Nation: as the world inioying the benefit of some of his trauels can giue testimonie, & is possible to giue better, if that rare & excellent worke which he now plyeth, once come to publike view. In the mean time I record his diligence, and mine owne petition to the grand Captaine, and commander of all armies, which is feruent and incessant, for the happy egresse & victorious successe of the expedition present: that the issue thereof may be, his glorie, the propagation of the truth, the confusion of the enimie, the terror of Antichrist, the comfort of the Church, the honour of our Prince, the renowne of our kingdome, and the immortality of your owne name. London the 24. of Ianuarie, 1589.
            
               
                  At your deuotion and seruice, Philip Iones.
            
         
         
            
            Ad eundem clarissimum, & fortunatissimum Equitem, D. Franciscum Dracum, eiusdem Philippi Iones, de conscripto exercitu carmen conscendens.
            
               NVncage, victricis Ductor fortissime classis,
            Periuri tremor Hispani, tutela tuorum,
            Hactenus indute exuuias, Regísque superbi,
            Primitias, manibusque arrepte insignia belli:
            Hinc vltrà infandi circum scandenda Tyranni
            Moenia pressa iugo tollendáque colla cruento,
            Pulsus, & antiquas Rex restituendus ad oras.
            Non hoc humanis opibus, non arte Magistra,
            Proueniet factum, neque te tua dextera seruat,
            Maior agit Deus, atque opus ad mirabile mittit,
            Mittentíque cohors ipsi tua militet omnit,
            Militet & patriae, patriaeque parentis honori
            Elizabeth: faciles tum velis auguror Euros,
            Praesentemque Deum: cursum Deus atque recursum
            Tum dabit optatum, reducique extendet amoris
            Amplexus natale solum, Elizabetha triumphum:
            Nec nostrum intereà noctes sic stertere possit
            Ingenium, neque tam tranquilla silentia Musae,
            Ducere, quin vestra extemplò soluetur in arma,
            Resque tuas Epico cantabit carmine gestas.
            Perge igitur faelix, tua iustam tela ministrent
            Materiem scripti; & quamuis me fata volentem
            Dura vetant oculis tua cernere facta, relictis
            Insequar ipse tamen votis, pro teque, tuísque
            Vt benè qui victor de victis hostibus exis
            Bis benè post victor de victis vrbibus adsis.
         
         
            
            Ad P. I. huius opellae 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               T. H. Medicinae Doctoris Hexasticon.
            EXiguum precio, nummisque (Philippe) volumen,
            Imprimis, at fructu grandius illud erit.
            Instruit ad bellum veluti armatura paratos,
            Sic proficiscentes haec 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                tua.
            Et proficiscenti Comitem hunc commendo Libellum,
            Lautior esse potest, nescio an vtilior.
         
         
            Ad eundem M. B. Oxoniensis aliud Hexasticon.
            VIx satis ex multis nostrorum millibus vnus,
            Quaerenti quae sint trans mare Regna facit.
            Non populi ingenium, mores, Respublica, lingua,
            Religio in Cerebrum nec cadit ipsa suum.
            Qui cupit huic tandem communi occurrere morbo,
            Consilii capiat pharmaca recta tui.
         
         
            
            The general sections, or places of this discourse are in number twelue: to some one whereof, whatsoeuer particular thing shall be seene, learned, offered, obserued and described in any Region, may very fitly, and orderly be referred. Viz.
            
            
               1 
                     COsmographie, or, the description of the worlde.
               2 Astronomie, or, the art of skill, in the course of the starres and planets.
               3 Geographie, or, the drawing and proportioning of the earth.
               4 Chorographie, or, the demonstration of Cities and Regions.
               5 Topographie, or, the protraiture of particular places.
               6 Husbandrie.
               7 Nauigation.
               8 The Politicall State.
               9 The Ecclesiasticall State.
               10 Literature.
               11 Histories.
               12 Chronicles.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The first Section. Cosmographie, or the description of the worlde: wherein is to bee noted.
            
               1 THe longitude and latitude of the place, not Geometrically, but by the degrees.
               2 The declination of the pole, and of the loade-stone, from the pole of the worlde.
               3 The variation of the compasse, both of the Marriner, and sunne dials, from the Or South. Meridionall line.
               4 Vnder what Lines of equall distance in the spheare. Parallel the place is situated: whether vnder the Aequator, or betweene the A circle wherein the sunne makes the daies and nightes of equall length. Aequator and a Tropike, or vnder one of the Tropikes, or betwixt a Tropike, and the circle Or northerne Artike: or vnder the Artike or Or southerne opposite to the Artike.Antartike circle: or betwixt the Articke circle and the pole, or vnder the pole it selfe.
               5 Vnder what climate or portion of the firmament betwixt North and South.
               6 In what Whereof the Astronomers make 5. in the spheare. Zone, either temperate, or intemperate, cold, or burning.
               7 In what Hemisphere, or halfe spheare, septentrionall, or southerly.
               8 Whether the place be about vs, against vs, or vnder vs, as the Antipodes, which are people going with their feete to ours.
               9 The manner of the shadowes, or the proportion betwixt the diall and the shadowe.
               10 The quantitie of the day, and of the night.
               11 The least and greatest lights of the sommer So called of Solstitiam which signifieth the stay of the sunne whē it can go neither higher nor lower. Solstitiall nightes.
               12 The rising and the setting of the sunne in the Solstitiall dayes.
               13 The beginnings, and ending, of the morning and euening twylightes.
            
         
         
            
            The second Section. Astronomie, or the art of skill in the course of the starres, and planets, wherein is to be obserued.
            
               1 THe ascendant The part of the firmament that ariseth euery houre from the east. Horoscope.
               2 The Medium, or heart of the heauen.
               3 The Zenith, or Verticall starre, which is the point of the firmament directly ouer a mans head, wheresoeuer he standeth.
               4 The Topicall starre, or starre of the place.
               5 The starre Dominant, or the signe of the heauen, which is the degree, or planet wherunto the place is subiect.
            
         
         
            The third Section. Geographie, or the drawing and proportioning of the earth: wherein is to be marked.
            
               1 WHether the place be A midland. Mediterrane, or the part of a Continent.
               2 Whether it be an Istmus, or narrow part of a countrie, where two seas do almost meete.
               3 Whether it be a Penyle, and place almost inuironed with water.
               4 Whether it be an Iland, little, indifferent, great, or very great.
               5 Whether there be many Ilandes in number 30. as the Scottish Ilands called Orchades, 50. as the Cyclades in the sea Aegeum, or more, or lesse.
               6 Whether it be in forme As England and Sicillia. trianglewise, or round, or more in length then in bredth, or what other fourme it beareth.
               7 VVhether it be among many Ilandes the chiefe, or of least account.
               
                  8 Whether it be an Ilande lying neere the continent, or farre in the sea, and remote from the lande, and how much.
               9 Whether it be bordering vppon the dominion, or dominions of any other prince, or diuers princes.
               10 Whether it be the sea shore of a countrie, or a place vp in the maine land.
               11 Whether it be neere any riuer, arme of the sea, or the Ocean, and maine sea.
               12 Whether it bee neere to any gulfe, hauen, creeke, or bay.
               13 Whether it stand vppon a riuer, or at the mouth of a riuer.
               14 Whether it be by, neere to, farre off, or in the mids of the sands, shoales, rocks, quicke sands, or shelues in the water.
            
         
         
            The fourth section. Chorographie, or the demonstration of Regions, and Citties: wherein is to be regarded.
            
               1 WHether it be a cittie, towne, village, or what else.
               2 In what Region, Kingdome, Dukedome, Erledome, bishoprike, presidentship it standeth.
               3 Whether it be like in situation to other citties, townes, villages, houses, &c.
               4 Towards what parts of the earth it stretcheth.
               5 The length of the miles, & distāce from place to place.
               6 The coastes and borders, with what Regions, riuers, mountaines, or woods, it is compassed, bounded, or separated from other places.
               7 The bignesse of it, in comparison of other places: the length, bredth, compasse, and circuit thereof.
               8 Whether the place bee much, or little frequented, of trauellers and merchants, or else desolate, or almost desolate.
               
                  9 Whether it be of any name & fame, for power, welth, force, multitude of people or not.
               10 The diuision, parts, shires, prouinces, of the region.
               11 As London. The chiefe, or mother citie, or the place of the prince.
               12 As Canterbury & York. The Metropolitane citties, or cittie thereof.
               13 The markets, faires, places of resort, and traffike.
               14 The Colonies, or places where people are sent, and conducted to plant, and dwell.
               15 The Citties and townes corporate, incorporate, free, Receiuing wages as townes of garrisons. stipendarie, confederate.
               16 The prouinces gouerned by deputies, vizroyes, presidents, lieutenants, or other officers, with their number, names, and situation.
               17 The next bordering countries, and regions, of what nature, name, force, gouernement, and temperature.
               18 As Barwike vppon our borders.The townes of warre, frontiers, castles, and defenses vpon the borders, with their prouisions.
               19 Whether the accesse, ingresse, and comming thereto be quiet, safe, difficult, or dangerous.
               20 The publike wayes, streets, passages, ferries, and common trauellings, with the state & qualitie of them and each of them.
            
         
         
            The fift Section. Topographie, or the portraiture of particular places, wherein is to bee noted.
            
               1 WHether the cittie, towne, village, or what place else so euer it be, be built vpon the top, or side of a hill, or in a low ground.
               2 Whether in a wet & marrish ground, or in a plain, vally, mountaine, hill, or foote of a hill.
               3 Whether vpon a rocke, cape, or promontorie.
               4 Whether within the wals there bee any hils, or little

hils, or some places higher, and lower then others.
               5 The manner, forme, and figure of the cittie or towne.
               6 To what point, and from what point it stretcheth, and looketh, from North to South, or from East to West, or otherwise.
               7 The geometricall bignesse, bredth, length, and circuite thereof.
               8 The diuision, parts, parishes, and wards of the cittie.
               9 The ditch, or ditches that compasse it, how broad, and how deepe they be.
               10 The castels, trenches, rampires, bulwarks, sconces, forts, towres, blockhouses, and fortresses thereof.
               11 The entrances and gates, how large, long, brode, high, their names, number and standing, with their distance also.
               12 The wals, of what matter built, stone, or timber, of what compasse, height, or thicknesse, state and reparation, strong and faire, or ruinous.
               13 Whether the wals bee furnished with artilerie, ordinance, and watch, yea or no.
               14 The streets of the cittie, the length, bredth, and beautie of them, and how many of the citty are of greatest account, vse, and concourse, with their names.
               15 The pipes, wels, and conducts of water, how many, in what places, of what plentie and aboundance of water: wherehence it commeth, howe far it is fet, be whether by pypes of lead, or otherwise.
               16 The bridge, or bridges, with their length, making, buildings, and whether they are in the time of war to drawne, yea or no.
               17 The windmils, and watermils seruing the cittie.
               18 The generall buildings of the cittie, or countrie, their situation, greatnesse, maner, forme, shape, beauty, elegancie, ornaments, prospects, courts, entries, hals, parlers, chambers, nurseries, kitchins, cellers, barnes, stables, priuate wels, and conduits, and other Pertaining to the order and gouernement of a house. oeconomicall necessaries.
               19 Publike houses: as Market places, shambles, almes-houses, hospitals, storehouses, theaters, laborinths,

hals of Companies, guildhals, burses, or places for the meeting of merchants, places of iustice, iudgment, punishment, correction, execution, signes of speciall vse, pillars, rases, spyres, crosses, & other such like common ornaments.
               20 The buildings of colleges, libraries, schooles, and vniuersities, with their forme, beautie, statelines, contriuings, number, and situation.
               21 Temples, churches, cathedrall churches, with their names, bignes, and furniture: as pictures, images, (if any) altars, Idolatries, organs, dials, clocks, bels, chimes, towers, steeples, &c.
               22 Monasteries, abbies, pryories, nunneries, oratories, chappels, &c.
               23 Courts of the law, common and ciuill, as Consistories.
               24 Armories of the Prince, subiects, noble men, speciall Citties and townes.
               25 The chiefest houses, and dwelling places of nobilitie, bishops, and gentlemen.
               26 The houses & pallaces of the Prince: with their names, beutie, matter, and manner of building, situation, offices, gardens, orchards, walkes, tilts, parks, ponds, speciall roomes, and other royall commodities, and appurtenances.
            
         
         
            The sixt Section. Husbandrie: wherein is to be obserued.
            
               1 THe vsuall natures and times of the spring, summer, Autumne, and winter, in that region.
               2 The winds proper, and peculiar to that place.
               3 The chiefest places, and dwellings of health, free and

safe, from vnholsome aires, and ill winds.
               4 The qualitie of the aire in generall, with the temperature, commoditie, and salubritie.
               5 Whether the people liue long, and come commonly to good ages, or else die in their youth, or riper yeres yea or no.
               6 The beautie, plesantnesse, fertilitie, barrennesse, of the region, soile, grounds, fields, &c.
               7 VVhether the land be plaine, hilly, rough, vneuen, ful, or scant, or reasonablie furnished with woods, waters, and riuers.
               8 The qualitie and nature of the ground, whether it bee moist, drie, moorish, fennie, clayish, myerie, cloddie, sandie, grauelly, stonie, and plentifull or scarse of necessary stone for building, cole pits, &c.
               9 The tillage, and manuring of the soile, and fields, how much it is, after what sort they labour and till them, what graine or graines they sow, and how it yeeldeth.
               10 The naturall goodnes of the soile, the haruest and increase of all sorts of fruits.
               11 The quantitie of grasse and hay, that the meddowes commonly yeeld.
               12 The gardens, sorts of herbs, flowers, arbors, knots, mounts, and places of delight.
               13 The Orchards, sorts of trees, apples, peares, plumbs, berries, spices, oringes, limmons, figs, and other fruits, with their quantities and increase.
               14 The medicinable herbes, and Apothecarie drugs.
               15 The vines, vineyards, and sorts of wine, and drinkes.
               16 The woods, what kind of trees bee most frequent and abundant, whether like or vnlike to the trees of other countries in nature, growth, and height.
               17 Whether the woods yeeld trees to mast shippes, yea or no, and what ships of burden they may serue.
               18 The hils with their names, number▪ greatnes, distance, situation, height, nature and forme: whether hauing any standing waters on the tops, any springs in their sides, any mettals in the bowels of them▪
                  
whether inhabited, or desolate, and frequented of wilde beasts: whether apt for the pastime of hunting: whether holow, with caues and dens, yea or no: and all other prodigious, and memorable thinges of them, that are knowne, and visible.
               19 Standing waters, pooles, lakes, ponds, riuers, ditches, boggs, and qua
                     •
                  emires.
               20 The springs and heads of riuers, with their fish: which way they runne: what other riuers or seas they fal into: what townes, citties, and villages they run by: of what bredth and depth: where nauigable, and where not, and how farre.
               21 How manie bridges they runne thorough, what, and howe manie milles they driue, what speciall vses they serue to, in those places, citties and townes, by which they runne: what varietie, abundance, or scarsitie of fish is in them, and how far vp they do ebb and flow.
               22 The qualitie of the water, whether sweete, salt, bitter, brackish, cleere, wholsome, running by any mines or mettals, yea or no.
               23 Bathes of whot water, the number, originall, cause, qualitie, force, and operation of them.
               24 Salines, or places of making of salt, the cause, number, kinds, and manner of preparing them.
               25 Minerals, mines, quarries of mettal, their kinds, multitude, place, and increase.
               26 Pretious stones, as pearles, diamonds, rubies, saphires, corals, and turkyes: whether these or any of these grow there yea or no.
               27 Birds & foules, their names, bignes, qualities, course, increase, and multitude.
               28 Fishes both of sea, and fresh riuers, with their kindes and abundance.
               29 Noisome and hurtfull beasts, as serpents, Adders, vipers, basiliskes, wolues, tygers, beares, and others of wild natures, with the woods & places of their breed and haunte.
               30 Poysons, with the remedies, and preseruatiues against

them there knowne, and vsed.
               31 Parks, cunnigers, berries, warrens, their largenesse, fruitfulnesse, game, situation, pleasantnesse, and to whom they belong.
               32 Flocks, and heards of sheepe, kine, oxen, swine, goats, with their common grounds, and medowes of pasture.
               33 All other commodities of the place that are knowne, either agreeing, or not agreeing with other countries and regions, and whatsoeuer else that place hath, strange, new, notable, and commodious.
            
         
         
            The seuenth Section. Nauigation: wherein it is to be obserued.
            
               1 THe widnesse, and greatnes, of the seas or riuers you passe.
               2 The depth, whether nauigable yea, or no, and for what ships of burden.
               3 The state and quality of the water, whether salt, cleere, thicke, and troubled.
               4 The colour, whether greene or Azure, &c.
               5 The sand, colour, and quantitie thereof.
               6 The shallowes, fords, and places of least depth.
               7 The quicke sands and dangerous places of sande, and grauell, how many, after what sort they lie, & how they may be auoyded.
               8 The hidden rockes of the sea that are knowne, their place and danger.
               9 The narrow & difficult passages, like vnto those rocks called Scyronia, betweene Attica, and Megaris, or the Symplegades in the Greekish sea.
               
                  10 Streights, & narrow seas, as Gibaltar, and the straights of Magellan.
               11 Famous and high rocks, vsed for notes and markes to the marriners.
               12 Places of toule, and custome, as the sounde of Denmarke.
               13 Promontories, capes, and heads of landes, with their names, and cause or originall of such names.
               14 Wracks on the sea, drownings of men, shippes, goods, with the value, time, cause, and occasion of the wracks.
               15 Commodious creekes, bayes, harbors, and docks.
               16 Ports, and hauens, their largenesse, narrownesse, and depth: what townes, and citties they serue to: what winds are commodious to arriue at them: whether it be an open hauen, or barred, and fortified, and how strong by nature, or art, with garrisons, castles, artillerie, &c.
               17 What store of shipping lie ordinarily in the hauen, and frequent the same most vsually.
               18 The safest, and most commodious rodes for riding, and anchoring of ships.
               19 The landing places, staires, wharfes, seruing to the sea, and hauen.
               20 The common passages, by botes, whirries, ferries, and the bredth, and depth of them.
               21 Swift streames, whirlepooles, gulphes, and ouerfals of water.
               22 The rising, and swelling of the water, the ebbing and flowing of the tides, the times, quantitie, and manner.
               23 The shipping of the place, of what number, bignesse, force, burden, manner of making, qualitie, and swiftnesse for sailing.
               24 Whether the people, and nation hath made or doo intende any long voyages, or discoueries: to what places, and what number of shippes and men they carrie, and what commodities are brought from such places.
               
                  25 The nauie of the king or prince; his ships, their names, number, burden, strength, artillerie, and imployment.
               26 The multitude or scarsitie, of Pylots, Shipwrightes, Shipmasters, Marriners, and others skilfull in marine causes.
               27 What men of skill in the art of nauigation, and composition of sea cardes, and other instrumentes are there famous.
               28 What course and order they take, for the making and breeding of skilfull and expert Pylots, and marriners.
               29 What Officers & persons of name belong to the princes Nauie; as the Admirall, Viceadmirall, Treasurer, Captaines, &c. and other men of principall charge, with their knowledge, diligence, and stipendes.
               30 What number of ships euerie citie, port towne and hauen is able to make, and of what burden and force either for warre, or marchandize.
            
         
         
            The eight Section. The politicall state, wherein is to be marked.
            
               1 THe forme of gouernment, whether it be a Monarchie, that is the Soueraintie of one person alone, as in England, France, Spaine, Scotland, &c. or an Aristocratie, that is, the gouernement of the better sort, as of old in Athens and Lacedemon, and nowe in Venice, and Genes: or a Democrati
                     •
                  , that is, a popular Regiment, as among the Cantons of Zwitzerland: or whether their contraries be in vse, as eyther a tyranny, as that of the great Turke, or an Oligarchie, which is, the authoritie of a few noble

or rich men, or an Octogarchie, which is a tumultuous, and disordered confusion, swaying without reason & law: or whether the gouernment & common wealth be mixt, & compounded of the first 3. and so made both Royal, Aristocraticall & popular as in old in Rome and Carthage, and is now also somewhat represented in the state of Venice.
               2 Whether the kingdome be electiue, as of old the dictatorship of Rome, and in these daies the Empire, the kingdoms of Polonia, Bohemia, Hungaria, Thunes Denmark, the dukedome of Venice, the popedom & the great Mastership of Malta, or else successiue, and hereditarie, as in England, France, &c.
               3 What manner of lawe the place is gouerned by, ciuill or common: and whether the lawes are made and corrected, according to the condition, and circumstance of times, (as our statutes of parlament) or such as may not be changed, as the Salike lawe in France, and the lawes of the Crowne in England.
               4 How the cities and townes are gouerned, by what officers▪ of what names, state, number, continuance in office, and manner of election.
               5 The multitude of the people, wherein consisteth much of the strength of the Realme.
               6 The speech, and language of the countrie, with the maner of pronunciation, and the rules thereof.
               7 Proper names of men and women, differing from those that are common in other places.
               8 The fare and dyet of the region, their manner and kinds of meate, drinke, ale, beare, with the order of making and dressing peculiar to that people.
               9 The habites and apparell of men, women, wiues, maydens, citizens, countrimen, Courtyers, noblemen, officers, Magistrates, Gentlemen, Marchants, Ministers, &c.
               10 The wits, and conceits of the people, whether quicke, and sharpe, or blunt and heauie.
               
                  11 The industrie, studies, manners, honestie, humanitie, hospitalitie, loue, and other morall vertues of the Inhabitantes, and wherein they chiefely exce
                     ••
                  .
               12 The speciall manuarie artificers, and handicraftes of the place of greatest perfection.
               13 The annuall fayres and markets, where they are kept, and howe often, and what commodities do there principally abound, with the prises of each good commoditie.
               14 The money and coyne, with the value, bignes, stampe, and mettall, eyther gold, siluer, or copper.
               15 The waightes and measures, both in drie wares, and liquid matters, with their names: whether yardes, el
                     •
                  es, quartes, gallons, bushels, quarters, hundreds, &c. and whether they be lesse or greater than ours, or of the same quantitie.
               16 What offences are there most common, and most punished, or tolerated.
               17 The kindes and varieties of punishmentes for malefactors.
               18 The prerogatiues and priuileges of speciall cities, townes, portes, and hauens.
               19 The subsidies, toules, impostes, customes, due, and payd to the prince.
               20 The disposition and spirit of the people: whether war-like and valiant, or faint hearted and effeminate: their store or want of militarie furniture, and prouisions: whether they, or their Ancestors haue beene famous for victories, or infamous for cowardlinesse and ouerthrowes, yea or no.
               21 How the king or prince is allyed with his neighbour Princes, and who are his confederates, and who not.
               22 The manners, rites, and ceremonies of Espowsals, marriages, feastes and bankets.
               23 The varietie and manner of their exercises for pastime and recreation.
               
                  24 The rites, solemnities, and pompes, of common and noble funerals and burials.
            
         
         
            The ninth Section. The state Ecclesiasticall, wherein is to be respected.
            
               1 THe religion, whether true, and reformed, or the Romish and superstitious.
               2 The preaching, prayers, and other holy exercises, in what language, how often, and with what deuotion they be vsed.
               3 The discipline and church gouernment, whether good, reasonable, or corrupt.
               4 The superstitions, and poperies in what sort, and degree, whether it be mayne Idolatrie, and abhominable yea or no.
               5 The holy dayes and festiuall times there obserued.
               6 The Ceremonies vsed or left in the ministerie and Sacraments.
               7 The doctrine, articles, opinions, held and taught agreeable or contrarie to other Churches.
               8 The greatnesse or smalnesse of auditories, assemblies, and concurse to sermons.
               9 The Ministers, Diuines, Preachers, and Clergie men, of greatest paines, account, learning, iudgement, languages, tongues, and vertuous liues, with their names degrees, charges, offices, and dwelling places.
               10 The times of publike fasting, almes giuing, of going on pilgrimage, if the place be superstitious.
               11 The Archbishops, and Bishoppes, with their sees and Churches, and Diocesses: Deanes, Abbats, Priors, Moonkes, Priestes, and other orders, with their names, stipends, offices, reuenues, & hospitalities.
               
                  12 The Heretikes if any spring vp, with their names and errors, absurdities, false opinions, and punishmēts for the same.
               13 The stipendes of Preachers, Pastors, Ministers, howe large, how small, and how collected in tythes or otherwise.
               14 The number of Churches, and congregations in euerie citie and towne, whereby the populousnes may be knowen.
               15 The speciall benefactors to the ministerie, with their liberalities, gifts, pencions, exhibitions, and other Christian workes, the fruits of faith.
               16 The greatest, famous, and most ordinarie preaching places.
               17 The number of godly preachers, and ministers in the greatest cities.
            
         
         
            The tenth Section. Literature wherein is to be noted.
            
               1 THe Charecters, and letters of the Alphabet, in that place, both printed and written: whether different or not from the forme and fashion of letters vsed among other nations.
               2 The facultie of imprinting, of what estimation, of what exactnes, and perfection: the number of Printers and Stationers, the names of the men of greatest learning and diligence in that qualitie.
               3 The common, or priuate libraries of any account, with the most auncient, and rare bookes there preserued.
               4 The monumentes and antiquities of famous and learned men.
               5 The names, places, and times of birth, education, and

death of such men as haue beene most renowmed for vertue, knowledge, learning and iudgement, of that nation.
               6 Ancient Epitaphs, and inscriptions, cut, grauen, carued, or painted vpon tombes, pil
                     •
                  ers, gates, Churches, and other buildings.
               7 Ancient coynes, as those of the Romanes, or others, with their stampe, signe, posies, and sentences.
               8 Ancient or late monuments, churches, tombs, pictures, pillers, and dyals, of rare and exquisite workmanship, with the workemen and authors, at whose charge they were erected.
               9 Ingenious epigrams, sonets, epitaphs, orations, poems, speeches, verses, adages, prouerbs, and other scholasticall and learned exercises, the fruits of good wits.
               10 Musicall instrumentes publike and priuate, with their inuentions, varieties, names sweetenesse of harmonie, and first authors.
               11 Instruments of speciall art, and vse in Geometrie, Astronomie, the Mathematikes, and handicraftes.
               12 Excellent, and rare artificers, in artes and faculties, as ingrauers, painters, builders, lapidaries, guilders, &c.
               13 Vniuersities, with their manner of gouernment, number of Colleges, multitude of studentes, commodities, situation, antiquitie, and priuileges.
               14 The manner and kindes of studies, in the liberall artes.
               15 Their publike and priuate lectures, discipline, wits, degrees, rewardes, and preferments.
               16 Publike schooles, schoolemasters, teachers, readers, lecturers, professors, gouernors of Colleges, with their names, stipends, diligence in gouernement, and othe
                     •
                   good partes.
               17 Men of speciall learning at this time, in Diuinitie, Philosophie, Arithmetike, Geometrie, Astronomie, Astrologie, Musicke, Poetrie, Grammer,

Hebrew, Greeke, Rhethorike, lawe, phisicke, and histories.
               18 Antiquaries, that is men excellently seene in antiquities and ancient monuments, both of the Church, and kingdome.
            
         
         
            The eleuenth Section. Histories: wherein is to be searched.
            
               1 THe Antiquitie, and originall of the cittie, towne, and kingdome, when it was first erected, first built, with the parts, portions, and chiefest places thereof.
               2 The conuersion of the nation to christianitie, when, how, and by whom.
               3 The first builders, and founders of citties, townes, churches, palaces, and other publike and notable edifices.
               4 The ancient names & appellations of the kingdome, cittie, people &c. with the etimologie, reason and cause of such names.
               5 The armes of the kingdome, prince, noble men, and chiefe citties, with the signification thereof.
               6 The first inhabitants of the Region, wherehence they came, when, and by what meanes.
               7 The most ancient families, and houses of noble men, and Gentlemen.
               8 The fortitude, magnanimitie, behauiour, discipline, disposition, welth, and fame of the ancient nobilitie.
               9 The affinities old and late, alliances, and intermariages of honorable personages & families, at home or abrode.
               10 The wars of their ancesters, and what acts and exploits worthie of honor, and remembrance haue beene done by them.
               
                  11 The Prince now liuing, his counsell, what they are, how many, how descended, their personages, education, experience, wisedome, liberalitie, and other honorable vertues.
               12 The royall line of the Prince, his progenitors, grandfather, father, their vertues, his correspondence, and princely partes in all respectes.
               13 The chiefest men of pollicie, and good gouernement, both in court and citie, for peace, warre, and all occurrences.
            
         
         
            The twelfth Section. Chronicles, wherein is to be learned.
            
               1 THe wars of that natiō both of old, & of late, whē they were, where, against whom, and with what successe, of victorie, or dishonor, waged, and helde.
               2 The diuersitie of seditions, rebellions, conspiracies, insurrections, and tumultes that haue risen in that countrie: with their pacifications, and conclusions of peace, for what time, and vpon what occasion.
               3 The strange and memorable euents, that haue happened in, and vpon the actions of great & noble mē.
               4 The birthes of monsters, where, when, of what parents, with the consequences thereof.
               5 Prodigious signes, and apparitions in the ayre.
               6 Comets, blasing starres, great and extraordinarie eclypses, and what they wrought.
               7 Great frosts, deepe snowes, thicke and monstrous yse, colde winters, with the dangers and inconueniences of each of them.
               8 Hot, and burning sommers, with the discommodities there hence arising.
               9 Lightnings and thunders, howe terrible, strange, and

perillous, and how common in those places.
               10 Mischiefes, losses, and detriments by accidents of fire in citties, townes, villages, and houses.
               11 The stormes and tempests that haue bin horrible, outragious, and fearefull, with their effects.
               12 Inundations, deluges, ouerflowings, breakings in of the sea, where, when, by what chance, occasion, or negligence, and how much ground haue ben lost, and harmes done by that meanes.
               13 Earthquakes, and their consequences.
               14 Dearthes, famines, and extremities for want of corne and graine, how long the scarsitie indured, when it ended, and how it was remedied.
               15 Sicknesses, and pestilences, that haue happened in any countrie, cittie, or towne: the beginning & cause of them, their continuance, end, and mortalitie of the people.
               16 Notable pyracies, and pyrates, with the indemnities, and losses, receiued by trauellers, and merchants.
               17 Egregious theeueries, and robberies, with the iudgement of God and the law vpon such persons.
               18 Infamous conspirators, & traitors, with their names, treasons, and executions.
               19 The horrible and iust ends of malefactors.
               20 Sudden deathes of great personages.
               21 Messages, intreaties, gratulations, and condolements sent to forren Princes.
               22 The arriuals, feastings, lodgings, and other royall intertainements of Ambassadors, with the time of their abode, cause of comming, and dispatch of businesse.
               23 The occasions of ia
                     •
                  res, and discontentments betwixt the Prince, and other Potentates,
               24 The perpetuall care of the Prince to withstand all the pollicies, inuentions, inuasions, violences, hostilities and indignities of other Princes, his or her enimies, and to preserue the realme, and people in peace, tranquillitie, securitie, and prosperitie.
            
         
         
            
            The opinion of Abrahamus Ortelius, the notable Geographer, concerning the vse of notes and obseruations in trauell, written by himselfe in his Itinerarium Belgiae.
            
            
               PEregrinationes nostrae futurae nobis erunt longè gratiores, si vnà cum itineribus animaduertamus, & annotemus in chartis, si quid obseruatione dignum occurrerit, non quod speremus posse a nobis ex locis visis annotari quod non omnibus est iam notum, sed quidlibet potius commentari, quàm in toto itinere esse otiosi: tum quòd hac ratione, quae semèl vidimus, securius memoriae mandentur, & cum Regiones illas cessaueremus perlustrare, iuuabit easdem quotiescúnque libuer
                     •
                  t nobiscum Domi, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   adeo sine itineris molestia recognoscere.
            
            In English thus.
            IF in our peregrinations and trauels, we shal obserue and note in our tables, or papers those things which doo occurre and seeme worthie of regard, we shall make our iournies and voyages in great measure, pleasant and delectable vnto vs: not thinking that our diligence can search & mark any thing in any place, which other men before vs haue not seene, but to discourse and recorde any thing, rather then to passe the way, and spend the 
                  •
               ime in idlenesse: and with all by this meanes, this commoditie is reaped, that whatsoeuer the eye seeth, is the easier and the better remembred, if it be once written. And when the time commeth, that we make an ende of our trauels, and personall view of forren parts, it will bee a singular pleasure vnto vs, whensoeuer we are so disposed to recognize, and recount those things which we haue seene, quietlie & in our chambers, without any trouble of iournie, or toile of bodie.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   