
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The worke of
Pomponius Mela. The Cosmographer, concerninge
the Situation of the world,
wherin euery parte, is deuided by it selfe in most
perfect manner, as appeareth in the
Table at the ende of the booke. A booke right plesant and profitable
for all sortes of men: but speciallie
for Gentlemen, Marchants, Mariners,
and Trauellers, translated
out of Latine
By
Arthur Golding Gentleman.
            
            
               AT LONDON,
Printed for Thomas Hacket, and
are to be sold at his shop in Lumbert streete, vnthe
signe of the Popes head.
1585.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the right Honourable,
Syr William Cicill, of the
Noble order of the Garter, Knight,
Barron of Burgley, Lord high Treasurer of
England, and one of her Maiestyes most
honourable pri
                  ••
               e Counsell, health,
honour and prosperitie.
            
               INtending long since
(my very good Lord) for the
benefit and delight of my Countrimen,
to haue set foorth a
description of the whole world
in our owne Language, according
to the consent of the auncient
and late VVriters, I
thought this mine Author Pomponius Mela, for hys
breefenesse, order, and perspicuitie, to bee a very fitte
ground to begin with, for those three partes which were
knowen in former ages: purposing, therewithall to haue
added some breefe collection of the late wryters, concerning
the description of the other partes, which beeing eyther
vtterly vnknowen, or very lyghtly and darckly glaunced
at by the men of auncient tyme, haue since beene
better discouered and brought to light, by the continuall
Nauigationes of the trauellers of these our latter yeeres.
And as my meaning and hope was then, to haue made
this first enterpryse of myn
                  •
               e as a frame of a buyldinge, to
haue beene set vp and finy shed by mee more exactly, afterward

at further leysure, accordinge to the small ability of
my poore skyll; or as a roughe hewen Image, to haue beene
perfected and polyshed by the industry of some other person
of greater readyng, better skyll, and longer experience,
and finally to haue beene beautifyed and furnished wyth
more particular and large discourses, bothe of the places
and of the notablest thinges whych eyther the places
themselues doo naturally yeelde, or haue beene doon or
made in them by the famousest personages, whome the
wrytinges of our auncestors haue made renowmed vnto
vs: So least this worke of myne (which hath slept now many
yeeres) might passe away as it were in a Lethargy, wherby
I of the performaunce, and my Conntry of the enioying
of any fruite of my duety in this behalfe, myght be vtterly
bereft, and so consequently my sayd purpose and the trauell
taken to the setting forward thereof, should bee of
none effect at all: I haue caused the Printer to put to hys
helping hand to the preuenting of that perrill, whych
thinge wyl easely be doon, if it may please your good Lordshippe
(according to your accustomed good wyll towardes
such as any way indeuour, eyther to further others or
to profit themselues, in the knowledge of lyberall Artes)
to permitte thys my trauell to shroude it selfe vnder
the shadowe of your protectyon, that beeing by your 
                  ••
               
               uour
after a sort quickned and cheered vp againe, it may
if not growe in tyme to full rypenesse, yet at leastwyse
yeeld the pleasure of the infancy, the delight wherof,
may chaunce to bee such as shall prouoke some person, 
                  •
               yther
to traine it vp to full grouth, or to vndertake the dooing
of some better worke of the same kynde. And for the
more inlarging hereof with substaūce and variety of matter,

both delectable and profitable, as farre as tyme would
permytte: I haue delyuered vnto the Printer hereof the
Polyhistor of Iulius Solinus, and certayne trauelles of
one Andrew Theuet, lykewyse translated long a goe to
bee added as appendauntes to thys worke of Pomponius
Mela, that as they treate though diue
                  •
               sly, yet cheefely of
one ground, so they may ioyne in one volume to remayne
together to the behofe of posterity, vnder the security of
your Lordshyps fauour, vnto the whych I most humbly
commend my selfe, and these my simple dooinges,
            
               wrytten thys sixt of February. 1584.
               
               Your good Lordships, most humble alwayes to commaund. Arthur Goldinge.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The fyrst Booke of
that worthy Cosmographer, Pomponius
Mela, of the scituation of the world.
            His Preface.
            
               
                  I Go about to intreat
of the scituation of the World,
a combersome worke, & which
in no wise admitteth eloquēce.
For in a manner, it consisteth
wholie of the names of Nations
and places, and of the order
of them, which is somewhat
troublesome, a matter more
tedious than handsome to bring to passe: howbeit right
woorthy to be séene and knowne, as that (not for the wittie
handling thereof by the writer, but in respect of it
selfe,) may sufficientlie recompence the labour of such as
take heede to it. An other time I will speake of mo things,
and more exactlie. As for now, I will meddle but with the
notablest thinges, and that bréeflie. And first, I will shewe
the platte of the world, which be the greatest partes therof,
how eche one of them lie to other, and howe they are inhabited.
Then will I peruse the outermost of them all againe,
and set out the Sea coasts according as they be, both
within and without, and according as the Sea shooteth into
them, or beateth about them: with an addition of such
thinges as are woorthie remembraunce, in the natures of
the Countries, and the inhabiters of them. And to the intent

this thing may the easilier be conceiued and borne away,
the summe of the whole shall be repeated somewhat
déepelie.
            
               
                  ❧ The deuision of the world
into fowre partes.
               The first Chapter.
               
                  
                     ALI this therefore whatsoeuer
it be, which we terme by the
name of Heauen and Earth, is
one: and in one compasse comprehendeth
it selfe and all other
things, & differeth but in parts.
From whence the sunne riseth,
is called the East: where it setteth,
is called the West: his
race betwéen them, is called the
South: and the quarter ouer against that, is called the
North. In the middes héer of the Earth rising in height, is
enuironed round about with the Sea, and being cut from
the East to the West, into two sides, which are named
halfe Spheres, it is distinguished with fiue Zones. Wherof
the middlemost is combred with heate, the two vttermost
with cold, & the other two being habitable, haue like
seasons of the yéere, but not both at one time. The Antycthones
inhabite the one halfe Sphere, & we the other. For
as much as the plat of the other is vnknowne, by reason of
the heate of the Zone, which is betwéene them and vs: we
must entreate of the scituation of ours.
               This therefore stretching from the East to the West,
and (because it lyeth so) being somewhat more in lenght,
than in breadth, where it is broadest: is enclosed wholie
with the Occean, from whence it receiueth foure seas: one

at the North, two at the South, & the 
                     •
                  ourth at the West.
The other thrée shalbe mencioned in their places.The mydland Sea, entring out of the West Occean, at the Streightes of Marocke. This being
narrowe, and not aboue ten myles ouer, openeth the
maine Landes, and entreth into them: where spreading
farre and wide, he driueth the shores a great way asunder,
and maketh them giue roome: the which on both sides
growing almost together againe, doo bring him to such a
streight, as he is not full a myle ouer: From thence,
howbeit verie leysurelie he wideneth himselfe againe, and
anon after, wresteth thorowe a narrower gappe than he
went before. And when he hath passed that, he wexeth
eftsoones great and huge againe, and with a narrow mouth
entreth into a poole which commeth against him, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
either side of him, beareth the name of our Sea into
it. All this is called the maine
                     •
                   Sea.
               The gappes and enteraunce of the Sea where it commeth
in, we call Streights, and the Gréekes call it Porthmos.
Where it floweth in widenesse, it taketh diuers syrnames,
according to the places it beateth vpon. Where it
first becommeth narrow, it is calledNow called S. Georges arme. 
                  Hellespont. Where
it wideneth againe, it is calledThe Sea of Constantinople. 
                  Propontis. Where it
streightneth againe, it is called theThe Streight of Cōstātinople. 
                  Bosphor of Thrace.
Where it spreadeth out againe, it is calledThe great Sea. 
                  Pontus Euxinus.
Where it medleth with the Lake, it is called the
The Streight of Caffa. 
                  Bosphor of Cimmeria, and the Lake it selfe is called
The Sea of Zabacca. 
                  Maeotis. With this Sea, and with two noble Riuers,
Nowe called Don. 
                  Tainas and 
                     
                        •
                     ilus, is the whole Earth deuided into thrée
partes.
               
                  Tanais procéeding from the North into the South, falleth
well néere into the mids of Maeotis: and right against
him falleth Nilus into the Sea. Whatsoeuer Land lyeth
from the Streightes to these Riuers, on the one side we
call Affricke, and on the other side Europe. That is to say,
from the Streightes to Nilus, Affricke: and from the saide
Streightes to Tanais, Europe. Whatsoeuer is beyonde,
is Asia.
               
            
            
               
               A breefe description of Asia.
               The second Chapter.
               
                  
                     ON three sides it is bounded with the
Occean, which beareth diuers names according
to their Coastes: At the sunne rysing,
with the east Occean, on the south
with the Indish, and on the North with the
Scithish. The Countrie of Asia it selfe, facing the East
with a large and continuall front, dooth there spreade as
much in widenesse, as is the breadth of Europe & Affricke,
and the Sea that is let in betwéene them both. After it
hath procéeded from thence, kéeping his full bredth, it receiueth
out of the saide Indish Occean, the Arabian and Persian
Sea, and out of the Scithish Occean, the Caspian Sea:
and therefore where it receiueth those Seas, it is somewhat
narrowed, but by and by it wideneth againe, and becommeth
as broade as it was before. Lastlie, when it is
come to his owne end, and to the marches of other Lands,
the middle part of it butteth vpon our Seas, and the rest
of it, runneth on the one side vp by Nilus, and on the other
side byNowe called Don. 
                  Tanais. The vttermost boundes thereof, come
downe with the channel of Nilus, along the riuers side into
the Sea, & a great while together keepeth chéeke by chéeke
with it, as the shore goeth. Then steppeth he foorth to
meete the Sea as it commeth against him, and there first
bendeth himselfe with a great bought. Afterward he beareth
himselfe foreward with a huge front, to the streight of
Hellespont. From thence againe he bendeth askew to
theOf Thrace. 
                  Bosphor, and bowing likewise by the side of Pontus,
turneth backe, with an elbowe to the enteraunce of Maeotis:
and thencefoorth imbracing the Lake, as it were in a
bosome, euen vnto Tanais, he becommeth the banke of Tanais,
euen to the head of it.
               
                  We vnderstand that the first men in Asia Eastward,The fu
                        •
                     thest people of Asia Eastward.
are the Indians, Seres, and Scithians. The Seres inhabite
almost the middle part of the East,The Setes. the Indians and Scithians,
                  The Indians and Scithians.
the two vttermost partes: both peoples extending
farre and wide, and not onelie toward the East Occean.
For the Indians stretch also into the South,The s
                        ••
                     tuation India. and with sundrie
Nations of their owne, one by an other, possesse all the
Sea coast of the Indishe Occean, sauing where the heate
maketh it vnhabitable.The scituation of Scit
                        ••
                     ia. And the Scithians likewise extende
into the North, and to the Scithish Occean, (sauing
where they be kept of with colde) euen vnto the Caspian
gulfe.
               Next vnto India is A
                        ••
                     ane,
                  The description of the South Countries of Asia. and Gedrosis, and Persis,
euen vnto the gulfe of Persia, this gulfe is enuironed with
the people of Persis, and the other with the people of Arabia.
All that is from Arabia vnto Affricke, belongeth vnto
the Ethiopians.
                  The North coast of Asia. On the other side are the Caspians,
next neighbours to the Scithians, beyonde whome are the
Amazones, and out beyonde them are the Hyperboreans.
The mid land Countrie,The myddle Countries of Asia. is inhabited by many and diuers
Nations: as the Gaudars, and Paricans, the Bactrians, and
Susians, the Pharmacotrophies, the Bomarins, the Coamans,
the Rophans, and the Dahans. Upon the Scithians,
and the Desartes of Scithia, and vpon the Caspian gulfe,
are the Comars, the Massagets, the Cadusians, the Hyrcanians,
and the Hyberians. Upon the Amazons and Hyperboreans,
lye the Cimmerians, the Scithians, the Eniochians,
the Georgians, theNow called Moscouites. 
                  Mosches, the Corsites, the Phoristes,
the Ryphakes, and where the Countrie passeth along
vnto our Seas, the Mardes, the Antibaraeans: and
from thence somewhat better knowne names, the Medes,
the Armenians, the Comagenes, the Murrans, the Vegets,
the Cappadocians, the Galgreekes, the Lycaonians, the
Phrygians, the Pysidians, the Isaurians, the Lydians, and
the Syrocilicians. Againe, of those that lye Southward,
That is to say, Syrians. Nations of one selfe sam
                     •
                   name, inhabite the innermost
coastes vnto the gulfe of Persia. Uppon this gulfe lye the

                  Parthians and Assyrians, and vpon the otherOf Arabia. gulfe lye the
Babylonians. Under Ethyope, the Egyptians possesse all
the coast,The Countries of Asia, lying vpon our mydland Sea. along the bankes of Nilus, the riuer of Egipt vnto
the Sea. Then stretcheth Arabia, with a narowe front,
to the next Seacoast. From Arabia, vnto the bought that
we spake of before, lyeth Syr
                        •
                     a, and in the verie bought itselfe,
lyeth Silicia: and without the bought lye Lycia and
Pamphilia, Caria, Ionia, Aeolis, and Troas, vnto Hellespont.
From thence to the Bosphor of Thrace, is Bithinia.
About Pontus, lye certaine Nations with seuerall bounds,
called all by one name, Pontians. Upon the Lake of Maeotis,
border the Maeotians, and vpon Tana
                        •
                     s theOtherwise called Sarmatians. 
                  Sauromates.
               
            
            
               A breefe description of
Europe.
               The third Chapter.
               
                  
                     EVrope is bounded on the East, with
                   T
                     •
                  
                  nais,
and Maeotis, and Pontus; on the South,
with the rest of our Sea, on the West with
the Athlantish Occean, and on the North
with the British Occean. The Easterne
coast thereof, from Tanais to Hellespont, and all along the
banke of the saide Riuer, and where it gathereth the bowing
of the Lake to the Bosphor, and where it lyeth with
his side against Pontus, Propontis, and Hellespont: is not
onelie scituate directlie ouer against Asia, but also is lyke
vnto it in fashion of shores.
               Betwéene that and the Streightes, sometime shrinking
a great way backe,Of Marocke. and sometime shooting forward againe,
it maketh thrée verie great Bayes, and with as manie
great frontes aduaunceth it selfe into the déepe. Without
the Streightes Westwarde, it is verie
                     •
                  vneuen, speciallie

in the middes: but where it runneth by North, if lyeth almost
as streight out, as if it were drawne by a lyne, sauing
onelie in one or two places, where it retyreth a great waie
in.The names of the midland sea. The Sea which it receiueth, in the first Baie, is called
Aegaean: that which followeth in the next, is in the mouth
of it called Ionishe, and innermore, Adriatishe: that
which is receyued in the last Baye, we call Tuscan, and
the Greekes Tyrrhene. Of Nations, the first is Scithia,
(an other Countrie that we spake of before) extending
from Tanais,
                  Scithia in Europe nowe containing Moscouia, Latuania, Polonia, Russia, &c. Macedonia and Thrace. well neere to the one halfe of the side of Pontus.
From hence into a part of the Aegaean coast, lyeth
ioyntlie the maine lande of Macedonia and Thrace.
               
               Then bolteth out Greece, and deuideth the Aegaean Sea,
from the Ionishe Sea. All along the side of the Adriatishe
Sea, lyeth Ilirike.
                  Greece. Betwéene the saide Adriatishe
Sea, and the Tuscan Sea, runneth foorth Italie. In the
innermost part of the Tuscan Sea, is Fraunce, and beyond
that is Spaine. These lye from the East to the West,
vppon the SouthEurope. It faceth the North also with diuers
fronts. For on that side is Fraunce againe, extending all
the way fromThat is to saye, the Tusoan or Tyrrhene Sea. our Sea thither. From thence stretcheth
Germany, to the Sarmatians, and they againe to Asia.
Thus much as concerning Europe.
               
            
            
               A breefe description of
Affricke.
               The fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     AFfricke is bounded on the East part, with
                  
the riuer Nile,
                  Affricke, which is also called Lybia. and on the other partes with
the Sea. It is shorter then Europe, in asmuch
as it extendeth any where against the
seacostes of Asia, nor lyeth side for side against
the sea▪ coastes of Europe.
               
               
                  Neuerthelesse, it is more in length then in breadth: and
it is broadest, where it boundeth on the Riuer. And as it
procéedoth from thence, so rysing higher and higher, with
mountaines, speciallie in the middle, it bendeth askew toward
the West, and gathereth softlie into a ridge, and
therefore in continuaunce, groweth somewhat narrower:
where it endeth, there is it narrowest. As much of it as is
inhabited, is excéeding fruitfull. But for as much as most
places of it are vnmanured, and eyther couered with barreine
sandes, or left vntylled, by reason of the drought of
the ayre and the soyle, or else with many kindes of beasts:
it is rather waste, then well peopled. The Sea wherewith
it is inclosed, on the North we call Lybik
                        ••
                     , on the
South Ethyopish, and on the West Athlantish. On that
side that butteth vpon the Lybike Sea, next vnto Nyle, is
the Prouince which they call Cyrene.
                  Cyrene. Then followeth
Affricke, whereof the whole Countrie taketh his name.
The rest is possessed of the Numidians and Moores: of
whome the Moores extend to the Athlantish Occean. Beyond
are the Nigrites, and Pharusians, vnto Ethyope. The
Ethyopians possesse both the rest héereof, and all that side
which faceth the South, euen vnto the borders of Asia.
But aboue those places that are beaten vpon wth the Lybike
Sea, are the Lybiaegyptians, and the white Ethyopians,
and the populous and manifolde Nation of the Getulians.
From thence lyeth a great wide Countrie together, all vtterlie
waste and vnhabited. Then the first that we heare
of Eastward, are the Garamantes, and next them the Awgyles
and Troglodikes, and lastlie toward the West, the
Athlant
                        •
                     . Innermost (if ye lyst to beléeue it) the Egypanes,
                  Woodwardes, or Wyldemen.
                  Blemyans, Gamphasants, and Satyres (scarce men,
but rather halfe Beastes,) wandring vp and downe without
house or home, rather haue the Landes then inhabite
them.
               This is the vniuersall platte of the World, these are the
great partes, these are the fashions, and the Nations of the
partes. Now that I must speake of the boundes and borders

of them seuerally, it is most handsome to begin, where
our Sea entreth first into the maine Landes, and specially
at those Countries that lye on the right hand, as it cōmeth
in, and so to scoure the Sea coast in order as it lyeth, and
when I haue perused all thinges that butte vpon the Sea,
then also to cast about those quarters that are enuironed
with the Occean, vntyll that hauing trauailed about the
world, as well within as without, the race of my attempted
worke, returne to the place where it began.
            
            
               A particular description of Affricke.
Of Mauritania.
               The fift Chapter.
               
                  
                     IT is saide before, that it is the Athlantishe
Occean, which toucheth the
maine lande on the West. From hence
as men sayle into our Sea, Spaine is on
the lefte hand, and Mauritania on the
right. These are the first parts, the one
of Europe, the other of Affricke. The
end of the coast of Mauritania, is Mulucha: the head and
beginning thereof is the Promontorie, which the Gréekes
callThe Vineyard. 
                  Ampelusia, and the Afres by an other worde, that
hath the same meaning. In the same is a caue hallowed
to Hercules, and beyond the Caue a very auncient Towne
called Tingi,
                  The Sheeld of Antaeus the Giant. builded (as men saye) by Antaeus. And there
remaineth a Monument of the thing, namelie, a huge
Shield, of the hide of an Elyphant, vnable to be wéelded of
any man now a dayes, by reason of the greatnesse thereof,
which the dwellers thereabouts beléeue, and report for a
certaintie to haue béene carried by Antaeus, and therefore
they honour it as a Relicque.
               
                  Then is there a verie high Mountaine,The pyllers of Her
                        •
                     ules. set directlie ouer
against that which is in Spaine, That in Spaine is named
Abyla, and the other is named Calp
                        •
                     , and both of them b
                     •
                  
called the Pillers of Hercules. Uppon the naming of them
so, Fame hath forged a Fable, that Hercules cutte a sunder
those two hylles, which erewhiles grewe whole together
in one continuall ridge, and by that meanes did let in the
Occean, which erst was shut out by the force of the Mountaines,
vnto the places which it now ouerfloweth. From
hence the Sea spreadeth wider, and through his great violence,
eateth winding gulfes into the maine Landes, which
he disseuereth farre a sunder: Howbeit the Realme is
vnnoble, and hath scarce any thing famous in it, it is inhabited
with small Uillages, and fendeth foorth small brookes:
it is better of soile then of men, & altogether vnrenowmed,
by reason of the slouthfulnesse of the people. Notwithstanding,
among the thinges that I maye vouchsafe to report,
are certaine high Mountaines, which being set on a
rowe one by an other, as it were for the nonce, are (by reason
of their number and likenesse one to an other) called
the seuen brethren. There is also the riuer Tamuada, and
Rusicada, and Siga, lyttle Citties, and a Hauen, which for
the largenesse thereof, is syr named the great Hauen. The
foresaide riuer Mulucha, is the bound of the Kingdomes of
Bocchus and Iugurth, which were puissaunt Realmes in
olde time.
            
            
               Of Numidia.
               The sixth Chapter.
               
                  
                     FRom the saide riuer Mulucha, to the
banke of the riuer Ampsaga, lyeth Numidia:
not so large a Country as Mauritania,
but better peopled, and wealthier. Of the
Citties which are in it, the greatest are

                  Cirta,
                  Cirta. farre from the Sea, now inhabited by the Sittians,
and in times past, the Pallace of King Iuba and King Syphax,
when it was in greatest wealth: Iol sometime verie
base, but now verie famous, in as much as it hath béene the
Pallace of Iuba, and is calledHeerof the prouince Caesarie
                        •
                     
                     sis tooke his name. 
                  Caesarea. On the hitherside
of this Cittie (for it standeth almost in the mid shore)
are the Towns of Cartenna and Arsenaria, and the Castle
Ampsa, and the gulfe Laturus, and the riuer Sardabale:
and beyond it, is the common buriall place of the blood Roiall.
Then comme Citties of Iasion, and Vthisia, and the
brookes of Ancus and Nabar, falling betwéene them into
the Sea: and certaine other thinges, which to suppresse
with silence, is neither losse of matter, nor preiudice to
fame.Straunge thinges in the inner partes of Numidia. Innermost, and a great way off from the shore,
(a woonderfull matter, if it be to be beléeued) the backe
bones of Fishes, broken shelles of Murreies and Disters,
Stones worne, as is woont to be with beating waues, and
not differing, Anchors fastened as in rocks of the Sea, and
other such like signes and tokens of the Sea, flowing euen
vnto those places in times past, are reported to be, and to
be found in the barreine féelds that beare nothing.
            
            
               The lesser Affricke.
               The seuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     THe Countrie that followeth from the
Foreland of Metagonium, to the Philens altars,
dooth properlie beare the name of Affricke.
In it are the Townes of Hippo
Rhegius, and Rusicade, and Tabraca. Then
thrée Forelands, called the white Mount, Appollos Mount,
and Mercuries Mount, shooting hugelie into the déepe,
make two great Bayes. The hithermost is called Hippon
of Hippo Diarrhytus, which is a Towne standing vppon
the riuadge of it.
               
                  At the other are Laelyes campe, Cornellis campe, the riuer
Bragada,
                  Vtica, and Carthage. the Citties of Vtica, and Carthage, both famous,
and both builded by the Phaenicians: Vtica innobled
with the destruction of Cato, and Carthage for the destruction
of it selfe: now a frée Towne of the Romanes, and in
old time a striuer with them for their Empire: euen now
againe wealthie, and euen now more famous for her former
destruction, then for her present recouery. From hence
theOr Whashe. 
                  Syrt, stand Leptis, Clupea, Abrotanum, Taphre and
Naples, as among bace thinges the famousest. The mouth
of the Syrt,
                  The lesser Syrt, or short Whashe. where it taketh in the open Sea, is almost a
hundred myles broade, and it is thrée hundred myles compasse
by the bankes of it: but it is harbroughlesse and
rough, and partlie by reason of the numbers of shallowes,
quicke sandes, and flattes that are in it, but more for the
changeable alteration of the sea, in his ebbing and flowing,
it is excéeding daungerous.
               Aboue this is a great Poole, which receyueth into it the
riuer Triton, and the Poole it selfe is also called Triton,
Whereof Minerua hath one of her syr names,The Poole and riuer Triton. because (as
the inhabiters thereabouts suppose) she was bred there.
And they make the tale to haue some likelyhood of trueth,
because they kéepe holie the same daye, which they thinke
she was borne on, with solemme Ioustes and Tourneies of
young Maidens. Beyond that, is the Towne Oea, and
the riuer Cimphis, which runneth through most fruitfull
féeldes.
               Then is there an other Leptis, and an other Syrt, of like
name and nature to the former,The greater Syrt, or Whash. but almost halfe as bigge
againe as the other, both at the mouth and in the compasse
of it. Unto this belongeth the Foreland of Boreon: and
the coast beginning at the same,Loteaters. (which the Loteaters are
reported to haue possessed,) from thence foorth to Phycus,
(which also is an other Forelande) it is altogether harbroughlesse.The notable zeale of the Philens, toward their Countrie.
The Altars aforesaide, tooke their name of
two brethren, called Phile
                        •
                     s, who being sent from Carthage
against the Cyrenians, to make a finall end of warre

that had béene long betwéene them, for the bounds of their
Countries, to the great slaughter of both partes: when
couenaunt was not kept according to agréement, (which
was, that wheresoeuer the Ambassadours mette, which
were sent out of both Citties at a time prefixed, there
should be the boundes of both the Realmes) vppon couenaunting
a new, that whatsoeuer was on this side, should
fall to the lotte of their owne countreyfolke, suffered them
selues to be buried quicke in this place: a wonderful thing,
and right worthy to be had in remembraunce.
            
            
               Of Cyrenaica.
               The eight Chapter.
               
                  
                     FRom thence to Catabathmos, is the Prouince
of Cyrenaica, wherin are the Oracles
of Hammon, famous for the assured trueth
therof, and a fountaine which they call Sonnewell,
                  A wonderfull Hyll.
and a certaine Mountaine, holie to
the South winde. For if this Hyll be touched with mans
hand, the winde ryseth excéeding boistrous, and turmoyling
the sandes, as it were waters, rageth as the sea dooth
with waues.A wonderfull Well. The Well at midnight, is scalding whote:
afterward by lyttle & lyttle, falling to be but luke warme,
at day light it becommeth colde: and as the sunne ryseth
in heigth, it wexeth colder and colder, so that at noone it is
most extreamelie colde. From that time it gathereth heate
againe, and in the beginning of the night becommeth
warme, and as it groweth further in the night, it encreaseth
more in heate, so that at midnight it is sealding where
againe.
               Upon the shore, are the Forclandes of Zephyrion and
Naust
                        •
                     thmos, the Hauen of Paraetonie,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
Hesperia, Apollonia, Ptolemais, A
                        ••
                     moe, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
it selfe, whereof the whole Countrie taketh his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
                  Catabathmos, (which is a slope valley, shoring downe to
Egipt-ward) is the vttermost bound of Affricke.
               
               Thus are the coastes inhabited,The manners, apparell, and diet of the people on the Sea coast of Affricke. for the most part with
ciuill people, after the manner of our Countries, sauing
that some of them differre in languages, and in the seruing
of their Goddes, which they kéepe of their owne Countrie,
worshipping them after their owne Countrie fashion.
There are no Citties neere one to an other, howbeit there
be houses which are called Uillages. Their fare is harde
and without cleanlinesse. The Noble men and Gentlemen
goe in Cassockes, and the common people are cladde
in skinnes of Cattell and wilde Beastes: the grounde is
their bedde to rest on, and their Table to feede on. Their
vesselles are made, eyther of woodde or of barke: their
drinke is milke, and the iuice of berries: their meate is for
the most part Uenison, for they spare their Cattell as long
as they can, because it is the onelie best thing which they
haue.
               The vplandishe folke doo yet after a more rude fashion,
wander abroade following their Cattell:The manners of the vplandishe folke of Affricke. and according as
pasturage leadeth them, so remoue they themselues and
their sheddes from place to place, and wheresoeuer day 
                     •
                  aileth
them, there they abide all night. And albeit that being
thus euerie where scattered by householdes, and without
any lawe, they consult not in common vpon any thing:
yet notwithstanding, for as much as euerie of them hath
many Wiues at once, and by reason thereof many Children
and kinsefolke, there neuer liueth any small company
of them together in one place.
               Of those sortes of people,The manners of the Athlantes. which are reported to be beyonde
the Wyldernesse, the Athlantes curse the Sunne,
both when he ryseth, and when he setteth, as noysome both
to themselues and to their groundes. They haue no names
seuerallie, neither feede they of any thing that beareth life,
neither is it giuen them to see such thinges in their sleepe,
as other men sée.
               
                  The Troglodites,
                  The manners of the Troglodites. possessing not any goodes at all, doo
rather iabber than speake, dwelling in Caues vnder the
ground, and séeding vpon Serpentes.
               Among the Garamants,
                  Of the Garamantes. also are those kinde of Cattell
that graze sideling, with their neckes awrie, for their
hornes growing downe to the groundwarde, will not suffer
them to féede right foreward. No man there, hath any
Wife of his owne. They that are euerie where borne, of
this vncertaine and confused companying together, take
those for their fathers, whome they most resemble in countenaunce
and making.
               The Awgyles thinke there are none other Gods,The Awgyles. but
the Ghostes of dead men. By them they sweare, at them
they aske counsell, as at Oracles: and when they haue
prayed what they would haue, they lye downe vppon
their graues, and receyue dreames for aunsweres. It
is a solempne custome among them, that their Women,
the first night they are married, shall abandon themselues
to the common abuse of all men that come with reward:
and it is counted the greatest honour that may be, to haue
had to doo with many, at that tyme: but euer after, they
kéepe themselues excéeding chaste.
               The Gamphasantes are naked,The Gamphasantes. and 
                     〈◊〉
                   vtterlie ignoraunt
o
                     •
                   all manner of armour: knowing neither howe to shun
a Darte, nor yet howe to throwe it: and therefore if they
méete any bodie, they runne away, and dare not eyther
come in companie, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   communicate with any other, then
such as be of their owne disposition and nature.
               The Blemmyes are without headdes,The Blemmyes. and haue theyr
faces in theyr breastes.Satyres or Woodwardes. The Satyres haue nothing of
man, sauing shape. The shape of thePanes or Gotefeete. 
                  Aegypanes
is such, as it is reported to be. And thus much of Affricke.
               
            
            
               
               A particular description of Asia.
Of Egipt.
               The ninth Chapter.
               
                  
                     EGipt, the first part of Asia, lying between

                           •
                        atabathmos
                   and Arabia, draweth altogether
inwardThat is to say, of the mid-land 
                        •
                     ea. from this shore, and runneth
styll Southwarde, vntyll it beare vppon
Ethyope with his backe. This Land is alwaies
without raine, but yet woonderfull
fertyle, and a very fruitfull mother, both of men & other liuing
wights.Of Nilus, the great ryuer of Egipt. The cause héereof is Nilus, the greatest riuer
of all those that fall into our Sea. This streame springing
out of the Desartes of Affricke, is neyther by and by sayleable,
nor by and by called by the name of Nile: but when
he hath come downe a long way, single, and yet rough: about
Meroe a verie large Iland, it is sheaded into Ethyope,
and on the one side is called Astaboras, and on the other
side Astapus. Where it commeth together againe
into one channell, there it taketh the name of Nile. From
thence, partlie rough, and partlie sayleable, it falleth into a
great Lake, through which it sweepeth with a violent
course, and imbracing another Ile called Tachempso, runneth
downe to Elephant, a Cittie of Egipt, all the way as
yet styll rough and raging. Then at length wexing somewhat
mylder, and now in manner sayleable: first about
the Towne of Cercassye, it beginneth to haue thrée channelles.
Afterward, deuiding it selfe once or twise more,
at Delta and Metilin, it passeth on wandring, and dispearsed
through Egipt, and at length parting it selfe into seuen
channels, and yet continuing verie huge in euerie of them,
it falleth into theThat is our mid-land Sea. Sea. It dooth not onelie wade through
Egipt, but also ouerflowing it in the chéefe of summer,

moysteth it with waters so effectuall to engender and
nourish,Water-horsses, and Crocodiles. that ouer and besides that it swarmeth with Fish,
and bréedeth Water-horsses and Crocodiles which are
huge monstruous Beastes, it also sheadeth life into the
cloddes, and shapeth liuing creatures of the verie moolde.
Which thing is héereby manifest, for that when he hath
ceased flowing, and is fallen againe within his channell,
there are séene in the moyst féeldes, certaine creatures as
yet not perfect, but then first beginning to receyue breath,
in some part hauing already their full shape, and in part
as yet starke earth.
               Moreouer,Opinions of the flowing of N
                        •
                     le. it increaseth, eyther because the snowe, being
melted with the great heate, falles more aboundantly from
the great high Mountaines of Ethyope, then that it can
be receyued into his bankes: or else because the Sunne,
wich in winter time was néerer the ground, and therefore
abated his spring, now in summer time mounteth higher,
and suffereth it to ryse whole and full, as it should be: or
else for that the North east windes, which ordinarilie blowing
in that season of the yéere, driuing the clowdes from
the North into the South, doo powre downe showres vpon
the head of his spring, or méeting his streame by the waye
with contrarie blastes, doo staie his course in the comming
downe, or else stoppe his mouthes with sande, which they
driue to the shore together with the waues: and so it becommeth
greater, eyther because it loseth nothing of it
selfe, or because it receyueth more then ordinarie, or because
it vttereth lesse than it should doo.
               But if there be an other World, and that the Anticthones.
goe féete to féete against vs in the South, it were not
much vnlyke to be true, that the riuer rising in those
Landes, after it hath pearced vnder the Sea in a priuie
channell, should vent againe in our World, and by that
meanes increase at the standing of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , for as much
as it is winter at that time he springeth.
               Other meruailous thinges also are in this Land.Woonders of Egipt. In
a certayne Lake, there is an IleA swimming Ile. called Chimmis, which

bearing Woods and Forrests, & a great Temple of Apollos,
floteth, and is driuen which way so euer the winde bloweth.
Bridges builded of Stones▪ thirtie foote square a
péece,High Bridges. whereof the greatest (for there are thrée of them) containeth
well néere foure acres of ground at the bottome,
and is full as much in height.
               
                  Maeris,
                  A Feeld turned into a Lake. sometime a plaine féeld, and now a Lake of twentie
myle compasse about, déeper of water then any great
Shippes, full fraughted doo drawe. Also a MazeA Maze. made by
Sammetichus, conteining (within the compasse of one
whole entire wall) a thousand houses and twelue Palaces,
builded wholie of Marble, roofe and all: which hauing but
one going downe into it, had within it waies almost innumerable,
turning hither and thither, with many windlasses,
altogether doubtfull with continuall steppes, and often
réere-vaultes, which winding rounde one aboue an other,
and eftsoones retyring backe, as much as they had
gone foreward, made it so busie and entangled, that a man
could not deuise how to winde himselfe out.
               The inhabiters of the Realme,The manners of the Egiptians. demeane themselues
farre otherwise then other men. In mourning for theyr
dead, they besmere themselues with doong, and they thinke
it not lawfull to burne them or burie them: but by the aduise
of Poticaries, they kéepe them preserued in their priuie
chambers. They write their Letters awkelie. They
temper claie with their hands, and knéede dowe with their
féete. Their Women pleade matters in Courtes, and
looke to forreine affayres, and the men spin and carde, and
take charge of the house at home. The Women beare burthens
on their shoulders, & the men on their heads. When
the Parentes fall in pouertie, the women are bounde of
necessitie to finde them, the men are at choice. They eate
their meate openlie, and without their doores, and doo their
naturall néedes in the innermost partes of their houses.
               They worshippe the shapes of many Beastes,The superstition of the Egiptians. or (to saye
the trueth) the verie beastes themselues, some one Beast,

and some an other: in so much as it is a matter of life and
death to haue kylled some Beastes, euen vnwares. And
when they die either by disease or by mischaunce, it is their
custome to burie them and mourne for them.
               The common God of all the people is Apis, a blacke
Bull, marked with certaine spottes, and vnlyke other
Bulles in tongue and fayle. It is a rare matter to finde
one of that bréede. For (as they holde opinion) he is not
engendered by a Beast of the same kinde, but is conceyued
by supernaturall power of heauenlie fire, and the daye
that he is calued, is helde for a most holie and Feastiuall
daye, of all the whole Nation.
               They being (by their owne assertion) the auncientest
of all Nations,The vaine assertion of antiquitie, among the Egiptians. haue registred in autentike Chronicles,
thrée hundred and thirtie Kinges before Amasis, and the
continuaunce of aboue thirtéen thousand yéeres. And they
kepe it written in good Recordes, that in the tyme that the
Egiptians haue continued, the Starres haue foure times
altred their courses, and the Sunne hath twise gone down
where it now ryseth.
               In the raigne of Amasis,
                  The largenesse of the kingdome of Egipt in olde tyme. they inhabited twentie thousande
Citties, and nowe also they inhabite verie many.
The notablest of them, farre from the Sea, are Say,
Memphis, Syene, Bubastis, Elephant, and Thebes, which
hath (as is reported in Homer) a hundred Gates, or
(as other saye) a hundred Pallaces, the houses of so many
Princes, eche of which Pallaces (as the state of affayres
required) was wont to send foorth ten thousande
armed men.
               On the shore standeth Alexandria,
                  Alexandria. by the Marches of
Affricke: Pelusium cutteth the borders of Arabia. The
names of the mouthes of Nyle, are Canopicum, Bolbiticum,
Sebenuiticum, Pathnuiticum, Mendesium, Tanicum,
and Pelusiacum.
               
            
            
               
               Of Arabia.
               The tenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     ARabia, extendeth from thence to the
                  
redde Sea: and being thencefoorth more
pleasaunt and plentifull, it aboundeth in
Frankinsence and Spices. In the hither
part (sauing where Mount Casius maketh
it high) it is altogether plaine and barren:
and there it receyueth the Hauen of Azotus, which is the
Mart Towne and vent for the wares of that Countrie.
Where this hyll mounteth in height, it is so high, that
from the toppe of it, a man maye sée the Sunne in the
That is before the breake of day. fourth watch.
            
            
               Of Syria.
               The eleuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     SYria runneth a great way along the Sea
                           •
                        
                     
                  
coast, and verie farre also into the mayne
Land, and is called by sundrie names.The names or diuisions of Syria. For
it hight Caele, and Mesopotamia, and Damascene,
and Adiabene, and Babilonia, and
Iewrie, and Sophene: furthermore, it beareth the name of
Palestine, where it butteth vpon Arabia and Phaenicia, and
where it ioyneth to Cilicia, it is called Antioche. In olde
time and a long while together, it was a puissant Realme:
but most puissant when Semiramis reigned ouer it. There
are surelie many notable workes of hers,The prayse of Semyramis. but two of them
passe all the rest: namelie, the building of that wonderfull
great Cittie Babilon, and the letting in of the riuers Euphrates
and Tigris, into those Countries which before time
were drie. Howbeit in Palestine, there is a great and strong

fortified Towne called Gaza,
                  Why Gaza was so named. for so the Persians terme a
Treasorie: and thervpon it tooke that name, because when
Cambises inuaded Egipt with warre, he bestowed his prouision
for the warres and all his Treasure there. There is
also Ascalon,
                  Ascalon. as bigge as the other. And there isNow called Port la
                        ••
                     e. 
                  Ioppa
builded (by report) before the flood: where the dwellers
by, affirme that Cepheus reigned, vpon likelihood, for that
certaine olde Altars, with great shewe of holinesse, haue in
them styll ingrauen, the names of him and of his brother
Phineus.
               
               And besides that, for a more assuraunce of the thing so
renowmed in verses and olde tales, and of the sauing of
Andromade by Perseus: they shewe for a plaine Monument,
the excessiue great bones of the Monstar of the Sea.
            
            
               Of Phaenicia.
               The twelfth Chapter.
               
                  
                     PHaenicia, is renowmed for the Phaenicians,
a pollitique kinde of men, and both in
feates of warre and peace péerelesse.The first inuenters of Letters, and of other thinges. They
first inuented Letters, and Letter matters,
and other Artes also: as to goe to the Sea
with Shippes, to fight vpon the water, to reigne ouer Nations,
to set vp Kingdomes, and to fight in order of battell.
In it is Tyre,
                  Tyre. sometime an Ile, but nowe ioyned to the
firme Land, since the time that Alexander made workes
about it to assault it. Further foorth, stand certaine small
Uillages, and the Cittie of Sidon,
                  Sidon. euen yet styll wealthie,
and in olde time the greatest of all the Citties vppon the
Sea coast, before it was taken by the Persians.
               
               Betwéene that and the foreland ofIt may be interpreted fayre prospect. 
                  Euprosopon, there
are two Townes, called Byblos and Botris: and beyonde
them were thrée other, ech distaunt a furlong a sunder, and
therefore the place was of the number called Tripolis:
                  Tripolis.
                  Tripolia.
                  
then follow the Castle Simyra, and a Cittie not vnrenowmed,
called Marathos. From thence the Countrie being
not crooked with the Sea, but lying right foorth side by side
vnto it, bendeth his shore into the maine Land, and receiueth
a great Baye. About the which dwell ritch people,
the cause whereof is the scituation of the place, for that the
Countrie being fertyle, and furnished with many Riuers,
able to beare Shippes, serueth well for the easie exchaunge
and conueying in of all kinde of wares, both by Sea and
Land.
               Within that Baye,Syria of Antioche. is first the residue of Syria, which is
syrnamed Antioche, and on the shore thereof, stande the
Citties Seleuca, Paltos, Beritos, Laodicia, and Arados: betwéene
which Citties runne the Riuers Lychos, Hypatos,
and Orontes. Then followeth the Mountaine Amanus,
immediatlie from whence beginneth Myriandros, and
Cilicia.
               
            
            
               Of Cilicia.
               The thirteenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     IN the innermost retreite, there is a
place, sometime of great renowme, as a
beholder and witnesse bearer of the discomfiture
of the Persians by great Alexander,
and of the flight of Darius: at
that time hauing in it a famous great
Cittie called Issos, whereof the Bay▪ is
named the Bay of Issos,
                  The Baye of Issos. but now hauing not so much as a
lyttle Towne. Farre from thence lyeth the Foreland Amanoides,
betwéene the Riuers Pyramus and Cydnus,
Pyramus being the néerer to Issos, runneth by Mallon, and
Cydnus, runneth out beyond through Tarsus. Then is
there a Cittie possessed in olde time by the Rhodians and
Argiues, and afterward at the appointment of Pompey by

Pyrates, now called Pompeiople, then called Soloe.
               
               Hard by, on a lyttle hyll,The Tombe of the Poet Aratus. is the Tombe of the Poet Aratus,
woorthy to be spoken of, because it is vnknowne, why
stones that are cast into it doo leape about. Not farre from
hence, is the Towne Corycos, enuironed with a Hauen
and the salt water, and ioyned with a narrowe balke to the
firme Land.
               Aboue it is a Caue named Corycus,
                  The Caue of Corycus. of singular nature,
and farre more excellent, then may with ease be described.
For gaping with a wide mouth, euen immediatlie from
the toppe it openeth▪ the Mountaine butting vpon the Sea,
which is of a great height, as it were of a ten furlonges.
Then going déepe downe, and the furder downe the larger,
it is gréene round about with budding Trées, & casteth
it selfe into a round vaulte on both sides, full of wooddes, so
meruailous and beautifull, that at the first it amazeth the
minds of them that come in to it, & yet maketh them thinke
they haue neuer séene inough of it. There is but one going
downe into it, narrow and rough, of a mile & a halfe long,
by pleasaunt shadowes and couerts of wooddes, yéelding a
certaine rude noyse, with riuers trickling on either hand.
When ye come to the bottome, there againe openeth an other
Caue, woorthy to be spoken of for other things. It maketh
the enterers into it afraide with the din of Timbrels,
which make a gastly and great ratling within. Afterward,
being a whyle lightsome, & anon the further ye go, wexing
darker, it leadeth (such as dare aduenture) quite out of
sight, & carrieth them déepe, as it were in a Mine: where
a mightie riuer rysing with a great brest, dooth but onelie
shew it selfe, and when it hath gushed violentlie a while in
a short chanell, sinketh downe againe, and is no more séene.
Within is a waste space, more horrible then that any man
dare pearce into it, and therefore it is vnknowne. It is altogether
statelie and vndoubtedlie holie, and both woorthy,
and also beléeued to be inhabited of Goddes. Euery thing
presenteth a statelynesse, and setteth out it selfe with a
certaine Maiestie.
               
                  There is an other beyond, which they call Typhos
                  Typhos caue. caue,
with a narrow mouth, and (as they that haue tried it doo
report) verie lowe, and therefore dimmed with continuall
darknesse, and not easie to be sought out: howbeit, because
it was sometime the chamber of the Giant Typho, an because
it nowe out of hand stifleth such thinges as are let
downe into it, it is woorthy to be mencioned for the nature
thereof, and for the tale that is reported of it. Beyond
that, are two For
                     •
                  landes, that is to say, Sarpedon, sometime
the bound of King Sarpedons Realme, and Anemurium,
which parteth Cilicia from Pamphilia, and betwéene
them Celendris and Natidos Towns builded and peopled
by the Samians, whereof Celendris is néerer to Sarpedon.
               
            
            
               Of Pamphilia.
               The foureteenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     IN Pamphilia, is a Riuer able to beare
Shippes, called Melas,
                  Melas. a Towne called Sida,
and an other Riuer called Eurimedon.
                  Eurymedon. At
this Riuer, Cymo Captaine of the Athenians,
gat a great victorie of the Persians and
Phaenicians, in a battell vpon the water. Into the Sea
where this battell was fought, out of a verie high hyll looketh
the Towne of Aspendos, which was builded by the
Argiues, and inhabited by the people of the Countrie about
it.
               Then are there two other mightie streames, called
Oestros andA sluce or flood-gate. 
                  Cataractes. Oestros is easie to be sayled:
the other hath his name of his headlong fall. Betwéene
them is the Towne Perga, and the Temple of Diana,
which of the Towne is syr named Pergaea. Beyond them
is Mount Sarde
                        •
                     isos, and Phaselis a Towne builded by
Mopsus, which is the end of Pamphilia.
               
            
            
               
               Of Lycia.
               The fifteenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     SVccessiuelie, Lycia so called of Lycus, the
sonne of King Pandion, & (as report goeth)
annoyed in olde time with the fires of Chimaera,
encloseth a great Bay, betwéene the
Hauen of Sida, and the Foreland of Taurus.
Mount Taurus it selfe rising of a huge height at the Easterne
sea shore,The description of mount Taurus. procéedeth streight foorth in one continuall
ridge from thence into y• West, with his right side toward
the North, and his left side toward the South, boūding many
great Nations▪ where he runneth out in bankes, and
where he deuideth the Countries, he passeth to the Sea.
As Taurus is the generall name of him whole together,The sundrie names of mount Taurus. so
is it also his name, where he faceth the East: next he is called
Haemodes, and Caucasus, and 
                     
                        •
                     aropamisus: then Caspian
Streights, Niphates, and the Streights of Armenia,
and (where he butteth vpon our Sea) Taurus againe. Behind
his saide Foreland, is the riuer Lymira▪
                  
                  Lymira. and a Cittie
of the same name, and a number of Towns of no great renowme,
sauing Patara, which is ennobled by the Temple of
Apollo, sometime like to that at Delphos, as well in ritches
as also for the truenesse of the Oracle. Beyond is the riuer
Panthus, and the Towne Panthos: the Mountaine Crag,
and the Cittie Telmisos, which endeth Lycia.
               
            
            
               Of Caria.
               The sixteenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     AFterward followeth Caria, inhabited
with people of an vnknowne beginning:
some thinke them to be bred in the Land,
some thinke they were Pelasgians, othersome
thinke they were Candians, a kinde of

people louing feates of Armes and fighting, so well, that
for wages they serued also in forreine and strange warres.
Héere are a fewe Castles, and then the two Forelandes of
Pedalion and Crya, and by the Riuer Calbis syde, the
Towne of Caunus, diffamed for the 
                     ••••
                  thinesse of the
inhabiters.
               From thence to Halycarnassus, lye these thinges, certaine
Townes of the Rhodians: two Hauens, the one named
Gelos, and the other Thissamissa, according to the
name of the Cittie that it enuironeth. Betwéene them is
the Towne of Larumna, and the Hyll Pandion shooting
into the Sea. The thrée Bayes on a rowe, Thymnias,
Schaenus, and Bubessus. The Foreland of Thymnias, is
Aphrodisium: Schaenus enuironeth Hylas: and Bubessus
compasseth about Cynotus. Guidus standeth in an angle
of a péece of ground, enclosed almost altogether with the
Sea. betwéene it and the gulfe of Ceranie, in the retreit of
Euthana,
                  Halycarnassus. is Halycarnassus, a Towne inhabited by the Argiues.
woorthy to be had in remembraunce, not onelie for
the founders thereof,A notable Tombe. but also for the Tombe of King Ma
                        •
                     
                     solus,
which is one of the seuen woonders of the world, and
was builded by Artemis
                        •
                     a.
                  Artemisia. Beyond Halycarnassus, are
these thinges: the shore of Leuca, the Citties Myndus, Aryanda,
and Naples: and the Bayes of Iasius, and Basilicus.
In Iasius is the towne of Bargylos.
               
            
            
               Of Ionia.
               The seuenteene Chapter.
               
                  
                     BEyond the Bay of Basilicus, Ionia
                   win
                     ••
                  deth
it selfe in certaine Angles, and first of
all, beginning to fetch about the Foreland
of Possideum, it enuironeth the Oracle of
Apollo,
                  The Oracle of Branchide. called in olde time the Oracle of
Branchide, and now the Oracle of Didymus. The Cittie

                  Miletus, sometime the chéefe of all Ionia, both in feates of
warre and peace, the Countrie of Thales the Astrologer,
and of Tymothie the Musician, and of Ana
                        ••
                     mander the
naturall Philosopher, and woorthelie renowmed 
                     •
                  or the excellent
wittes of others that were borne there: is a
                     •
                  ter a
manner called Ionia. There is also the Cittie Hyppis,
where the Riuer Meander falleth into the Sea, and the
Mountaine Latmus, famous for the Fable of Endymion,
whome (as men saye) the Moone was in loue with. Afterward
bowing againe, it enuironeth the Cittie P
                        ••
                     ene, and
the mouth of the Riuer Gessus, and anon after as it casteth
a greater circuite, so it comprehendeth mo thinges. There
is the holie Land called Panionium, so named, because the
Ionians occupie it in common. There is the towne Phygela,
builded (as some saye) by fugitiues, to which report,
the name séemeth agréeable. There is Ephesus,
                  Ephesus. and the
most famous Temple of Diana, which the Amazons are
reported to haue consecrated, when they helde the souereintie
of Asia. There is the Riuer Cayster,
                  Cayster. there is Lebedos,
and the Cappell of Apollo, Clari
                        •
                     us, which Manto the
Daughter of Tyresia builded when she fled from the Epigons,
that had gotten the victorie of the Thebanes: and Colophon
which Mopsus the sonne of the saide Manto builded
at the Foreland wherwith the Bay is enclosed, which
on the other side maketh an other Baye called Smyrnie,
and shooteth out the rest with narrowe shankes. From
thence it spreadeth wider, in manner lyke a Nesse, aboue
the Streightes, on the hither side to Teos, and on the further
side to Clazomen. And because the hinder partes
are streightened and knitte together with the néerenesse
of the Sea, with diuers frontes they face diuers Seas.
In the varie Nesse, is Coryna. Within the Baye of
Smyrnie, is the Riuer Thermodon, and the Cittie
Leuca: and without it is Phocis, the
vttermost part of Ionia.
               
            
            
               
               Of Aeolis.
               The eighteene Chapter.
               
                  
                     THe next Countrie, since the tyme it began
to be inhabited by the Aeolians, tooke
the name of Aeolis,
                  The Countrie about Troy. whereas before tymes
it was called Mysia: and where it boundeth
vpon Hellespont, as long as the Troianes
possessed it, it was called Troad. The first Cittie they
call Myrina, after the name of Myrinus the founder thereof.
The next, Pelops builded▪ at his returne out of Greece,
when he had ouercome Oenomaus. Cyme,
                  Cyme, a Captain of the Amazons. a Captaine of
the Amazons, driuing away the inhabiters that dwelt before
at Cyme, named it so, after her owne name.
               Aboue runneth the Riuer Caycus, betwéene Elea and
Pitane,
                  Archesilas the Philosopher. where Archesilas was borne, that most famous
president the Academie, which affirmed the knowledge of
nothing. Then is the Towne of Cama, scituate in a foreland:
& as soone as men are past that, there receiueth them
a Baye of no small bignesse, which boweth a great way of
and softlie withdraweth by lyttle and lyttle into the land,
euen vnto the foote of Mount Ida. The Streight betwéene
the Seas, is sprinckled with a fewe Citties, of
which the notablest is Cistena. In the innermost part of
the Baye, a féeld called Thebes, conteineth the Townes of
Adrimittium, Austra, and Teressa, lying one by an other in
the same order, as they be rehearsed.
               In the other side is An
                        •
                     andros.
                  Why An
                        •
                     andros was so named. There are reported
two causes, of the naming of this Towne so. Some saye
that Ascanius the sonne of Aenaeas reigned there, & being
taken prisoner by the Greekes, gaue them this Towne for
his raunsome. Other thinke it was builded by such as in
a tumult and insurrection, were driuen out of the Ile of

                  Andros. These would haue Antandros taken for Andros,
and the other would haue it taken as it were for a man.
The coast following, reacheth to Gargara & Aslos Towns
builded and inhabited by the Aetolians.
                  The Countrie about Troy. Then an other
Baye called the Gréekishe Hauen, windeth his bankes not
farre from Troye, that Cittie most renowmed for the
warres and destruction thereof. Héere was the Towne
Sigae
                        •
                     , where the Greekes encamped, during the time of
the warre. HéereCalled also Panthus. 
                  S
                        •
                     amander, running downe from
Mount Ida, and Simois, Riuers of greater Fame then
streame, fall into the Sea.
               Mount Ida it selfe being renowmed with the contention
of the Goddesses,Mount Ida, and of the rysing of the Sunne there. and the iudgement of Paris, sheweth the
rysing of the Sunne after an other sort, then it is woont to
be séene in other Landes. For vnto such as looke out of the
toppe of it, there appeare (almost at midnight) dispearsed
fires glistering euerie where, and as the daye light approcheth,
so séeme they to méete and ioyne together, vntyll
that being assembled more and more, afterwarde they
growe feawer, and lastlie, burne all in one flame. And
when it hath so shined a good while together bright, and
lyke a fire, it gathereth it selfe rounde, and becommeth a
great globe.
               The same also appeareth a great whyle huge, and ioyned
with the earth, and afterward by little and little
wexing lesse, and the more it decreaseth wexing brighter,
last of all it chaseth away the night, and becomming the
Sunne, riseth with the day.
               Without the Baye, are the Rhetaean shores renowmed
with the famous Citties of Rhetaeum and Dardania,
                  The Tombe of Aiax, the sonne of Telamon.
but most of all with the Tombe of Aiax. From hence
the Sea wexeth narrower, and nowe no more washeth
away the Land, but deuiding it againe, cutteth through
the banke that méeteth it at the Streightes of Hellespont,
and maketh the Landes where it runneth, to haue sydes
againe.
            
            
               
               Of Bithynia.
               The nineteene Chapter.
               
                  
                     INnermore are the Bithynians and Mariandynes.
On the Sea coast are the Greeke
Townes of Abydos, Lampsacum, Pa
                        •
                     ion,
and Priapos. Abydos is famous for the intercourse
ofHe meaneth of Leander and Hero. great Loue in olde time. The
Phocans gaue Lampsacum that name, vpon this occasion,
because when they asked counsell of the Oracle, into what
Countrie they should chéefelie goe, aunswere was made,
that they should there take vp their dwelling place, where
it first sh
                     •
                  ned.
               Then againe the Sea becommeth more open, which is
called Propontis.
                  The riuer Granicke. Into it falleth the Riuer Granike, famous
for the first battell that was fought there, betwéene
the Persians and Alexander. Beyond the Riuer, in the
necke of a péece of ground, which is almost an Ile, standeth
Cyzicum, a Towne so named of one Cyzicus, vanquished
in battell and slaine (as we reade) vnwares by the Minyes,
as they went to Colchos ward. After are Place and Scylace,
lyttle Townes builded by the Argiues, on the backe
part whereof hangeth the Hyll Olympus of Mysia,
                  Olympus of Mysia. as the
the inhabiters call it, which sendeth foorth the Riuer Rhindacus
into those quarters that follow.
               There abouts bréede Snakes of vnmeasurable bignesse,Woonderfull Snakes
woonderfull, not for their hugenesse onelie, but also for that
when they haue retired into this channell of the saide Riuer,
to auoide the heate of the Sunne, there putting vp
their heads and gaping, they swallowe in the Birdes that
passe ouer, flie they neuer so high and so swiftlie.
               Beyond Rhindacus is Dascylos, and Myrlea, which the
Colophonians builded. From thence are two good measurable
Bayes. The one of them being namelesse, compasseth

in the Cittie Cion, a most commodious Marte
Towne of Phrygia, which lyeth not farre from thence: the
other Baye compasseth in the Olbians. In the Foreland
it beareth the Chapell of Neptune, and in the bosome
the Towne of Astacon builded by the Megarians. Then
the Land strikes before againe, and maketh a narrowe
channell for the Sea to passe out at into Pontus: and the
Bosphor of Thrace (as is aforesaide) disseuereth Europe
fiue furlonges from Asia.
               
               In the verie mouth of the Streightes is a Temple,
and a Towne calledThis Towne is ouer against Canstantinople. 
                  Chalcedon. The founder of the
towne was Argias Prince of the Megarians: the Idoll of
the Temple is Iupiter, and the builder thereof was Iason.
Héere the Sea spreadeth it selfe wide (sauing where the
Forelandes be) stretching out on both sides, with a long
and direct shore, and then foorth bending inward. But
because it extendeth not so much foreward, it wideneth on
both handes, the bowing inward of it with smooth points
vntyll it growe to a narrowe issue on both sides, is as lyke
as can be to aOr a Turki
                        •
                      bowe. 
                  Scythish bowe.
               It is short, rough, mistie, fewe harboroughes in it, not
inclosed with softe and sandie shores, bleake vppon the
North winde, and because it is not déepe, full of waues, and
euer raging, in olde time calledHarbroughles. 
                  Axenus, of the nature
and disposition of the dwellers about it, which was verie
cruell, and afterward, as their manners began somewhat
to amend and wexe milder, through hauing traffique with
other Nations, it was calledHarborous. 
                  Euxinus.
               
               First of all, the Mariandines inhabite a Cittie there,
giuen them by Hercules of Argos, (as the report goeth)
which is called Heraclea,
                  Heraclea. and therefore made the report
to haue so much the more likelihood of trueth.
               By the same is the Caue Acherusia, that leadeth (as
they saye) to hell: and it is supposed that Cerbe
                        •
                     us
                  Cerberus. was
drawne out thereat.
            
            
               
               Of Paphlagonia.
               The twentie Chapter.
               
                  
                     THen foloweth the Towne of Tios, sometime
inhabited by the Milesians, but nowe
altogether Paphlagonish, as wel the people
as the soyle: in the midde shore whereof almost
is the foreland Cerambis, on the hyther
side whereof is the riuer Parthenie,
and the Citties Sesamus, and Cromna, and Cytoros builded
by Cytorus the sonne of Phrixus. Then followeth Cimolis,
and Armine, which endeth Paphlagonia,
               
            
            
               Of the Chalybies.
               The xxi. Chapter.
               
                  
                     THe Chalybies, who were next neighbors
to Paphlagonia, haue two right famous Citties,
Amysos and Synope, the place where
the doggishe Diogenes was borne:Doggish Diogenes. and the
Riuers of Halys and Thermodon. By Halys,
is the Cittie Lycast: and along by Thermodon, is a
plaine wherein was the Towne Themyseyre, and the
campe of the Amazons, and therfore they call it Amazonia,
Upon the Chalybies, doo border the Taberenes, whose chéefe
felicitie is in laughing and playing.
               Beyond Cerambis dwell the Mossynaekes, in Towers
of timber,The manners of the Mossynaekes. printing all their bodies with markes, eating
their meate abroade, and companying with their women
in common. They choose their King openlie by voices, and
kéepe him most streightlie in prison and gyues: and if he
offend in misgouernement, they make him fast all a whole
day for his penaunce. But they are churlish, vnmannerlie,
and verie hurtfull to such as arriue among them. Furtherfoorth

are people lesse sauadge, but they also are vnmannerlie
and vnciuill as wel as the other, which are called Longpa
                        •
                     es,
Dischers, and Buxers: and a fewe Citties, whereof
the notablest are Cerasus, and Trapaesus.
                  Trebizond. From thence
is a place where the Coast that is drawne along from the
Bosphor taketh his end, and so foorth bowing himselfe forward
in the bosome of the shore ouer against it, maketh the
narrowest angle of Pontus. Héere are the Colchians:
                  Colchos. from
hence issueth Phasis. Héere is a Towne of the same name
that the Riuer is of, builded by Athenistagoras a Milesian.
Héere is the Temple of Phryxus, and a wood famous for the
old Fable of the golden fléece.The Ceraunishe Hylles, and the names of the same.
               
               From hence rise certaine Mountaines, which stretch out
with a long ridge, vntyll they ioyne with the Ryphaean
Hilles, which running with the one end toward Euxinus,
Maeotis, and Tanais, and with the other of the Caspian
Sea, are calledThey maye be called the Thunder-hylles. 
                  Ceraunii. The same are called by sundrie
other names, as Taurish, Moschian, Amazonish, Caspian,
Coraxincian, and Caucasean, according to the sundrie Nations
that border vpon it.
               But in the first turning of the winding shore, there is a
Towne which the Merchauntes of Greece are reported to
haue builded: and because when they were tossed with a
darke tempest, & knew not what Land it was, the crowing
of a Swan gaue them knowledge, they called itIt may be interpreted Swanton. 
                  Cygnus.
The residue of it along the waste Sea, is inhabited by cruell
and vnciuill Nations, calledBlacke Cotes. 
                  Melanch
                        •
                     laenes. The
vpland Countrie is inhabited by the Sepolites, Coraxes,
Phthirophagies, Eniochyes, Achaeans, and Cercetikes: and
in the borders of Maeotis dwell the Syndones. In the marthes
of the Eniochyes, is Dioscurias
                  Dioscurias. builded by Castor and
Pollux, when he entred the Sea with Iason: and Syndos
in the marches of the Syndones, builded by the inhabiters
of that Land. Then the Country writhing aside, and spreading
somewhat in breadth, shooteth foorth betwéene Pontus
and Maeotis to the Bosphor, which rūning with two channelles
into the Lake and the Sea, maketh Corocondama
                  
almost an Iland. There are fowre Citties, Hermonassa,
Cepoe, Phanagoria, and in the verie mouth Cimmerium.
               
               When men are entred heere, the large and wide Lake
receiueth them, which (where it toucheth the firme land) is
enclosed with a bending shore, and where it is néerer the
Sea, being as it were ouer-dréeped with a banke (sauing
where the mouth of it is) it is almost like vnto Pontus, but
that it is not so bigge. The coast which bendeth from the
Bosphor vnto Tanais, is inhabited by the Toreates, the Arichies,
the Phicors, and (next of all to the mouth of the riuer)
by the Iaxamathians, which Nations are called by one
generall name Maeotians.
               
               Among the Iaxamathians,
                  The manners of the Iaxamathiās. the women exercise the same
feates that the men doo, insomuch that they be not priueledged
from the warres. The men fight a foote with arrowes,
and the women fight on horsebacke. Neither encounter
they with weapons, but such as they can snare with ropes,
they strangle with drawing them after them. They marrie:
howbeit, to the intent they may be counted marriageable,
the matter consisteth not in their yéeres, for they abide
vnmaried vntyll they haue killed an enimie. The Riuer
Tanais being sheaded out of the Mountaine Ryphey,
                  The head of the riuer Tanai
                        •
                     . falleth
so headlong, that when all the streames néere abouts,
yea, and Maeotis & the Bosphor, and some part also of Pontus
are frosen with the winters cold, he onely bearing sommer
and winter a like, runneth alwaies at one staye, both
full and swift. The banks therof, and the Countries adioyning
to the bankes, are inhabited by the Sauromats, which
is one nation of diuers peoples, and diuersely named. First
are the Maeotians, called the Women-seruers, the Kingdome
of the Amazons. The Budines possesse the fatte pasture
grounds, which otherwise are but barreine and naked
féeldes. The Gelones inhabite a Cittie built of Timber.
Hard by them,The Turkes. the Thyrssage
                        •
                     s and Turkes hold the waste
Forrests, and liue by hunting. From thence foorth to the
Arymphaeans,
                  The country and manners of the Arymphaeans. lyeth a large Countrie, rough with continuall
hilles, and altogether Desart. These Arymphaeans
                  
liue most vprightlie. In stéede of houses, they haunt woods.
Their foode is berries: and as well the women as the men
goe bare headed. They are therefore counted holie: and so
farre is any man of those so many cruell Nations from
dooing them harme, that if other folke flie vnto them, they
be as safe as in a Sanctuarie. Beyond them riseth the
Mountaine Riphey, and beyond the Mountaine lyeth the

                     •
                  oast that butteth vpon the Occean.
            
         
         
            
               ❧ The second Booke
of that woorthy Cosmographer,
Pomponius Mela, concerning
the scituation of the world.
            
               Of Scithia, of Europe.
               The first Chapter.
               
                  
                     THE marches▪ and
scituation of Asia, extending to
our Sea and the riuer Tanais,
are such as I haue shewed before.
Now to them that rowe
backe againe downe the same
riuer into Maeotis, on the right
hand is Europe, which was directlie
on the left side of them,
as they sailed vp the streame: & it butteth vpon the mountaine
Riphey▪
                   for the same also extendeth hither. The snow
which falleth continually, dooth make the Coūtrie so vntrauellable,
that a man is not able to sée any farnesse into it.
               
                  Beyond is a Countrie of a verie ritch soyle, but vninhabitable
notwithstanding,Of the Griffons. because the Griffons (a cruell and
eger kinde of wilde Beastes) doo woonderfullie loue the
golde, which lyeth altogether discouered aboue the ground,
and doo woonderfullie kéepe it, and are verie fierce vppon
them that touch it. The first men are Scithians, and of the
Scithians, the first are the Arimaspians:
                  Arimaspians. which are reported
to haue but one eye a péece. From thence are the Essedons
vnto Maeotis. The Riuer Buges
                  B
                        •
                     ges. cutteth the compasse
of the Lake, and the Agathyrsies,
                  Agathyrsies. and the Sauromats,
inhabite about it, who because they dwell in Cartes, are
namedWhich may be interpreted Cart-wonners. 
                  Hamaxobits. Then the coast that runneth out askew
to the Bosphor, is inclosed betwéene Pontus & Maeotis.
The side toward the Lake, is possessed by the Satarches.
The brest toward the Bosphor of Cimmeria, hath the
townes of Myrmecion, Panticape, Theodosia, and Hermesium.
The other side toward Pontus Euxinus, is possessed
by the Taurians. Aboue them is a Baye full of Hauens,
and therefore is called the fayre Hauen, and it is inclosed
betwéene two Forelandes: whereof the one called the
Rammes head, butteth against the Foreland of Cerambis,
which we saide before to be in Asia: and the other called
Mayden-hyll. 
                  Parthenion, hath néere vnto it a towne called Cherronesus
builded (if it may be beléeued) by Diana, and is very famous
for the Caue Nymphaeum in the toppe therof hallowed
to the Nymphes. Then the Sea fléeteth vnder a
banke, and following continuallie vppon the shores flying
backe (which the Satarkes and Taurians possesse) vntyll he
be but fiue myles from Maeotis, maketh a Nesse. That
which is betwéene the Lake & the Bay, is named Taphre,
and the Bay it selfe is called Carciuites. In the same is the
Cittie Carciue, by the which doo run two Riuers, Gerros &
Hypacyris, which fall into the Sea in one mouth, but come
from two seuerall heads, and from two seueral places. For
Gerros swéepeth betwéen the Basilids and Nomades. Then
are there woods, wherof those Countries beare very great
store, and there is the Riuer Panticapes, which disseuereth

the Nomades and Georgians.
                  Georgians of Europe. From thence the land wideneth
farre, and ending in a slender shanke, ioineth with the
Sea shore. Afterward enlarging againe measurablie, it
sharpeneth it selfe by little & little, and gathering his long
sides as it were into a point, groweth into the likenesse of
the blade of a sworde laide flatlinges.
               
                  Achilles entering the Sea of Pontus with a Nauie like
an enimie, after he had gotten victorie, is reported to haue
made a gaming in the same place for ioy therof, and to haue
exercised himselfe & his men in running, while they rested
from warre, and therefore the place is called Achilles race.
Then runneth Boristhenes by a Nation of the same name,The ryuer Borysthenes.
the pleasauntest of all the Riuers of Scithia. For whereas
all the other are thicke and muddie: he runneth excéeding
cléere, more gentle than the rest, & most pleasaunt to drinke
of. It cherisheth most fine and batling pasture, and great
Fishes which are of very delicate taste, and haue no bones.
He commeth from farre, aud springing from an vnknowne
head, beareth in his channell fortie daies iorney: and being
all that way able to beare Shippes, he falleth into the sea▪
hard by Borysthenides and Olbis Gréeke Citties.
               
                  Hypanis,
                  The riuer Hypanis, and the nature thereof. rysing out of a great Poole▪ which the dwellers
by call the mother of Hypanis, incloseth the Callipeds, and
a long while together runneth the same that he was at his
head. At length, not farre from the Sea, he taketh so bitter
waters out of a lyttle Fountaine▪ called Exampaeus,
that from thencefoorth the runneth vnlike himselfe, and altogether
vnsauerie. The next which is called Axiaces, commeth
downe among the Calli
                        ••
                     des, and Axiakes. The Riuer
Tyra seperateth these Axiakes from the Istrians: it
springeth among the Neures, and falleth into the Sea, by a
Towne of his owne name. But that famous Riuer which
parteth the Nations of Scithia from the Natiōs folowing,
rysing from his spring in Germanie, hath an other name
at his head than at his falling into the Sea.The riuer Ister, called also Danow. For through
huge Countries of great Nations, a long while together
he beareth the name of Danow. Afterward, being diuersely

termed by the dwellers by, he taketh the name of Ister,
and receyuing many riuers into him, wexeth huge, and giuing
place in greatnesse to none of all the Riuers that fall
into our Sea, sauing onelie to Nile, he runneth into the sea
with as many mouthes as he,The cruel mann
                        •
                     rs of sundrie Nations, by the riuer Danow. whereof thrée are but small,
the rest are able to beare Shippes. The natures and behauiours
of the Nations differ. The Essedones
                  The Essedones. solemnize the
deathes of their Parents merelie, with sacrifices, and feasting
of their neighbours and acquaintaunce. They cutte
their bodies in péeces, and chopping them finelie with the
inwardes of beasts, make a feast of them and eate them vp.
The heads of them, when they haue cunninglie pullished
them, they bind about with gold, & occupie them for Cups.
These are the last dueties of naturall loue among them.
The Agathyrsies paint their faces and their lyms: and as
any of them commeth of better Auncestors,The Agathirsies. so doth he more
or lesse die himselfe: but all that are of one lynnage, are
died with one kinde of marke, & that in such sort, as it cannot
be gotten out. The Sarmates, being altogether vnacquainted
with Golde and Siluer,The Sarmates. the greatest plagues in
the world, doo in stéede thereof vse exchaunge of one thing
for an other. And because of the cruell coldnesse of the
winter, which lasteth continuallie, they make them houses
within the ground, and dwell either in Caues, or else in
Sellars. They goe in long side garmentes downe to the
ground,The Taurians. and are couered face & all, sauing onely their eies.
The Taurians (who be chéefelie renowmed with the arriuall
of Iphigenia and Orestes) are horrible of conditions,
and haue a horrible report going of them, namely, that they
are woont to murther straungers, and to offer them vp in
sacrifice. The originall of the Nation of the Basilides,
                  The Basilides. commeth
from Hercules and Echidna. Their manners are
Princelike, their weapons are onelie arrowes. The wandring
Nomades,
                  The Nomades or Graziers. follow the pastures for their Cattell: and
as féeding for them lasteth, so is their continuaunce of abiding
in one place. The Georges
                  The Georges or Tyl-men. occupy tillage of the groūd
and husbandrie. The Axiakes
                  The Axiakes. knowe not what stealing

meanes: and therefore they neither kéepe their owne, nor
touch that is an other mans. They that dwel more vpland,The vplandills Scithians.
liue after a harder sort, and haue a country lesse husbanded.
They loue warre and slaughter, and it is their custome to
sucke the blood cleane out of the wounds of him that they
kyll first. As euerie of them hath slaine most, so is he counted
the iolliest fellowe among them. But to be cléere from
slaughter, is of all reproches the greatest. Not so much as
their loue-daies, are made without bloodshed. For they that
vndertake the matter, wound themselues, and letting their
blood drop out into a vessell, when they haue styrd it together,
drinke of it, thinking that to be a most assured pledge
of the promise to be performed. In their feasting, their
greatest myrth and commonnest talke, is in making report
what euerie man hath slaine. And they that haue tolde of
most, are set betwéene two cuppes brim full of drinke: for
that is the chéefe honour among them. As the Essedones
make cuppes of the heads of their Parents: so doo these of
the heads of their enimies. Among the Anthropophages,
                  The Anthropophages, or eaters of men.
the daintiest dishes are made of mans fleshe. The Gelones
                  The Gelones.
apparell themselues and their horsses, in the skins of their
enimies: themselues with the skins of their heads, their
horsses with the skins of the rest of their bodies. The Melanchlaenes
                  Melanchlaenes, or Blacke-coats.
goe in blacke cloathes, and thereof they haue
their name. The Neures
                  The Neures. haue a certaine time, to euerie of
them limitted, wherein they may (if they will) be chaunged
into Woolues, and returne to their former shape againe.
The God of them all is Mars, to whome in stéede of Images,
they dedicate Swords and Tents, and offer to him
men in Sacrifice.
               The Countries spread verie large, and by reason that
the Riuers doo diuers times ouerflowe their bankes, there
is euerie where great store of good pasture. But some
places are in all other respectes so barreine, that the inhabiters,
for lacke of woodde, are faine to make fyre of
bones.
            
            
               
               Of Thrace.
               The second Chapter.
               
                  
                     NExt vnto these is Thrace, and the same
extending wholy inward from the front that
beareth vpon the side of Pontus, euen vnto
the Illyrians, where spreading into sides,
it butteth vpon the Riuer Ister and the Sea.
It is a Countrie chéerefull neither in ayre nor soyle, and
(sauing where it approcheth to the Sea,) vnfruitfull, cold,
and a verie euill cherrisher of such thinges, as are eyther
set or sowen. Scarce any where dooth it beare an Apple
trée, but Uines somewhat more commonlie, howbeit the
Grapes ripe not, ne come to any good verdure, vnlesse it be
where the kéepers haue fenced them with boughes to beare
of the colde. It is somewhat more fréendlie in cherrishing
of men, though it be not to the outward showe: for they be
harde fauoured and vncomelie shaped. Howbeit, in respect
of fiercenesse and number, to haue them many and vnmercifull,
it is most fruitfull. It sendeth fewe Riuers into
the Sea,Hebrus, Nestos, and Strymon, riuers, Haemus Rhodope, and Orbele, mountaines. but those verie famous: as Hebrus, Nestos, and
Strymon. Innermore, it rayseth vp the Mountaines Haemus,
Rhodope, and Orbele, renowmed with the Ceremonies
of Bacchus, and with the flocking of the Maenades,
when Orpheus first gaue them orders, and trained them
to that Religion. Of the which hilles, Haemus mounteth
to such a height, that in the toppe thereof, a man maye sée
both the Sea of Pontus, and the Sea of Adria.
               
               One onelie Nation of the Thracians inhabites the whole
Countrie,The manners of the Nations of Thrace. termed by sundrie names, and endewed with diuers
dispositions. Some are vtterlie wilde and verie willing
to die,The manners of the Gets, and their opinions of the immortalitie of the soule. namelie the Gets, and that is stablished through
sundrie opinions. For some of them thinke, that the soules
of them that die, shall returne into their bodies againe. An
other sort thinke, that though the soules returne not, yet

they die not, but passe into a blessedder state. Others thinke
they die, but that dying is better then to liue. And therfore
among some of them, the childebeddes are sorrowfull, and
they mourne for them that be borne: and contrariwise, the
burialles are ioyful, and solemnized with singing and playing,
as if they were high holie dayes. Not so much as the
women, haue cowardlie or faint courages: for they sue euen
with all their hearts, to be killed vpon the carkases of
their dead husbandes, and to be buried with them. And because
the men haue many wiues at once, they pleade verie
earnestlie before Iudges, which of them may come to that
honour. It is imputed to their good behauiour, and it is the
greatest ioye to them that can be, to get the vpper hand in
this kinde of sute. The rest of the women fall a wéeping,
and shréeke out with most bitter complaintes. But such as
are minded to comfort them, bring their armour and ritches
to the Hearse, and there professing themselues ready to
compound with the destinie of him that lyeth dead, or else
to fight against it, if they could come by it, when neither
money nor fighting can take place, continew wooers at the
pleasure of the widdowes whome they like of. The Maydens
when they shall marrie, are not bestowed at the discretion
of their Parents, but are openlie either let out to
be married, or else solde. Which of these shall befall vnto
them, procéedeth of their beautie and behauiour. The honest
and beautifull yéeld a good price: the other are faine to
buie husbandes to marrie them. The vse of Wine is to
some of them vnknowne: neuerthelesse, when they are
making good chéere, as they are sitting about the fires, they
cast in a kinde of séede, whose sent prouoketh them to a certaine
mirth like vnto droonkennesse.
               On the Sea coast next vnto Ister, is the Cittie Istrople:
and next vnto that, Galatis builded by the Milesians, and
Tritonice, and the Hauen Carie, and the foreland Tiristris,
immediatly beyond the which is an other Angle of Pontus,
directlie ouer against the Angle of Phasis: and it were like
vnto it, but that it is larger. Héere perished Bizone by an

earthquake. There also is the Hauen Crunos, and the
Citties of Dennysople. Odessos,
                  Now called Me
                        •
                     imbria. 
                  Messembria, Anchialos,
and (in the innermost bosome of the Baye, where Pontus
finisheth an other of his windinges with an Angle) the
great Cittie Apollonia.
                  Apollonia. From hence it goeth with a direct
coast, sauing that almost in the middes, it shooteth out
a Foreland called Thin
                        ••
                     a, and turneth inward to it selfe
with crooked bankes, and beareth the Citties Halmydesse,
and Phyleas, and Phinople. Hitherto is Pontus: and
héereafter is the Bosphor, and Propontis.
               
               In the Bosphor, isNow called Constantinople. 
                  Bizance, and on Propontis are Selymbria,
Perinthus, Bathynis, and running betwéen them
the Riuers Ergine and Atyras: Then followeth a part of
Thrace, where sometime reigned King Rhaesus and Bysanth,
a Towne builded by the Samians, and Cypsella,
sometime a great Cittie.
               After that, ensueth a place called of the Gréekes, Longvvall,
                  Lysimachia.
and (in the necke of a Nesse) the Towne of Lysimachia.
The Land that followeth, being no where broad,
runneth foorth narrowest héere betwéene Hellespont and
theNow called Arch-sea. 
                  Aegean Sea. The Streights thereof they call Isthmos,
and the front thereof Mastusia, and the whole together
Chersonesus. It is woorthy to be had in remembraunce
for many thinges. In it is the Riuer Aegos, renowmed
with the Shipwracke of the Athenian Fléete.
There is also Sestos, scituate against Abydos, verie famous
for the loue of Leander. There is also the Countrie,
where the Persian hoast aduentured to make a bridge ouer
the Sea that parteth the one maine land from the other,
(a woonderfull enterprise) and passed ouer the Sea, out of
Asia into Greece on foote, and not by Ship. There are the
bones of Protesilaus consecrated with a Temple. There is
also the Hauen Caelos, renowmed with the destruction of
the Laconish Fléete, at such time as the Athenians and Lacedemonians,
encountred there in battell on the Sea.
There is also Dogs-graue,
                  The Tombe of Queen Hecuba. the Tombe of Quéene Hecuba,
which place receyued that homely name, either of the shape

of a Dogge, whereinto Hecuba is reported to haue béene
transformed, or else of the misfortune that shee fell into.
There is Macidos, and there is Eleus which endeth Hellespont.
               
               By and by the Aegean Sea beateth hugelie vpon a long
shore, and with a great compasse fetcheth leysurelie about
the Lands which it seuereth farre a sunder, vnto the Foreland
of Sumum. Such as sayle by that coast, when they
are passed Mastusia, must enter into a Baye: which washing
by the other side of Chersonesus, is enclosed lyke a
valley, with the ridge of a hyll: and being called Melas
of the Riuer Melas which it receiueth, it imbraceth two
Citties, Alopeconesus, on the one side of the narrowe
Streights, and Cardie on the other side. Aenos
                  Aenos. is famous,
builded by Aenaeas, when he fled from Troy.
               
               About Hebrus are the Cycones,
                  The Cycones. and beyond it is Doriscos
where Xerxes (because he could not number his armie,) is
reported to haue measured them by the space of the ground.
Beyond, is the Forelande of Serrium, out of which, the
wooddes of Zona are reported to haue followed Orpheus,
                  Orpheus.
when he soong. Then is the Riuer Scaenas, and (adioyning
to his banckes) the vpper Countrie of Maronie, which
brought foorth Diomede,
                  The Tyraunt Diomede. that was woont to make straungers,
prouinder for his cruell Horsses, and in the ende,
was by Hercules cast to them himselfe. The Tower
which they attribute to Diomede, remaineth as a remembraunce
of the Fable: and a Cittie which his sister Abdera
                  Abdera.
named after her owne name. But that Cittie is woorthier
to be had in memorie, for bréeding of Democritus
                  Democritus. the
naturall Philosopher, than for her sake that builded it.
               Beyond that, runneth the Riuer Nestos: aud betwéene it
and the Riuer Strymon, are the Citties, Phillippos, Appollonia,
and Amphippolis. Betwéene Strymon and
mount Athos, are the Tower Calarne, the Hauen Caprullon,
and the Citties Acantos, and Oesyma. Betwéene Athos
and Pallene, are Cleone and Olynthus.
               
               
                  
                  Strymon (as we haue saide before) is a riuer,Of the Riuer Strymon. which rysing
a farre of, and running slender, becōmeth greater and
greater with forreine waters: and when he hath made a
Lake within a little of the sea, he bursteth foorth in a greater
channell than he came in.
               Mount Athos is so high,Mount Athos. that it is thought to reach aboue
the place from whence the raine falleth. The opinion
hath a likelihood of trueth, because the ashes are not washed
from the Altars in the toppe thereof, but continue
                     •
                   in the
same heape whole as they were left. This Hill shooteth
not with an elbowe into the Sea, as other Hilles doo, but
it kéepeth on whole, and aduaunceth with a whole breast, a
great length into the Sea. Where it cleaued to the maine
Land, it was cutte through by Xerxes, when he made his
voiage against the Grayes, and was sayled ouer, & an arme
of the Sea conueied through it, to make way for his ships.
The neathermost partes of it, are furnished with small
Towns, builded & peopled by the Pelasgies. In the top was
the towne Acroathon, the inhabiters whereof were woont
(by report) to liue halfe as long againe as other men. Pallene
is of such a large soyle, that in it are fiue Citties, with
their territories. It riseth all in height, somewhat narrow
where it beginneth, and there is the Cittie Potidaea. But
where it wexeth wider, there are the Townes of Mend
and Scione, woorthy to be spoken of, Mend builded by the
Eretrianes, and the other by the Greekes, as they returned
from the taking of Troy.
               
            
            
               Of Macedonia.
               The third Chapter.
               
                  
                     THen the people of Macedonia inhabite
many Citties, of the which, Pella is the
most renowmed, for her two 
                     •
                  oster children
Phillippe the subduer of Greece, and Alexander
the conqueror of Asia also. In the

shore, the Bay of Mecyberne betwéene the Forelandes, deuideth
Canastreum and the Hauen that is called Cope: and
encloseth the Citties of Toron and Physcell, and also Mecyberne,
whereof it taketh the name. Scione is next vnto
the Foreland of Canastre: and Mecyberne Baye entreth
somewhat within the Land in the middes, where it giueth
way like a bosome. Howbeit casting foorth long armes into
the déepe, it becommeth a great gulfe betwéene the seas.
Into it runne Axius through Macedonia, and Peneus
through Thessalie. A lyttle aboue Axius, is the Cittie
Now called Salonich. 
                  Thessalonica. Betwéene them both are Cassandria,
Cydna, Azaros, and Derris. Beyond Peneus, are Sepias,
Cordynia, Melibaea, and Castanea, all of like renowme, sauing
that Phyloctetes
                  Phyloctetes. who was fostered at Melibaea, beautifieth
that towne. The inner Landes are renowmed with
the names of famous places, and containe almost nothing
that is not notable. Not farre from hence is Olympus,
and héere is Pelion, and héere is Ossa, Mountaines renowmed
with the Fables of the Giantes warres. Héere is
Pieria,
                  Pieria. the dwelling place and mother of the Muses. Héere
is the ground that Hercules of Greece trode last vppon,
namelie, the Forrest of Oeta: Héere is Tempe ennobled
with holie wooddes. Héere lyes Lebethra, and the versifying
fountaines.
               Then followeth Greece, shooting foorth hugelie and
mainlie, and bearing from the North into the South, till it
butte vpon the Myrtean Sea. Where the Sunne ryseth,
it faceth the Aegean Sea, and where the Sunne goeth
downe, it faceth the Ionish Sea. Next that, lyeth a large
Countrie, named Hellas, which steppeth foorth with a large
front, and anon after is cutte off almost by the waste, with
both the Seas: whereof the Ionish entereth furthest into
his side, vntill the Land becommeth but fiue myle wide.
Then againe the Landes widen on both sides, and shoote
into the déepes, but more into the Ionish Sea than into the
Aegean Sea: and stretching foorth, not altogether so broad
as they began (howbeit verie great) they become a Nesse,

which is calledNow it is called Morea. 
                  Peloponesus: which by reason of the
Bayes and Forelandes wherewith the shores thereof are
fretted, as it were with lyttle veines, and therewithall
because it spreadeth out a toside with a slender stalke, is
verie like the leafe of Plane trée.
               In Macedonia, the first Countrie is Thessalye,
                  Thessalye. the next
Magnesia,
                  Magnesia. and then Phthiotis.
                  Phthiotis. In Greece are the Countries
of Doris, Locris, Phocis, Beotis, Attis,
                  The sh
                        •
                     eres of Greece. and Megaris:
but the most renowmed of them all is Attis. In Peloponesus,
are Argolis, Laconice, Messenia, Achai
                        •
                     , Elis, Arcadia:
and beyond it are Aetolia,
                  The shieres of Peloponesus. 
                  Acarnania, and Epyrus,
vnto the Adriatish Sea.
               Of the places and Citties scituate in the maine Lande,
these are the woorthiest to be touched: In Thessaly, Larissa,
                  Larissa.
sometime called Iol
                        •
                     os: in Magnesia, Antronia: in
Phthiotis, Phthia: in Doris, the Cittie Pindus, and harde
thereby the Cittie Erineon: in Lo
                        •
                     ris,
                  Delphos and Parnasus. 
                  Cynos and Calliaros:
in Phocis, Delphos, and Mount Parnasus, and the
Temple and Oracle of Apollo: in Baeotia, Thebes, and
Mount Cytheron
                  Thebes and Cytheron. most renowmed in Fables and Poetry:
In Attis, Eleusis.
                  Eleusis, hallowed vnto Ceres,
                  Seres. and the noble Cittie
of Athens,
                  Athens. more famous of it selfe, then it néede to be
set out: in Megaris, Megara,
                  Megara. whereof the Countrie hath
his name: in Argolis, Argos, and Mycene,
                  Argos and Mycene. and the Temple
of Iuno verie famous for the auncientnesse and Religion
thereof: in Lacon
                        •
                     ce, Therapne, and Lacedemon,
                  Lacedemon. and Amy
                        •
                     le,
and Mount 
                     
                        •
                     aygetus: in Meslenia, Messene, and
Now called Modon. 
                  Methone: in Achaia and in Elis, sometime Pises,
the Pallace of Oenomaus, and Elie, and the Idoll and
Temple of Iupiter of Olympus, renowmed for the gaming
of exercise, and for the singular holinesse, but most
of all, for the Image it selfe, which is the worke of Phi
                        ••
                     dias.
               
               
                  Arcadie
                  Arcadie. is enuironed round about with the Nations of
Peloponesus. In it are the Citties Psophis, Tenea, and
Orchomenon: the Mountaines Pholoe, Cyllenius, Parthenius,
and Maenalus: and the Riuers Erymanthus,
                  
and Ladon. In Aetolia,
                  Aetolia is Naupactus: in Acarnania,
Stratos:
                  Acarnania. inNow called Albanie. 
                  Epyre, the Temple of Iupiter of Dodon,
and a Well which in this considerationA woonderfull Fountaine. is counted holy,
for that whereas it is colde, and quencheth sirebrandes that
are put into it, as other waters doo: If ye holde brandes
without fire a good waie off from it, it kindleth them.
But when men scoure the Sea coast, theyr waie is to sayle
from the Foreland of Sepias, by Demetrias, and Boion,
and Phtheleon, and Echinon, to the Baye of Pagasa:
which imbracing the Cittie Pagasa, receyueth the Riuer
Sperch
                        •
                     us: and because the Minyes (when they made
their voyage into Colchos) launched foorth there with
their Argosie, it is therefore had in estimation.
               From thence as men sayle to Sunium, they must passe
by these thinges: namelie, by two great Bayes, the one of
Malea, the other of Opus, and in them the Monumentes
of the slaughter of the Lacedemonians: By Ther
                        •
                     opile,
Opaes, Scarphia, Cnemides, Alope, Anthedon, and Larymna:
by Aulis, the Hauen where the Fléete of Agamemnon
and the Greekes that conspired against Troye, did
harborowe: By Marathon, a witnesse of many vialent
déedes, euen from the tyme of Theseus, but most chéefeli
                     •
                  
renowmed with the slaughter of the Persians: By Rhamnus,
a little Towne, but yet famous because of the Temple
of Amphia
                        •
                     rus, and the Image of Nemesis, made by Phi
                        •
                     dias,
which are in it: and finallie, by Thoricos and Brauron,
some time Citties, and now but bare names.
               
                  Sunium is a Forelande, which finisheth the East side
ofThis is the Countrie, properlie called by the name of Greece. 
                  Hellas. From thence the Lande leaneth Southward
vnto Megara, now facing the Sea with his front,
lyke as before it laye with his syde against Attica.
Then is Pyrrheus the Hauen of Athens, and Scyrons
rockes, euen at this daye diffamed▪ for the cruell entertaynement▪
that Scyron gaue there to Straungers in olde
tyme.
               The boundes of Megaris, extend euen to the Balke,

which is so tearmed, because it parteth the Aegean Sea
but fiue miles space from the Ionish Sea, and knitteth Peloponesus
vnto Hellas, with a narrowe balke. In it is the
towne of Cenchree, the Temple of Neptune, the famous
gaminges called the B
                        •
                     lke games, and Corinth
                  Corinth. sometime
renowmed for ritches, but afterward more renowmed for
the destruction thereof, and now newlie builded againe,
and peopled by the Romanes: which Cittie out of the topcastle
thereof called Acrocorinth, viewethThat is the Aegean and Ionish Seas. both the seas.
As we saide before, the Sea coast of Peloponesus, is indented
with Bayes and Forelands: on the East side with
Bucephalos and Chersonesus, and Scyllion: on the South
syde with Malea, Taenaros, and Ichthys: and on the
West with Chelonates and Araxos. From the narrowe
balke to Scylleon, inhabite the Epidaurians, renowned
with the Temple of Aesculapius:
                  Aesculapius. and the Troiezenians,
famous for their faithfull continuaunce in league & fréendshippe
with the Athenians. Also there are Saronike Hauen,
and Schaenitas, and Pagonus. The Townes of Epidaure,
Troizen, and Hermion, stand vpon this shore. Betwéene
Scylleon & Malea, is the Bay of Argolis: betwéene
that and Taenarus, is the Bay of Laconia, from thence to
Acritas, is the Bay of Asine, and from thence to Ichthys,
is the Bay of Cyparissus. In the Bay of Argolis, are the
knowne riuers of Erasmus and Inachus, and the knowne
towne of Lerne. In the Bay of Laconia, are the Riuers
Githius, and Eurotas. On the head of Taenarus, are the
Temple of Neptune, and a Caue like vnto the Caue of Acheruse
                  Acheruse.
in Pontus, that we spake of before, both in fashion
and Fable. In the Bay of Asine, is the Riuer Pamisse,
and in the Bay of Cyparisse, is Alpheus: These two
Bayes take their names of two Citties, Cyparissus, and
Asine, that stand vpon their shores. The Messemans and
Pylians, inhabite the Landes, and Pyle it selfe standeth
néere the Sea, and so doo Cyllene
                  Cyllene. and Callipolis. The Cittie
Patre, standeth vpon that shore where Chelonates and
Araxos, runne into the Sea. But Cyllene is notable, because

men thinke that Mercurie was borne there. Afterward
Rhion (it is the name of a Baye) falling lyke a
Lake with full mouth, as it were in at a narrowe gap betwéene
the Aetolians and Peloponesians, breaketh in euen
to the Balke. In it the shores beginne to looke Northward.
               Héere abouts are Aegian, and Aegira, and Oluros, and
Sicyon: and in the coastes ouer against them are, Page,
Creusis, Auticyra, Oeanthia, Cyrrha, and (whereof the
name is better knowne) Calydon, and the Riuer Euenus.
Without Rhion in Acarnania, the notablest thinges are
the Towne Leucas, and the RiuerAchelous. 
                  Achelous.
               
               In Epire,
                  The Bay of Ambrace. nothing is more noble, than the Baye of Ambrace.
The cause héereof in part, is the Baye it selfe, which
at a narrow gappe, lesse than a mile wide, letteth in a great
Sea: and partlie, the Citties Actium, Argos▪
                   built by
Amphilocus, and Ambrace the Pallace of the posteritie of
Aeacus, and of Pyrrhus, which stand by it. Beyond is Butroton,
and then the HillesThe Thunder
                        •
                      hylles. 
                  Ceraunii, and from them the
winding toward Adria. This Sea being receyued farre
into the Land, and spreading verie broade, but yet broadest
where it pearceth in▪ is besette with the Countries ofNow called Sclauonie. 
                  Illyricke
vntoNow called Triest. 
                  Tergestum, and the residue with the Nations
of Italie and Fraunce.
               
               The Parthi
                        •
                     nes and Dassarets, possesse the first partes of
it: The next by little and little, is possessed 
                     •
                  y the Euchelies
and Pheakes: afterward, are they that be properlie
called Illyrians: then the Pyreans, and Lyburnes, and Histrich.
Of Citties, the first is Oricum, the secondNow called Durazo. 
                  Dyrrachium,
called before Epidamnum, vntil the Romanes changed
the name, because it séemed to them to be a forespeaking
of euil lucke, towards them when they went thether.
Beyond are Apollonia, Salon, Iader, Naron,
                  Now Bruzza. 
                  Tragurie,
the Baye of Pola, and the Cittie Pola, inhabited (as report
goeth) by men of Colchos, and now (as thinges altar) peopled
by the Romanes. Also, there are the Riuers Aeas, and
Nar, and Danow▪
                   which is spoken of before by the name

of Ister. But Aeas falleth into the Sea by Apollonia: and
Nar, betwéen the Pyreans and Liburnes: and Ister, through
Istrich. Tergestum, which is scituate in the innermost
nooke of Adria, endeth Illyrich.
               
            
            
               Of Italie.
               The fowrth Chapter.
               
                  
                     SOmewhat shalbe saide of Italie, rather
because order so requireth, then for that it
néedeth any setting out: for all thinges are
known. At the Alpes, it beginneth to mount
in height, and as it procéedeth, raysing it selfe
in the middes, it runneth foorth with a continuall ridge betwéene
the Adriatishe and Turkishe Seas, or (as they are
otherwise tearmed, betwéene the vpper Sea, and the neather
Sea) a great while whole: but when he hath gone
farre, he splitteth into two hornes, whereof the one faceth
the Sea of Sicill, and the other the I
                        •
                     nishe Sea. It is
through out narrowe, and in some place much narrower
than where it began.
               The inner partes thereof are inhabited by sundrie Nations.
On the left side, the Carnies and Venetians possesse
Now a part of Lombardie. 
                  Gallia togata. Then follow Italian people, the Picents,
the Frentanes, the Daunians, the Appulians, the Calabrians,
and the Salentines. On the right side vnder the Alpes,
are the Ligurians, and vnder Appenine, is Hetruria. After
that, is Latium, the Volscies, Campane, and aboue Lucanie,
are the Brutians.
               
               Of Citties inhabited farre from the Sea, the wealthiest
on the left hand, are Padua,
                  Padua. builded by Antenor: and Mutina,
and Bononi
                        •
                     , builded by the Romanes:
                  Rome. and on the
right hand Capua, builded by the Thuscanes, and Rome
in olde tyme founded by Shéepheardes, but nowe (if it

should be treated of according to the woorthinesse) an other
whole worke of it selfe.
               In the Sea coast next toNow called Triest. 
                  Tergestum, is Concord.
Through it runneth the Riuer Timauus: which rysing
from nine headdes, falleth into the Sea with one mouth.
Then the Riuer Natiso, not farre from the Sea, passeth
by the ritch Tow
                     •
                  e Aquileia, beyond which is Altine.
The Riuer Po,
                  The riuer Po. occupieth a large space in the vpper shore.
For he ryseth out of the verie foote of the Mountaine Vesulus,
and gathering himselfe at the first of lyttle springes,
runneth a while lanke and leane: but anon after he so increaseth,
and is so fedde with other Riuers, that at the last
he emptieth himselfe with seuen mouthes. One of these,
they call great Po, and he gusheth out of it so swiftlie, that
beating aside the waues, he carrieth his streame a great
while in the same sort that he sent it out of the Landes
ende, and kéepeth his channell styll euen in the Sea, vntyll
the Riuer Ister flushing with lyke violence, out of the shore
ouer against him, dooth méete with him. Héereby it comes
to passe, that as men sayle through those places, where the
saide Riuers come on both sides, they drawe vp freshe water
among the waues of the Sea.
               From Po to Ancona ward, the waye lyes by Rauenna,
Arm
                        •
                     ne, Pisaure, the fraunchised Towne of Fane, and the
Riuers Metaurus and Esis. And in the verie skirt of those
two Forelandes, méeting one against an other, standeth the
saide Towne of Ancona,
                  Ancona, or Ancon, signifieth an elbowe. which hath that name giuen it by
the Greekes, because the scituation thereof resembleth the
bowing of a mans elbowe: and it is as a bound betwéene
the Marches of the French and Italian Nations.
               For when men are passed this Towne, they come vpon
the coast of Picene, wherein are the Citties, Numana,
Potentia, Claterna, and Cupra: the Castles of Firmum,
Adria, and Truent, with a Riuer running thereby of
the same name. From thence is the Sea coast of Senogallia,
vnto the mouth of the Riuer Aterne: the Citties
whereof are Bucar and Histon.
               
               
                  The Daunians haue the Riuer Tiferne, the Citties Cliterne,
Lucrine, and Theane, and the Mountaine Garganus.
There is a Baye in Appulia, inclosed with a whole shore,
which is called Vrias, of small roome, and for the most part
rough to come vnto. Uttermore, is Sypunt, or (as the
Greeks call it) Sypius, & a riuer that runneth by Canusium,
and is called Aufidus. Afterward are Barium, Egnatia, and
Rudie, ennobled with Ennius,
                  E
                        ••
                     ius the Poet who was of that Cittie. And
in Calabria, are Brunduse, Valece, Lupie, and Mount Hydrus,
together with the plaines of Salent, and the Sea coast
of Salent, and a Greeke Cittie, named Gallipole. Hitherto
extendeth the Adriatishe Sea, and hitherto extendeth the
one side of Italie. The front of it (as we haue saide) splitteth
into two hornes. But the Sea that is receyued in
betwéene them both, being once or twice disseuered with
thin Forelandes, is not enuironed with one whole banke,
nor receiued open and at large on leuell shore, but in
Bayes. The first is called the Baye of Tarent, which
lyeth betwéene the Forelandes of Sale and Lacinium: and
in it are Tarent, Metapont, Heracle, Croto, and Turium.
The second, is called the Baye of Scyllace, betwéene the
Forelandes of Pacinium, and Zephyrium, wherein are
Petilia, Caecine, Scyllace, and Mistre. The third, which is
betwéene Zephyrium and Brutium, enuironeth Consiline,
Caulone, and Locres. In Brutium are the Kinges Pillar,
Regium, Scylla, Taurian, and Metaure. From hence is the
turning into the Tuscan Sea, and to the other side of the
same Land, on the which side are Terine: Hippo now called
Vibon: Temesa: Clampetia: Blanda: Buxent: Velia:
Palinure sometime the name of ye Maister of Aeneas Ship,
and now the name of a place: the Baye of Pesta, and the
Towne of Pesta: the Riuer Silarus, the Cittie Picentia,
the Rockes which the Mermaides dwelt in, the Foreland
called Mineruaes Mount, the fatte groundes of Lucanie,
the Baye of Puteolis, the Citties of Surrent and Herculean,
the view of the Mountaine Vesuuius, the Pompeyes,
Naples, Puteolis, the Lakes of Lucrine and Auerne, the

                  Bathes, Missene▪
                   now the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of a place, sometime
the name of a Troiane Souldiour: Cumes, Linterne,
the Riuer Vulturne, the Towne Vulturne, the delectable
Sea coast of Campane, Sinuessa, Liris, Minturne, 
                        •
                     ormie,
Fundie, Tarracine, Circes house sometime called Circey.
Autium, Aphrodisium, Arde, Laurent, and Ostia on the
hither side of Tyber.
               
               Beyond it are Pyrgie, Anio, Newcastle, Grauiske, Cossa,
Telamon, Populon, Cecine, and Pises, places and names of
Hetruria. Then Luna, 
                        •
                     igurum, and 
                     
                        •
                     iguria, and Geane,
and Sabatia, and Albigaunum. Then hath it the Riuers
Paule and Varus, both falling from the Alpes, but Varus is
better knowne, because it endeth Italie.
               
               The Alpes themselues,The Alpes. spreading farre and wide from
these shores, doo first run a great step into the North: and
when they haue touched Germanie, then turning their
race, they goe foorth into the East, and disseuering cruell
Nations, extend euen into Thrace.
               
            
            
               Of the Prouince of Narbon.
               The fift Chapter.
               
                  
                     GAllia being deuided by the Lake Leman,
                  Now called Lake Losan, and the Lake of Geneua.
and the Moūtaine Gebenna, into two sides,
whereof the one butteth vppon the Tuscan
Sea, and the other vpon the Occean, extendeth
on the one side from Varus, and on the
other side from the Rhine vnto the Moūtaine Pyrene. The
part that bordereth vppon our Sea, was sometime called
Braccata, and is now called the prouince ofSauoy and Delphynoys. 
                  Narbone, and
is more inhabited and tylled, and therefore also more chéerfull.
Of the Citties that it hath, the wealthiest are Vasio
of the Vocontians, Vienna of theAuignion. 
                  Allobrogians,
                  Nimes, 
                  Auenio
of the Cauars,
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Nemausus of the Arecomikes, Tolous
                  
of theLanguedocke. 
                  Tectosages,
                  Orenge. 
                  Aurasio of the Secundanes,
                  Arle. 
                  Arelate
of the Sextanes▪
                   and Blitera of the Septumanes.
               
               But before them all steppeth the place where the Atacines
and Decumanes dwelt, from whence succour was ministred
to all those Countries: which place is nowe the
Martiall Narbo,
                  Narbon in Prouince. the name-giuer and beautie of the whole
Prouince. On the Sea coastes, are a fewe places of some
reputation. But the Citties stand thinne, because there
are fewe Hauens, and all that quarter lyeth open to the
South and South-west windes.
               
                  Nicea toucheth the Alpes, and so doth the Towne of Deceate,
and so doothRagnie. 
                  Antipolis. Afterwardes is Iulius Markette,
a Towne builded by the Octauians, and then foorth
Athenople, and Olbia, and Glauon, and Citarist, and Halycidon,
the Hauen of Marsilles,
                  Marsilles, and the foundation thereof. & in it the Towne of Marsilles
it selfe. This being founded by the Phoceans, and
builded in olde time among boistrous Nations, hath now
brought them in awe, and made them good neighbours,
farre vnlyke to that they were before. It is a woonderfull
thing, how easilie it then tooke sure setling, and vnto this
daye kéepeth the olde custome. Betwéene it and Rhone,
lyeth Marius Ditch, vpon the Sea side néere vnto the Poole
of the Auatikes, That shore carrieth a part of the saide Riuer
into the Sea, in a channell able to beare Ships: otherwise
it is but a rascall banke all stonie, where the report
goeth that Hercules fighting against Albion and Bergion▪
                  
the sonnes of Neptune, and hauing spent all his Artillerie,
called vppon his Father Iupiter, who rayned downe
stones to helpe him with: and a man would beléeue it had
rained stones in déede, there lye so many, and that euerie
where, and so farre of.
               The Riuer Rhone
                  Rhone. springeth not farre from the heads
of Ister and Rhyne, and then being receyued into the Lake
Losan, he holdeth on his race, and forcing himselfe whole
through the middes of it, passeth out as great as he entered
in. From thence being carried backe into the West, he
deuideth Gallia a while, and then turninig his course

Southward, kéepeth so foorth on, and becomming nowe
great with the resort of other Riuers, and continuallie
wexing greater, runneth 
                     •
                  ut at the Landes 
                     •
                  nd, betwéene
theThe people of Mount Pelier. 
                  Volscies and the Cauers.
               
               Beyond are the Pooles of the Volscies, the Riuer Lede,
the Castle Latara, and the Hyll Mesna, enuironed almost
round about with the Sea, and (but that it hangeth by a
narrowe Cawsie to the Land) a verie Ile. Then Soan
falling out of the Mountaines of Auue
                        •
                     ne,
                  The Riuer of Soan. runneth into
the Sea by Agatha, and Obris by Bliters. Atax comming
downe from the Mountaine Pyrene,
                  The riuer Atax. as long as he
hath none but the waters of his owne spring, runneth smal
and shallowe, and yet a great channell, howbeit not able
to beare a Shippe any where, sauing where he passeth by
Narbone.
               
               But when he swelleth with winter showres, he is woont
to ryse so high, that his bankes be not able to holde him in.
A Lake receyueth him▪ named Rubresus, verie large, but
where the Sea entreth into it narrowe mouthed. Beyond
is Leucata, as shore so named, and the Fountaine of
Salsusa, which sheadeth water, not swéete, but more brackishe
than the water of the Sea.
               Hard by, is a Féeld verie gréene with short and slender
Réede,A strange Feeld. but floting vpon a Poole that is vnderneath it. That
it is so, the middle part of it plainlie proueth, which being
cutte off from the rest about it, swimmeth lyke an Ile, and
suffereth it selfe to be shooued and drawne too and fro.
Moreouer, by those places that are cut through, appeareth
the Sea sheaded vnderneath it. Wherevpon, whether it
were through ignoraunce of the trueth, or that they were
purposelie disposed to make a leasing, it lyked as well our
Authors, as also the Greekes, to leaue in writing vnto such
as should come after, that Fishe was digged out of the
whole ground in that Countrie, which in déede comming
out of the déepe Sea thether, and there being killed by such
as babbed for them, was drawne dead out of the foresaide
holes.
               
                  From thence is the coast of the Sardones, and the lyttle
brookes of Thelis and Thicis, which are verie noysome
when they rise with any rage of water: and Ruscinum, a
Towne of the Romanes, and the Uillage Eliberris, which
sometime was a great Cittie, and nowe is but a slender
Monument of great wealth. Then betwéene the Forelandes
of Pyrene, is the Hauen of Venus▪
                   in a Baye of salt-water,
and a place calledIt may be called Herts-walke. 
                  Ceruaria, which is the ende of
Gallia.
               
            
            
               Of Spaine.
               The sixt Chapter.
               
                  
                     THe Mountaine Pyrene, first runneth
from hence into the Britishe Occean: and
then turning with a front into the mayne
Land, breaketh into Spaine, and shutting
out the lesser part of it on the right hand,
stretcheth out a long in one whole ridge, vntyll such tyme
as hauing passed a long race through all the Countrie, it
come to those shores that are butting vppon the West.
Spaine it selfe (sauing where it boundeth vppon Fraunce,)
is enuironed round about with the Sea. Where it cleaueth
vnto Fraunce, there is it narrowest, then widening it
selfe by little and little into our Sea and the Occean, and
wexing larger and larger, it runneth into the West, and
there becommeth broadest. It is so plenteous and fruitfull
of Men, Horsses, Iron, Leade, Brasse, Siluer and Golde,
that if in any place it be fruitlesse and vnlike it selfe▪ for
want of water, yet it beareth Flaxe andA shrub lyke Broome, wherof they make Cables. Spart. It is
distinguished by thrée names, one part is called Tarraconensis,
an other Boetica, and the thirde Lusitania.
                  Nauar, Aragon and Biskay. 
                  Tarraconensis,
butting with the one headde thereof against
Fraunce, and with the other vpon Boetica and Lusitania,
thrusteth out his sides Southward to our midland Sea,

and Northward to the Brittish Occean. The RiuerGuadiana. 
                  Anas
parteth Boetica from Lusitania, and therforeThe kingdom of Granado. 
                  Boetica
looketh into both the Seas, that is to saye, Westward into
the Athlantish Occean, and Southward into our midland
Sea.Portingale, Gallicia, and castile. 
                  Lusitania lyeth onelie against the Occean, that is
to wit, with his side into the North, and with his front into
the West.
               Of vpland Citties, in Tarraconensis, the famousest in
olde time werePalenze. 
                  Pallance, and Numance: and nowe the
famousest isSaragossa. 
                  Cae
                        •
                     auragusta: in Lusitania, Emerita: and
in Boetica, Astigie
                  Siuill. 
                  Ispalis, and Corduba. But if ye goe
along the Sea coast, next beyond Ceruaria▪
                   is a Rocke
which thrusteth Mount Pyrene into the déepe. Then followeth
the riuer Thicis vnto Rhoda, and Clodian to Empuries;
beyond which, is Iupiters Mount: the West part
whereof, (by reason of the stones that rise with a little distaunce
one aboue an other like greeces) they call Hanniballes
Stayers.Hanniballes Stayers.
               
               From thence toTerragon. 
                  Tarracon, are the little Townes, of
Blanda, Illuro, Betullo,
                  Barsilone. 
                  Barchino, Subur, and Tholobie:
and the little brookes of Betulo▪
                   next to Iupiters Mount,
and Rubricate, somewhat bigger at the shore, betwéene Subur
and Tholobie. The Cittie Tarraco, is the wealthiest
of all that stand vppon these coastes. Aboue it runneth a
meane Riuer called Tulcis, and beneath it runneth the
great riuerIber or Ebro▪
                   
                  Iberus. From thence the Sea windeth it selfe
into the Land, and entering at the first with great force, is
anon after deuided into two Bayes, with a Foreland called
Ferrar. The first Bay is named Sucron, which is the
greater of both, and receyueth the Sea at a verie large
mouth, wexing styll narrower the further it goeth. It receyueth
Serabis and Duria, and Sucron, riuers of no great
bignesse. It embraceth other Citties, but the best knowne
are Valentia, and that famous Towne of Saguntum, renowmed
both for faithfulnesse, and for the miseries it endured.
The other Bay following▪ called Ill
                        •
                     ce, hath Alone
and Lucence, and Illice whereof it taketh the name.

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  Héerhence, & from those things that are spoken of already,
vnto the Marches ofThe kingdome of Granado. 
                  Boetica, there is nothing woorth the
writing, except it beCartagene. 
                  Carthage, which Hasdruball Captaine
of the Carthaginens
                        •
                     s builded. On those coastes are
base Townes, which are not woorth the naming, but for
orders sake: as Virgie, in the Baye called Virgie Baye:
and without it Abdera, Suell, Hexie, Menoba,
                  Malliqua. 
                  Malaca,
Salduba, Lacippo, and Berbefull. Afterward followeth the
The Streights of Siuill, or the Streightes of Marocke. opening of the narrow Sea, where the two Mountains,
Abyla & Calpe doo in manner ioyne the shores of Europe
& Affricke▪
                   together, as we said at the beginning. They are
called the Pillers of Hercules, and both of them (but Calpe
more, and in manner wholie) beare foreward into the Sea.
The same being woonderfull hollowe on that part that is
toward the Sunne setting, openeth almost his midde side,
where into there shutteth a Bay, which is almost altogether
passageable as farre as it goeth, and beyond it is a
Caue. In that Bay, Carteia in times past (as some thinke)
called Tarteslus, and Mellaria enuironed with the Sea, a
Towne which the Phenicians passing out of Affricke inhabite,
(the place where I was borne) together with the
Townes of Bello and Besippo,
                  The place where the Author of this worke was borne. occupie the rest of the coast
on that narrow Sea, vntoSaint Vincents head. 
                  Iunos Mount. This rising into
the West into the Occean with a bowing ridge, and facing
the Forelands of Ampelusia which we told you to be
in Affricke, is the ende of Europe toward our Seas.
            
            
               The Iles of the mid-land Sea.
               The seuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     THe IleCales. 
                     Gades, which meeteth men
when they passe out at the Streightes, putteth
me in remembrance, chéefely to speake
of the rest of the Iles in our mid-land Sea,
before I procéede to treate of the coast of the

Occean, and the vttermost circuite of the maine Lands, as
I promised at the beginning.
               There are but few in Maeotis, (for it séemeth most handsome
to beginne there) and yet all of them are not inhabited,
for they yéeld not sufficient sustenaunce. Héerevpon it
comes to passe, that the inhabiters of them, drie the fleshe of
great Fishes in the Sunne, and braying it into fine powder,
vse it in sléede of meale. There are also but f
                     •
                  we in
Pontus, Leuke, a verie little Iland, scituate against the
mouth of Boristhenes, is syr named Achille
                        •
                     ,
                  Leuce or Achillea. because Achilles
lyeth buried there. Not farre thence is Aria,
                  Aria. which
being consecrated to Mars, did (as is reported in Fables,)
bréede Birdes▪ that cast foorth feathers as it had béene
Dartes, and therewith made great slaughter of such
as arriued on that coast. There are six at the mouthes
of Ister, of which Peuce
                  Peuce. is the best knowne, and the
greatest.
               
                  Thynnias
                  Thynnias. facing the borders of the Mariandynes, hath
a Cittie, which (because the Bithynians builded it) is called
Bithynis. Against the Bosphor of Thrace lye two
lyttle Iles,The Cyanies or Symplegades. distaunt a small space asunder, sometime beléeued
and reported to haue runne together, called Cyanies
and Symplegades. In Propontis,
                  Proconesus. onelie Proconesus is
inhabited. Without Hellespont, the notablest (of such as
lye vpon the coast of Asia) are Tenedos,
                  Tenedos. ouer against the
Foreland of Sigaeum, and such as are scituate against the
Foreland of Taurus, whereof I will speake in order as
they stand, which were called Macarons Iles,Macarons Iles. eyther because
they haue a happie ayre and soyle, or else because one
Macar and his Uicegerentes, helde them vnder theyr
dominion.
               Upon the coast of Troad is Lesbos,
                  Lesbos. and in it some tyme
were fiue Townes, Antissa, Pyrrha, Eressos, Ciraua, and
Mitylene. Upon Ionia, lye Chios, and Samos:
                  Chios & Samos. vpon Caria,
Cos:
                  Cos. Rhodes. vpon Lycia, Rhodes: and in eche of these Iles,
is a Cittie of the same name. In Rhodes where ere-while
thrée:The Chelidonies. 
                  Lindus, Cami
                        •
                     us, and Ialysus.
               
               
                  The Iles that lye against the head of Taurus, being combersome
to sayle vnto, are named Ch
                        •
                     lidonies. In the
greatest Baie that Asia receiueth, almost about the middes
thereof lyeth Cyprus:
                  Cyprus. which stretching it selfe from the
East into the West, shooteth with a streight ridge betwéen
Cilicia and Syria, and is verie great, as which sometime▪
conteined nine Kingdomes. And at this day it beareth certaine
Citties, whereof the notablest are Salamis, and Paphos,
and Palaepaphos, where the folke of that Countrie
holde opinion, that Venus set first foote a lande out of the
Sea. There is a lyttle Ile in Phenicia,
                  Ile Arados. called Arados,
conueied all in one Towne as much as is of it, but plentifullie
peopled, because it is lawfull for men to dwell, euen
vnder other mens roofes. Canope
                  Canop
                        •
                     . also is a lyttle one, at
the mouth of Nile▪
                   called Canopicke. Menelaus
                   Shipmaister,
Canopus, dying there by chaunce, gaue that name
to the Ile, and the Ile gaue name to the mouth of Nile,
Pharos
                  Pharos. is nowe ioyned with a bridge to Alexandria, but
in olde time (as is reported in Homers worke) it was disseuered
a whole dayes sayling from that coast. And if it
were so in déede, it maye well be coniectured, that Nile
hath béene the cause of so great alteration: who bringing
mudde continuallie downe his channell (and that chéeflie
when he floweth) and beating it to the shore, encreaseth the
Landes, and enlargeth the plat of them, by growing foreward
into the next shallowes.
               In Affricke, against the greater Syrt, is Cuteletos.
                  Cuteletos, against
the Forelandes of the lesser Sy
                        •
                     t, are Meniux, and
Cercinna:
                  Meniux and Cercinna. against the Baye of Carthage, lye Tarichie,
                  Tarichie and Aegates. and
the Aegates▪
                   renowmed with the Shipwracke of the Romanes.
Many mo are scituate against the coaste of Europe.
               
               In the Aegean Sea, néere to Thrace, are Thasos, Imbros,
Samothrace, Scandille, Polyegos, Scyathos, Halonesos
and Lemnos,
                  Thasos, Imbros, Samothrace, Scandill, Polyegos, Seyathos, Hole
                        •
                     esos, Lemnos▪
                   where the women in olde time are reported
to haue murthered all the men, and to haue helde
the Realme alone. Lemnos lyeth ouer against the Mountaine

                  Athos: the Bay of Pagasa, faceth 
                     
                        •
                     cyathos, and embraceth
Cicyneton. Euboea thrusteth out the Forelandes
of Geraestos,
                  Eubaea. and Caphareum, into the South: and Coeneum
into the North. It no where beareth any breadth: and
where it is narrowest, it is two miles ouer: but it is long,
and lyeth against all Baeotia, being disseuered from the
shore thereof, with a verie narrowe arme of salt-water,
which they call Euripus, a swift Sea▪ ebbing and flowing
seuen times a daye, and as often euerie night, with so vnmeasurable
strong tides, that it disappointeth Ships which
haue the winde full on their sayles.
               There are a fewe Townes in it, as Hestiaea, Eretria,
Pyrrha, Nesos, and Occhalia: but the wealthiest, are Carystos
and Chalcis. In Attis, is Helene knowne,
                     
                        ••
                     e Helene. for the
adultrie of Quéene Hellen, and Salamis
                  Salamine. better knowne,
for the destruction of the Persian Fléete.
               About Peloponesus, yet still in the Aegean Sea, are
Phitiusa, and Aegina,
                  Phitiusa, and Aegina. scituate against the shore of Epidaurus.
Against Troiezen (among vnrenowmed thinges) is
Calauria,
                  Calauria. renowmed otherwise with the death of Demosthenes.
In the Myrtoan Sea,Cythera▪
                   is Cythera set against Malea,
and Theganusa
                  Theganusa. against Acritas. In the Ionish Sea,
are Prote, Hyria, Cephalenia, Neritos, Same, Zacynthos,
Dulychium,
                  Prote, Hyria, Cephalenia, Neritos, Same, Zacynthos, Dulychium, & Ithaca. and (which is not to be reckoned among the
base sort) Ithaca, most chéefelie renowmed with the name
of Vlysses. In Epyre, are the Echinades, and the Strophades,
                  The Echinades and Strophades.
in olde time called Plottes. Against the Bay of
Ambrace, is Leucadie, and néere vnto the Adriatish Sea,
Corcyra: and these lye against the Lands of the Greekes,
                  Leucadie, Corcyra, now called Cortu.
and the Thracians.
               
               But innermore are Nelos, Ol
                        •
                     aros, Aegina, Ca
                        •
                     hon, Ios,
Thera, Hyaros, Hippuris, Donysa, Cianos, Chalcis, Icaria,
Pinaria, Nisyros, Lebynthos, Calydne, and Asine,
                  The Sporades. and all
these (because they lye scattering) are called Sporades. Afthem
follow Sicynus, Cythnos, 
                        •
                     yphnos, S
                        •
                     riphos, Rhene,
Paros, Scyros, Tenos, Myconos, Naxos, Delos, and Andros:
                  The Cyclades.
which (because they stand round, as it were in a cyrcle together)

are called 
                     
                        ••
                     clades. Aboue them in the mid Sea,
Candye. 
                  Crete, (furnished sometime with an hundred Citties)
sendeth out into the East a Foreland called Samon, and into
the West an other, called the Rammes-head. But that
is greater then Cyprus, it were lyke it. The same thereof
is blazed abroade▪ with many Fables: as the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
Europa, the Loues of Pasiphae and of Ariadne, 
                  
                     •
                  he cruelnesse
of Minotaure and his death, the workes of Dedalus▪
                  
and his flight in the ayre, and moreouer▪ his arriuall and
death: but most of all, for that the inhabiters yet doo showe
the Tombe of Iupiter
                  Iupiters Tombe▪
                   with his name grauen therevppon,
as an 
                     •
                  uident Monument of his buriall there.
               Of the Citties therein, the best knowne are Gnosus,
Gortyna, Lyctos, Lycastos, Holopixos, Phaestos, Cydon,
Manethusa, and Dictyn
                        •
                     a. Among the Hilles, the same
of Mount Ida excelleth, because it is saide that Iupiter was
nourished there. By the same Hill are Asticle, Naumachos,
Zephyre, Crise, Gaudos,
                  The Carpathian Sea. and thrée Townes called all
by the one name of Musagories, and Carpathus, whereof
the Carpathian Sea taketh his name.
               In the Adriatishe Sea,Absoros, Celaduse, Absyrtis, Trucon, Issa, Hydria, Electrides, blacke Corcyra, Tragurie, Diomedia, Aestria, Asine, Pharos. are Absoros, Celaduse, Absyrtis,
Issa, Trucon, Hydria, Electrides, blacke Corcyra, Tragurie,
Diomedia, Aestria, Asine, and an other Pharos lying
to Brundusium as the other did to Alexandria. Sicill (by
report) was sometime maineland, and ioyned to the Countrie
of Brutia, but afterward it was cut off by an arme of
the Sicilian Sea.Sicill. The same being narrowe and sharpe,
runneth with interchaungeable course, one while into the
Thuscane Sea, and an other while into the Ionish Sea,
rough, cruell, and renowmed with the terrible names of
Scylla and Charybdis. Scylla is a Rocke, and Charybdis
a Sea. both of them perillous, for such as passe by them.
               The Ile it 
                     •
                  elfe being great, and shooting foorth with
thrée headdes thrée sundrie wayes one from on other,The description of Sicill. maketh
the shape of the Greeke Letter called Delta. That
which looketh toward Greece, is named Pachynus: that

which looketh to Affricke ward, is called Lilybie: and that
which enclineth to Italie, and is direct against Scylla, is called
Pelorus of Pelorus a Shippe Maister, buried there by
Hanniball. For when Hanniball 
                  
                     •
                  ledde out of his Countrie,
as he was passing at waye into Syria, because that
to his sight a farre of, the shores séemed to ioyne all in one
                     •
                  
as if there had béene no Sea to passe through, thinking himselfe
to be betrayed by Pelorus, he killed him. The coast
that extendeth from thence to Pachinus, along the Ionish
Sea, beareth these notable thinges: Messana, Taurominium
Catina, Megaris, 
                        •
                     yracuse, and among these the woonderfull
Arethusa.
               
               It is a Fountaine wherein are séene againe,The Fountaine Arethusa. such things
as are cast into the Riuer Alpheus, which (as we haue
saide) sinketh into the Sea-banke of Peloponesus. Whervpon
it is beléeued, that the saide Riuer mingleth not himselfe
with the Sea, but sinking downe, carrieth his streame
in a channel, vnder Sea and land hither, and héere springeth
vp againe.
               Betwéene Pachynus and Lilybie, are Acragas, Heracle,
and Therme. Betwéene Lilybie and Pelorus, are Panormus
and Hymera. Innermore are the Leontines, Centuripine,
Hybla, and many others. Enna
                  Enna. hath the chéefe
fame, for the Temple of Ceres. Of Mountaines, the most
renowmed is Eryx▪
                  
                  E
                        •
                     yx. for the Temple of Venus builded by
Aenaeas▪
                   and Aetna▪
                  
                  Aetna. which in olde time nourished the Cyclopes,
and now burneth with continuall fire.
               Of the Riuers, Hymera is woorthy to be spoken of,A straunge running of a streame. because
that rysing in the verie harte of the Countrie, it runneth
two contrarie wayes, and cutting it into two halfes,
falleth with the one mouth into the Lybish Sea, & with the
other into the Thuscane Sea. About Sicill, in the narrowe
Sea of Sicill, is the IlandThis is supposed to haue been called Ogygia, and Calypsus. 
                  Aeoee, where Calypso is reported
to haue dwelled. Toward Affricke are Gaulos,
                  Malta. 
                  Melita, and Cosura: and toward Italie, Galata, and those
seuen which by common name and reputation, are called.

                  Aeolus Iles,Aeolus Iles, or Vulcanes Iles. that is to wit,It is also called Euonymos. 
                  Osteodes, Lipara, Didyme,
Phaenicusa, Ericusa, Hiera, and Strongyle, which burne
with continuall fire like Aetna. But Pithecusa, Leucothea,
Venaria, Sinonia, Capree, Prochyta, Pontia, Pandataria,
Phytonia, and Palmaria, lye against the side of Italie,
on this side the mouth of Tyber. Beyond are certayne
little ones, called Dianium, Iaginium, Carbania, Vrgo, Ilua,
and Capraria. Then are there two great ones, deuided
with the Hetruscan Sea: of which Corsica,
                  Corsica, called also Cyrnos. néerer to the
shore, being long and slender betwéene the sides, is inhabited
by barbarous people, sauing where the Romane
Townes, Aleria, and Marian are.
               
                  Sardinia,
                  Sardinia. butting vpon the Sea of Affricke, sauing that
it is narrower Westward than Eastward, is alike square
on all sides, and euerie where somewhat larger than Corsica
where it is largest. It is fruitfull, and of better soyle
then ayre: for as it is fruitfull, so is it almost pestilent. In
it the auncientest people, are the Ilians, and the auncientest
Citties, are Calaris and Sulchie.
               
               But on the coast of Fraunce, there are none woorthy to be
treated of, saue onelie the Stechades,
                  The Stechades. which are spread
from the coast of Ligurie, vnto Mas
                        •
                     ilia. The Baleards in
Spaine,
                  The Iles called Baleares, now called Mallorca and Minorca. scituate against the coast of Tarraconensis, are not
farre distant one from an other: and of their bignesse they
take their agréeable names of Maiorica and Minorica. In
Minorica, are the Castles of Iamno and Mago: and in Maiorica,
are the Romane Townes, Palma and Polentia.
The Ile Ebusus,
                  Ebusus, now called Euiza. being scituate directlie ouer, against the
Foreland of Ferrara, which is in the Bay of Sucron, hath
a Cittie of the same name, onelie barreine of Corne, but
of other thinges plentifull, and so cléere from all noysome
creatures, that it suffereth not somuch as those that of wild
thinges are made tame, to bréede and encrease, neither can
abide them to be brought in.
               Of a contrarie nature is Colubraria,
                  Colubraria, or Adderland, now called Cormedera. wherof it commeth
to my minde to write. For although it swarme with many
kindes of hurtfull Serpents, and be therefor vninhabitable:

yet notwithstanding when men arriue there, if
they bring of the earth of Ebusus with them, as many as
are within the precinct▪ that is strowed about with that
earth, are safe without perill, and the Serpentes (which otherwise
would aduenture to méete them and assault them)
shunning the sight of the dust (or rather some other secret
                     •
                  
power thereof) flie farre of for feare.
            
         
         
            
               ❧ The thyrd Booke
of that woorthy Cosmographer,
Pomponius Mela, concerning
the scituation of the world.
            
               The vttermost shores of Spaine.
               The first Chapter.
               
                  
                     THE coast of our
mid-land Sea is already spoken
of,The description of the Occean, and the opinion
                        •
                      of the ebbing and flowing thereof. and the Iles that it conteineth
are spoken of also. Now
remaineth that circuite which
(as we haue saide at the beginning)
is enuironed with the
great Occean, that vnmeasurable
Sea, which raging with
great tydes (for they so terme the mouinges thereof) one
while floweth into the féeldes, and an other while leauing
them a great way bare, flieth backe, from one to an other
successinelie, and not turning by enterchaungeable course,

eft into one and eft into an other. But when he hath
powred himselfe whole together out of the middes into all
shores, as well of Ilandes as of maine landes, though they
be contrarie one against other, he gathereth from them againe
into the middes, and retireth into himselfe, rushing
foorth alwaies with such violence, that he driueth backe
hudge streames, and eyther taketh the Beasts of the Land
vnwares, or else leaueth the Beasts of the Sea waterlesse.
Neither is it yet certainlie knowne, whether the world
cause it with his panting, and vttereth out on all sides about
him the water that he had drawne in with his breath,
for (as it seemeth to the learned sort) the world 
                     〈◊〉
                   a lyuing
wight: or whether there be some hollowe Caues in
the ground▪ for the ebbing Seas to retire into, and to lyft
themselues out againe when they are too full: or whether
the Moone be the cause of so great fléetings. This is certaine,
that according to the rysing and going downe of the
Moone, the course of the Occean varieth, and kéepeth not
one ordinarie time, but as she mounteth or falleth, so we
perceiue it to go and come.
               When men are come out hither, and pursue those parts
that are on the right hand, the Athlantish Occean, and the
coast of the front ofGranate. 
                  Boetica, receyueth them, which lyeth
in manner streight vnto the Riuer Anas,
                  Guadiana. sauing that once
or twice it withdraweth a lyttle into it selfe. The Turdules
and Bastule, inhabite it. In the hithermost Bay, is
a Hauen which they call Gad
                        ••
                     
                   Hauen, and a Wood which
they call▪
                  Of wylde Oly
                        •
                     fes. 
                  Oleastre. Then on the shore▪ is the Castle of
Ebor, and farre from the shore▪ is the Romane Towne
Asta, and without the Baye is the Temple and Altar of
Iuno. In the verie Sea is the Tombe of Geryon, set rather
vppon a Rocke, then in an Ile. The Riuer Boetis
comming out of the Countrie of Tarracon,
                  The riuer Boetis, now called Guadalquebir. runneth a long
while▪ almost through the middle of this Countrie, in one
channell as he sprang vp at his head. But afterward hauing
made a great Lake. not farre from the Sea, he ryseth
double▪ as it were out of one spring, and issueth out as great

in either of them, as he came in single in his owne. Then
boweth there an other Baye inward vnto the ende of the
Shore, vpon the which Baye stande
                     •
                   the little Townes of
Olitingie and Onoba.
               
               Beyond the Riuer Anas,
                  Portingale. 
                  Lusitunia (on that side where
it looketh into the Athlantishe Occean) steppeth out at the
first with a great bulke into the déepe, and afterward shrinking
backe againe, retireth further inward than 
                     
                        •
                     oetica.
Where it beareth foreward, it receyueth the Sea twise into
it, and so is deuided into thrée Forelands. That which is
next the Riuer Anas, (because it passeth foorth from a broad
base, and by little and little groweth into a narrowe point)
is calledWedge-feeld, or Wedge-land. 
                  Cu
                        •
                     eus Ager. The second, they call Holy Head:
and the third, Great Head. In the Wedge, are M
                        •
                     tylis, Balsa,
and Ossobona: In Holie Head, are Lacobriga, and Hanniballes
Hauen: and on the Great Head, is Ebora. Betwéene
these thrée Heads, are the Bayes: in the hithermost
wherof is Salacia, & in the other is the CityLisbone. 
                  Vlisippo, and
the mouth of the Riuer Tagus, which ingendreth Gold and
precious Stones. From these Forelandes to that parte
which retired backe, is opened a great winding gap, wherin
be the olde Turdules, and their Townes: and the Riuers,
Monda and Durius, of which Monda runneth out almost
through the middest of the side of the last mentioned
Foreland: and Durius swéepeth by the verie roote of it.
That Front for a while hath a direct shore, which afterward
making a little winding, shooteth foorth anon againe,
and then shrinking in once or twise, procéedeth right foorth
with a direct banke vnto the Foreland which we callNow called the Landes end. 
                  Celticke.
All this Coast is inhabited by the Celts, from the
Riuer Durius, to the bought of Gronium, & through their
borders runne the Riuers Auo, Celandus, Nebis, Minius,
and (which beareth the name of forgetfulnesse) Limia. The
bought it selfe imbracing the Cittie Lambriaca, receyueth
the Riuers of Ie
                        •
                     na and Via. The foremost part of the
bought, is inhabited by the Presamarkes, through whose
Country, the Riuers Tamaris and S
                        •
                     rs, hauing their heads

not farre one from an other, doo runne into the Sea, Tamaris▪
                  
at the Hauen of Artabrie, and Sars at a Towre renowmed
with the name of Augustus.
               
               The rest of the Countrie beyond, is inhabited by the Tamarikes,
and Nerians, who be the last on that coast. For hitherto
the shores lye full vpon the West: and from thencefoorth,
the Land turneth with full side to the North, from
the Celtike Foreland, to the Foreland of Scithia. From this
Celtike Foreland, vnto theBiscay. 
                  Cantabers, the Coast is almost
right out, sauing that there be a few small Bayes and
little Forelandes. On that coast, are first the Artabers, and
Ianasum, Celtike Nations, and next them the Asturians.
In Artabria, a Bay with a narrowe mouth▪ receyuing the
Sea into a large roome, bendeth about by the Cittie Adrobike,
and the mouthes of fowre Riuers: whereof two be
but smallie regarded▪ euen of the dwellers by: and by the
other two, the Riuers Mearus and Narius run into Libunca.
On the shore of the Asturians▪
                   standeth the Towne
of Naega: and in a certaine Nesse there are thrée Altars▪
which they call Sestians, which are ennobled with the name
of Augustus, whereby they ennoble these Lands also, which
were vnnoble afore.
               Neuerthelesse, from the Riuer which is called Salia, the
coast beginneth to drawe backe by little and little, and
more and more to streighten the widenes of Spaine, which
yet notwithstanding is wide still, gathering the Landes into
so narrowe a roome, that betwéene the two Seas where
Spaine butteth vppon Fraunce, Spaine is narrower by the
one halfe, than where it reacheth into the West. That
Coast is helde by the Cantabers and Vardules. Among
the Cantabers are diuers people and Riuers, howbeit,
whose names can not be vttered by the mouth of vs Romanes.
               
               Through those Countries, comes downe the Riuers▪
                  Salenos, and Saurium: and through certaine people, called
the Autrigones, and Origeuiones, commeth downe the Riuer
Nesua. The Riuer Deua runneth by Tritium▪ Tobolicum,
                  
and beyond that, Magrada passeth by Iu
                        •
                     rissa, and
Iason. The Vardules being one entyre Nation, extend from
hence to the head of Mount Pyren, and so close vp 
                     〈◊〉
                   the
Countrie of Spaine.
               
            
            
               The vttermost coasts of
Gallia.
               The second Chapter.
               
                  
                     NOw followeth the other side of Gallia,
                  
whose Coast shouing somewhat forewarde
into the déepe, and anon stepping foorth, wellnéere
as much into the open Sea, as Spaine
had retired backe, bresteth the Lands of Cantabrie,
and winding about with a great circuite, turneth
his side vnto the West. Then turning againe to y• North,
it spreadeth out with a long and streight coast, vnto the
bankes of the Rhyne. It is a Land verie fruitfull, théefelie
of grasse and corne, & pleasant to behold for great Forrests.
Whatsoeuer kind of séede can away with n
                     •
                   cold, the countrie
yéeldeth it not euerie where, neither is there any great
store of hurtfull Beasts. The people themselues are proud,
superstitious, and sometime also they haue béene outragious:
insomuch that they haue beléeued, that the Sacrificing
of men, was the best and acceptablest thing to the Goddes.
There remaine yet still some remnants of their foreworne
crueltie: insomuch, that although they abstaine from vtter

                     ••
                  eaing of men, yet notwithstanding, they bring them to the
Altars, and taste of their blood. Neuerthelater, they haue
their kinde of eloquence, and teachers of wisedome, whome
they call Druides. These professe themselues to know the
greatnesse and fashion of the world, the moouinges of the
Heauen, and of the Starres, and the will of the Goddes.
They teach many things, to the men of chéefe Nobilitie in

that Nation, priuilie and a long time together, euen by the
space of twentie yéeres, in some Caue of the earth, or in vnséene
corners.
               One of the thinges which they teach, is escaped into common
knowledge: namelie, that mennes soules are euerlasting,
and liue an other life after they be departed out of
their bodies: and that is to the intent, that men should be
the better for the warres. And therefore when they burned
or buried their dead, they sent with them an account of
their affaires, agréeable to their state aforetime when they
were aliue, yea, and also a demaund of the debtes, which
they owed or had owing vnto them: yea, and there were
some which did willinglie cast themselues into the fyres▪
where their fréendes corses were burnt, as folke that looked
to liue together with them.
               The Countrie which they inhabite, beareth wholie the
name of Gallia Comata. Of Nations, are all comprehended
vnder thrée chéefe names, and are limitted by great Riuers.
For from Mount Pyren▪
                   to the RiuerGeround. 
                  Garumna, is Aquitane,
from thence toSeane. 
                  Sequana, dwell theFrench men. 
                  Celtes: and
from thence to the Rheine, inhabite theThe people of the Lowe Countries, as Braband, Holland, Zealand, Flaunders, &c. 
                  Belgians. Of the
Aquitanes, the most renowmed are the Auscianes: of the
Celtes, the Heduanes: and of the Belgians, the Treuires.
The wealthiest Citties, are among the Treuires, Augusta:
among the Heduanes, Augustodunum: and the Auscians,
Elusaberris. The Riuer of Geround▪
                   falling out of Mount
Pyren, runneth a long while shallowe▪ and scarce sayleable,
sauing when he swelleth, by reason of winters rayne, or of
the melting of the snowe. But wh
                     •
                  n he is once increased▪
by méeting with the comminges in of the flowing Occean,
and carrieth both his owne waters, and the Occeans also▪
in their going backe againe: he becommeth somewhat fulser,
and the further he goeth, still the wider. At length, being
like a great arme of the Sea, he not onelie beareth

                     •
                  reat Shippes, but also swelling after the manner of the

                     •
                  aging Sea, he tosseth the Sailers, and that very cruellie, if

the winde and the tide be one against an other. In this Sea
is an Iland called Antros, the which the Inhabitants therof
doo thinke to hang loose, and to be lift vp with the rysing
of the water, because that when it séemeth high, it ouerdréepeth
the water, and when the waues are vp to their
full, they not onelie inuiron it as afore, but also ouerpéere it:
and the thinges which at other times would not be séene
for the bankes and hilles, doo then lye open to sight, as from
a higher place.
               From the going out of Geround, beginneth the side of the
Land that shooteth into the Sea, and lyeth right ouer against
the coast of Cantabria. The midde partes thereof
are inhabited by sundrie sortes of people, bending downeward
from the Santons, vnto the Osismians. For from
thence againe, the front of the shores faceth the North againe,
and so holdeth on to theThe people of A
                        •
                     toys and Picardie. 
                  Morines, which are the vttermost
people of Fraunce. And the Morines haue not any
thing that is better 
                     •
                  nowne, then the Hauen that is called
Calis. 
                  Gessoriacum.
               
               The Rh
                        •
                     in
                        •
                     
                   falling downe from the Alpes, maketh two
Lakes within a lyttle of his head, namelle,It is called now a dayes, the lower Lake and Cellar. 
                  Ve
                        •
                     et, and

                     
                        •
                     t is called Poden-sea, and the Lake of Constance. 
                  Acronie, from thence running a long time whole againe,
and in one channell, he is dispearsed asunder againe▪ within
a lyttle of the Sea, Howbeit yet Riuer-lyke styll on the
left hand, euen vntyll he runne out into the Sea.
               But on the right hand, at the fyrst he is narrowe, and
lyke himselfe: but afterward, his bankes giue waye, so as
he becommeth not a Riuer, but a great Lake, and hauing
fylled the féeldes, is called Fl
                        •
                     uo, and imbracing an Iland
of the same name, he becommeth narrower
againe, and falleth lyke a Riuer againe
into the Sea.
            
            
               
               Of Germanie.
               The third Chapter.
               
                  
                     FRom hencefoorth to the Alpes, Germanie
                  
is bounded on the West, with the Rhyne, on
the South, with the Alpes themselues, on
the East, with the borders of the Nations
of Sarmatia, and on the North, with the Occean
Sea. The Inhabitants are huge of body,
and hautie of minde, and according to the sauadgenesse
that is bredde in them, doo inure both of them, as well their
mindes to battell, as their bodies to the custome of paines
taking. In the greatest colde that is, they goe naked, tyll
they growe to mans estate, and childe-hood is verie long among
them. The men goe cloathed in Mandilions, or in
barkes of Trées: and be the winter neuer so sharpe, they
not onelie can endure to swimme, but also haue a delight in
it. They be at warre with their next borderers, and they
picke quarrelles to them of pleasure, and not of desire to
raigne, or to inlarge the thinges which they possesse, (for
they doo not greatlie manure the grounds which they haue)
but to make Countries about them waste. Force is their
Lawe, insomuch that they be not ashamed euen of robberie
and murther: onely they be good to Straungers, & mercifull
to suppliaunts. They be so hard and carelesse of their fare,
that they féede euen vpon rawe fleshe, either new killed, or
softened by kneading it with their handes and féete, in the
skinnes of the Cattell and wilde Beastes themselues, after
it is stiffe for colde.
               The Land is troublesome with the multitudes of Riuers,
combersome with the multitude of Mountaines, and
for a great parte vntrauelable for Wooddes, Fennes, and
Marishes. Of Fennes and Marishes, the greatest are Su
                        •
                     
                     cia,
Mesia, and Melsiagum. Of Wooddes, the greatest is

                  Herts-wald. 
                  Hercynia. There are some other also that beare name,
but as Hercynia is the greatest, for it is thrée score dayes
iourney ouer, so is it also the best knowne. The highest of
the Mountaines, are Taurus and Rhetico, sauing those
which it is scarcelie possible for the tongue of a Romane to
vtter.
               The notablest Riuers, of them that runne foorth into other
Nations, areDanow or Tonware. 
                  Danubius, andRhone. 
                  Rhodanus: of them
that runne into the Rhyne, Maenus, and Lupia: of them
that fall into the Occean,Emse. 
                  Amisius,
                  Weser. 
                  Visurgis, and Albis.
Uppon the Riuer Albis, is the great gulfe called Codanus,
full of Ilandes, both great and small. The sharpe Sea▪
which is receyued into the bosome of those shores, dooth
no where beare any great breadth, nor any likenesse of a
Sea, but is shed out wanderinglie and dispearsedlie, after
the likenesse of Riuers, by waters that runne into it,
and oftentimes runne cleane through it. Where it beateth
vpon the shores, it is hemmed in with the bankes of Ilands
not farre distant asunder, so as it is euerie where almost of
a lyke scantling, narrowe, and resembling an arme of the
Sea, bowing and bending from place to place▪ with a long
brew. In it are the Cimbrians, and Theutons, and beyond
them theSome thinke these to be the Pomeranes, and some, to be Prutenes. 
                  Hermions, which are the vttermost people of
Germanie.
               
            
            
               Of Sarmatia.
               The fourth Chapter.
               
                  
                     SArmatia being broader innermore, then
                  
at the Seas side, is deuided from the former
Coūtries, by the riuer Visula, from whence
it extendeth backe to the riuerDanowe. 
                  Ister. The
people in their behauiour and Armour, resemble
much the Parthians. But as their Countrie is of
sharper ayre, so be they of fiercer disposition. They abide

not in Citties, no nor in any certaine dwelling places: but
as pasturage prouoketh them, or as the enimie fléeing or
pursuing, giueth them cause, so doo they euer conuey their
goodes and Cattell with them, dwelling alwayes in Tents
lyke warriers, frée & vnbridled, and so vnmeasurablie fierce
and cruell, that euen their women goe to battell with the
men, & to the intent they may be the fitter for the purpose,
as soone as they be borne, their right pappes are seared, that
the hand which is to be put foorth to seruice, maye be the
more at libertie to strike, and their breast become the more
manlike. To bend a bowe, to hunt, and to ride, are the tasks
of Maidens. To encounter the enimie, is the wages of women
growen: insomuch, that not to haue stricken an enimie,
is counted a heinous crime, and for their punishment,
they be enioyned to liue Maidens still.
            
            
               Of Scithia.
               The fift Chapter.
               
                  
                     FRom thence-foorth, the Sea coastes of
Asia, sauing where the snowe lyeth continuallie,
and where the colde is intollerable, are
inhabited by the Nations of Scithia, called
almost all by one name, vniuersallie Sages.
The first vpon the Sea coast of Asia, be the
Hyperboreans, furthest North beyond the Riphoean mountaines,
vnder the verie North-pole: in which Countrie
the Sunne dooth not rise and set daylie, as it dooth with vs:
but it ryseth in the Lenton equinoctiall, and setteth not againe,
tyll the Haruest equinoctiall, by reason whereof, it is
daye by the space of sixe whole monethes together, and likewise
night, by the space of other sixe monethes. The Land
is narrowe, open to the Sunne, & fruitfull: the Inhabiters
are most vpright dealers, and liue both longer, & more happilie
than other men. For they enioying alwaies feastfull

peace, can no skill of warre, nor of quarelling, but doo buste
themselues about matters of Religion, specially cōcerning
Apollo, the first fruites whereof, they be reported to haue
sent to Delos, at the first by certaine Uirgins of theirs, and
afterward by their neighbour Nations, deliuering them
from one to an other, styll further & further, which custome
they kept long time, vntill at length it was restrained,
through default of those Nations. Their dwelling is in
Woods and Forrests: and when suffizance, or rather wearines
of life commeth vpon them, then decking themselues
with garlands, they throwe themselues chéerfully headlong
into the Sea▪ from a certaine rocke, which vnto them is the
honourablest buriall that can be.
               The Caspian Sea breaketh into the maine Land, at the
first with a narrowe and long gutte like a riuer, and when
it is flowne in after that manner▪ in a streight channell, it
sheadeth abroade into thrée Bayes: namelie, into the Hircanian▪
                  
directlie against the mouth, into the Scithian on th
                     •
                  
left hand, and on the right hand into that which peculiarlie,
and by the name of the whole, is called the Caspian
Baye. It is altogether rough, cruell, harborlesse, open on
all sides to winde and weather, and more replenished with
noysome Beastes, then other Seas are, and therefore lesss
nauigable.
               At the right hand as ye enter in, the Scithians syr named
Grazyers. 
                  Nomades, possesse the Sea shores. Within it to the Caspian
Bay, are the Caspians, & the Amazons, otherwise called
Sauromats. At the Hircaniā
                   Bay, be the Abanes, Mosks, and
Hircanians. At the Scithian Bay, be the Amards, & Pesiks,
and at the enteraunce it selfe, the Derbiks. Many Riuers,
both great and small, do run into that coast: but the famousest
is Araxes, which springing out of the side of Moūt Taurus,
commeth downe from the Thunder-hilles in one channell,
and issueth out into the Caspian in two. So long as he
cutteth through the féelds of Armenia, he glideth calme and
styll, so as although ye looke neuer so wistlie vppon him,
ye cannot discerne which way he 
                     •
                  unneth.
               
                  But when he commeth downe into the rougher places,
then being pinched in on either side with Rockes, and the
more he is pent becomming the more swift, he breaketh
himselfe against the stones, that lye vp in his way, and by
reason thereof, tumbleth downe with great flushing and
noyse, so swiftlie, that by reason of his forcible fall, he slyppeth
not plum downe to the ground vnderneath him, but
spowteth a farre of without any channell, carrying his waters
aloft more then the space of an acre, and bearing himselfe
vp in a hanging streame without channell, at length
commeth bowing downe againe like a bowe, and becomming
calme againe, passing on quietlie, and scarse mouing,
from thence into the foresaide Bay.
               
                  Cyrus & Cambises, springing out of the foot of the next hil▪
which is called Coraxus, run two sundrie waies, & passing
on a great while through Iberia and Hyrcania in channels
farre distaunt, afterward being receyued into one Lake,
not farre from the Sea, they runne out into the Hyrcanian
Bay, both at one mouth. Iaxartes and Oxos passe into the
Scithian Bay, out of the Countries of the Sogdianes, from
the Desartes of Scithia: Laxartes being great from his verie
spring, and Oxo
                        •
                     
                   becomming greater by the falling of
other Riuers into him, who kéeping his course a whyle
from the East into the West, turneth aside first among the
Dahanes, and taking his course into the North, openeth his
mouth betwéene the Amards, and Pesikes. The Forrests
of Hyrcanie bring foorth other ouglie beastes, but speciallie
the Tiger, a cruell kinde of wilde beast, and so swift, that
they be woont euen with ease to ouertake a horse man▪ that
is gone away vpon the spurre, and that not once or twise,
but diuers times▪ after they haue gone backe againe to the
place they came out from. The cause héereof is, that when
the horse men hauing caught vp a whelpe of theirs, makes
haste to carrie it away, and to eschewe the furie of them,
when they come néere, dooth of pollicie laye downe one of
many that he had taken away: the damme catching vp the
whelpe that was cast downe, carries it home to her kennel,

and comming backe againe dooth the lyke oftentimes, vntyl
the robber haue escaped by flight into places of more resort,
then the Tygers dare aduenture into. What was beyond
the Caspian Bay, was a long time doubtfull, namelie, whether
the foresaide Occean, or whether some Land incombred
with
                     •••
                   cold, hauing neyther bound nor end, were cast
out beyond it. But besides, Homer, and the naturall Philosophers,
who haue affirmed the whole world to be becléeped
with the Sea: Cornelius Nepos, though later in time,
yet certainer of credite, reporteth the same. And for witnes
thereof, he sciteth Quintus Metellus the Swift, declaring
that he made such a report as this: namelie, that when he
had the gouernemēt of the Galliaze as Proconful there, the
King of the Sweuians sent him certaine Indians for a present:
and that when he asked by what means they came into
those Countries, he vnderstood that they were brought away
by force of tempest from the sea coast of India, and that
hauing passed ouer the space that is betwixt that & Sweueland,
at length they arriued vpon the coast of Germanie.
Now therefore remaineth the maine Sea: but the residue
of that side is frozen with continuall frost, and therefore is
vninhabited.
            
            
               The Ilandes of Spaine, and of
the North-partes.
               The sixt Chapter.
               
                  
                     AGainst the sayde Coastes which I haue
glaunced at from the angle of Boetica hitherto,
there lye many vnrenowmed, yea, and
also namelesse Iles. But of those which I
am loth to ouerpasse, Gades butteth vpon the
dery Streightes, and being cutte off from the verie firme
Land by a narrowe space, and as it were but by a Riuer,

carrieth almost a direct shore, where it is néerest the maine
Land. Where it faceth the Occean, there bolting out with
two heads into the déepe, it shrinketh in his mid-shore, in
one of the which it beareth a wealthie Cittie of the same
name, and in the other a Temple of the Egiptian Hercules,
noble for the builders, for the Religion, for the Antiquitie,
and for the ritches thereof. The builders thereof were the
Tyrians: the holinesse of it, groweth of the bones of him
that lyes buried there: as for the yéeres, what a number is
there of them? The beginning of them, comes from the
times of Troy: and continuaunce of time, hath nourished
the wealth.
               Against Lusitania, is Erythia,
                  Erythia. where we reade that Geryon
dwelt: and other Iles without peculiar names, so
fruitfull of soyle, that when Corne is once sowen, the séede
that sheadeth as they fell the harnest, springeth vp againe
from time to time, and yéeldeth at the least, seuen croppes
one after an other, and sometimes mo. On the Celtishe
coast are some,The Tynn
                        •
                      Mynes. which (because they abound with Leade and
Tinne) are called all by one name, Cassiterides.
               
               
                  Sena, being scituate in the Britishe Sea, against the countrie
of the Osismydes, is renowmed with the Oracle of the
God of the Galles, whose Uowes in number nine, are
hallowed to continuall Uirginitie. They call them Gallicens,
and are of opinion, that through the singular wisdome
wherewith they are endued, they rayse the seas and winds
with their charmes, and transforme themselues into what
Beastes they will, and heale such diseases as to others are
incurable, and knowe thinges to come, and prophesie of
them, but not vnto any other, then such as sayle thither for
the nonce, and come of set purpose to demaund 
                     〈◊〉
                   counsell
of them.
               What manner of thing Brittaine is, and what manner
of folke it bréedeth, we shall shortlie be able to make more
tried report. For beholde, our most puissaunt Prince is
now disclosing of it, which hath so long béene shutte vp, and
as a conquerour, not onelie of vnsubdued, but also of vnknowne

Nations before his time, his bringing home the
certeintie of his owne exploytes, to be declared and published
in Triumph, in lyke sort as he endeuored to come to
them by Battell.
               Howbeit, as we haue hitherto heard of it,The description of Brittaine, as it was knowne in the tyme of Mela, the Author of this worke. shooting betwéene
the North and the West, it faceth the mouth of
Rhyne, with a great Angle, and then withdrwing his shoring
sides, butteth with the one of them vpon Fraunce, and
with the other vpon Germanie. Afterwardes being pulled
backe, with a continuall banke of a direct shore, it sharpeneth
it selfe againe into diuers Angles, and is thrée cornered
verie like Sicilie, plaine, great, and fruitfull: howbeit,
of such thinges as are rather for the foode of Cattell,
than for the sustenaunce of men. It beareth Wooddes,
Forrests, and verie great Riuers, which ebbe and flowe after
the manner of the Sea, whereof some bréede Pearles,
and precious Stones.
               It beareth Nations, and Kinges of Nations, but they
are all vnciuill, and the further they be from the mayne
Land, somuch the more vnacquainted with the wealth of
other Nations: onely ritch of Cattel and Land: and (whether
it be for to beautifle themselues; or for some other purpose)
they be stained all their bodies ouer. They séeke occasion
of warre, and picke quarrels one with an other from
time to time, speciallie, for desire of soueraigntie, and to enlarge
those thinges which they possesse.The fashion of armed Chariorts, which the Brittons vsed in Battell. They fight not
onelie on horsebacke and on foote, but also in Wagons and
Chariottes, and are armed after the manner of the Galles.
They call those Chariots Couines, which are set with sithes
round about the naues.
               Aboue Brittaine is Ireland, almost of lyke space,Ireland. but on
both sides equall, with shores e
                     •
                  elong, of an euyll ayre to

                     •
                  ypen thinges that are sowne, but so aboundant of grasse,
which is not onelie rancke, but also swéete, that the Cattell
maye in a small parte of the daye, fyll themselues, and
if they be not kept from féeding, they burst with grazing
ouer-long.
               
                  The Inhabiters thereof are vnnurtured, and ignoraunt
of all vertues, more then other Nations, but yet haue they
some knowledge, howbeit altogether voide of godlinesse.
There are thirty Ilandes,The Iles of Orkenay. called Orchades, disseuered with
narrowe spaces, one from an other. There are seuen also
called Hemodes, scattered against Germanie, in that gulfe
which we called Codan. Of these, lyke as Codanonia,
which the Theutons inhabite to this day, excéedeth the rest
in bignesse, so also it excelleth them in fruitfulnesse. Those
that lye against Sarmatia, by reason of the interchaungeable
comming and going of the Sea, and because the space
that is betwixt them, is sometimes couered with water,
and sometimes left bare, séeme one while to be Ilands, and
an other whyle all one with the maine Land. Moreouer,
that in them are Oones,
                  Oones. which féede onelie vpon egges, of
water-fowles, & Oten cakes: and the Hyppopodes,
                  Hippopodes. with
féete like Horsses: and the Satmales,
                  Satmales. which haue sowsing
eares, so side and large, that they are able to wrappe in their
whole bodies, and serue them to cloath them with, being otherwise
naked: besides that, it is reported in Fables, I
finde it also in such Authors, as I am not ashamed to followe.
Iseland. 
                  Thule is scituate against the Coast of the Belgies,
renowmed in the Poetries, both of the Greekes and of vs.
In it, because the Sunne riseth and setteth farre of, the
nightes are verie short: in Winter-season darke, as in other
places, and in Sommer lightsome, because at that time
the Sunne mounting somewhat high, although he be not
séene, yet sheadeth a glimmering light into the partes néere
where he goeth. But in the heart of Summer, there is no
night at all, because at that time being néerer sight, he sheweth
not onelie a brightnesse, but also the greate
                     •
                  t part of
himselfe.
               
                  Talga, in the Caspian Sea, being plentifull without tyllage,
hath aboundaunce of Corue and all fruites: howbeit,
the people néere aboutes, thinke it vnlawfull, and as yll as
Church-robbing, to touch any of the thinges that growe
there, for they thinke they are prepared for the Goddes, and

that they are to be spared for the Goddes. Also, against
those coasts which we saide to be Desart, ly
                     •
                   some Ilandes
that are Desart likewise, which being namelesse of themselues,
are called the Scithish Iles. From these the Coast
turneth againe into the East, and extendeth to the Coast
that beholdeth the Sunne rising. This from the Scithish
Foreland, lying directlie against the same side, first is altogether
vntrauelable for snowe, and afterward for sauadgenesse
of the Inhabiters, vnhusbanded.
               TheEaters of man
                        •
                      fleshe. 
                  Anthropophages and Sages, and Scithians, disseuered
with a Countrie which is a wildernesse, by reason
it swarmeth with wilde Beastes. Beyond againe be waste
groundes, annoyed with Beasts, vnto the Foreland of Tabis,
which hangeth into the Sea: farre from thence ryseth
Mount Taurus in height. Betwéene them, are the Seres, a
Nation ful of vpright dealing, as appeareth by the exchange
of wares. that they make by leauing of their thinges in the
wildernesse, and going their way.
            
            
               Of India.
               The seuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     INdia, a Countrie right famous, which
                  
butteth not onelie vppon the East Occean,
but also vppon the Southerne, which wée
haue called the Indishe Occean, and on the
West, is bounded with the ridges of Mount
Taurus, occupieth as much space along the Sea coast, as a
Shippe with full Sayles, maye passe in thrée score dayes,
and as many nightes.
               It is so farre distaunt from our Countries, that in some
part thereof, none of both the North waies appeare, and
contrariwise to other Regions, the shaddowes of thinges
fall into the South. Howbeit, it is fruitfull, and replenished

with sundrie sortes of men and beastes.Ants as bigge as Mastiues. It bréedeth Antes,
full as bigge as the greatest sort of Mastiues, which after
the manner of Gryffons, are reported to kéepe Golde digged
out of the innermore partes of the earth, and to put
them in daunger of their liues, that dare aduenture to touch
it.
               Also,Hage Serpents. there be some so vnmeasurable great Serpentes,
that they ouerthrowe Elephantes, with byting them, and
with winding their tayles about them. In some places, the
Soyle is so fatte and fruitfull,Hunny, Cotten and Reedes. that Hunny droppeth from
the leaues of Trées, Wooddes beare Wooll, and the Réedes
being cl
                     •
                  aued in the middes, make Boats betwéen knot and
knot, able to carrie two men a péece, and some thrée men.
               Of the Inhabiters, the Apparell and manners are diuers.
Some are clad in lynnen,The manners and apparell of the auncient Indians, or with the wooll aforesaide, some
with the skinnes of Beastes and Birdes: some goe naked:
some hide onelie their priuie members: some are lowe of
stature and small: othersome are so tall and hudge of body,
that they take the backes of Elephantes, and ride vpon
them as easilie and handsomelie, as we doo vpon our Horses,
and yet the Elephantes are verie great and large
there.
               Some thinke it good to kill no liuing thing, nor to eate
any fleshe. Some liue onelie by Fishe: some kill their
neighbours and parents, in manner of Sacrifice, before
they pine away with age and sicknesse, and thinke it
not onelie lawfull, but also godlie, to eate the bowelles
of them when they haue killed them. But if they
bee attached with olde age or sicknesse, they get them
out of all companie into the Wildernesse, and there without
sorrowing for the matter, abide the ende of theyr
life.
               The wiser sort of them, which are trained vp in the profession
and studie of wisedome, 
                     •••
                  ger not for death, but
hasten it, by throwing themselues into the fire, which is
counted a glorie.
               
                  Of the Citties which they inhabite (which are verie many,Nysa and mou
                        ••
                      Meros.)
the famousest and greatest is Nysa: a
                     •
                  d of the Mountaines,
Meros, (which is hallowed vnto Iup
                        ••
                     er) hath the
théefe renowme. Nysa, because Bacchus is supposed to
haue béene borne in it, and Meros, because Bacchus was
supposed to haue béene fostered in the Caue thereof. Whervppon,
either good grounded matter, or else vaine report
was ministred to the Greeke Authors, to say that Bacchus
was sowed in Iupiters thigh.
               From the Riuer Indus, to the Riuer Ganges, the Palibotranes
inhabite all the coast. From Ganges, to the
Foreland of Iolis, dwell the Nysians, where the heate is
more feruent, then that it maye be inhabited, there doo
dwell Nations swart, and in manner all one with the Ethyopians.
from Iolis to Cudum, the shores are streight,
and the people fearefull, and weltering in ritches of the
Salt-water.
               There is a Foreland called Tamos, which Mount Taurus
rayseth: it is the Angle of an other part, and the beginning
of the side toward the South. There are the Riuers
of Ganges and Indus.
                  The greatnesse of the Riuer Ganges. 
                  Ganges springing out of many heads
in Haemodes, a Mountaine of Inde, as soone as he commeth
in one channell, becommeth of all Riuers the greatest:
and being in some place broader, where he runneth
narrowest, he is ten myles ouer, and dispearseth himselfe
into seuen coastes.
               
                  Indus rysing out of the Mountaine Paropamisus,
                  The Riuer Indus recey
                  
                     •
                  eth
into it other Riuers also, whereof the noblest are Cophes,
Acesines, and Hydaspes, and in broade channell, carrieth
the water that he hath receiued out of many streams.
Hencefoorth he almost matcheth Ganges in bignesse. Afterward,
when he hath gyrded the hill oftentimes with many
great windlasses. He commeth downe againe hudge,
streight, and in one channell, vntyll at length splitting himselfe
to the right hand and to the lefte, he empties himselfe
at two mouthes, farre distaunt one from an other.
               
                  At Tamos, is an Ile calledGold-land. 
                  Chryse: and at Ganges an
other calledSyluer-land. 
                  A
                        •
                     gyre. The soyle of the one is Golde (so
haue auncient Authors reported,) and the soyle of the other
Siluer: and so it comes to passe, of most likelihoodde, that
eyther the names of them are giuen them of the thing, or
else the Fable is forged of their names.
               
                  Taprobane,
                  Taprobane. is reported of Hypparchus, to be either some
verie great Iland, or else the hithermost part of the other
world. But for as much as it is inhabited, and no man
by report is néere about it, it shooteth néere the trueth.
On the contrarie parte,The Gates of the Sunne. there are the mouthes, called the
Gates of the Sunne, so vninhabitable, that as soone as men
enter into them, the outragious heate of the caulme ayre,
smothereth them by and by.
               Betwéene the mouthes, lyeth a scattered countrie, somewhere
voide of inhabitaunts, by reason of the intollerable
heate. From thence to the entraunce of the redde Sea,
lyeth a way-lesse and Desart ground, more like ashes then
duste, and therfore there run out of it verie fewe streames,
and those not great, whereof we heare say, the notablest are
Tubero, and Arusaces. The Greekes (whether it be because
it is of that collour, or because one Erythras reigned
there,)The redde Sea. call the redde Sea, Erythran Thalassan. It is a stormie,
rough, and déepe water, and nourisheth hudge beastes,
more then all other Seas.
               At the first, it beateth euenlie vpon the vttermost banks
of the earth giuing waye, and if it entered not somewhat
inner, it were but some broade Bay. But where it had
bowed the bankes, it breaketh twice in, and openeth
againe two other gulfes, whereof that which
is néerer to the foresaide Countries, is called
the Persian gulfe, and the further is
called the Arabishe gulfe.
            
            
               
               Of the Persian gulfe.
               The eight Chapter.
               
                  
                     The gulfe of Persia, where it taketh in the
Sea, comprehendeth a great mouth, with
streight iawes on both sides, in likenesse of a
necke: and then the Lande (which euerie
way shrinketh in a great space, and euerie
where a like) enuironeth the Salt-water within the compasse
of a great round shore, and maketh the likenesse of a
mans head.
               The mouth of the Arabishe gulfe is narrower, and the
breadth lesser, but the retreit is somewhat bigger, and the
sides much longer. It runneth farre into the maine Land,
vntill it attaine almost vnto Egipt and Mount Casius of
Arabia, wexing lesse and lesse wide into a point, and the
further it pearceth, the narrower.
               From these saide things to the gulfe of Persia, all is wildernesse,Shelfish-eaters.
sauing where the Chelonophagies doo dwell. In
it, on the right hand as men sayle, are scituate the Carmanians,
                  Carmania, nowe called Rasigut.
without Apparell, without Corne, without Cattell,
and without houses, who cloath themselues with Fishes
skinnes, and féede on their 
                     ••
                  eshe, and are rough all their
bodies ouer, saue their heads. The inner partes are inhabited
by the Gedrosians, and foorth on by the Persians.
Through Carmania runneth Cethis, and aboue them run
Andanis and Corios, into the Sea.
               In that part, that is ouer against the mouth of the Sea,
are the boundes of the Babylonians, and Chaldyes, and two
noble Riuers, Tygris
                  Tygris. néere vnto Persia, and Euphrates
                        •
                     
                  
                  Euphrates.
further of. Looke how Tygris springeth, so runneth he all
the way to the Sea coast. Euphrates, opening an excéeding
wide mouth, dooth not onelie passe foorth, from whence he
ryseth, but also falleth mainlie: neither dooth he by and by

cut through the féeldes, from place to place as he goeth, but
spreading wide into Pooles, and becomming slowe with
long settled waters abroade without Channell, afterward
when he hath broken out of his brimme, becommeth a Riuer
in déede, and purchasing bankes, runneth swift and fomie
Westward through the Armenians and Capadocians,
as though hee would come into our Seas if Mount
Tau
                        •
                     us letted him not. From thence he is turned of to the
South, and entring first into Syria, and afterward into Arabia,
holdeth not out into the Sea, but one while béeing
great and able to beare Shippes, and anone after becomming
lanke, dyeth a pelting Brooke, and no where runneth
out againe with issue to be séene, as other Riuers doo, but
soketh away into the ground. The other side is enuironed
with a Countrie shooting foorth betwéene bothe the Seas,
named Arabia,
                  Arabia. and surnamed the Happi. It is but narrow
howbeit most plentifull of Cinnamon, Frankincence and
other Spices. The Sabaeans
                  The Sabaeans. possesse the greater part therof
next vnto the mouth, and the Maces the part ouer against
the Carmanians. That which lyeth betwéene the mouthes
is roughe with Woodes and cragged Cliffes. In the mids
are certaine Iles of which Ogiris is more famous then
the rest, because the Tumbe of King Erithras is in it.
            
            
               
               The gulfe of Arabia.
               The ninth Chapter.
               
                  THe other Gulfe is enclosed round about by the
Arabians. On that side which is on the right hand
as men enter in, are the Citties Carre, Arabia,
and Gaudam. On the otherside in the innermost Angle
are, first Beronice betwéene Heroopoliticum and Strobilum:
next Philoteris and Ptolemais, betwéene the promontories
Merouenon and Colaca: beyond them, Arsino
                        •
                     
                  
and another Beronice: then the Forrest that beareth the
Wood Ebonie, and the spices, and a Riuer made by mans
hand, and therefore to be spoken of, because that béeing
drawne by a Dich from the Riuer Nile without the Gulfe.
(Howbeit bending, and as no part at all of the red Sea)
it is annoyed with beastes, and by that meanes desert also.
Part hereof is inhabited by the Candanes, which people
(because they féede vpon Serpents, are named Ophiophagies.
                  Serpent eaters.
Innermore were the Pigmies a kinde of Dwarfes,The Pigmies.
which were destroyed in a battell that was fought against
the Cranes for theyr Corne that was sowne. There be many
kinds of wild fowles, and many kindes of Serpents.Winged Serpents. Of
Serpents the worthiest to be had in remembraunce, are
those which béeing very little (and whose stinginge is present
death,) are reported to come foorth of the mudde of the
frozen Fennes at a certaine time of the yéere, and from
thence flying in flockes toward Aegipt, are in the enteraunce
thereof incountered with another flocke of Birdes
called Ibisles, which fight with them and destroy them. Of
Birdes the worthiest to bée spoken of is the Phoenix,
                  The Phoenix. which
is euermore but one alone: for it is not conceyued by treadinge
or disclosed by hatching. But when he hath continued
the full time of fiue hundred yéeres, hée brooth himselfe vppon
a Neste that hée hath timbered of diuers spyces, and
there wasteth away. Afterward growing againe of the
matter of his rotting flesh, hée conceiueth himselfe and bréedeth
of himselfe againe. When he comm
                     •
                  th to be full fledge
he carieth the bones of his olde body wrapped in mirre into

                  Egipt,
                  This Cittie is called Heliople. and there in the Cittie which they call by the name
of the Sunne, he layeth them vpon a Herce of swéete smelling
Nardus, and consecrateth them with honourable Funeralles,
The Foreland, wherewith that Sea is inclosed,
hath no waye to it from theThese are not the same that were spoken of heeretofore in Europe, but others in Ethyope. 
                  Ceraunish Hilles.
            
            
               Of Ethyope.
               The tenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     BEyond them dwell the Ethyopians.
                   The
Meriones haue the Land which Nylus embraceth
about, in the first windlasse that he
fetcheth, where he maketh an Iland. Some
of them (because they liue halfe as long againe
almost as we doo) are called Macrobians: and some
of them (because they came out of Egipt) are named Automales.
               
               They are beautifull of personage,The goodlinesse of the Inhabiters of Meroe, and of their customes. streight bodied, and
somewhat more honourable of countenaunce, then other
men, as the followers of most excellent vertues. It is a
custome among them, to choose him that they will obey, by
his beautie and strength. Among them is more Gold then
among the Persians, and therefore they count that to be the
preciouser▪ whereof they haue the lesse store. They make
their ornamentes of Brasse, and their fetters for offenders
of Golde. There is a place continuallie furnished with
meates readie dressed to eate, and because euerie man may
eate thereof at his pleasure,
they call it the Table of the
Sunne,The Table of the Sunne. and they affirme that such thinges as are set there
in Messes, doo come thither by the prouidence of God.
               There is a Lake,A s
                        •
                     raunge Lake. with the water whereof▪ if men washe
themselues, their bodies become as crispe and shining as
if they were annointed with Oyle. Yet is the same droonke
also: and it is so shéere, and so weake to beare vp thinges

that fall into it or are borken into it, that it is not able to
beare vp the leaues that fall from the Trées about, but that
by and by they sincke down to the very bottome. There are
also most cruell beasts,Straunge beasts. as Licaons spotted with all kinde of
colours, and Sphinxes in such sort as we haue read of them.
There are also wonderfull Birdes,Straunge Birdes. as Tragopomones
which haue hornes, and Pegasies which haue eares like horses.
But as men sayle along the coastes into the Eastward,
they méete with nothing worth remembraunce, all is wast,
all is full of stéepe cliffes, and there are rather bankes
then shores. From thence is a great Coast inhabited. It
was a doubtfull matter a good whyle, whether there were
a Sea beyond, and whether the land might bee coasted about,
or whether Affricke béeing altogether voyd of fruite,
extended so farre as that there were none ende of it. But
Hanno of Carthage béeing sent by his countrimē to search
the coastes,The voyage of Hanno Captaine of Carthage about the coast of Affricke. when he had passed out at the mouth of the Ocean,
saylinge about a great parte thereof, reported that he
wanted not Sea roome, but victuall. And in the time
of our graundfathers, one Eudoxus fléeing from Latirus
King of Alexandria, passed out of the gulfe of Arabia, and
(as Nepos affirmeth) was brought by this Sea euen vnto
the Gads,
                  The Iourney of Eudoxus. by meanes whereof some thinges of that coast are
come to knowledge. Beyond those places which wée sayd
euen now to bée desert,Speechlesse people. there are dumbe people which vse
signes in stéede of spéeche. Some haue no sound of tongue:
some haue no tongue at al: some haue their lippes growing
together, sauing that they haue little rounde pipeholes in
their Nosethrilles at which they sucke in drinke: and
when they haue list to eate, they are reported to drawe in
one graine of Corne at once, which groweth euery where.
There are people towhom (before ye comming of Eudoxus)
fire was so vnknowne,People vnacquainted with fyre. that they were wonderfully delighted
with the vse thereof, and gladly embraced the flames
and put burning coales in their bosomes, vntill such time
as they felt it hurt them. Aboue them the shore fetching a
great compasse, encloseth a great Ile, wherein are reported

to bée none but women, heary ouer al their bodies, which of
their owne nature beare children without the companie of
men:A straunge kind of Women. and they bée of so f
                     •
                  erce and boystous kind, that some
of them can scarce be restrained from strugling, no not euen
with chaines.
               This report was made by Hanno, and because he brought
home the skinnes of some that hée had killed: hée was the
beter beléeued. Beyond this gulfe is a highe Hill called of
the Gréekes Gods Chariot,
                  A Hill called Gods Chariot. which burneth with continuall
fire. Beyond this mountaine is another Hill with a long
ridge fresh and gréene, lying all along the Sea side, from
whence is a prospect into a Champion Countrie of much
more widenesse, then that a man may sée to the ende of it.
The opinion of the Pannes and Satires
                  Pannes and Satires. tooke credit herevppon,
for that whereas in this quarters, there is nothing tilled
or husbanded, no place for men to dwell in, nor print of
mans foote, but a day times waste solitarinesse, and therewithall
more waste silence: in the night time there appear
                     •
                  
many blasing 
                     •
                  ires, and as it were Campes pitched farre abrod,
with noise of Trumpets and Dromes, and Shalmes,
which are heard much lowder then those that men vse.
               Then againe are the Aethiopians,
                  The Westerne Aethiopians. not ritch as those wée
spake of heretofore, nor like them in bodies, but lesser, vnnurtured,
and called by the name of Westerne Aethiopians▪
                  
In the Countrie of these men is a fountaine supposed
of some to bée the head of Nile.
                  The head of Nilus. The inhabiters call it Muchull,
and it may séeme to bee all one name with Nilus,
though more corruptly pronounced of the barbarous pople.
It nourisheth a Riuer also, which breedeth the same kindes
of beastes that Nile dooth, though somewhat lesser: whereas
all other runne toward the Ocean, this onely Riuer goeth
into the hart of the land toward the East, and no man can
say where his issue is.
               Herevpon it is coniect
                     •
                  red, that Nilus béeing conceiued
in this spring, and caried foorth a while through wailess
                     •
                  
places, and therefore vnknowne where he becommeth,
sheweth himselfe againe when he hath procéeded into the

East: but by meanes of béeing hidden so longe, it comes to
passe, that men thinke that this fountaine runneth to some
other place then to Nile, and that Nile springeth from some
other head then from this fountaine. Among them is bred a
beast of no great bignesse, but hauing a great and ouergreat
béetle head, and therefore hanging his muzell (for the most
part) alwayes downeward to the ground, called a Catoblepe,
                  The beast called Catoblepe.
worthie to be intreated of for his singular power.
For whereas by stinging or bitinge hee is able to doo no
harme at all, yet to behold his eyes is present death. Ouer
against them are the Iles Gorgones,
                  The Gorgon Ile
                        •
                     
                   sometime (by report)
the dwelling place of the Gorgones. The maine land it selfe
taketh his ende at a promontorie, called Hesperionkeras.
                  The Western
                        •
                      horne
               
            
            
               The coast and Ilandes of the
Athlantishe Ocean.
               The eleuenth Chapter.
               
                  
                     FRom thence beginneth that same front
which shoreth toward the West, and is beaten
vppon with the Athlantish Ocean. The
first part thereof is inhabited by the Aethiopians,
the middle by no body, for either the
Countries are burnt vp with heate, or ouerwhelmed with
sande, or annoyed with Serpentes. Against the scorched
Countries lie the Ilandes where the Hesperides
                  The Iles of the Hesperides. are reporto
haue dwelled. In the sandy Countries is a Hill rysing
very highe of it selfe, which is stéepe downe on all sides
with ragged cliffes, not possible to bée traueled ouer, and
taper-shapē vp to the toppe. The which because it reacheth
higher then a man can sée, euen vnto the cloudes, it is sayd
not onely to touch the Skye and the Starres with his top:

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ A Table containing the Contentes
of this Booke.
            
               The first Booke.
               
                  THe deuision of the world into fowre
partes. Cap. 1, fol, 
                     •
                  
               
               A breefe description of Asia. Cap. 2. fo, 4
               A breefe description of Europe. Cap, 3, fol, 6.
               A breefe description of Affricke. Cap. 4. fol. 7.
            
            
               A particular discription of Affricke.
               Of Mauritania, Cap, 5, fol, 9
               Of Numidia. Cap, 6, fol, 10
               The lesser Affricke. Cap, 7, fol, 11
               Of Cirenai
                        •
                     a. Cap, 8, fol, 13
            
            
               A particular description of Asia.
               Of Egipt. Cap, 9, fol, 16
               Of Arabia. Cap, 10, fol, 20
               Of Siria. Cap, 11, fol, 20
               Of Phoenicia. Cap, 12, fol, 21
               Of Cilicia. Cap, 13, fol, 22
               Of Pamphilia. Cap, 14, fol, 24
               Of Lycia. Cap, 15, fol, 25
               Of Caria. Cap, 16, fol, 25
               Of Ionia. Cap. 17, fol▪ 26
               Of A
                        •
                     olis. Cap, 18, fol, 28
               Of Bithynia. Cap▪ 19, fol, 30
               Of Paphlagonia. Cap, 20, fol, 3
                     •
                  
               
               Of the Chalybies. Cap, 21, fol, 32
            
            
               The second Booke.
               Of Scithia, of Europe. Cap, 1, fol, 35
               
                  Of Thrace. Cap, 2, fol, 40
               Of Macedonia. Cap, 3, fol, 44
               Of Italie. Cap, 4, fol, 50
               Of the Prouince of Narbon▪
                   Cap, 5, fol, 53
               Of Spaine. Cap, 6. fol, 56
               The Iles of the mid-land Sea. Cap, 7, fol, 58
            
            
               The third Booke.
               The vttermost shores of Spaine. Cap, 1, fol, 65
               The vttermost coastes of Gallia
                        •
                     , Cap, 2, fol, 69
               Of Germanie. Cap, 3, fol, 72
               Of Sarmatia. Cap, 4, fol, 73
               Of Scithia, Cap, 5, fol, 74
               The Ilandes of Spaine, and of the North-partes. Cap, 6, fol. 77
               Of India. Cap 7. fol, 81
               Of the Persian gulfe. Cap. 8. fol. 85
               The gulfe of Arabia. Cap. 9. fol. 87
               Of Ethiope. Cap. 10, fol. 88
               The coast and Ilandes of the Athlantish Oce
                     •
                  n. Cap. 11. fol. 9
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   