
      
         
            
            
               
                  P. MELANCTHON
               
            
         
         
            
            A Godly and learned
Aſſertion in defence of
the true Church of God, and of his
woorde: written in Latine by
that reuerend father D. Philip
Melancthon, after the
Conuention at Katiſtona.
Anno 1541.
            Tranſlated into Engliſh by
R. R.
Scene, peruſed, and allovved.
            
               
                  Eſay. 66.
Reioyce ye vvith Hieruſalem, and bee glad
vvith her, all yee that loue her: Reioyce
for ioy vvith her, all yee that mourne
for her▪
               
            
            Imprinted at London
at the three Cranes in
the Vinetree by Thomas
Dawſon. 1580.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Right Honorable
Edwarde, Earle of Rutlande,
Lorde Roos, of Hamelake, of Beauuoyr,
and of Truſbuz, my ſinguler good Lord
& noble Mecoenas, long life with encreaſe
of honour, and the perfruition
of eternall Beatitude,
in Ieſus Chriſte our
Lord & Sauiour,
for euer.
            
               GODS holie ſpirit in
the xii. chapter of the
Reuelation of S. Iohn
the Diuine, (Right
Honorable) deſcribeth
vnto vs, two notable
myſteries: The one, A woman
cloathed with the Sunne, hauing the
Moone vnder her feete, vpon her head,
a Crowne of xii. ſtarr
                     •
                  s, and beeing with
childe, cried traueling in birth, and was
payned ready to bee deliuered: The other,
A greate redde Dragon, hauing ſeauen
heades, tenne hornes, and ſeauen crownes
vppon his heades: hiſ tayl
                     •
                   drue the third
parte of the Starres of Heauen, and caſt

them to the earth, and he ſtoode before the
woman which was ready too be deliuered,
to deuoure her child, when ſhe had brought
it foorth. &c. By the woman is prefigurate
the moſt bleſſed eſtate of that
chaſte choſen Church of God inuironed
with the light of doctrine Propheticall
and Euangelicall, who treading (as
it were) vnder feet the moone of mans
inconſtancie, or rather mans vaine and
wauering imaginations and deuiſes, is
crowned with the crowne of conſtant
truth & adorned with the xii. ſtarres of
eternal bleſſednes: & traueling with ſpiritual
fruites, as, True knowledge of God,
Faith, Feare, Loue of God, true in
                     •
                  ocatio
                     •
                  ,
&c. beeing payned with aduerſities &
calamities in this world; crieth with
the Patriarchs, Prophets, Gouernors, Apoſtles,
Teachers & ſuch like, to be deliuered
out of and from al worldly wretchednes,
to enioy the promiſed ſweete
ioies of euerlaſting bleſſednes. But ſuch
& ſo extreeme is & hath byn the hatred
of the old enimy Sathā that red Dragō
(by the heads of his malignant church)
that is by impiety, idolatry, & infidelity,
and by the Hornes that is by violency,

iniury and tyranny of Pharao,
Abimolech, Nabuchodonoſor and ſuche
like cruell perſecuting powers: with his
tayle of blaſphemy hypocriſie and ſuperſtition,
euermore enuying the verity
of the doctrine propheticall and euangelicall
in all ages) that when gods
churche hath beene moſt readyeſt too
bring forth her ſincere frutes of good
lyfe and doctrine, then hath this red
Dragon, with open iawes of tyrannicall
power, exalting his tayle vp to
the skyes, and as it is ſayde (aboue all
that is called God, 2. Teſſ. 2.) been moſt
ready therewith too drawe downe
the thirde parte of the ſtarres, that is
too ſaye not onely too obſcure the
light of the true worde of God, and of
the glorious Goſpel of his ſonne Ieſus
Chriſte, but alſo vtterly too caſte vnder
foote all true teſtimonies thereof.
Yet bleſſed bee the Lorde God of
Iſrael, who being careful for his elect,
doeth nowe and then rayſe vp a mighty
ſaluation vnto his people, Luk. 
               
                  〈◊〉
                i
                  •
                ſending
one or other good Michael, with
his Angels, that is too ſay, one or other
godly religious and chriſtian Prince

with his Godly religious and chriſtian
Nobles, Biſhops, Doctors, Preachers,
and Teachers, who with the ſworde of
Truth, the ſhield of faith, breaſtplate of
righteouſneſſe & Helmet of hope vnto
ſaluatiō in Chriſt, haue borne away like
victory & prize of like Gigantomachia,
with the triumphe of truth according
to that ſaying: Thoſe ſhall 
                     •
                  ight with the
Lambe, & the Lambe ſhall ouercome thē,
becauſe hee is the Lorde of Lordes, and
King of Kinges: and they which are on
his ſide, called, and elect, and faithfull. Apoc.
17. Experience of this ſpirituall victory
(Right honorable) doeth the ſacred
bible ſufficiently adminiſter vnto
vs: Later ages of the worlde geue vs
alſo freſh memorie thereof: And our
time no doubte by Gods prouidence
can teſtifie too his prayſe and glorie.
It is not paſte fourtie yeeres agone
ſince the triall of this was wonderfully
manifeſted to all Chriſtendome, by
the ſtate of Gods churche diſquieted
in Germany. What time a
little before the death of that noble
Prince George Duke of Saxony, the

citie of Franckfoorde ad Moenum was
vexed with the enmity of the Romiſh
Dragon. So that after ſome preruption
on both ſides, it was the good prouidence
of God to moue the myndes of
the noble Princes electors there, to require
of the Emperors Maieſty Charles
the fifth then liuing, a determinate
conuention or meeting for the eſtabliſhing
of true religion, and aboliſhing
of Popety: which beeing decreed too
bee had at Hagonea ad Rhenum in Germany
A
                     •
                  no 1540. thither amongeſt
other learned Germaines came the reuerent
Doctor Philip Melācthon. Who
thinking too haue full conference by
diſputation, in preſence of Granuellanus
Preſident for the ſaide Emperor:
euen at that time (ipſis aduerſarijs tergiuer
ſantibus) were vtterly diſappoynted
of their expectation: For Ecchius the
Popes champion with his confederates
ſeeking priuy and ſecrete ſhiftes
of lettes, refuſed that conflict. And
the matter being deferred till the yeere
following 1541. too bee handled at
Ratiſbona, thither in perſon came the

ſaid Emperour, the Princes electors of
Germany with their lerned Diuines, &
the Popes legate with his adherents the
aduerſaries. By whom after ſome diſputation
and concertation had, the
conuention for that time was there
alſo diſmiſſed, vppon ſufficient good
conſiderations, & by reaſon of the Emperours
expedition in his warres againſt
the Turke.
            And after that, as the Reuerent
Ioachim
                     ••
                   Camerarius teſtifieth, (who
writeth the whole diſcourſe of his life,)
this zealous Phinees deſiſted not in
defence of Gods quarrel, as by publiſhing
his other workes before▪ Namely
his Confesſio fidei, exhibited at Auguſta,
and his Siluula addreſſed for the
pacification of the controuerſies in
Franckforde: So nowe did he write this
booke intituled De Eccleſia, after the
aſſembly at Ratiſbona. Like a Godly
wiſe Aeoonomus in the Lordes houſe,
and like vnto the prouident Scriba doctus
ad Regnum Coelorum, (as Chriſte
ſaieth Matt. 13.) bringing forth with
the good Paterfamilias this learned aſſertion

of ſpirituall treaſures Nonorum
& Veterum: for confirmation of
the antiquity of Gods true churche,
and co
                  •
               tutation of mans latter inuentions.
Which hee dedicated vnto that
Godly renowmed Prince and valiaunt
defender of the truthe, Albertu Duk
                  •
               
of Pruſe and M
                     •
                  rque
                     •
                  
                of Brandenburge.
The remembraunce whereof ſurely as
it is notable, ſo were it a thing iniurious
to deteine frō the poſterity of the
faithfull ſuch a teſtimony of profound
knowledge. And agayne, as Germany
hath bin a natural nurſe to the vniuerſal
diſperſed and afflicted church of the
goſpel long agone▪ ſo haue wee in Englande
greate cauſe (prayſing God for
both their proſperous eſtates at this
day) to imbrace, & commemorate the
doynges of ſuch godly learned fathers
there liuing, as haue bin, & yet are ſoūd
faithful furtherers of Gods glory, & cō
               ſtant
friends of that truth, which we alſo
now profeſſe. Wheras, (Right honorable
Earle,) ſith by Gods gratious prouidence
his church with rare & excellēt
benefits is thus many yeers fructifiyng

amongeſt vs: Eſpecially vnder the protectiō
of the immediat next vnder god
ſupreme heade thereof, ſo gratious a
Queene, ſo godly & religious a Princes
our deare Soueraigne Lady, Queene
Elizabeth, thus proſperouſly and prudently
vpholding her houſe with the wiſe
woman. Prou. 14. that, As the Sunne ſhineth
ouer all the worlde, from the ſeate of
the moſt higheſt: So the beautie of ſo
good a woman (ſo vertuous a Virgin
Queene and ſo gratious) muſte needes
be, not onely the principall ornament of her
owne houſe, Ecele. 26. but alſo is a light
of excellent comfort vnto the faithfull
throughout all Chriſtendome: Which
I pray God continue to the end of the
world. And again, ſith in reſpect of her

                  •
               iſe & honourable graue counſellers,
with thoſe godly lerned Fathers of the
ſpiritually this proſperous peace may
verify that Prouerb with vs (Salua res
eſt conſuliante Sene:) Who doubteth, to
the glory of God be it ſpoken, that the
churche of Englande is the Phoenix of
the world, The Roſe planted in Hierico,
Eccle. 24. yea the flower of the fielde, and

the Lillie of the Vallies? Cantic. Canticor.
cap. 2.
            The which bleſſed eſtate when euery
member thereof is bounden by all
good gifts to adorne: As it is my onely,
by ſimple Summum Bonum now &
then too edifie my ſlender capacity, in
tranſlating and writing: So at this
preſent with the furtheraunce of the
right reuerend father in God my good
Lord the Biſhop of London by his auctority,
and by ſome helpe of a learned
Diuine my friendly well willer herein,
I haue tranſlated this book, and geuen
it the name, or Title of A Godly and
Learned Aſſertion, &c. Now publiſhed
as a true teſtimony of my boūden duety
and earneſt zeale too the welfare of
Gods Church preſent, and of the poſteritie.
And for good cauſes mouing me,
I haue choſen your good Lordſhip the
Patrone thereof: As one (whoſe noble
progenie heretofore loyall too their
Prince, and louing too their Countrie,
eſpecially the Lorde Roos, in the raigne
of the moſt victorious King Henrie the
viii. for his noble valiaunt and renoumed

ſeruice in Scotlande moſt woorthy
of memory) your honor deſeruing
no leſſe well to bee thought of for your
like loyalty, learning, wiſedome, godly
zeale, and like true ſeruice alſo, if like
time of neede ſhould require. And thus
humbly crauing pardon of your honor
for my boldeneſſe proceeding of an intier
good will towardes you: And
therwith beſeeching your noble bountie,
to graunt the ſame fauourable protection
vnder the winges of your godly
zeale, as an earneſt Hypotheca of my
duetifull true hearte towardes your
honour: which as I ſhall perceiue to
bee affected towardes my good meaning
in this behalfe, ſo by Gods grace
ſhall I not onely take further encouragement
of duetifull gratitude, towardes
your honour, and my natiue
Countrie: But alſo as heeretofore, ſo
ſtill ſhall I reſt heartily and inceſſauntly
praying vnto the maieſtie Diuine
and Lorde of Lordes, too endue your
Honourable Lordeſhippe and the honourable
Ladie your Louing Spouſe

with long life, perfect health, augmentation
of honour, and true renowme
in this world: And finally the inexpreſſible
ioyes of life eternall
in the heauenly Hierarchie
of the moſte
higheſt Ich
                     •
                  
                  ua.
            
            
               Your Honorable Lordſhips
moſte humble and
bounden poore Orator,
Richard Robinſon.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Of the Churche, and of the
Auctority of the woorde
of God.
            
               IT was accuſtomed oftentymes,
to be diſputed vpon,
how much credit might be
giuē vnto the opiniōs of the
Churche, decrees of Synodes,
and ſayings of wryters.
For, although wee
holde it for a rule, that wee embrace and haue
the worde of God in reuerence, yet notwithſtandinge,
when there ſeeme doubtfull places
in the wrytinges of the apoſtles, as it were to
occurre,What the aduerſaries do argue. or come in the way, ſome men doo diſpute,
that the opinions of the churche rather
are too bee followed, than the wrytinges of
the apoſtles.
            Moreouer they pretende that the Autority of
the church,A wrong opinion touching the auctority of the church alleged by the aduerſaries. is to be preferred before the word
of God: and that the Churche hath power
to change or alter ſuche thinges as are delyuered
in the worde of God. Vnto theſe opinions,
doo they cite the ſaying of S. Auguſtyne,
which is this: I woulde giue no credit vnto the
Goſpel, were it not but that the auctority of

the Catholike Church mooued me therevntoo.
And therfore vnder a falſe colour of the name
of the Church,What the aduerſaries do vnder a falſe collour of the name of the Churche. do the Pope and Biſhops decree
and commaunde many thinges for their
ſenſuality contrary vnto the word of God, yea
they confirme and ſtabliſh wicked doctrine, &
Idolatry: And alſo by this meanes the very
name only of the Churche terrifieth very many
nowadaies from the true doctrine of the
Goſpel which we profeſſe. Therefore needful
it is that men bee admoniſhed rightly as touching
the autority of the Church.
            Againe, alſo certaine more malaparte
buſiheades, when they imagine newe opinions
out of ſayings of the ſcriptures which are
lewdely wreſted, doo vtterly deſpyſe the conſent
of the true Churche, and all Synodes
without difference.
                  Pantaleon teſtifieth that this Michael Seruetus for holding a new erronious opinion of the Trinity, and of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, was afterwards put to death at Geneua, Anno 1553. As when Seruetus wrangleth
with the Churche of al ages, and dooth
depraue the ſayings of the word of god, in the
firſt Chapter of S. Iohns Goſpel, and ſeeketh
after a more fitte interpretation, as hee thinketh.
To the ende therefore that ſuch a malaparte
buſibraine ſhoulde bee reſtrained and
brydeled, the Church had need of her boūds
by al meanes, (if I may ſo ſay) as the olde ſynodes
and wryters doo alleadge their firſt teſtimonies,
which they haue taken from the

Apoſtles, and other Authors.
            
               Tertullian wryting againſt Praxeas,
               Examples of the fathers alledging the Church. Tertullian his teſtimony. ſayeth
thus, wee muſt holde this for a rule againſt al
Heretykes: Rectum eſſe, quodcunque primum,
quodcunque verò poſterius adulterinum.
That whatſoeuer was firſte, was good, but
whatſoeuer was laſt, is coūterfait. And ſurely
he calleth that firſt, which the Apoſtles for certaine
did deliuer, for ſo he doth interprete himſelfe.
            
               Irenaeus wryting againſt Florinus,
               Ireneus. allegeth
the autority of them which were in the firſte
age, and namely the autority of Policarpus,
who was the diſciple of S. Iohn the Apoſtle:
for hee ſaith that he woulde haue deteſted the
opinions of Florinus, if hee had hearde them,
& woulde haue ſhunned the place (wherin they
were declared) as lothſome and polluted.
            
               Baſilius alledgeth his nurſe whoſe godlineſſe,
                  Baſilius allegeth his nurſe, for her godlyneſſe.
hee ſayeth, was then ſpecially commended:
and he addeth that ſhee receaued her
doctrine of Gregory Neocaeſarienſis, which
at that time for his learning & miracles was
famous: alſo refuted Samoſatenus, and left his
poſterity a briefe confeſſion of the faith, which
conteineth an excellent teſtimony of the Trinity.
And it is apparant in the 7. booke of the
eccleſiaſtical hiſtory.
            
               
               Origen alledgeth the Apoſtles,
                  Origen allegeth the Apoſtles. as touching
baptiſing of infantes. For he ſaith, that
in the 6. Chapter of S. Paule too the Romanes,
it appeareth that the Churches receaued
their tradition from the Apoſtles, that infants
might be baptiſed.
            Theſe do rightly alledge the auctority of
the churche.
                  Phil. Melancthons purpoſe in diffinition of the true Church of God. Wherfore I wil orderly declare
what the church is, & what Churche is too bee
heard, & that wee muſt vſe approoued teſtimonies.
And yet notwithſtāding that the doctrin
is to be iudged out of the woorde of God, that
the chief autority of Gods word may remain,
according to that ſaying, If any man ſhal teach
any other doctrine,
               Galat. 1. 
               let him be holdē as accurſed.
            
            But firſt, when I ſpeake of the Churche, I
do not meane Popes, Biſhoppes, and others
which do allow their opinions in this behalf:
For theſe are the enimies of the true church,Hee ſheweth, who be the enimies of the true Chu
                     •••
                  e.
ſome of them being Epicures, and otherſome
of them manifeſtly giuen to Idolatry: But,
I call the Churche, the ſociety of them which
truely beleeue,What, & who bee the true Churche, and where. which haue the Goſpel and
Sacramentes and are ſanctified by the holy
Ghoſt, as (in the 5. Chapt. of S. Paule too the
Epheſ.) the Church is there deſcribed and as
in Iohn. 10. Where it is ſaide, My ſheepe heare
my voyce.
            
            
               
And although it bee needful, that this true
church ſhould be euerlaſting, bicauſe the kingdom
of Chriſt endureth for euer, & it is writtē.
I will remaine with you vntil the ende of the
world: Mat. 28. Yet wee muſt vnderſtand and
know that this true church, doth not alwaies
floriſh togither in one place, but oftentymes
becommeth a very ſmall Churche, and afterwardes
againe is reſtored by God when true
teachers are ſent therevntoo:The Church 
                     〈◊〉
                   the firſt age of the world before the deluge. As in tyme of
Noah; the church was in a narrowe rowme &
a congregation of a fewe perſons.
            So after the deluge, Melchiſedech, wc was
the ſonne of Sem,
               The Church i
                     •
                   the ſame age after the deluge▪
                the ſonne of Noah, reteined
the true doctrine: And whan Idolatry increaſed
amongeſt the Chaldees, & that the true doctrine
of God was almoſt extinguiſhed euery
where, God, by calling Abraham, renewed
his Churche. Afterwardes the family of Abraham
and a fewe of his 
                  •
               earers became the
Church, when as in meane tyme the Chaldees
and Egyptians boaſted themſelues too bee the
poſterity of the fathers, that they reteined the
examples of the fathers, and manner of woorſhipping
God,The Chaldea
                        •
                     s and the Egipt
                        ••
                     ans vainly bo
                     ••
                  
                  ſted themſelue
                     •
                   to be the chur
                     ••
                   and were not. & openly declared themſelues
to bee the people of God, when they retained
not Gods word amongſt them, although they
had reteined ceremonies, whervnto notwithſtanding

they deuiſed peruerſe opinions, and
moreouer added Idolatry.
            In the time of Achaz, was the church extinguiſht
in Iſrael, afterwards againe by Elias &
Eliſeus it was encreaſed, and yet after that did
it decay againe.
            When Chriſte was borne, there was a
very ſmall Churche in Iury:Anno Mundi 3970. Luc. 2. 
                     •
                  roſ. 
                     •
                  . cap. 22. Regnante Octaui
                  
                     ••
                   Auguſto. namely, Mary,
Ioſeph, the family of Zacharias, Symeon,
Anna, the ſheepeheardes and a fewe others.
In the meane time Eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction
was in the dealing of the Phariſees and Saducees
which were notoriouſly knowne a
wicked people. Alſo the Saducees were Epicures,
and yet notwithſtanding challenged
they the title and name of the people of God,
vnto themſelues eſpecially.
            And ſo in time of the Prophetes the true
church was but ſlēder as in Eſay. 1. Where it
is teſtified,The churche in tyme of the prophetes. 
               Except that the Lord had left vntoo
vs ſeede, we ſhoulde haue beene made like vnto
Sodom & Gomorrha.
            
            Theſe wordes moſt grauely do admoniſh vs
that we ſhold not think or iudge of the church
as of a worldly gouernment,Howe the church is to bee reputed, accep
                  
                     •
                  ed, & beleeued. neither that wee
meaſure the ſame by ſucceſſion of Biſhops, or
by degree, or ſeate of the Biſhops of Rome:
but that we do acknowledge, the church to bee

amongſt thē which retain the true doctrine of
the goſpel. In this ſociety there muſt needs be
ſome true beleuers: For vnto this ſociety doo
the promiſes pertain.Enimies of the church of Eſayas tyme. Therfore Eſaias bereaueth
the princes & chief biſhops in his time of
that ſtately title, & ſaith, That there was a ſmall
offſpring in that ſelfſame people, left, which was
called the people of God.
            
            And in the time of Ieremy, whē the kings, &
Prieſts ſet thēſelues againſt him, the churche
conſiſted not in the multitude of thoſe prieſts,Enimies of the churche in Hieremyes tyme.
               
but of them which beleeued the preaching of
Ieremy, Amoz. 3. So and in ſuch manner ſhal
Iſrael bee deliuered, That if the Sheepheards
do take twoo legges, or a peece of an eare out of
the Lyons mouth, &c.
            
            And finally at the length there was a very
ſmal church,Al Nations except Iuda onely had vtterly loſt the knowledge of God. in reſpect of the multitude of the
wicked ones, when as all nations (the people
of Iuda onely excepted) had vtterly loſte the
knowledge of God.
            The Scripture alſo foreſheweth that after
the Apoſtles tymes,A premonſtration of the ſtate of the churche after the Apoſtles tyme. Matt. 14. there ſhoulde happen
deadly perſecutions vnto the Churche, as in
Math. 14. Many falſe Prophets ſhall aryſe and
ſhal deceaue many.
            
            Again our ſauiour Chriſt ſaieth,The Romiſh Synagogue reputed for the Church. 
               When
you ſhall ſee the abhomination of deſolation

ſtanding in the holy place. &c. Mat. 24. Here,
doth he ſignify that in the churche which is ſo
called, ſhall Idolatry aryſe, whereby true doctrine,
and true worſhipping of God ſhall bee
ouerwhelmed, and there ſhal bee made a deſolation
of the Church, that is too ſay, a ſolitarines
or ſuppreſſion thereof. And ſo indeede it
hath come to paſſe.One probable teſtimony by the abuſes of Maſſes, &c. For after that the abuſes
of Maſſes and ſuperſtitions of traditions did
once aryſe, there haue followed darkeneſſe of
true woorſhipping God, of fayth, of inuocation
in fayth and of functions in vocations too
bee performed: Bycauſe mans conſcience beholding
her owne merites is not able too vnderſtande
the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, nor comprehende
the manner of true calling vppon
GOD, and the expecting for his diuyne
helpe.
            Moreouer it is ſaide,The Church of the latter age. They ſhall woorke
ſignes and wonders, that, if it may be poſſible,
the very elect ones ſhall bee deceaued. 2.
Theſſ. 2. There ſhall happen a departing from
the fayth, &c. Alſo Luke 18. Thinke you that
when the Sonne of man commeth, he ſhal finde
fayth vpon earth? Againe, in the 88. Pſal. Haſt
thou made al men for nought?
                For, it is a complaint
vpon the decay of the Church in tyme
to come.
            
               
Theſe ſayinges doe witneſſe, although it
be needefull,The Churche ought in the la
                     •
                  ter age eſpecial
                     •
                  ly to be cared for and preſerued. that the Churche bee preſerued,
notwithſtanding in the latter age eſpecially
that it is little or a companie of a few perſons
which are deſpiſed and abiect in this life, as
S. Paule ſaith, Not many wiſe, not many mightie
men. &c. 1. Cor.
                1.
            Theſe teſtimonies haue I cited too that
ende, that wee may firſte conſider, wwhat
the Church is: and that the minde bee withdrawen
from carnall opinions, which imagine
that the Church is the pollicie or conſtitution
of the Biſhoppes, and doe tie the ſame
vnto the ordinary ſucceſſion of Biſhoppes, as
the ſtates of gouernment doe conſiſt in the ordinary
ſucceſſion of the Princes.The Churche is not tied vnto ordinary ſucceſſion of human
                     •
                   ſtate: but vnto the worde of God. But it goeth
otherwiſe with the Church: For this is a
multitude not tyed vntoo ordinary ſucceſſion,
but vnto the woorde of GOD. There is the
Churche renewed, where God reſtoreth doctrine
and giueth his holy ſpirite. And that
Churches are thus to be gouerned and preſerued,The true Churche.
not by ordinary ſucceſſion, S. Paule doth
witneſſe the ſame. Epheſ. 4. Hee hath giuen
giftes vnto men,
               
               Where, and which S. Pau
                     ••
                   reputeth & teacheth the Churche 
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               that the Apoſtles Prophets. &c
For, hee teacheth, that, that is properly the
Church, wherein Chriſt is effectuall woorker,
and giueth true Teachers. Therefore, when

as the name of the Church and the authoritie
thereof is obiected vnto vs:
                  No
                        ••
                     . Authoritie of the Church obiected. Let vs firſt conſider,
whether mention bee made of the true
Churche, eyther els of the multitude of Biſhops,
and the politique ſucceſſion thereof:
neyther let vs ſuffer our ſelues to be terrified
or diſcouraged from the worde of God, vnder
a falſe pretence of the name of the Church.
            Secondly after that wee haue declared
which is the true Churche,More touching the true church 
                     •
                  t retayneth the doctrine of the Goſpel. let vs nowe adde
therevnto that this true Church, which is but
ſmall, and a cōpany of holy ones, doth retein
the true doctrine of the Goſpel, or the articles
of the faith, like as S. Paule calleth the ſame
The ſeate of trueth. But this ſelfe ſame true
church hath her doctrine, ſometime more, and
ſometime leſſe pure & manifeſt. She hath alſo
in her many weake and feeble members, as
the Apoſtles were the church,The Apoſtles 
                     ••
                  er the church, but yet they 
                     •
                  either knew what the 
                     •
                  hurch was be
                  
                     •
                  ore the reſur
                  
                     •
                  ection of Chriſt, neither what manner 
                     •
                  ingdom, Chriſtes kingdome ſhould be but yet they vnderſtood
not (before the reſurrectiō of Chriſt)
what ſhould bee the kingdome of Chriſt. For
Peter (after the holy Ghoſte was geuen) did
yet ſuppoſe that the rites and ceremonies of
the lawe was needefull to be vſed: but when
he was admoniſhed frō heauen, he then knew
that the kingdome of Chriſt was not a Iudaicall
pollicy, but ſpirituall and continual woorſhipping
of God.
            
               
Afterwards whē the Apoſtles begā to prech
there did ſhine in thē,Example therof by Peter Many weake members of the Church in the Apoſtles time. a pure & cleare doctrine
& yet notwithſtāding in mean ſeaſō there were
many weake mēbers, wc albeit they were true
mēbers of the church, & held ſtil amōgſt them
the articles of the faith, yet they added herevnto
ſome error, as they which obſerued the ceremonies
of the law, & did not ſufficiently well
vnderſtand the abrogation of the law, & what
was the true worſhipping of God. This was
no ſmall error, & brought in with it ſome obſcurity
to the articles of the faith: ſo did chriſt
foreſhew as touching the churche in the latter
age: that there ſhould happen great darknes
which ſhoulde hinder the very electe ones of
God.Chriſtes propheſie of the Church in the latter age. Mat. 24. Whereby they ſhoulde the leſſe inioy amongſt
them the true doctrine.
            Therfore yet remaineth the true Church in
ſome place,The true Church remaineth in ſome one place or othen effectuall, from time to time. wc retaineth the articles of ye faith
but now & thē leſſe pure & obſcured with ſome
hurtful opinions, & which haue ſome error in
thē. And as yet I ſpeake of the true members
of the church & of the holy ones, not of others,
wc hauing loſt the light of the word do leeſe ye
holy Ghoſt: & follow the iudgment of reaſon, &
when they thinke that they deliuer very godly
things, they yet ſay cleane cōtrary things and
vngodly. Like as euē at this day alſo ther are

excellently learned, of good conuerſation, and
outwarde ſhewe of holineſſe, which ſeeme to
themſelues to ſpeake moſt holy thinges, when
in deede they are farre of from the true light,
(that is) from the true vnderſtanding of the
worde of God. Concerning ſuch perſons, I
ſpeake not as yet, but I onely make mention
of the true members of the Churche, which
for the more parte, are weake and infirme.
            
               So therefore ſaith Saint Paule 1.An inuincible grounde of the true Church mentioned by S. Paule. And a weake ground of the wrong Church ſubiect to ouerthrowes. 
               Cor. 3.
No man can lay any other foundation, then that
which is already layde. But ſome man buildeth
vpon it Golde, other wood, and other ſtraw or
ſtubble. &c.
            By the foundation, he meaneth, The Articles
of the faith, that is to ſay, the whole ſumme
and ſcope of Chriſtian doctrine, and the doctrine
of Chriſtes benefites: but hereunto (ſaith
be) ſome ſhall adde profitable doctrine and interpretation,
and true ſpirituall honouring of
God, and theſe he calleth Golde. Some other
ſhall adde ſtraw and ſtubble, (that is) hurtful
opinions, and which are infected with ſome
erroures, Like as in the firſt age of the world,
ther were ordained ceremonies which brought
with them falſe opinions.
            As I do iudge S.
                  Melanc
                        ••
                     on
                        •
                     
                   opinion of the builders in both churches 
               Ambroſe to be a true mē
               ber
of the Church. And yet euen he thus ſpeaketh

of the Lent faſte: Caetera ieiunia ſunt voluntatis,
hoc neceſſitatis eſt. That is, other faſtings
are voluntary,Faſting: ſtubble added by Ambroſe
                but this is of neceſſity.
This opinion of Ambroſe is ſtraw & ſtubble,
added to the doctrine of fayth.
            So Baſilius addeth Monkerie, as ſtraw and
ſtubble,Monkery ſtubble added by Baſilius.
                and commendeth this kinde of life
with immoderate and falſe commendations,
when as in deede hee was therefore reprehended
of his owne Biſhop.
            Butch at it is no ſmall faulte too ordeine
newe woorſhippings of God: the Scripture
warneth vs hereof, and this one ſentence ſufficiently
ſheweth the ſame:Eſay. 29. 
                     •
                  9. 
               In vaine doe they
woorſhip me with commaundementes of man.
Matth.
                15. It is a grieuous ſinne againſt
the firſt commaundement, to ordeine or allow
woorſhippinges not commaunded by God.
For the firſt precepte, ſeeyng of forbiddeth
there ſhoulde be any ſtraunge Gods, doth alſo
forbid ſtrange woorſhippinges.
            
               Cyprian vrgeth canonicall puniſhmentes,
which then was vſed,Puniſhmentes by canonicall lawe. and hee confirmeth opinions,
as though they were neceſſary,Stubble added by Cyprian.
                & that
by reaſon of them, ſinnes might be forgeuen.
Sometime againe he ſaith, that without thē,
abſolution of ſinnes is vnprofitable. Peraduenture
hee thought more conuenient heerein

then he ſpake: Notwithſtanding theſe are no
ſmall erroures, but very thicke ſtubble obſcuring
the doctrine of Chriſtes benefites and of
faith which we ſhoulde haue in him.
            Furthermore, oftentimes, writers haue
writtē more cōmodiouſly, then they haue ſpoken,
becauſe for the moſt part they were very
negligent & vnperfect in teaching, & borowed
many ſentences and methodes of the common
people,Errors of ſatiſfaction reprehended. wherein cōſiſted ſome kinde of errors.
As for example, Auguſt. borroweth the name
of ſatiſfactiō, frō the vulgar ſort, yea although
he doth openly reprehēd the errors of ſatiſfactions.
He troubleth himſelfe in the interpretation
of this ſentence, that euery ſinne is voluntary,
where he diſputed of the ſinne originall,
when notwithſtanding the Sentence is a
ciuill ſaying ſette downe concerning external
offences.
            So cal they the ſupper of the Lord an oblatiō,The Supper of the Lorde called after the maner of the peoples oblate
                  
                     •
                  n. after the maner of the people, whē it is not
an oblation, but Chriſt himſelfe was the high
Prieſt, which offered his owne ſacrifice. And
indeede in times paſt there was not made in
the ceremony of the ſupper, an oblation of the
body and blood: but before the conſecration,
there was breade offered, and other thinges
and the Prieſt ſaide that he did offer vp prayers

and thankeſgeuing, and all the ſeruice,
which was woont there to be done.
Although therefore the oblation was not vnderſtood
after one manner, yet notwithſtanding
the name afterwardes was wreſted vnto
the oblation of the body, wherevppon haue
enſued great abuſes.
            
               Dionyſius in that booke which containeth
ceremonies of the Churche,
                  Dionyſius his booke concerning ceremonies. when hee doeth
diligently deſcribe the order of the Lordes
Supper, yet doth he not at all make any mention
of the oblation of the Lordes body. Neither
doth the cannon of Baſilius containe this
oblation: but after this, I will ſpeake more
concerning the Lords Supper. Theſe things
onely haue I added too the ende I might declare
how that in tymes paſte the auncient
writers now & then haue borrowed incōuenient
ſpeeches of the people, as it is wont to happen
in all ages.
            Somtimes,The multitude holding ſome one Church haue borne a great ſtroake with ſome perſons. they are ouercome with iudgments
& examples of the multitude (wc is not
godly) that they bee drawen into ſuperſtitious
by ſome humane imagination: As in the
Nicen Coūcel, except Paphnutlus alone had wt
               ſtood
the ſame, the opinion of them had beene
allowed for good wc woulde haue made a decree,
that prieſts ſhuld abſtain frō their wiues.
            
               
So did cuſtome ouercome Cyprian and
many others,Cuſtome alſo hath done the like. inſomuch that they did allowe
the forbidding of marriage. Alſo the whole
Nicene Councel, beyng ouercome with the agreement
of a multitude, or of time, ratified
the Canons of penaunce, which afterwardes
brought foorth intollerable erroures.Examples of great perſonages apt to ſeduce the people into darkneſſe. Examples
alſo of greate perſonages doe oftentimes
deceaue the Godly: Like as the example
of Antonius cauſed many too erre.
            Hitherto haue I ſpoken of the godly, which
although they bee holy, yet notwithſtanding
very many of them are weake. Nowe will
I proceede further touching thoſe which doe
tranſgreſſe.
            Sometimes the Godly doe vtterly tranſgreſſe,
                  Ori
                        •
                     en a godly member of the church had his erroures.
and loſe the holy Ghoſt (as I do iudge)
that Origen did vtterly fall, eſpecially if hee
affirmed thoſe mōſtruous errours, That there
ſhoulde be innumerable worldes: That the very
Diuels at the laſt day ſhoulde be ſaued.
            
               Tertullian alſo doth vngodly diſallowe the
ſeconde marriages,
                  Tertul an other had alſo his infirmities. but peraduenture they
haue afterwardes repented. For many hauing
fallen in deede both in life and doctrine, haue
and yet at length doe amende. And very oftentimes
doth it happen that holy men doe thorowly
fall, and doe not iudge according too

the worde, and ſpirituall light, but are deceaued
by the imagination of reaſon,Many godly members of the Church being deceiued by the imagination of reaſon, haue yet at length vene reclaymed. which notwithſtanding
afterwardes doe better aduiſe
themſelues.The true Church may ſometime haue her faultes Like as Gedeon altogether trāſgreſſed,
when by mans aduiſe and counſell he
ordayned ſtraunge kindes of woorſhipping
God.
            Of all theſe, followeth this concluſion, although
the true Church, which is but ſmall in
number, retaine the articles of the faith: yet
notwithſtanding the ſame true Churche may
haue her faults, obſcuring the articles of the
fayth.
            Furthermore, many doe ſo fall, that they
altogether allowe and ratifie wicked errors,
againſt the articles of the faith, although peraduenture
ſom of them do afterwards amēd.
            Firſt, therefore, when the autority of the
Church is alleadged;Authoritie of the true church alleadged, how to be prooued. wee muſt ſearche, whether
it be the conſent of the true Church agreeyng
with the worde of God.
            Secondly,Writers of the Church. it is ſo to be ſaide that the writers
which are extant, haue oftentimes fallen,
and peraduenture ſome of them were no
members of the Church at all.
            Thirdly,In the Church are not al members likewell diſpoſed. an other Difference is too
bee added. In that ſocietie which is called
the Churche, there is a greate number of

vngodly perſons, of whome many excel the others
in autority, outward ſhewe of religion, &
opiniō of doctrine; ſuch as were the people of
Iuda in the tyme of Hieremy,
               Example in Hieremies tyme.
                the Biſhoppes &
wicked prieſts that alledged againſt Hieremy
the autority of the ſeate, of the lawe, & the very
promiſes: affirming that the lawe ſhoulde not
periſhe from the Prieſtes: they denyed, that
their congregation coulde erre, when notwithſtanding
they did altogither erre, and
diſgereede in matters from Hieremy. Alſo in
Chriſtes tyme, there were very fewe godly
perſons, namely, Zacharias and Symeon.
            
            Furthermore when the vngodly multitude
hath autority in the Churche,The vngodly multitude firſte embraced Maſſes. it ordaineth many
falſe and wicked thinges in the name and
vnder the title of the Churche. Such alyke
multitude firſte embraced the application of
Maſſes, for the quicke and dead, & moreouer
the eſtimation of vowes, and woorſhipping of
Sainctes: afterwardes the very example of
theſe thinges did hurt the godly. And ſuch a
multitude, decreede in a certaine Synode,
that marriages of Prieſtes ſhoulde vtterly be
taken away.The vngodly multitude decreed that marriages of prieſts ſhoulde vtterly be taken away. For it oftentymes comes too
paſſe in the churche, that vngodly perſons of
excellent wittes boldly challenge vnto themſelues
the ordinance of religion, by mans
wiſedome: who when they bee not mooued or

affected by the woorde of God, but are led
therevntoo by the imagination of reaſon, and
ſeeke for apte opinions for their purpoſes, do
breede wicked errors,
                  Samoſatenus, Arius, and Pelagius, heretikes, liuing about the yeeres of our Lorde. lyke as Samoſatenus,
Arius, and Pelagius. Others ſeeke to eſtabliſh
merites, or ſeeke for fayre kinde of gouernement,
good ordering of the people and with
theſe cauſes are mooued to the inſtitution &
heaping vppe of ſundry ceremonies,Samoſatenus, 274. as the
Monks do,Arrius, 320. as Gregory did, and as at this day
the Popes,Pelagius, 435. biſhops, Princes, & many learned
mē, (deſiring to ordain a forme of the church)
are mooued with mans wiſedome: & reiecting
the word of God, wil eſtabliſh a church according
to their owne imaginations, neither doo
they ſee it is a horrible impiety to ſlide away
frō the word of God, to ſeeke god without his
word, to ordaine meanes & maner of worſhipping
god, by mās opiniō, without the expres
cōmaundement of god, to chaūge the true opinions,
& oppreſſe the purity of gods word.
            
               When, therefore, the autority of the
Churche is obiected vntoo vs, as of the application
of Maſſes, the church doth not erre,
The Churche hath thus many ages vſed Maſſes:Alleadging of Maſſes.
Therfore this cuſtome is to bee obſerued.
We muſt anſwer vnto the Maior: The vniuerſal
churche, which is the multitude of them that
gouerne in the church, may erre, as the Biſhops

and Prieſts in Hieremies time, & in Chriſts time
did alſ
                  •
                
               
                  •
               rre.
            And although beſides that number, there
are ſome godly perſons, which retaine ſtill
the Articles of the faith: Notwithſtanding
euen they beeyng moued with examples, doe

                  〈◊〉
                yeelde vnto certaine erroures: whereby it
comes to paſſe, that they retayne the ſame articles
of faith leſſe pure, then they ought too
doe.
                  Bernarde condiſcended vnto many errors. Like as Bernarde is ſeene too haue had
better iudgement, then others, although yet
hee yeelded and condiſcended vnto many errors,
to the abuſes of Maſſes, too the Popes
power, too vowes, and woorſhippings of
Saintes.
            Therefore the autority of the multitude, is
not at all to be alleadged againſt the worde of
God▪ But we muſt returne to the rule, If anie
man teach any other Goſpel, let him bee holden
accurſed: Gal. 1. Let the chiefe autority 
                  •
               e
of the worde deliuered by God:The firſt autority being of the worde of God: proueth that to be the true Churche which is agreeyng therwith. Afterwards
that is to be reputed the church which agreeeth
with that worde, as Chriſt ſaith, My ſheep
heare my voyce, Iohn 10. and Sainte: Auguſtine
ſayeth: The queſtion is, Where the
Churche doeth conſiſt. What ſhall wee
then doe? Shall wee ſeeke the ſame in our
woordes, or in the woordes of the chiefe head

thereof, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte? I thinke
th
                  ••
                wee ought▪ too ſeeke the Churche in his
woordes, who is the trueth, and 
                  〈…〉
               
               
                  •
               eſt his owne body.Obiection if the autority of the Church bee refuſed. But heere obiection is
made, if the autoritie of the Church bee refuſed,

                  •
               henis graunted too much▪ and 
                  〈◊〉
                large
liberty vnto the malaper
                  •
               neſſe of mens inuentions.
For if once the opinions of the Churche
be reiected, many will deuiſe ſtraunge and
vngodly interpretations of the 
                  〈◊〉
               
This daunger, when it is not too be contemned,
and that it is profitable too reſtrayne
that libertie, we muſt then agayne 
                  〈…〉
               
foorth the autority of the Church is to be
required.
            For Seruetus,
               
                  Seruetus the he retique his opinion. when he reneweth the wicked
error of Samoſatenus, and denieth the
word
                  •
                too bee vnderſtood the perſon, in this
ſaying, 1. Iohn. In the beginning was 
                        〈◊〉
                     
worde,
                doeth mightilly extoll the autoritie of
the Scripture, he bidde
                  ••
                that this autority
be preferred before the decrees of the church.
After that he diſputeth ſubtilly ſaying, The
woorde is ſimply too bee ſo vnderſtood. But
whereas the Woorde, in the common ſpeech
of men doth not ſignifie the perſon, hee denieth
that in Iohn 1. it is too bee vnderſtood
the perſon. As if, Demoſthenes ſhoulde

reade this ſaying: In the beginning was the
woorde, ſurely he woulde not thinke that any
perſon were to bee vnderſtood.
            I aſke the queſtion therefore, whether it
proffit not againſt ſuch to oppoſe the autority
of the churche: Heere I anſwere: That the
Churche is to be heard,
               How the church is to be hearde. 
               ſo farre forth as the goſpel
commaundeth. So I ſay alwaies, the congregation
is too bee hearde with whome the
woorde of God hath bene, and which is called
the churche, euen as we commaunde our Paſtors
to bee hearde. Let vs therfore heare the
church teaching and admoniſhing vs. But we
muſt not ground our beliefe vpon the autority
of the church, for the churche doth not inſtitute
The articles of the fayth, ſhee doth only teach,
and admoniſh vs. But for the woorde of God
muſt we beleeue, when namely; we being admoniſhed
of the church do vnderſtād that this
ſentence is truely & without ſubtil allegation
deliuered in the worde of God.
            Peraduenture Demoſthenes woulde not
thinke of a perſon, if hee ſhoulde reade that
ſentence, In the beginning was the woorde, &c.
But the hearer beeing admoniſhed of the
church, (that the word ſignifieth the perſon, to
ſay the ſonne of God) is nowe helped of the

church, teaching and admoniſhing him, & the
ſame hearer doth beleeue the article, not for
the autority of the Churche, but by cauſe hee
ſeeth this ſentence to haue aſſured teſtimonies
in the ſame ſcripture:Touching vnderſtanding [the worde] to be the ſecond perſon in trinity. hee ſeeth there is mention
made of a certaine perſon, who taking
vppon him nature of man in the worlde, was
conuerſant with men. Hee ſeeth that this perſon
is called the woorde: her gathereth apt
and firme teſtimonies of both natures in
Chriſte. For, hee knoweth that (touching the
nature of God) we muſt beleeue the heauenly
voyce vttered, and that it is great wickednes
too inuent opinions, as touching The nature
of God, without his teſtimony 2. Peter 1. and
17. Math. Heare yee him.
            
            Alſo,The firſt church of the Apoſtles touching dotrine, and not mans traditions. The firſte Churche is of force, as
The witneſſe of the Apoſtles. But I ſpeake
as touching doctrines, and not mans traditions,
for they woulde haue doctrines too bee
firme and perpetuall, but mans ordinaunces
they woulde not haue to bee perpetual
and immutable. Neither did the Apoſtles
erre in doctrine: Therefore it is profitable to
reteine thoſe teſtimonies whereas the moſte
auncient wryters doo alleadge the autority of
the Apoſtles.
            
               
As Origen, Tertullian, Irenaeus, Gregory
Neocaeſarienſ.
               Auncient Fathers citing teſtimony of the Trinity. 
               Alexander Biſhoppe of Alexandria
and many others doe cyte their teſtimonies
touching the Trinitie.
            Who when they doe witneſſe that the doctrine
of the Trinitie was receaued of the Apoſtles,
do greatly ſtabliſh and confirme the
Godly. Therefore ſuche teſtimonies are not
at all too be deſpiſed nor contemned.
            And I ſayde alſo, that the writers are to
be hearde as now in like manner we ſay,How writers of former ages are to be heard that
our Preachers are to be heard, becauſe there
do ſome remayne ſtill in the Churche, which
doe retaine and embrace the trueth, in ſome
place more pure, in ſome other places, leſſe
pure and corrupt. But heere, we muſt adde
this, That they which are hearde, are too bee
iudged by the woorde of God, which thing the
rule of doctrine inſtituted, alwayes admoniſheth.
            
               Examples.
               
                  Auguſtine, (touching originall ſin) more
ſharply contendeth,Examples of the ſame wryters. then the reſt. Therefore
hee doeth bothe teach and admoniſhe, and
when we ſee him truely and without ſubtilety
to recite any ſentence of the ſcripture, we thē
                  
beleue the article, not for Augaſtyne, but for
the worde of God, and wee ſee, that the wryters
named haue helde the ſame opinion, although
they haue not handled this article ſo
copiouſly or ſo plainly.
            
            
               An other.
               
                  Peter Biſhop of Alexandria contending againſt
Meletius, affirmeth, that ſuch as ſlyde
away from the fayth are to bee reentertained,
and hee alledgeth an ancient autority.Opinion of an ancient father touching ſuch as ſlyde away frō the church. For
theſe wordes Epiphanius reciteth as the doctryne
which hath come to vs in our age doth
declare: Therfore the ſame Biſhop of Alexandria
doth both teach and admoniſh, that ſuch
as ſlyde away are to bee reentertained. Thi
                     •
                  
doo wee beleeue, not for this Biſhop: but bicauſe
wee ſee this ſentence is expreſſed in the
woorde of God, and heerevnto teſtimonies of
the auncient Church do condiſcend alſo.
            
            
               Synodes or Councels.
               The ſame doo I ſay touching Synodes or
Councels:
                     Examples. How Syno
                        ••
                      or Councels 
                        •
                     re to be heard.
That they are alſo too bee hearde▪
which, when they doo diſpute touching the
worde of God, doo teache and admoniſhe vs:

but thereunto let iudgement bee adioyned, &
when they deliuer vntoo the worlde thinges
which are true, let vs giue credit vntoo them,
for the woorde of God: As the Nicene Councel
taught both godly and profitably, and admoniſhed
al poſterity, of the ſonne of God. But we
beleue the article, not for the Synode or Coū
                  cell,
but bicauſe wee ſee it ſo expreſſed in the
woorde of God.
               The other thinges, which are without the
Scriptures are not ſo wel to be embraced, As
the Councel of Nicene, inſtituted Canons of
repentance, which are mās traditions, beſides
the ſcriptures, and haue beene the ſeedes of
many ſuperſtitous opinions.
               
                  Sampſons gueſtes coulde not expounde
the ridle which was proponed at the feaſt,
but that his wyfe was firſte aſked the queſtion:
Wherefore,
                     
                        
                           •
                        udicum, cap. 14. 
                        •
                      compariſon 
                        •
                     or triall too 
                        •
                     now where the 
                        ••
                     urch of God 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Sampſon ſayde vnto them,
except you had firſt plowed with my heckfer
you ſhoulde not finde out my queſtion. So
lykewyſe, muſte wee diligently looke about
and make inquiry where the Church is,
which hath the woorde of GOD, and wee
muſt ſee which multitude of the fathers or of
Councelles is the purer & vncorrupt: that is,
which of them haue the leſſe opinions beſides

the word of god. Theſe things doth the church
teache, admoniſh and teſtifie. But we muſt ſee
whether thoſe things which ſhee proponeth or
decreeth, haue the firme teſtimonies of Gods
woorde, yea or no.
               And truly it becommeth the godly too acknowledge
and confeſſe that the fathers haue
deſerued well of their poſterity,The godly muſt acknowledge that the fathers of the Churche haue wel deſerued of their poſterity. which with
ſharpe and earneſt contentions haue defended
and retained godly doctrine: that benefit is
not ſmally to be accompted vpon. Heerevnto
pertaineth that ſaying of S. Auguſtyne, I
woulde not beleeue the Goſpel, were it not but
that the autority of the Churche mooued mee
therevntoo.
                  
                     Auguſtynes opinions touching the Church. 
                  Auguſtyne dooth not heere thinke
that the autority of the Church is greater, thā
of the woorde of God, or that the churche can
aboliſh articles expreſſed in the word of God:
but he thinketh that the church is the teacher,
and Teſtimony of thoſe articles. Wee woulde
not beleue the Goſpel, but that the church doth
ſo reach vs, and that it did teſtify, that this doctrine
was deliuered vs from the Apoſtles.
               
               And this ſaying is of force to confounde
ſtraunge opinions. which were neuer ſeene
in the Churche, lyke as the Manichees haue
inuented newe doting opinions.
               
                  
For, the doctrine neceſſary too edify in godlineſſe,
muſt needs bee ſeene in the beginning
by the preaching of the Apoſtles. Therefore,
ſtraunge and altogither vnknowne opinions
not vſed in time of the apoſtolic at Church are
to bee reiected. But concerning the ſaying of
Auguſtyne, in other places more amply it i
                     •
                  
diſputed vppon.The Churche hath none autority to ordayne any thing contrary vnto the word of God. Surely hee dooth not grau
                     ••
                  
that the Churche hath or may haue any autoritie
of ordayning any thing contrary too the
expreſſe word of god: or of aboliſhing articles
deliuered in the woorde of GOD: eyther
elſe of making new or ſtraunge articles of the
faith.
            
            
               A Reſytal of Teſtimonies
by the Autor.
               I wil collect a fewe examples of the councels,
and Fathers,Teſtimonies of Councels. as it appeareth, that in
them there is matters of teſtimony in ſome
of them, differing from others ſome, leaſt
(without difference made) all the ſayinges of
all men, or al the ordinaunces of auncient fathers,
ſhoulde bee reputed and taken as neceſſary.
               Lyke as truely the fooliſhe and ignoraunt

people are ſo in loue with antiquity that they
wil haue al ancient traditions of men to be reſtored
in the churche,The common ſort haue alwayes held antiquity in great eſtimation. euen as if nowe they of
Sparta would haue al ancient ordinaunces reſtored
vnto the ſtate of their common wealth
at this day: ſeeing that ordinaunces deuiſed
by men, are partly faulty, and partly allowable:
yet notwithſtanding they are not agreeable
vnto al times and ages.
               The Councel called Neocaeſarienſe, forbad,
that Prieſtes ſhoulde not come too banquettes
at the ſeconde marriages,Concilium Neoceſar. vnder Couſtantinus. Anno. 315. Preſent thereat Germanus, Leontius, Baſilius, Longinus & aliis leaſt they
ſhoulde bee ſuppoſed of others to allow them.
Such like foliſh conſtitutiōs very many haue
beene entermingled with good ordinaunces:
wherfore, choiſe is to bee made in ſuch caſes,
and wee muſt not raſhely reioyce or take encouragement
a
                     •
                  euery ſaying of the auncient
fathers, or Councels.
               Anno Domini 324. The Councel of Nicene
was called togither by Conſtantyne
the Emperour,
                     Nicene Councel vnder Conſtantyne, Anno. 324 Preſent there at 268. biſhops. wherein Euſtathius biſhop of
Antioche was chiefe. In this Councel, therewere
very greate and grieuous controuerſies
of opinions diſcuſſed and deryded, and the
errours of Samoſatenus, and of Arrius were of

good right condemned.
                     Nicene Count. Alſo the errours of
thoſe called Cathari, which denied that ſuche
as had ſwarued from the Churche, were to
be receaued again, and denied that ſuch could
haue forgiuenes of their ſinnes.
               Afterwards,Policies for the gouernment of churches deuyſed at the ſaid Councel. there were certaine policyes
ordained touching gouernement of churches:
That the biſhoppe of Alexandria ſhoulde gouerne
the Churches of the eaſt▪ and the biſhop
of Rome thoſe Churches of the nations adiacent.
Alſo that biſhoppes ſhould bee conſecrated
of the other biſhoppes which dwelt nea
                     •
                  e
vnto them. Theſe policies, although they are
profitable, yet they which conſtituted theſe,
would not haue them too bee taken for the articles
of the fayth.
               Thirdly,Ceremonial inſtitutions were cauſes of ſuperſtitions. they alſo ordained certaine ceremonial
inſtitutions: namely, Canons of
penance, as they termed them, which at
the firſt, were not ſo difficulte, and peraduenture
were leſſe ſuperſtitious.
               But afterwardes it grewe to an intollerable
yoake, and ſuperſtition therby increaſed,
and the free remiſſion of ſinnes, was by
meanes heereof obſcured and darkened.
Wherfore; in this matter, the fathers of this
Councel were not circumſpect ynough: And

ſeing that the euent ſo manifeſted afterwards,Fathers faulty.
that ſuperſtitions did hereby encreaſe, let vs
not in his behalfe ſo maruel at the dooing of
that Councel,Canons of repentance. that wee wil eyther allowe, or
reſtore theſe Canons as profitable for the
Churche.
               Neither, doo wee therefore differ in opinion
from the ancient Churche: we retaine in
our Churche the articles of the Councel, touching
doctrine, which properly belong vntoo
the churche. As for the other ceremonies,
which eyther are beſide, or againſt the worde
of God, they doo nothing at al pertaine vntoo
the church.
               Anno Domini 383. The councel of Conſtantinople
was called togither,The councel of Conſtantinople ſecundum Pantaleonem vnder Gratian. Anno 383. Preſent thereat 180. Fathers. Controuerſies. Heretikes. of Theodoſius
the Emperour, wherein was chief the biſhop
of Conſtantinople: there was a greate controuerſy
diſcuſſed vppon and dreyded as concerning
The holy Ghoſte, That he is a perſon proceeding
from the father, and the ſonne and that
hee is God: And for their contrary opinion
therein, was Eunomius, and other Heretikes
of right condemned.
               And there were alſo certain pollicies here
decreed,Pollicies. as this one: namely, that no biſhops
ſhoulde haue any thing to deale in other dioceſſes
than in their owne.
               
                  
Anno 433.
                     The 3. Councel of Epheſus ſecund. Pantal. Romanis ducibus inter ſe de imp
                        •
                     
                     rio diſciptantibus 433. Preſent thereat 200. fathers. Hereſies of Neſtorius. The Councell at Epheſus, was
called of Theodoſii
                        •
                     s, the younger, Emperour,
wherein was cheef, Cyrillus, biſhop of Alexandria.
This Synode by good right condemned
the heretike Neſtorius, who denied in
Chriſte the worde vnited vnto humane nature,
by a ſubſtantial vnion, but that the word
is onely preſent, and (as it were a gueſt in

                     〈◊〉
                  ) doth dwel in humane nature, that it
might there bee effectuall.
               This controuerſy was of greate efficacy.
For in Chriſte,Twoo natures in Chriſt truly aud ſubſtantially vnited. there are twoo natures vnited,
truely & ſubſtantially. Neither is it onely
true, that the humane nature alone is Chriſt,
and the dwelling place of the worde aſſiſtent,
or vnited. Therevpon haue the godly vrged
theſe kindes of ſpeach, touching the vnity of
the perſon, That God was borne, that hee ſuffered,
&c. And although Neſtorius, denied that
hee helde like opinion as Samoſatenus helde,
yet notwithſtanding I ſuppoſe that in deede
hee helde all one opinion, but that hee hath
after aforte propounded an olde doting opinion,
darkly ſhadowed or cloked.
               Anno 452. The Councell of Calcedon,The 4. Councel of Calcedon vnder Martian. 452.
was called together of the Emperor Martian,
wherein Eutiches was rightly condemned,

which alſo denied the two natures in Chriſte;
and contended that the ſame nature of the
woorde was ſente from GOD, that it was
brought foorth by the Virgin, neyther that
there were two natures vnited: and here hee
ſeemeth to haue renued the doting madneſſe
of Samoſatenus, but propounded by ſome other
ſleyght or cullour. This iudgement of the
Councell, is to be commended.
               But now there had increaſed in the church
mans traditions,Mans traditions increaſed in the Church. therefore this Synode
brought foorth corrupt conſtitutions, not touching
opinions, bnt touching ceremonies, &
woorſhipping of God, otherwiſe then the
ſcriptures allowe, and notwithſtanding theſe
ordinaunces, were more within the limites of
modeſty, then other which ſprang vpp afterwardes.
In this Synode, was firſt an order
decreed which forbad the marriage of
Monkes, and of Virgins which had made
vowes:Monks forbidden to marry & virgins which had made vowes. and excommunicateth ſuche as contrace
matrimony, out of that ſociety, although
it addeth ſome mitigation, and that this
may be graunted by the iudgement of the Biſhoppe.
               But many pollitike ordinaunces were at
this time profitably decreed:Politike ordinaunces for the Church decreeed in the Councell of Calcedon.
                   Namely, That
the Biſhoppes ſhoulde not themſelues, holde

the adminiſtration of eccleſiaſticall faculties,
but that Churches ſhoulde haue theyr ouerſeeers.
That no one perſon ſhoulde haue moe
functions then one. That no man ſhoulde
be admitted without the order of Miniſtery.
Alſo that Biſhops in theyr ſeueral Prouinces
ſhoulde yeerelymeete together, and conſtitute
Connenticles concerning the preſent controuerſies
in the Churche.Aduerſaries charged with diſſimulation. Theſe profitable
decrees, of the Synodes, the aduerſaries doe
diſſemble with, and in meane time doe bring
foorth other lighter matters, in the ende they
woulde ſeeme to oppoſe vnto vs the autority
of the auncient church.
               There were alſo in the meane time other
Synodes in other places, eyther prouincials,
or more often aſſembled: wherin the Biſhops
of the next prouinces abiacent, did alſo meete
together,Th
                        ••
                     . Council of Antioch vnder Foelix the B
                     
                        •
                     ſhop of Rome there holden about the yeare 274, Touching the heriſie of this Paule Samoſatenus. looke in Pantaleon page 22. Such a one was the Synod of Antioche
(before that of Nicene aforeſayde) called
againſt Samoſatenus: which godly & rightly
condemned the wickednes of Samoſatenus.
Alſo the like Synode beyng auncient vncorrupt,
called Gangrenſis in Galatia, ordayned
verye good decrees agaynſt the ſuperſtitions
of marriages, of meates, and of Monkery.
And it is manifeſt that this Councell was gathered
too condemne thoſe two Heretikes.

                  Montanus & Martion, with others ſuch, which
woonderfully augmented thoſe ſuperſtitions.
               Since that, there enſued other Councelles
more later, as that called Auchiranum, which
decreed this conſtitution worthy of memory:
ìf Deacons in theyr ordinaunce had not promiſed
a ſingle life,Vowes of Dea
                        •
                     tons touching mariage or ſingle life fondly allowed of. they were ſtill too bee retayned
in theyr miniſteries, althoughe afterwardes
they had married wiues: but if they
had promiſed vowes of ſingle life, and afterwardes
indeede married: they were then too
bee remoued and diſplaced out of the miniſtery.
The ſame Synode hath alſo other daungerous
& ſuperſtitie us Canons, of the yeeres
of penaunce.The Councel of Laodicia vnder Valeut 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Anno 368.
               
               The Councell of Laodicea in Anno Domini
368. called together) did rightly confounde
the Nouatian Heritikes.Lay men axacted vpon, which had married 2 wiues. Concil. Laodicenum.
                   But it erred
in exacting vppon thoſe Lay men, which
already haue had two wiues: it willeth them
firſt to be puniſhed before they be admitted to
the Communion. It doeth alſo forbid baptizing
14 dates after the beginning of lent:Error of Baptiſing forbidden for 14 dayes after beginning of lent. the
other politike ordinaunces there decreed, are
good, as namely this one, when it forbiddeth
matrimony and marrying with Heretikes.Marriage forbid with Heretikes.
This Synode followed that of Nicene not
long tyme betweene.
               
                  
Vnder Honorius the Emperour was the
firſt councell of Toledo called,The Councell of Toledo vnder Arcadius & Honorius. Anno 395. which containeth
many profitable arguments of doctrine.
For it godly reciteth the articles of the Diuinitie
and natures of Chriſt,Articles of diuinity and humanity in Chriſt. and certaine other
articles. Afterwardes it adioyned vntoo
this certayne pollitike conſtitutions and
ceremonies, touching the maner of their annoynting,
and touching vowes.
               This Synode forbiddeth the preferring
of Deacons vnto the office of Prieſthoode, if
they doe not abſtayne from lawfull wiues.Dea
                        •
                     ons.
Alſo it doeth excommunicate thoſe Parentes
which loue theyr daughters with affection of
parents if they do marry after they haue once
bound them ſelues wt bowes.Excommunication of Parents. Alſo, this coūcell
doth not admitt them once,A great and vnmeete abſurdity. beeing marryed,
to come to the communion, e
                     •
                  cept they departe
away from their huſbands. Pantaleon
writeth that this was ratified in Anno Domini.
399.
               The 5. Councel of Carthage which was
held Anno Domini 438.The 5. Councel of Carthage vnder Aurelius Biſhop. Anno 438. forbiddeth Biſhops,
Prieſts,Preſent therat 74. Biſhops. and Deacons to haue the vſe of lawfull
wyues. And ſo by a little and a little the
prohibition here of augmented. Before, that it
was lawfull for Deacons to liue with their
wiues, as the Synode called Anchirana Synodus
                  
both teſtifie. Afterwardes followed a
prohibition hereof.Preſent therer
                        •
                      74. Biſhops. Marriage of eccleſiaſticall perſons forbidden. And theſe ordinaunces
touching ſingle life, were therevpon eftſones
repeated in all Synodes and Councelles, and
more ſharper puniſhments were adioyned
them, as a certaine Councell holden at Toledo
ordayned, that the riches or ſubſtaunce of women
ſhoulde be ſoulde away if they returned
agayne vnto theyr huſbandes.
               For,A conſtitution concerning Chappels and Aulters of Sayntes. this Councell now holden at Carthage
contayneth alſo another conſtitution woorthy
of memory concerning Chappels, and Aulters
of Saintes, where as theyr bodies were
not buryed. Theſe Aulters and Chappelles,
did the Biſhop commaunde ſhoulde bee throwen
downe, or if they feared any inſurrection
of the people, he biddes them exhort the people
in their Sermons, that they come not to
thoſe places. It appeareth that there were
ſome at that time which woulde prohibit and
withſtande the ſuperſtition of woorſhipping
Sayntes euen when it was firſte ſpringing
vp.Superſtitiouſe woorſhipping of Saintes withſtood and diſanulled.
               
               
                  Pantaleon reciteth that this was ratified
in the time of Clodoueus ſonne of Pharamund
Duke of Franconiain Germany.
               The Councell of Carthage in Anno Domini
457.The 6. councel of Carthage vnder Aurelius Biſhop there. Anno 457. touching the appeale of Biſhops

therin the biſhop of Rome required ye appeale
to the ſea of Rome might be graūted,Preſent thereat, 217, Biſhops. whēceſoeuer
any man had appealed vnto the Biſhop
of Rome.Apeale to the See of Rome. laboured for by the Biſhop there. And bicauſe he would obtain this, he
played a falſe part, hee alleadged a counterfaite
decree, which hee affirmed was eſtabliſhed
in the Nicene councel too that purpoſe:
afterwardes by originalles or copies fetcht
from Conſtantinople,
                  
                     Auguſtine was preſent at this Councel. the vanity heereof was
founde out: and the demaunde of the Biſhop
of Rome was vtterly reiected.Note. The impudent forgery of the Biſhop of Rome. At this councel
was Sainte. Auguſtine preſent. By ſuch
cunning ſleights haue the Romiſh biſhoppes
made themſelues a way and meane to obtaine
the ſupremacy. This example admoniſheth
vs, that wee ſhoulde not bee ſo farre in loue
with antiquity, that wee altogither acquyte
it of al faultes there.
               
                  Pantaleon teſtifieth that this Synode was
ratified for the 6. by Aurelius the Biſhop
of Carthage.
               
               The 4. Synode there, contained a decree
made,A Relation vnto the 4. Councel
                        •
                      holden there 
                  Touching Prayer, and offering for the
dead, in theſe woordes: Thoſe that repent thē
of their ſinnes, which haue diligently obſerued
the canons of repentance,
                  A decree touching repentaunce. 
                  if they happen too dye
before they communicate, let the memory of
them be commended in prayers, and offeringes.
                  
That age had not as yet any priuate Maſſes,
but yet by a little and a little, ſuperſtition had
encreaſed. This Canon doeth not allowe
of the dead, except they had obſerued diligently
the rites of penaunce. Alſo, it addeth
a kinde or maner of offringes.
               
                  Pantaleon reporteth that this Synod was
ratified in Anno 436. vnder the ſame Biſhop
Aurelius.
               
               The Councell called Mileuitana Synodus
in Affrica handled a moſte weighty cauſe,The Councell called Mileuitana about the time that Hilarius entred againe into Rome. 
                        •
                     n. 420.
whereat Saynt Auguſtine was preſent, and
did rightly defende this godly doctrine of originall
ſinne, of Grace, and of iuſtification: the
ſame Councell had alſo certeyne politike conſtitutions,
amongſt which, namely, theſe are
woorthy of memory, it forbiddeth ſute of appeale
vntoo the Biſhoppes of beyonde the
Seas.S. Auguſtine was preſent thereat with a great nūber of Biſhops. But indeede this decree, woulde
not the Biſhoppe of Rome nowe admitte or
receaue.
               It alſo forbiddeth Iudges,Sute of appele to the See of Rome forbiddē. but not Byſhops
to be required of the Emperor. That
was agreable vnto thoſe dayes. Now it were
very harde too bee obſerued:Diuorcements Moreouer touching
Diuorcements it decreed that the innocent
or faultleſſe perſon ſhoulde not againe
contract matrimony with any other.
               
                  
And it moreouer addeth that requeſt is to
be made, that the Emperour would eſtabliſh
a lawe to that end and purpoſe. And that thing
was alſo more grieuous. For Fabiola, as it
appeareth by the teſtimonie of Saint Hierom
contracted an other marriage after her firſte
deuorce at Rome.
               That Synode alſo confirmeth the ſuperſtition
of vowes,Superſtition of vowes confirmed. Virgins to be couered before the age of 25. yeeres. it alloweth virgins to be couered
before fiue & twenty yeeres of age contrary
to the auncient Canons. Although therfore
touching doctrine it pronounced thinges
which were very well to be borne withall, yee
afterwardes, notwithſtanding, were added
ſome ſtubble: and ſuperſtitious conſtitutions.
               Wherefore, not all the decrees of the
Coūcels without choyce, are to be well allowed
of: And yet notwithſtanding we muſt confeſſe
and acknowledge that godly Councelles
haue wel deſerued to be borne with and allowed:
bicauſe they haue retayned and conſerued
ſome Articles of Chriſtian doctrine. And
concerning theſe things, it is profitable to retayne
the Teſtimony of Councelles, and of
Antiquity.
            
            
               
               Of auncient Eccleſiaſticall
writers.
               THeſe alſo haue well deſerued of,Auncient eccleſiaſticall wryters ſo farre foorth as they are witneſſes of the auncient and firſt church of the Apoſtles haue wel deſerued to be allowed of. eſpecially
ſo farre foorth as they are witneſſes
of the Auncient and firſt Church of the Apoſtles.
For, they confirme vs with their teſtimony
as touching the Trinity, of the natures
in Chriſte, of baptizing infantes, of the
vſe of the Lordes Supper, of ordayning miniſters,
touching marriage of miniſters, touching
the vſe of thinges indifferent, touching
repentaunce of thoſe which haue tranſgreſſed.
As concerning all theſe articles, there
are recited examples worthy of memory, frō
the Apoſtles, which doe mainteyne and defende
our doctrine.
               But ſome of them haue ben more diligent
in ſome matters,Other writers oftentimes er
                     
                        •
                     ing by admoniſhment haue amended. & as it is the nature of man
they doe often raſhly and vnaduiſedly powre
out abſurde and falſe opinions, whereof if
they had beene admoniſhed, they woulde vndoubtedly
haue corrected them. Oftentimes
when they thought not amiſſe, yet coulde they
not ſo perſpicuouſly or plainly declare their opinions,
as they would. Oftētimes by reaſon
of the cuſtom of times and ages they did more

obſtinately defende their preſent traditions:
And they haue alſo nowe and then falſe opinions.Without choice be made al writing or teſtimonies of the fathers may not be allowed.
Wherefore without choyce to be made
all writinges or teſtimonies of the Fathers,
may not be allowed, and oftentimes they thē
ſelues doe contende amongſt themſelues, neither
is it a thing ſeldome ſeene, that a man
diſagreeth from him ſelfe. Wherefore the
iudgement ought to be giuen according to the
writing and ſaying of the Apoſtles. But I
now ſet downe examples.
            
            
               Of Origen.
               
                  Origen recytyng the examples and ſentences
of the Apoſtles,
                     Origen was Bi
                     
                        •
                     hop of Alexan
                        
                           •
                        ria. Anno 235 
                        •
                     n ſome points 
                        •
                     e is a witnes 
                        •
                     rofitable. and of the auncient Churches,
is a witneſſe very profitable for the poſterity
concerning ſome articles touching the
Trinity, touching the twoo natures in Chriſt
touching Baptiſing of Infantes, Originall
ſinne, vſe of the Lordes ſupper, and certeine
other things.
               But he hath mixed many falſe and abſurde
opinions with his writinges,With his wri
                     
                        •
                     ings he mixed 
                        •
                     any falſe and 
                        ••
                     ſurde opini
                     
                        •
                     ns. whereof
ſome were diſallowed euen in his tyme.
Hee fayned, or imagined that before this world
there were many moe worldes. Hee imagigined;
that the tormentes ordayned for Diuels,

and damned perſons ſhould haue an end. Theſe
thinges did that his age reprehend, and diſalowe.
               Vpon the Romanes 3. Where hee handleth
this propoſition: Wee are iuſtified by
fayth, not by woorkes, Hee vnderſtandeth
by a figure Synecdoche, wee are iuſte by
fayth, that is too ſay, through a perfect fayth
conteyning all vertues, that he declareth: he
ſaith the ſame may be ſpoken of other vertues:
as by mercy wee are iuſt, namely beyng perfect
comprehending all other vertues. This
is to ſay none other thing,
                     Origen Error touching righteouſnes. but that men may
by reaſon of theyr woorkes and vertues haue
remiſſion of ſinnes, and are iuſte. And
when they doe not diligently conſider what
Saynt Paule goeth about,His error touching workes and vertues. what hee calleth
Fayth, what that excluſiue particle (not
of woorkes) meaneth, he addeth heerein confuſed
and troubleſom interpretations, neither
doth he agree with himſelfe.
               For, ſometimes hee vttereth ſome one tollerable
ſaying, but the ſame doeth hee afterwardes
corrupte: Like as that in the
fourth to the Romanes where he thus argueth
that the beginning of iuſtificatiō from God,
is fayth, which beleeueth in hym that

iuſtifieth,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      fault in Origen where he afterwardes corrupteth that which before he applyed wel. and this faith when ſhe is iuſtified,
a
                     •
                  ideth firme in the grounde of the ſoule, as
the roote of a tree beeyng watered with a
ſhewre, that when by the lawe of God it beginneth
too bee tilled, ſtreight way out of the
ſame there ſpringes braunches which beare
the frutes of woorkes. Not therefore out
of woorkes, the roote of righteouſnes, but frō
the roote, the fruite of woorkes doth growe,
that is to ſay, from the roote of righteouſnes
wherby God accepteth righteouſnes without
woorkes.
               In the 3. cap.He alle
                        •
                     geth 
                        ••
                     ſtification by 
                        •
                     aith. 
                  Rom. where he intreateth
vppon this ſentence, Where is then thy glorying?
hee nowe ſeemeth to come nearer vntoo
the minde of Saint Paule: he graunteth this
excluſiue particle, that Men by fayth onely are
iuſtified: and he alleageth the theefe vpon the
croſſe, and the women mencioned by S. Luk
cap. 28. Thy fayth hath ſaued thee.
                   But after
declaring theſe thinges, he ſeemeth thus too
meane, that a man at the beginning doeth
obtayne remiſſion of ſinnes by faith onely. Afterwardes
that he is iuſt through other vertues,
like as he ſayeth afterwardes: Faith is
reputed for righteouſneſſe vnto him which is
conuerted, but afterwardes righteouſneſſe is rekoned

vnto righteouſneſſe.
               
               Furthermore there is a meruailous varietie
and doubtfulneſſe of his interpretation, although
he graunteth in the beginning,Variety in hys interpretation. that
Man may obtaine remiſſion of ſinnes onely by
Fayth, yet notwithſtanding if afterwardes he
imagine, that ſuch as are conuerted, be without
ſinne, by reaſon of other vertues: hee then
diſagreeth from Saint Paule and the reſt of
diuine Scriptures, according to that ſaying
of Dauid, No man lyuing ſhall be iuſtified in
thy ſight. Pſal.
                   143. Agayne, If we ſay, wee
haue no ſinne. &c. 1 Iohn
                   1.
               In ye 7. Chap. he ſaieth playnely, that the
holy ones doe reſemble in thēſelues the perſon
of others, when they attribute ſinne vnto thē
                  ſelues,
as it is manyfeſt in Daniel.
                  His corrupting of ſentences greeuouſly erronyous. 
                  Not in
our righteouſneſſe, but in thy mercy, thou wilte
heare vs. Suche like ſentences doth hee corrupt,
and teacheth either truſt in a mans own
righteouſneſſe, or els deſperation.
               Chap. 3. Ro. he ſaith Without the law is the
righteouſneſſe of God made manifeſt. That is
to ſay, without the naturall lawe: there are
newe lawes giuen vs in the Goſpel, as that
which is mencioned in Matth. 6. Let not the
right hande knowe what the lefte hande doeth.
                  
This lawe, (ſaith he) was before vnknowne:

Agayne: the lawe is ſpirituall. He vnderſtandeth
onely touching the allegory, that is ceremonies
haue their allegorie,
                     Origen vnderſtandeth the holy Ghoſt amiſſe. and oftentimes
hee vnderſtandeth the holy Ghoſt amiſſe, not
conceauing of the motions of the holy Ghoſt,
but onely of the allegoricall interpretation or
meaning.
               In the eight chapter, that which was impoſſible
vnto the Law, bycauſe it was weakened
through the fleſh, he applieth the fleſhe
vnto the Lawe: the fleſhe of the Lawe was
weakened, that is, ceremonies were impoſſible,
vnprofitable. &c. But S. Paule meaneth
the fleſh, the nature of man, The lawe was
weakened by fleſhe, that is, it coulde not bee
fulfilled by humane nature. Theſe places doe
ſhewe that Origen ranne clene beſide the high
way, and did not vnderſtand here what Saint
Paul meant.
               I could collect many light or ſiēder matters,
as where he ſayth,Note his error in preferring Peter aboue all the reſt of the Apoſtles. Mat. 16. Mat. 20. 
                  That Peter excelled the reſt,
becauſe it is ſayde vnto him in the plural number:
it ſhall be looſed in the heauens, and to al
the whole cōpany of the Apoſtles it is ſayd in
the ſinguler nūber, it ſhall be looſed in heauen.
But theſe trifles I let paſſe, yet it proficeth the
learned and ſuch as apply their iudgementes
to reade the auncient writinges: firſt by reaſon

of hiſtoricall teſtimonies, & thē bicauſe the
cōference of them, ſharpneth the wits & exerciſeth
the ſtudious. So ſhal the reading of Origen
profite them, which before are rightly
inſtructed, & doe holde faſt the ſumme & principles
of chriſtian doctrine.
            
            
               Of Dionyſius
               There is one booke which Dionyſius writt
touching the eccleſiaſtical hierarchy,This Dionyſius is thought to haue byn the Diſciple of Origen, and alſo thiefe ſchoolemaiſter of the ſchoole in the City of Alexā
                        dria, Anno 250. and it is
for the hiſtory profitable, the reſt conteyneth
vaine matters of knowledge. For there the
ceremonies of the Sacraments are ſet down,
and the ordinaunces of the Church, & it appeareth
in thoſe dayes, that there were mean ceremonies
as yet. And eſpecially the ordināces of
the Maſſe are there too be cōſidered, ſo that it
appereth the later popes that haue byn in the
church, haue in their time digreſſed farre frō
the ancient rule of the church. They vſed to recite
certein Pſalmes,Popes of the later times haue digreſſed from the auncient rule of the Church. & certeyne leſſons cut of
the Goſpel, they made alſo Prayers for the
church, & for the cōmon weale. After this, the
prieſt ſtāding at the table, recited the wordes
of Chriſte concerning the Lordes Supper.
Furthermore he diſtributed the ſacramēt vnto
the people, & laſtly folowed a giuing of thāks.

This was the ordinary maner of their maſſe,
wherby it playnly appeareth, that the Maſſe
was only a Communion, and that there were
then no priuate Maſſes,
                     Dionyſius teſtifieth that there was no Maſſe but Communion in his time. but that is alſo to be
meruailed at, that there is no mention at all
made of oblation: no nor ſo much as the rite
or maner of him that doth offer. Theſe things
ſpecially it is profitable too obſerue in Dionyſius,
that wee may oppoſe antiquity againſt
thoſe, which defend the abuſes of their
Maſſes.
               He maketh mention of Baptiſme, Anointing,
Communion,His teſtimonies touching baptiſme annoynting Communion, ordering of prieſts and a godly order in burying the dead. and as I ſaid, of the ordeining
of Prieſtes, and of them which made
bowes, and of thoſe which annointed the dead:
where he declareth, what maner ceremonies
they vſed at funerals: when the dead body was
placed in the Church, in preſence of the people,
there were recited certeine leſſons out of
the worde of God, touching reſurrection. The
people alſo after this was bid to geue thanks
in theyr prayers, that ſuche a one had departed
out of this worlde in the knowledge of the
Goſpel. And herevntoo was added an exhortation,
that euery one touching himſelf ſhuld
pray for a Godly ende out of this life. This
was an order very godly, and woorthy of commendation.
               
                  
For, what greater benefites may be deuiſed,
than in that greate agony firmely too
retaine in minde the knowledge of Chriſte, to
be helped of Chriſte, and ſaued by him. This
better ceremony the latter age hath vtterly
aboliſhed, retaining, and heaping vp of others
farre woorſe.
               Alſo Dionyſius addeth, that after this exhortation,
the Prieſt we
                     •
                  t from his former
place, and powred oyle vpon the corps, and
prayed that God woulde pardon his infirmity,
which was remayning after the tyme of
his conuerſion. Afterwardes the coarſe was
laide ſtraightway in the earth. Theſe onely
were the ceremonies of burialles, at that
tyme: there was, as yet no mention in the
Maſſe, of them that were departed: much leſſe
was the body of the Lorde offered for thoſe
that were dead. This prophanation or abuſe
of the Sacrament was added in the latter
age.
               Thus much,Ceremonies were the beginnings of monkery. concerning Dionyſius, wherin,
although ceremonies apeare ſomewhat
leſſe faulty, yet notwithſtanding were they the
beginnings of Monkery, and this thing was
woorthy of great reprehenſion that it maketh
no difference, betweene the ſacramentes appointed
by God and mans traditions. Touching

thing anoynting hee ſpeaketh al one, as of
Baptiſme, and he maketh by thinges equall
with thinges of ſubſtaunce. And it preferreth
the ordering of Monks, before the inſtitution
of Miniſters; which is greatly too be diſprayſed
when as the inſtitution of Miniſters, pertaineth
vnto the preaching of the Goſpel. And
that ordering of Monks is ſuperſtitious, and
is only ordained for a kinde of woorſhipping
God, not allowed of according to that ſaying,
They woorſhip me in vaine teaching traditions
of men. Mat.
                   15. And yet Monkery is there
called perfection.
               Therfore let theſe teſtimonies of this Dionyſius
be of force ſo far as they pertaine to the
hiſtory, that wee may know what ceremonies
were then vſed. But let no doctrine or lawes
be inſtituted by his deſcriptions.
            
            
               Of Tertullian.
               
                  Tertullian rightly confuted Martyon and
other Heretikes of that ſeet.
                     Tertullianus Apher was famous in Anno 230. He conteineth
profitable teſtimonies of the Trinity not recyting
his opinion therein, but the ancient opinion
receaued from the Apoſtles. Againſt
Praxea, he hath a large & lightſome teſtimony
of the worde, that is, of the ſonne of God, that

he is the ſecond perſon▪ yea, before he toke vpō
him humane nature. But yet the auncient fathers
doo alſo reprehende his errors: namely,
that he diſalloweth the ſecond marriages,His errors touching mariage. and
in that he very fondly alleadgeth. That a man
may not lawefully marry the wife of a Chriſtian
brother that is dead: for (ſaith he) who ſo
marryeth the widow of a Chriſtian, marrieth
the wife of a brother deceaſſed, therefore hee
doth not right.
               Hee doth alſo tryfle as touching the kingdome
of the ſainctes,His errors touching Saincts. when they fained that
it ſhoulde endure a thouſande yeeres in this
corporall life; before the conſummation of the
worlde, and before the laſt iudgement, too others
by a little, and a little ryſing ſooner, & too
others ryſing later.His errors touching traditions. This Iudaicall doting opinion
is altogither to bee excluded out of the
Churche.
               In his litle booke De corona militis, hee
ſpeaketh many things concerning mans traditions:And touching cuſtome.
and very ſharply hee declameth, touching
cuſtome that it is too bee reputed for
a lawe. By meanes of theſe ſayinges
wreſted a wrong way in the Churche, as it
happeneth, might greate errours bee eſtabliſhed
in all ages, bycauſe mans circumſpecyou

and vigilancy can neuer bee ſuch and ſo
greate, but that ſome peruerſe cuſtomes doo
creepe into the churche ſome tyme.
               Moreouer Tertullian rehearſeth very childiſh
faſhions: namely,Alſo touching Baptiſme. that for ſeuen dayes after
Baptiſme, there bee no vſing of bathe or
entering into baine. Alſo that vnto ſuch as
wer
                     •
                   baptiſed, milke and hony ſhoulde be giuen
too taſte. Hee ſayeth alſo there: Wee
make once a yeere oblations for the ſoules departed,
and for the byrth dayes of thoſe that are
liuing.
               
               That thing now do our aduerſaries vngodly
apply vntoo Maſſes for the ſoules departed.Touching birthdayes and buriall daies.
But why doo they leaue out the byrth
dayes, if they giue ſo much credit to the autority
of Tertullian? But hee maketh no mention
of the Supper of the Lorde. But at the byrth
dayes and buriall dayes, there was meate
brought intoo the Churches, and other giftes
was beſtowed vpon the poore people. Theſe
they called offeringes and feaſtes of charity.
And this tradition was receaued of the Ethnicks,
but ſomewhat reformed, and in better
order. For the Ethnicks alſo gaue theyr feaſ
                     •
                  es
in the Churches, at theyr byrth dayes and burial
dayes: and afterwardes the Nicene councel
and others, for bad this pompe, at the

byrth dayes.
               Therefore like as of the reſt I haue declared,
ſo heere the teſtimonies hiſtorical in Tertullian,
doo profit what the former churche did
thinke. But as for his interpretations and diſputations,
let them not be receaued for good
doctrine, except ſo far as they agree with the
wryting of the apoſtles.
            
            
               Of Cyprian.
               
                  Cyprian liued about the yeere of our Lorde
275.
                     Cyprian Biſhop of Carthig
                           •
                        
                      and dyed a Martyr about the yeere 275. Hee conteineth profitable teſtimonies,
as touching the Trinity, as touching baptiſing
of infantes, of the vſe of the Lordes Supper,
and of the maner in chooſing of Biſhops,
which hee wryteth are to bee elected by them
of autority in the church, and that the ſame election
is to bee ratified by certaine other biſhops
dwelling neare vntoo that place, which
are to be adioyned.
               But the auncient fathers did reproue Cyprian,
                  Note his error touching baptiſing by Heretikes. that hee thinketh ſuch are too bee againe
baptiſed of the Heretikes, which haue bene once
already baptiſed. As he declameth herevppon,
now and then, hee layeth out abſurde and corrupt
opinions, when hee dooth exagerate or
amplify, with immoderate and ſuperfluous

ſpeeches: the cauſe hee taketh in hande, as
hee wryteth very ſharply of Canonicall puniſhements,Touching re
                     
                        ••
                     iſſiō of ſinnes. hee ſayeth, Abſolution of ſinnes is
not auayleable, except thoſe paynes or puniſhements
bee firſte performed. This ſaying
howe greate inconuenience it hath, it is manifeſt.
               Alſo hee dooth very vehemently diſpute of
ſingle life, although hee dooth mitigate that
place, he biddeth thoſe perſons contract marriages
which haue made their vowes, yea if
they keepe not promiſe.
               In his litle booke of Almes,
                  His error, touching original ſinne. hee ſaith, that
thoſe ſinnes which were committed before
baptiſme, are by meanes of Chriſtes paſſion
forgiuen, but hee ſaieth, that after baptiſme,
forgiueneſſe of thoſe ſinnes then committed
muſt bee ſought for, and obtained by almoſe
deedes.
               The ſame man dooth affirme touching
ſuch as ſlyde away from the Church,His error touching ſuche as ſlyde away frō the Churche. that the
benefite of Chriſte which came by baptiſme,
is vtterly loſt. But afterwards that remiſſion
of ſinnes is to be ſought for by almoſe deedes.
Theſe things are ful of abſurdity, whereof he
being admoniſhed, no doubt woulde haue reformed
himſelf. Therfore, not al his ſayinges
are to hereputed & taken for good doctrine.
               
                  
As touching the Lordes Supper, hee is
wont too vſe the woordes of Oblation and Sacrifice
lyke as the other wryters before did,
which ſay confuſedly:Bycauſe Cyprian vſed the word: [oblatiō] for the Lords ſupper, therefore the aduerſaries ratify their maſſe. 
                  Wee offer prayers, wee
offer bread, wyne, wee offer the body and blood
of Chriſt. For that is alſo founde in Cyprian.
Heere vpon, our aduerſaries take
their Teſtimonies too defende the prophanation
of the Lordes Supper in their priuate
Maſſe, &c.
               Greate is the force of cuſtome, and men
imitating this, doo oftentymes ſpeake improperly:
As nowe wee cal it the Maſſe▪
where neuer any man knewe the right ſenſe
or meaning of that name. So the auncient fathers
retained the ſpeeches of oblation and
ſacrifice, not very wel regarding the Etymology
or proper ſignification thereof. And bycauſe
Auguſtyne ſawe there was ſome diſcommodity
in thoſe names,
                     Augustines interpretation of the wordes, Sacrifice and oblation. hee ſomwhat mitigateth
the ſame thee ſayeth, That it is called
Sacrifice, for the remembrance of the thing Sacrificed,
and Oblation, for the memory of the
Oblation. Theſe are Metonymiae, or figures of
denomination, as we ſay the paſſeouer for the
memory or the ſigne of the paſſing ouer. But
I wil not heere ſubtilly either interprete vpō,
or excuſe the vſed phraſe of ſpeech in that age.

For indeede ſo did the people ſpeake, which
nowe and then receaued an vnapt phraſe of
ſpeeche.
               
                  Irenaeus plainly declareth,The opinion of Irenaeus touching oblation. 
                  That this oblation
is a thankesgiuing. The ſame did others
thinke alſo, as the name of the Euchariſt, or
thankesgiuing, or, ſupper of the Lorde, doth
teſtify, wherefore they thought it was a ceremony
whereby thankes are giuen. That hath
no inconuenience in it at al. For we receaue it
to the end that we may therby be admoniſhed
of the benefit giuen vs by Chriſt, that we may
ſtirre vp and increaſe our faith thereby, furthermore
that wee may giue thankes for that
benefite. Neither doth it therevppon followe,
That that woorke is to bee doone for others,
or too bee applyed for others, &c. Theſe monſters
truely were not once thought vppon by
the fathers.
               Therefore,Sacrifice and oblation how to be vnderſtoode. when wee reade the name of
Sacrifice and oblation, let vs vnderſtande it,
eyther for a ſigne of the Sacrifice and oblation,
or for a thanksgiuing. Let vs not imagine that
it may be applyed for any others.
               Nowe and then, in one woorde they cal
oblation all that buyſineſſe which is there in
hande: That is too ſay, Prayers, and the ſupper
of the Lorde. This when it happeneth, than

are Prayers too bee vnderſtoode for oblations.
               
               Alſo,Certain word
                        •
                      in Cyprian which the late writers do wreſt contrary to good meaning. there are certaine woordes read in
Cyprian, concerning the dead, which the later
wryters doo wreſt contrary to good meaning,
Wee offer Sacrifices for them. But theſe
thinges hee ſpeaketh, as touching Martyrs.
For, of them there was mention made in
Prayers, when thankes were giuen vnto God,
that hee had aſſiſted them. As the Greeke canon
ſayeth, Wee offer for the Patriarkes Prophetes,
Apoſtles that is, wee doo giue thee
thankes, that thou haſt choſen thy church vnto
thee euē from the beginning, that thou haſt
redeemed, ſanctified: &c. This was the meaning
of thoſe words at the beginning: they did
not require of God, that hee would 
                     •
                   mitigat
                     •
                  
the paines of thoſe which were dead.
               Afterwards in tyme there hapned euil opinions,
and the former woordes were partly
chaunged, partly they of the latter age (retayning
the forme of thoſe woordes) vnderſtood
yet an otherthing, than they of the former
age did.
               Ergo the teſtimonies of antiquity doo not
maintaine or defende later abuſes,Teſtimonies of antiquitie doo not defend later abuſes. which are
partly ſtraunge and contrary vnto the ſtate of
the tyme preſent, partly if in them they haue

any faulte, they ought not too be obiected vntoo
the firme teſtimonies of the ſcripture, bycauſe
other ages had alſo their diſcommodities.
Theſe thinges moſt ſimply without ſubtil
cautilation doo I aunſwere touching the
wordes of Oblation and Sacrifice.
               
            
            
               Of Baſilius.
               In Baſilius there are profitable teſtimonies
of the Trinity,
                     Baſilius was Biſhop of Caeſarea in Capadocea abowte the yeare. 370. and of Repentaunce againſt
Nouatus. In his ſermon of Humility hee ſetteth
downe an excellent opinion touching
righteouſnes of fayth, which doth manifeſtly
defend vs. Hee plucketh away iuſtification of
good workes, without ſubtil cauillation therevppon,
neither ſpeaketh he of things ceremoni
                     ••
                  
but of al vertues, neither ſpeaketh he only
of works before reuocatiō, but of the vertues,
in them which be renewed, and hee biddes vs
beleue, that onely by confidence in the mercy
for Chriſts ſake promiſed we are iuſt and not
otherwayes His wordes are theſe.
               And the Apoſtle ſayth.Touching rightuouſnes. 1. Cor. 1. He that reioyceth,
let him reioyce in the Lord,
                   ſaying, that
Chriſt is made for vs wiſdom frō God, righteouſnes,
ſanctification & redēption, that as it
is written, he which reioyceth might reioyce in
the Lord. Eodē,
                   for indeed this is perfect & vpright

reioycing in God, when as truly a man
dooth not exalte or glory in his owne righteouſnes,
but doth acknowledge that true righteouſnes
taketh in himſelf. And that by fayth
only in Chriſt he is iuſtified. And S. Paule reioyceth
ſaying, that he doth deſpyſe his owne
righteouſneſſe, but by faith in Chriſt ſeeketh
that righteouſnes which is of God.
               Theſe wordes do ſufficiently declare, that
Baſilius did ſo vnderſtande righteouſneſſe of
fayth, that wee ought too beleeue by that wee
are iuſt through faith for Chriſt by mercy, that
is, wee are acceptable vntoo him not for any
vertue which is in vs.
               But,
                     Baſilius firſt in
                        •
                     stituted the o
                        ••
                     res of Monkery. wheras Baſilius firſt inſtituted the order
of Monkery: That example is hurtful, &
hath in it ſome fault, yea although he himſelfe
had no groſſe ſuperſtitions in him firſte, and
thoſe companies or orders of Monkes were
as yet a certaine ſhewe o
                     •
                   ſchooles. And
there are certaine bookes euery where ca
                     •
                  
                  ried
about vnder his name, which containe
rules for Monkes: wherof without doubte
ſome were counterfe
                     ••
                  ed by other wryters,
long tyme after Baſilius dyed 
                     〈◊〉
                   or they
are full of falſe opinions touching Single
lyfe, and other rites or ceremonies deuyſed
by man without the commaūdement of God,

and they containe fooliſh tryfling matters, as
a greate heape of penalties or ſatisfactions,
which hee calleth in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is
too ſay,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Puniſhmentes. puniſhementes: as if during ſeruice
tyme a mayde ſhoulde laugh in the queere, ſhe
ſhoulde be enioyned to ſit two dayes togither
in the church porch, and ſuch like foliſh toyes,
which if a man would renewe in admiration
of antiquity, he ſhoulde ſurely bee as one that
is out of his wittes.
            
            
               Of Gregory Nazianzen.
               
                  Gregory entreateth vpon the article of the
Trinity,This Gregory is ſuppoſed to be 
                        〈◊〉
                      which was 
                        〈◊〉
                      in the Church. Anno. 
                        ••
                     85. hee toucheth other doctrine but ſlenderly.
Hee writ the whole life of Cyprian,
wherein hee mentioneth that there was a
certaine mayde, whome before his conuerſion
Cyprian loued, who calling vppon the virgine
Mary ouercame the magical bewitchinges
of Cyprian.
               
               This example is recited touching inuocation
of Saincts. And although this ſeemeth
to hee rather a fayned fable, and afterwardes

                     〈◊〉
                   abroade vnder the title of Nazianzen,
yet, admitte the Hiſtory were true, it is not
therefore too bee cited too confirme or ratify
the inuocation of Sainctes: For the errours

of the godly are not too bee oppoſed or ſet againſt
the word of God,Errors of the Godly are not to be oppoſed againſt the word of God. for euen the godly in
euery age which are of the Church, haue their
infirmities alſo.
               Our foreſaide aduerſaries doo further alleadge
our of Baſilius and Nazianzen,
                  What the Aduerſaries do alleadge out of Baſilius.
                   that in
the end of their ſermons touching Sainctes,
they were wont to cal vpon them for helpe: as
namely, O Athanaſius, pray for vs. But although
theſe Apoſtrophees, or turning of
ſpeeche may bee excuſed vnder rhetoricall figures,
yet it may bee, that (according too the
maner of their tyme,) they did than call vpon
Sainctes: for inuocation of Sainctes at that
tyme, by litle and litle crept into the church, &
errors of the tymes doo ſeduce men, that they
leſſe diſallowe of things vſed in the Church, &
wel eſteeme the ſame. Lyke as the violent
force of raging floods carrieth with it ſuch as
ſayle there, and yet notwithſtanding is the
inuocation of Saincts, neuer the more to bee
wel allowed of. And ſeeing this cuſtome increaſed,
and nowe the impiety is diſcouered, it
ought vtterly to be aboliſhed out of ye church.
               Neither dooth Baſil ſpeake any thing touching
Inuocation,
                     Baſilius his opi
                        •
                     nion touching Saintes or th
                        •
                      holy ones. hee onely ſayeth, that the
memory of ſainctes or holyones is & ought to
bee had in eſtimation, that wee may followe

their vertues, and hee calleth theſe holyones,
helpers of our prayers, not that they are to be
called vppon, but bicauſe al the bleſſed in heauen
pray for the Churche, and commende the
ſame vnto God.
               
                  Epiphanius wryteth that certaine women
calling vpon the virgine Mary,Epiphani
                        •••
                     
                   were wont to
beare about them the Image of her.Idolatry detected by hym. All this
buſines dooth hee diſallowe, and calleth it a
woorke of Idolatry. For Epiphanius contei
                  
                     •
                  eth
refutations of ancient hereſies, ſpecially
touching the Trinity, & a few other matters▪
which autor as hiſtorical I iudge him ſpecially
worthy of reading.
            
            
               Of Chryſoſtome.
               
                  Chryſoſtomes tyme had then receaued many
corrupt traditiōs,
                     
                        •
                     oannes Chryſoſtomus vixit cir
                     
                        •
                     iter annum Do
                     
                        •
                     ini. 404. 
                        •
                     piſcopus Con
                     
                        •
                     ātinopolitanus. which he himſelf rehearſing,
dooth not finde fault with them, as hee
commendeth thoſe which go vnto the monumentes
or tumbes of ſaincts, and hee maketh
mention of prayer for the dead: Hee aduaunceth
the Monkes life or ſolitary life with immoderate
and falſe commendations. In his
treatice of Repentance where he collecteth togither
many meanes and wayes of obtayning
remiſſion of ſinnes:
                     
                        •
                     is errors tou
                     
                        •
                     hing remiſſion 
                        •
                     f ſinnes. namely, Almoſe, Teares,

and other woorkes, yet notwithſtanding,
hee ſpeaketh nothing concerning fayth,
whereof ought too bee ſpoken, and that wryting
of his doth containe many falſe things,
and it is both confuſed, and alſo very
doubteful.
               The Grecians ſpecially commende his
commentaries vppon Paule,
                  
                     Chryſoſtomes commentaryes touching iuſtification and faith. where in places
touching iuſtification and fayth, the whole
ſcope of Paules diſputation carryeth him
thither, that hee oftentymes repeateth this
ſentence, That by fayth we attaine remiſsion of
ſinnes for Chriſtes ſake, and not for woorkes or
by woorkes. And hee ſaieth manifeſtly, That
by fayth not onely is God loued, but that againe
beleeuers thinke, they are beloued of God, although
they are guilty by many meanes.
               
               In this ſentence he ſignifieth ſufficiently
wel that he taketh faith,His opinion touching faith. not only for the knowledge
of the hiſtory, but for the truſt & cōfidēce
through which we beleeue our ſinnes are forgiuē
vs: & truly this fayth doth he ſeparate frō
workes, as frō not ſtealing, not killing, &c. Rō.
13. & he ſaieth that this is the better meanes of
honoring God. Although in deede the declaration
heereof bee playner and leſſe vncorrupt,
as that formerly ſet downe by Origen:
Yet, that notwithſtanding is alſo obſcure

and dooth not in euery place agree with it
ſelfe.
               In the 7. Chap. hee rometh further out
of his boundes: he ſayeth, that concupiſcence
and affections, except they bring foorth external
woorkes, are no ſinnes. But yet, if a man
diligently and with iudgement reade thoſe
commentaries, he ſhal find many teſtimonies
of many articles. And although at that tyme,
there was darkenes in the Churche, yet it appeareth
that moſte men haue retained this
common iudgement,A true teſtimonie of remiſſion of ſinnes giuen in time of Darkenes. 
                  That through ſayth (for
Chriſtes ſake) not for our workes are our ſinnes
forgiuen vs. Therefore though now and then,
the auncient wryters ſpake not ſo well their
mindes, yet in other places may bee marked
what they meane in deede.
               Touching the ſupper of the Lorde,
                     Chryſostome doth not mention of any priuate maſſe in his time. out of
Chryſoſtome it is ſufficient manifeſt, that
there was then no priuate Maſſes at all. For
hee deſcribeth the Prieſt ſtanding at the table,
and calling the people too come vntoo the
communion.
               In his litle booke De dignitate Sacerdotii,
hee dooth learnedly diſcerne Cyuil, & Eccleſiaſtical
autority: hee denyeth that Eccleſiaſtical
iuriſdiction hath any right to repreſſe
with corporal power.
            
            
               
               Of Ambroſius.
               Many cauſes doeth Ambroſe throughly
touch,Ambr. vixit circiter annum 376. Epiſcopus Mediolatienſis creatu
                        •
                      377. viz. of the Trynity, againſt the Nouatians
of iuſtification. And although in his cō
                  mentaries,
now and then ſentences vnlike are
founde, which ſeeme not ſo muche too haue
been written of him as to haue beene ſet forth
by others, yet it is cleare, that out of his lōger
diſputations, bee helde opinion touching
Grace, and iuſtification, the very ſame that
wedoe teache.
               That doeth his Epiſtle vnto Irenaeus teſtifie
vppon the 4. of Saint Paule too the Romanes,
ſaying: The law worketh wrath. Epiſt.
71. where he ſayeth ſo: By woorkes of the
lawe is no man iuſtified, that is, by the lawe
is ſinne manifeſted, but the faulte is not diſpenſed
with.S. Ambroſe his true teſtimony touching remiſſiou of ſinues. Therefore our Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt comming into the worlde forgaue euery
one their ſinnes, which no man coulde auoyde:
and cancelled the handwriting of our
debt, by vertue of his blood ſhed for vs. This
is it where he ſaith:Rom. 5
                        •
                     
                   
                  Sinne did ouerabounde
by reaſon of the lawe, Grace did ouerabounde
through Ieſus Chriſt. As Saint Iohn ſayth alſo,
Beholde the Lambe of God, which taketh
away the ſinnes of the worlde. Iohn Euan.

cap.
                   1. Therefore (ſayth hee) let no man reioyce
or boaſt in his woorkes bycauſe no man
ſhalbe iustified by his deedes:Note his worthie teſtimonie touching Iuſtification. but hee that is
iuſt, hath this geuen him from aboue, bicauſe
through Chriſt he is iuſtified. Therfore it is
fayth which deliuereth by the blood of Chriſt,
bycauſe bleſſed is hee vnto whome ſinnes are
forgeuen;Pſal. 32. and pardon is graunted.
               And a fewe like ſentences, are founde in other
places of this Writer, as touching the
calling of the nations. Alſo, where he ſayeth
vnto the virgin Demetrias:
                  Ambroſlus ad Demetriadem Virginem. 
                  Neyther is a commaundement
geuen for any other ende or purpoſe,
but that the helpe and ayde of him that
commaundeth might be ſought for. But vnder
his title or name, there are extant certain
preparations vntoo the maſſe, and certayne
other vayne matters which ſeeme after his
time to be counterfeict.
            
            
               Of Hieronymus.
               
                  Hierome by his labour did much profite
the Churche in his tranſlations:Sanctus Hie
                        •
                     onymus Stridonenſis per totum 
                        •
                     errarum orbē notus in Bethleem illustris habitat, Anno 387. and
though his interpretations vppon the Prophetes
are but ſlender, yet the expoſition of
the Hiſtories deriued from the auncient Fathers,
is profitable. Touching doctrines hee

wrote few things. Agaynſt Iouinian, he greatly
confirmeth falſe & ſuperſtitious opinions
touching mans traditions.Writing againſt Iouinianus he confirmeth ſuperſtitious doctrine, touching man
                        •
                      traditions. Hee diſprayſeth
marriage, and inueigheth agaynſt it with reprochefull
ſpeech, which is not 
                     〈◊〉
                   nor
ſeming worthy for a Chriſtian ſo to do. He gathereth
ſentēces of Scripture very euill wreſted
as thogh they diſpraiſed marriage, as this
one, namely, If you liue according to the fleſh,
you ſhal die. Rom.
                   8. & ſuch others. And he ſayeth
expreſſely, that the woman which marrieth
agayne after ſhe hath been already twice
married,His miſtaking of matrimony: nothing differeth from a whore. Alſo
he affirmeth, That we muſt regarde, Not
ſomuch what God graunteth vs; but what hee
will haue vs doe, as though God woulde not
haue marriage.
               Finally after the manner of Ethni
                        •
                     es, hee
collecteth common places of reprac
                     ••
                  es agaynſt
the feminine ſexe and agaynſt marriage,
of whom a Chriſtian 
                     •••
                  ght 
                     •
                  arre
otherwiſe too iudge. Who knoweth, that
the cauſe of infirnity in both ſexes, is
the corruption of nature, And yet notwithſtanding
wee muſte attribute a kynde of
honor or dignity vnto the ſexe, becauſe God
hath ſo commaunded.
               
                  
And ſeeing God hath not in vayne created
both ſexe, we muſt acknowledge that it is the
woorke of God, and an ordinaunce to be highly
eſteemed of. Neyther is the infir
                     ••
                  ty of
mynd leſſe in the men, in accompliſhing ſuch
thinges, which are enioyned them. But a
Chriſtian ought for Gods ſake to beare withall
and tollerate the imbecillity or weakenes
in the ſociates or companions of this life, wt
are adioyned by Gods ordinaunce, and as
the Coheyres of eternall glory, & he knoweth
that it is Gods will we ſhould care for them.
as for part of mankinde: and that not through
Diueliſhe pride we ſhoulde once deſpiſe, nor
deiect them.
               Theſe & ſuch others touching this opiniō,
might rather haue byn ſpokē by way of Chriſtiā
diſputation, thē thoſe vnreuerent reproches
of the ſexe or kind & of Gods ordinance.
               Touching difference of meates, hee commendeth
ordinaunces inſtituted without the
worde of God,His errors touching difference of meats. as if they were the commandements
of God, yea hee eſteemeth them, for
perfection of matter, too ſerue his purpoſe
withall. It is a fooliſh ſpeeche which hee
alludeth herevnto,Rom. 14. 
                  If thou wilte bee perfect, it
is beſt for thee to drinke no wine, and to eate no
fleſh, where he hath not well applyed that ſaying

of Paule, where hee ſayeth: It is beſt for
thee too eate no fleſhe, (he addeth) If the example
thereof offend thy Brother. But ſeeyng
it is needefull that ſuch ſuperſtitions ſhoulde
be reprehended in the church, (for they bringfoorth
many errours) we muſt therfore wiſely
iudge of thoſe and ſuch like ſayinges ſo vnaduiſedly
vttered.
               In his Dialogue agaynſt Pelagius he doth
rightly diſpute,His right opinion touching mans regeneration. 
                  That mans regeneration may
not onely be by force of free wil: but that it hath
neede of the helpe of the holy Ghoſt. For hee
rightly denieth that the holy ones of God are
without ſinne, and hee alludeth one ſentence
worthy of remembrance, which is this: Then
are we iuſt, when we confeſſe our ſelues too be
ſinners, and that our righteouſnes commeth not
by any merite in vs, but by the mercy of God.
But afterwardes he ſpeaketh not ſufficiently
to this purpoſe,His miſvnderſtanding of ſinnes. he vnderſtandeth the ſinnes
of Sayntes ſo touching actuall ſinnes: as
the burning flambes of luſtes or anger, and
ſuch other like, hee vnderſtandeth them not,
touching the inward and perpetuall doubting
ſecurity and concupiſcence.In Hieromes wrytings are many and no ſmal errours. Therefore it is
manifeſt that in the writings of Hierom there
are many and no ſmall erroures.
            
            
               
               Of Auguſtine.
               
                  Auguſtine handled well many neceſſary
controuerſies:
                     Aurelius Auguſtinus Biſhop of Hippona and Diſciple of Hierom liued in Anno. 395. he refuted the Arians, Manachies,
Donatiſtes, and Pelagians. For nowe in
his tyme, there had crepte intoo the Churche
philoſo phicall opinions which Pelagius confirmed,
tranſforming the Goſpel intoo philoſ
                     •
                  phie:
For he contended that originall ſinne
was a matter of nothing,In Auguſtines time there had crept in Philoſophicall opinions confirmed by Pelagius.
                   that men might by
the lawe of God make ſatiſfaction, and that
by reaſon of that externall obedience they
might deſerue forgiuenes of ſinnes, that they
were iuſt, and that they coulde merite or deſerue
by theyr woorkes euerlaſting life. But,
hee ſayed nothing Touching fayth in Chriſt,
Nothing touching helpe of The holye Ghoſt.
This doctrine of Pelagius,
                  His error by confirming of Merits by woorkes. was not of the Goſpel,
but of Philoſophy, as for the moſt parte
the opinion of al learned ſchoole men, bended
the ſelfe ſame way. But that theſe doe annexe
heere vnto ſome monaſtical ſuperſtitions. And
now agayne in our time many doe ſlide away
into Pelagian opinions, becauſe they are plauſible
to humane reaſon. Therefore, Auguſtine
in his tyme reſtored afreſhe and agayne
lightened the doctrine of the goſpel touching

Grace,
                     Augustine in his time reſtored a freſh the Goſpel touching grace and fayth in Chriſt. & faith in Chriſte, when as it was almoſt
extinguiſhed. For this benefite, the
Church is much bounde vnto him. Touching
Originall ſinne, he ſpeaketh with much more
perſpicuity, than all others. Alſo hee ſpeaketh
more diſtinctly and more rightely as
touching Free will. That by force of free
will, man may doe the externall woorkes of
the lawe and other honeſt ciuil woorkes: But
hee ſayeth without the holy Ghoſte,His good Opinion touching the enioying o
                        •
                      ſpirituall moti
                        •
                     ons. men can
not haue ſpiritual motions, true feare of God,
true fayth, and true patience, (that is) newneſſe
of life which ought too appeare in thoſe
that are to be ſaued.
               Hee geueth vs a profitable difference betweene
the Letter and the Spirite.
                  
                     Auguſtines pro
                        •
                     fitable difference betwee
                        •
                      the letter and the ſpirit. He teacheth
vs of the free remiſſion of ſinnes. Hee admoniſheth
howe and after what maner Paule
is too bee vnderſtood of vs, where hee ſayeth:
               
                  By the workes of the lawe, is no man iuſtified.
Gal.
                   2. That hee not onely plucketh away
iuſtification from ceremonies, but alſo from
moral woorkes. The Church had great need
of this admonition. Far O
                     •
                  gon, and manie
which followed him, had ſpread abroade
falſe interpretation in the Church onely with
ceremonies was iuſtification pluckt away, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
they imagined that men might fulfil the law,
and be iuſt through their workes.
               Therefore Auguſtine handleth this queſtion
learnedly in his booke De ſpiritu & litera,
and affirmeth that Paule alſo ſpeaketh vniuerſally
touching moral thinges, when he denyeth
vs to be iuſt by the lawe: and alſo denyeth
man to be able to ſatisfie & f
                     •
                  lfill the law.
Rom. cap. 8.
               This admonition of Auguſtyne, and this
place of his, to haue in remembrance, it ſhal
very much auayle vs: For bycauſe ſeeing
that reaſon cannot ſufficiently diſcerne the
hugeneſſe of Original ſinne and of our natural
corruption, it eaſily ſlydeth away vntoo thoſe
opinions, namely, That it thinketh a man may
be able to fulfil the lawe, and too be iuſt for the
woorkes ſake. So contrariwyſe The righteouſneſſe
of faith is obſcured, and true ſpirituall
exerciſes are caſt of from vs, namely,
Trne inuocation, which ought too ſtay or reſt
vppon the onely mercy of God. Lyke as wee
are nowe derided of our adnerſaries, which
will needes ſeeme wyſer then wee, and crye
out againſt vs, that wee doo fooliſhly exaggerate
or encreaſe our owne infirmity, and fondly
plucke away iuſtification from woorkes,
when notwithſtanding, reaſon vnderſtandeth

righteouſneſſe is meant none other matter,Righteouſneſſe what it is.
but obedience, according to the lawe.
               But the doctrine of the Goſpell,The doctrine of the Goſpel what it is. touching
ſinne, alſo, touching righteouſneſſe of fayth
is a ſecrete and peculiar wiſedome of the true
Churche, which euen a very fewe of the wryters
haue knowen, and the ſounder parte of
thē haue acknowledged the fame, ſome more
obſcurely, ſom more manifeſtly. The Scotiſts,
and ſuch others,
                     Scotiſtae ſubtil deſputers, This Scotus lined about the yeere. 1298. haue altogither ouerwhelmed
this doctrine. Therefore after that God
hath againe nowe reuealed theſe thinges in
our dayes, let vs diligently defend and mainteine
this doctrine nowe manifeſted.
               Furthermore why doo not our aduerſaries
againe conſider, howe abſurde a thing it is,
too ſay, that Chriſte hath deliuered vs onely
from the Ceremonies of the lawe? Againe,
if our deliueraunce pertaine only vntoo Ceremoniall
thinges, it profited not the fathers,
before Moyſes, any thing at all. And it is
needeful, that wee beleeue, that our deliueraunce
from the lawe pertaineth vntoo the vniuerſal
Churche, from the beginning, vntoo the
ende of the worlde. Theſe thinges are more
amply diſputed vppon in his little booke De
Spiritu & litera.
               
               Finally they altogither knowe not what

the deliuerance from the law meaneth, which
vnderſtand or thinke the ſame conſiſteth onely
of Ceremonies.Deliuerance from the Lawe. As all men after Adams
fall, are oppreſſed with ſinne, with the
wrath of God, with death, with great and greuous
calamities of this lyfe, with eternal puniſhmentes.
               So all men are burdened with the
Lawe, which rebuketh ſinne, accuſeth
vs, and with eternall terrors ſlayeth vs as
Paule ſayth.What it meaneth. Therefore to be deliuered from
the Lawe, is as much, as to bee deliuered
from that accuſation, that we be not guiltie
of the wrath of God, and of eternall death.
               It is not onely to be deliuered from ceremonies
or external ſhewes: but much more
rather to be ſet free from the Law fearing vs,
curſing, condemning, and killing vs: when
as in deede an other thing is ſet before vs, for
the which we are pronounced iuſt: that is to
ſay, The Sonne of God, which was made a ſacrifice
propiciatorie for vs.Examples of the firſt age.
               
               So Adam, Noe, Abraham, & all the other
Eleete before Mofes▪
                   were deliuered from
the Lawe, were accuſed of the Lawe,
were exerciſed with horrible terroures, with
feeling of Gods wrath and of his Curſe

But amongeſt theſe terrours they were rayſed
vp by the acknowledgement of the mercy
promiſed vnto mankinde,Note the Conſolation i
                        •
                      the promiſed Sauiour vpon deliuerance from the Law. by and through the
Lorde and Sauiour, that ſhould come, and
they beleeued that they were pronounced
iuſt, by and for becauſe of the Sacrifice
that woulde come, and not by or through the
Lawe. They knewe that ſinnes were not
onely externall treſpaſſes, but an inwarde
vncleanneſſe, horrible diſtruſt in God, murmuring
and grudging agaynſt God in our aduerſities,
and other wicked motions. And they
knewe that euen the ſame ſinne, and infirmitie
of mans nature or the wrath of God was
not taken away by any Lawe: But they
knew that through the acknowledgement and
aſſured truſt of the promiſed Sauiour, they
ſhould bee deliuered out of ſo greate miſeries.
               And ſo were they alſo deliuered from the
Lawe moral,Law moral and the deliuery therefrom. that is, which iudgeth and
ſleyeth them, and ſo were they deliuered
from the eternall wrath of God, whiche the
Lawe declareth vntoo them. They knewe
that in this their naturall knowledge the
free remiſſion of theyr ſinnes was not ſet
downe.
               
                  
Therefore they required the ſayde remiſſion
of ſinnes from an other place. For if they
had beleeued in themſelues, that they ſhoulde
ſo haue bene made iuſt, when they were without
fault, they had vtterly fallen downe in the
agony or vexation of theyr conſcience, but
they knewe therefore was the Sauiour promiſed,
that they might beleeue they pleaſed
God, yea although they were vnwoorthy and
vncleane perſons. So did they beleeue, that
they were iuſte, not by or through the lawe,
but by and through the Sauiour that ſhoulde
come.
               Theſe ſo greate matters doth the deliueraunce
from the law comprehend, which men
of ſecure mindes vnderſtande not, who know
not, what true repentance meaneth, nor what
pertaineth vntoo true Inuocation. Finally
which are not exerciſed in afflictions, and either
haue their mindes occupied in carnall
pleaſures, or are delighted with their owne opinions,
and deſpiſe the word of God: either
els, which do wreſt it and abuſe it, according
too their owne imaginations.
               Some of our aduerſaries more ſubtill then
others,That ſome of 
                        •
                     he aduerſaries 
                        •
                     oe touching Auguſtines interpretation 
                        〈◊〉
                      the interpretation of late writers vpon Paul▪
                     
                   although they plainely ſee that Auguſtines
interpretation, and ours alſo is the
true meaning agreeable vntoo the mynde

of Paule, and of Propheticall as alſo Apoſtolicall
ſcripture: yet they exclaime againſt vs,
and cite for theyr purpoſe the autority of Origen,
Hierome, Chryſoſtome, and I knowe not
of whom: Not becauſe they allowe thoſe frō
theyr hearte: but onely too bleare the eyes of
the ignoraunt people, leaſt they ſhoulde ſeeme
to be ouercome.
               For ſurely our aduerſaries bring not with
them vnto theſe conflictes,Priuate hate of the aduerſaries toward the truth. a good conſcience
and a zeale in ſearching foorth the trueth, but
they bring with them priuate hate towardes
vs, contempt of the Goſpel, & a care to mainteine
theyr owne force and autoritye. What
the people ſhould or ought to beleue touching
Chriſte, or howe and in what maner the churches
ſhould be inſtructed, they iudge nothing
pertayneth vnto them: and partly nowadaies
exerciſe better inuec
                     •
                  iues or ſycophancies,
ſuch as Cochelus Wicelius & the like: partly
they are Tyran
                     •
                  es, and Champions of Tyrances,
which for the opinion of wiſedome or
vertue, doe gouerne the Councels of Popes
Kinges, and Princes, when indeede they
are Homines 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   godleſſe perſons of no
religion, which altogether ſuppoſe that true
religion is as fa
                     •
                  ling ſtories, and for this
cauſe doe woonderfully pleaſe themſelues,

that they dare 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
farre agaynſt the thunder.
                     Ariſtophanes That is they be haue themſelues moſt ſhamefully beaſtly and contemtuouſly in contemning the mightie and meru
                        •
                     ilous woorkes of almightie God. As the fellow in the
comicall writer affirmeth. Yea & yet ſuch wil
be ready to ſpeake theyr opinions in Synods
or Councelles, touching the glory of Chriſte,
whoſe name they thinke to be Fabulus.
               
               Therefore I exhorte the godly Readers,
firſt to conſider the kindes of doctrine, whether
that ſimply and without cauelling theſe
men doe propone the opinion of the ſcripture
Propheticall and Apoſtolicall. Next this, when
the Fathers are cited too haue good regarde:
what ſayinges of thoſe Fathers are moſt conſonant
and agreeable vntoo the heauenly will
and woorde of God. For there is greate difference
and inequality of the Fathers.
               Laſtely (as Paule biddeth) too prooue
the Spirites, the opinion or minde of both
partes is to be regarded, and whole ſcope of
theyr determination is alſo too bee marked.
For after that manner doe our Aduerſaryes
ha
                     ••
                  le theyr matters, not to make any thing
the better by theyr dealing, but by one precended
collour or other too defend theyr Tyranny,
confirme and mainteyne theyr dignities
and riches.An e
                        •
                     hortation 
                        •
                     o the Godly 
                        •
                     eaders,
               
               Therefore at this day Kynges and Byſhoppes

ſet themſelues agaynſt the marriage
of Prieſtes and ſpirituall perſons,In 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      time Kings and Biſhops ſet themſelues againſt the mariage of Prieſts. bycauſe
they ſee that ſingle life is more expedient too
the retayning of autority and power, and too
the conſeruation of worldely wealth. And
by this meanes, when there appeare ſignes
of a wicked wil, in certeyne manifeſt articles:
it is ſufficiently apparant, that they are not
mooued with the good ſpirite, but rather that
they are the enimies of Chriſte,The cauſes. and that
they doe not in other articles ſearche for the
trueth. Wherfore let vs conſtantly caſt away
from vs and vtterly reiecte their iudgemente
and opinions.
               
                  Auguſtine vppon the twoo and fourtye
Pſalme, affirmeth, That the regenerate
Man is not iuſte bycauſe of hys woorkes,
but by fayth. For ſo hee ſayeth, In deede
feare thou if thou accompreſt thy ſelfe iuſte,
yf thou haſte not the ſame ſaying out of an other
Pſalme, Pſalme 130. Enter not intoo
iudgement with thy Seruaunt, for yf
thou ſhalte execute Iuſtice without Mercye,
                  
                  
                     Auguſtines affirmation touching the regenerate man not iuſt by workes but by fayth.
                  Whither ſhall I goe? if thou Lorde ſhalte
marke ſtrayghtly our ſinnes, Oh Lord, who ſhal
abyde it? Pſal.
                   144.
               
                  
                  Enter not into into iudgemēt with thy ſeruant
becauſe no liuing fleſhe ſhalbee iuſtified in thy
ſight.
                  Pſal. 144. Thē here no liuing fleſhe ſhal be iuſtified
in thy ſight: becauſe, whoſoeuer liueth here
though he liue neuer ſo iuſt, yet woe be to him
if God ſhall enter into iudgement with him.
               
                  For as it appeareth in an other Prophet
God doth thus chyde the arrogant and proud
people ſaying. Why doo you contend in iudgment
with me. You haue all forſaken me,
ſaith the Lorde. Doe not therfore contend
with me in iudgement, geue thy indeuour too
be iuſt,Confeſſion. and how muche iuſt ſoeuer thou be, confeſſe
yet thy ſelfe to bee a ſinner: Hope thou for
mercy,Contrition. and in this humble confeſſion beeing ſecure,
ſpeake vnto thy ſoule troubling thee & turmoyling
thee on this maner: Why art thou heauie,Truſt in the Lorde.
oh my ſoule, and why doſt thou thus trouble
me? Perhaps thou wouldeſt truſt in thy
owne ſelfe: but truſt thou in the Lorde, & not
in thy ſelfe: for what art thou in thy ſelfe? What
art thou of thy ſelfe? Let him be health in thee,
which receued ſtripes for thee, & he ſaith, Truſt
thou in the Lorde.
               
                  Dauid in his one and thyrtie Pſalme ſaith,
Who are bleſſed? Not they in whom the Lorde
ſhall finde ſinne, for all haue ſinned, and haue
neede of the glory of God. Rom.
                   5. If then

in al men, ſinne be founde, it reſteth, that none
are bleſſed, but they whoſe ſinnes are forgiuē.
This therefore did the Apoſtle thus commende,
Abraham beleeued God, and it was reputed
vnto him for righteouſnes. Rom.
                   4. Here
dooth hee rightly apply this ſaying touching
faith, and hee witneſſeth in this place that hee
vnderſtandeth faith is not only the knowledge
of the hiſtory,Fayth touchin
                        •
                      righteouſneſſe, howe to bee vnderſtood. but that it is an aſſured confidence,
whereby wee truſt without doubting
that our ſinnes are forgiuen vs for Chriſtes
ſake. Neither indeede can any man ſufficiently
vnderſtande the meaning of Paule in this
point, except he vnderſtande faith in this maner.
This again (as we ſay) is 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ely to knock
at a wrong dore, when men vnderſtande
faith as the knowledge of the hiſtory, and not
as the aſſured confidence which wee ought to
haue in the promiſed mercy of God, for his
ſonne Chriſtes ſake.
               And it is no metuel,Monkes erring all the way in expounding Paules meaning that Monkes haue erred
al the way in expounding the meaning of
Paule, bicauſe euen in this place they were
fouly deceaued. And this miſty clowde, is at
this day a ſpeciall let vntoo our aduerſaries,
that they cā not ſo wel brooke the doctrine of
fayth, bicauſe they rightly vnderſtande not
the name of fayth. Why do they not duely

examine and way ſuch ſayinges of Auguſtine,
as this is, which erewhyle I haue recited? He
witneſſeth Paule meaneth this, that Abraham
was pronounced iuſt, bycauſe hee beleued, not
only touching the promiſe of God concerning
his poſterity, but alſo touching the forgiuenes
of ſinnes for Chriſtes ſake.
               Such lyke ſentences ſhal a man meete
withal in Auguſtine euery where,
                     Auguſtine beleeued touching grace and faith the very ſame which the later age teacheth. which ſufficiently
ſhew, that he beleued touching Grace
& faith, the very ſame which we do teach. Like
as in his booke De Spiritu & Litera, he ſaith
thus: By meanes of the lawe wee feare God but
by fayth wee flee vntoo the mercy of God. Loe
heere doth he manifeſtly diſcerne betwene the
Lawe and the Goſpel.
               And although nowe and then in his wrytinges
there happen togither as it were certaine
figures of ſpeeche not ſufficiently well
expounded or inconuenient, yet theſe are to lie
attributed to the tymes, bycauſe the cuſtome
of the common people, had receaued certaine
figures, as namely the name of Merite,
and certayne others. And theſe coulde not
the learned then put away. More ouer neither
were the wryters themſelues ſufficiently
accuſtomed vntoo diſputations, and what
myſty clowde of ignoraunce was in the

Church at that tyme,
                     Pelagius his hereſte in eſtimation. thereby might bee eſteemed,
ſo that the wicked opinion and hereſy of
Pelagius was entertapned with ſo greate ioy,
that Auguſtine and certaine few others, could
not aboliſh the ſame againe out of their churches
without great conflictes and controuerſies.
               But as touching Ceremonies,Ceremonies in Auguſtines time. if any man
obiect vnto vs the tyme wherein Auguſtine liued,
let him knowe, that in deede all the rytes
or ceremonies of his tyme did not pleaſe Auguſtine▪
                  
for hee complayneth that many 
                     ••
                  
                  perſtitious
opinions then remayned ſtill in
the Churche:Mans traditions better eſteemed then the commaundemen
                        ••
                     s of God. That mans traditions were
eſteemed better then the commaundementes
of GOD, and that ceremonies were ſo
encreaſed: that the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the Iewes in
tymes paſt was more tollerable, than of the
Churche in Auguſtines tyme.
               
                  His woordes are theſe vntoo Ianua
                  
                     •
                  ius,
in his 119. Epiſtle.
                   Yet notwithſtanding
the ſame Religion, which in a very few
and moſte manifeſt ſacramentes of honouring
GOD, The mercy of God woulde haue to be
free, doo they ſuppreſſe now with ſeruile yokes,
that the ſtate of the Iewes was more tollerable
to them in tymes paſt, which were yet ſubiect
vnto Gods lawes and not vnto mans.
               
                  
And firſte touching mans traditions, hèe
ſayeth, Al this kinde of matter hath his free obſeruations.
And afterwardes hee willeth
that vnprofitable traditions of men ſhoulde be
cut off.Note, Augustines ſounde iudgement touching the ouerthrow of mans traditions. Therefore by this it appeareth, Auguſtine
dooth not ſo allowe the ceremonies of
his tyme, that hee woulde tye or binde the
Churche vntoo that rule: for there were many
thinges then receaued in the Church, which
in deede himſelfe dooth not at all allowe of:
Nay rather hee woulde thoſe too bee founde
faulte withall, and reformed: And certayne
other thinges there were, which after the maner
of his tyme hee obſerued: So that wee all
doo yeelde much vntoo preſent manners or faſhions
of their tyme.
               In this mannes tyme ſpeeches of Purgatory
began euery where too waxe ryfe:Sermons touching Purgatory frequented in Auguſtines tyme. which
hee neither refuteth nor confirmeth. Only hee
declareth, ſaying there were certaine perſons
which ſo thought that the ſoules of the godly
were purged, after that they departed out of
their bodyes: But in his 9. booke of Confeſsions
hee requyreth of God in his prayer for his
mother departed, in theſe words, Lorde inſpire
thy ſeruauntes, that they may remember my father
and my mother, at the Alter. Neither doth
hee require any thing more. Nowe although

this be ſpoken modeſtly by him:S. Auguſtines words of prayer wreſted by the Papiſtes for oblation of the ſacrament of the dead. yet now it to
wickedly wreſted too the oblation of the Sacrament
for the dead, ſuch as was not in Auguſtynes
tyme.
               And there were vowes accuſtomably vſed
at that time, and the Queſtion was aſked,
whether marriages after vowes contracted
might bee diſſolued, yea or no. Touching this
matter,
                     Auguſtines affirmation touching mariages contracted. the opinion of Auguſtyne is extant, in
decretis 27. q. 1. c. Nuptiarum. Here, although
Auguſtyne attributed more vntoo vowes then
was conuenient, yet he pronounceth that marriages
contracted after the vowes, are not 
                     •
                  oo
bee diſſolued. And hee affirmeth them too bee
mariages, indeede: Bycauſe the one perſon
ought not returne vntoo the vowe again with
the iniury of the other. Neither is the bonde
made fruſtrate betweene both perſons▪ yea
although one of them haue brought with him
the chaunging of his former purpoſe. Theſe
thinges briefly dooth hee ſpeake in that
texte. But the error of vowes was then
of more valure, then this mitigation of Auguſtyne.
Therefore the conſtitutions which afterwardes
folowed in the church did ſeparate
and diuorſe Mariages.
               
                  Auguſtine alſo then ſaw that this diſtractiō
was faulty:Vowes reprehenſible. but he did not ſufficiently conſider

what fault might be euen in thoſe vowes thē
                  ſelues
which was a more obſcure and darke
thing to be diſcerned. For hee was ouercome
with vulgar opinions of his tyme: Now was
the cuſtome receaued of making vowes: A
number liuing in that kind of life were greatly
meruailed at, and admiration of ſuch hindereth
or hurteth iudgement.Many errors wrapped in popiſh vowes. Hee therfore did
not at al diſpute whether vowes were of force
yea or no, when as indeede there were many
errors wrapped in them, they were accompted
for woorſhipping of God, for a ſingular
merite of righteouſnes, for perfection, alſo to
a great many they were impoſſible. Theſe if
he had firſt refuted, he might the better beene
able to haue prohibited the ſeparation and diuorſe
of ſuch mariages:
               Therfore it is manifeſt,
                     Auguſtines time had many abuſes, whereof ſome he was againſt. that in thoſe dayes
there remained many abuſes in the Churche,
wherof althogh Auguſtin was againſt ſome of
them, yet he tooke in good part others ſome,
which after they be diſcouered, ought not too
be defended. Moreouer, although the exāples
of the ancient fathers were after a ſort diſſembled
in their tyme, yet nowe ought they not at
al to be applyed for the confirmatiō of greater
abuſes, as for exāple this conſequēce is of no
force. As admit Auguſtine biddeth that prayer

be made at the alter for his mother departed,
Ergo, Maſſes are too bee allowed for thoſe
which are dead. Or elſe, certaine perſons in
Auguſtines tyme did thinke that there was a
Purgatory.A weake argument wreſting the application of authorities by the aduerſaries for their maſſes, pardōs, &c. 
                  Ergo, Maſſes, pardons, and other
foundations deuyſed for the dead are to be allowed.
For as yet in Auguſtines tyme theſe
monſtruous impieties were not at al heard of,
although, by litle & litle the ſeedes of ſuch impiety
were ſprinkled.
            
            
               Of Gregory Romanus.
               
                  Gregory entred into the Popedome, Anno
593. 157. yeres fully expyred after the death
of Auguſtine.
                  Hic Gregorius contra animi ſen
                        •
                     tentiam Pontifex electus anno. 593 Long oberdi. In the meane tyme many Barbarous
nations flocked togither intoo: Italy,
as the Gothes Lumbardes and their confederates.
And not onely the ſtudies of learning
were put too ſilence, and the Churches were
neglected: but alſo, thoſe ſame Barharous nations
which poſſeſſed Italy, eyther brought in
with them, or eaſily receaued amongeſt them
many ſuperſtitious opinions. Therefore in
ſhorte ſpace after encreaſed many abuſes and
that greatly.Encreace of errors.
               
               During that troubleſome ſtate of Italy it

ſeemed a peculiar felicity too bee out of the
country too dwell a farre of in ſome ſolitary
place, either without their houſholde, without
children and not too beholde the deſtructions
of theyr Cities, and ſpoyling of theyr natyue
country.Virg. A
                        •
                     neidos. 2 For it is a miſerable thing too ſay
that which Aeneas ſayeth: Et quorum pars
magna fuit. Signifying that hee himſelf was
one of the chiefe beholders and ſufferers of
the trouble. Therefore men of modeſt conuerſation,
which kept houſes and families did
thinke thoſe which liued ſolitarily to be happy
for theyr tranquility.Monks had in great eſtimatiō where & when. So encreaſed the admiration
of men to wards Monks or ſolitary perſons,
and many began to ſeeke for and to loue
ſolitarily by places.
               Moreouer barbarous people meruaile at,
and are in loue with newe faſhions, which
haue a ſhewe of excellent godlineſſe, and as it
were of fellowſhip with God.Barbarous people meruaile at 
                        •
                     hoſe ſtraunge 
                        •
                     rdinaunces. It was therfore
not too bee merualled, if than the crewes of
Monkes increaſed, & that plauſible opinions
touching that kinde of workes, did ſpread further
abroade, and that the light of the Goſpel,
touching true fayth, and true worſhipping of
God, was then extinguiſhed.
               Alſo the Barbarous people were wel pleaſed
with the worſhipping of Sainctes. Afterwardes

when it was once receaued too reuerence
or honor them,Worſhipping of Saincts. namely, the ſaincts with
Images and peculiar temples after the Heatheniſhe
manner: the cuſtome increaſed by
the imitation of thoſe in greate autority. And
by litle and little it came to ſo great vngodlineſſe,
that this woorſhipping of Sainctes in
theſe later dayes differed nothing at all from
the manifeſt Idolatry of the Ethnickes in
tymes paſt.Idolatry. For, they nowe called vppon S.
Anne, S. George, and others, none otherwyſe
then the Ethnicks did vpon Iuno, Mars or Hercules.
They ranne to theyr Images, and the
Biſhops with greate autority confirmed that
ſame 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Idolomaniam mad woorſhipping
of Idols, yea and theyr doctors and
learned men commended them for ſo dooing.
And in ſuch kinde of worſhippinges conſiſted
the whole ſūme of religion.Ignorance in them, touching inuocating vp
                        •
                      Chriſt, &c. But al this while,
touching inuocation vpon Chriſte, & touching
fayth in him, there was greate ſilence amongſt
them.
               The beginnings therefore of ſuch and ſo
greate impiety were too bee taken heede of,
which indeede Gregory himſelfe greatly confirmed,
                     Gregory confirmed many vngodly exerciſes.
who firſt than inſtituted the publique
ordinaunce of calling vppon ſainctes: who
commaunded that Temples ſhoulde bee dededicated

too the bones, and duſt of thoſe
Sainctes. And alſo at that tyme crept
in an opinion touching the oblation of the
body and blood of Chriſte,Prophanation of the Sacrament. too bee made:
for the dead. This opinion brought foorth
horrible prophanation or abuſe of the Sacrament.
               Therefore although after Gregories tyme
greater darkeneſſe enſewed,Errors in Gregories time. yet notwithſtanding
theſe errours at that tyme remained in
the Churche. A falſe perſwaſion brought in
by Monkery: Of woorkes deuyſed without
the commaundement of God: praying vntoo
Sainctes, and the oblation of the body of
Chriſt for the dead. Theſe errors afterwards
haled with them greate ruyne of GODS
Churche. Therefore the ſtate of Gregories
tyme may not bee a ſufficient rule too reforme
the Churche, which thing the more euident
that it may appeare, I wil firſte recite more
manifeſt faultes in Gregory, and afterwardes
I wil diſpute vpon a fewe things pertayning
to the Lordes ſupper.
               
                  Gregory in Libro 3. Epiſtol.
                   in that his Epiſtle
vntoo the Biſhoppe of Catanea in Cilicia
giueth charge that Subdeacons or Deacons
ſhoulde not vſe the company of theyr

wyues,He forbiddeth Subdeacons & Deacons to haue the company of their wiues. which they had maried before they
were ordered. When as in deede the people
Siculi before theyr tyme had obſerued the maner
of the Grecians, and did not forbid the
huſbands to vſe the company of theyr wyues.
This faulte is heere nowe ſufficiently manifeſt.
For no godly perſon can allowe the
ſeparation or diuorſe of lawefull matrimony.
Hee telleth that there was one called Specioſus
which had rather leaue and forgo his function
of beeing Subdeacon,His firſt error forbidding of marriage. then too wante
the company of his wyfe. This whoſoeuer
hee was, no doubt was indewed with ſounder
iudgement in this poynt, then they which
ſought the ſeparation or diuorſes of ſuch marriages.
               This increaſed the offence of Gregory, that
hee woulde haue this tradition to be receaued
in the Churches of thoſe people called Siculi.
Which at that tyme according to the decrees
of auncient Synodes or Councelles, retayned
ſtill marriages in all theyr Eccleſiaſticall
degrees, neyther did they burden
theyr Deacons with vowes, or any
other perſons.His artrogancy and tyranny. Why dooth Gregory heere
take vppon him the rule and gouernement of
other Churches? When as indeede hee declameth
ſo tragically that hee abhorreth

from the name of the vniuerſall Biſhop. Further
more, why dooth he there diſanul marriages,
where the Deacons are not burdened
with vowes? Why doth he not heere ſtande in
awe of the autority of former Councels? This
faulte where it containeth manifeſt vngodlynes
and tyranny it is very euident, that this
age wherein Gregory liued, was not without
greate errors.
               And howe vniuſt is hee againe towardes
thoſe, which at theyr fathers requeſte were
frō theyr infancy brought vp in monaſteries,His ſecond error touching yong men broght vp in monaſteries.
and afterwardes beeing young men deſired
an other kinde of lyfe. Touching theſe hee
aunſwereth againe, that it is wickedly done
of ſuch too forſake that monaſtical life. This
ſtraitneſſe is not ſo much therfore to be found
fault with, bycauſe it was made an iniury too
that young age: but alſo bycauſe it greatly
ſtabliſhed ſuperſtitious opinions, touching
Monkiſh tradi
                     •
                  ions.
               The thirde offence in him I wil alſo adde
heerevntoo,The third error of Gregory in being ſeduced by night viſions. which is manifeſt. Hee was ſeduced
with night viſions too allowe or bring
in the oblation of the ſacrament for the dead.
Hee maketh mention of twoo, which after
theyr death, had ſerued in bathes. Whereof

the one requyred that oblation of the Sacrament
might bee made for him, that hee might
bee deliuered out of thoſe paynes and puniſhementes.
From theſe viſions he groundeth
doctrine in the Churche, contrary too
the expreſſe woorde of GOD, as it is
written. Deut. 18. Thou ſhalte not aſke counſel
at the dead:
                  
                  That is, wil they refuſe too be taught of the Prophet who in the mouth of God and ſeeke helpe at the dead which is the illuſion of ſathan. and as it is alſo written, Eſay
8. Should not a people in quyre at theyr GOD?
from the liuing too the dead. Ergo, what kinde
of ſtate 
                     •
                  oever the ſoules of thoſe departed, are
in after this life: Yet notwithſtanding, from
viſions orſights wee ought not to take any dotrine
of confirmation or otherwyſe. And againe
who ſeeth not that it is a fained fable,
wherehee ſaieth, that after death men became
bath keepers. This fable is lyke the fayned
tale of the daughters of Danaus, which drawe
vp water with a ſiue.
               We haue not here determined to recite this
Catalogue,The Autors purpoſe vpon the confutation of Gregories errours. bycauſe we would adde herevntoo
the confutations of his errors, which elſe
where are 
                     〈…〉
                  , I onely meant
here to rehearſe his faults, to the end it might
appeare that they are 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which were ſo
greatly in loue with the fathers, as though
they had bin 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  alia
                        •
                      Innoxii, Men

blameleſſe or without fault and neuer doo diſagree
from the expreſſe woorde of God. Allthough
therefore the better learned Fathers
now and then do ſomewhat to the purpoſe admoniſh
vs, yet we muſt euen iudge of them by
the worde of God.
               Therefore, omitting other confutations,
I will nowe further adde certaine thinges
briefly,Oblation for the dead confuted by 
                        〈◊〉
                      arguments. touching oblation for the dead. Wee
neede not inquyre, whether there be any Purgatory
yea, or not this queſtion pertaineth nothing
too the oblation. Although there were
a Purgatory, yet it is wickedly doone too
offer the Sacrament for the dead. There are
many moſt ſtronge argumentes to prooue the
ſame.
               The firſt is vngodlyneſſe, too ordayne a
tradition in the Churche without the commaundement
of God. Againe, the application
of the Lordes ſupper for others, is
made without any commaundement of God,
or teſtimony of Gods will. Ergo, without
all doubting this application is wicked.
               Many ſentences confirme the Maior,
                  Confirmation of the Maior.
                   as
namely this. Thou ſhalt haue none other Gods
but mee. Exo.
                   20. Lo heere the worſhipping of
ſtrange Gods, is by expreſſe commanndemēt

forbidden. And hithertoo pertaineth that ſaying,
Eſay, They worſhip mee, in vaine, teaching
traditions of men.
                   Againe. S. Paul ſayth, Rom.
14. Whatſoeuer is not of fayth, is ſinne.
                   Furthermore
woorſhippinges or ſeruice without
the commaundement of God, can not be done
by fayth. But the worlde perceaueth not howe
greate a ſinne it is, too ordaine woorſhipping
without the commaundement of God, too departe
from the word of God. Of this miſchief
the Prophetes doo greatly cry out & bewayle
the blindeneſſe of men, which with horrible
boldnes do appoynt traditions and opinions
touching the wil of God, neither retaine they
the worde and ordinance wherwith god hath
manifeſted his wil towardes vs. Themſelues
beeing blinde too ſeeke after God, by other
meanes.Confutation of Sacrifice for the deade. For it is manifeſt, that Chriſte himſelf
neuer deliuered the Sacrament, to haue it
applyed for the dead. For what mētiō is there
made of the dead?
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Hee bids vs Celebrate his
ſupper,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  that wee may haue in remembraunce his
death & benefits. Are the dead thē preſent with
vs, too remember theſe with vs? But I will
briefly adde vnto theſe other reaſons alſo.
               The ſecōd reaſon: this ſentence to 
                     •
                  rue & aſſured
which by no meanes may be 
                     〈◊〉
                  
or denyed, The iuſt man liueth by his fayth.

                     Abac.
                   2.Forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, what & how they are graunted vs. Wherefore, it is needeful that in our
life tyme wee do receaue forgiueneſſe of our
ſinnes at Gods handes. And it is impoſſible,
that forgiueneſſe of ſinnes ſhoulde bee graunted
too any perſon, by or for any kind of worke
doone, or ſacrifice offered by any Prieſt. Cauſes
obſcure, and doubtfull, require long diſputations.
This error, touching oblation is
refuced by ſo euident and firme argumentes,
that they require not at all any long declaration.
The doctrine touching forgiueneſſe of
ſinnes is certaine and manifeſt. No man
may haue remiſiion of ſinnes, except by his
owne faith hee receaue the ſame. This opinion
if any man go about too take away, hee
dooth then blaſpheme and iniury Chriſt himſelfe.Confutation of ſacrifiſing of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Ergo they blaſpheme and iniury
Chriſte, which do feigne that the ſame oblation
can deſerue remiſſion of ſinnes for the
dead.
               The thirde reaſon:Vſe of the Sacrament rightly aplyed. the vſe of the Sacrament
only proffiteth them, which vſing the
ſame, doo remember the death and benefites
of Chriſte. Ergo it is impoſſible that this
woorke ſhoulde profit them that are dead,
which neither vſe the ſame themſelues, nor
doo make any remembraunce of the death of
Chriſt. The antecedent is manifeſt, by the

inſtitution of Chriſte, bycauſe hee biddeth vs
celebrate this myſtery in remembrance of
him. And wee ought not by Imagining too
adde any thing vnto the inſtitution of Chriſt,
if any man imagine moe thinges, if any man
tranſferre the ſame vnto the dead, he doth wickedly
defile the inſtitution of Chriſt.
               The fourth reaſon: The ſcripture ſayeth
manifeſtly, Bleſſed are the dead, which dye in
the Lorde. Rom. 8. The body dyeth bycauſe of
ſinne,
                  Iuſtification of the Spirite in this life. 
                  but the ſpirite is life for righteouſnes ſake
                        •
                     
                  
(that is) they that are iuſtified in the ſpirite, ſo
long as they cary about them this body where
in are as yet the remnauntes of ſinne, they are
afflicted in diuers manners, too the ende that
by calling vppon God, fayth, knowledge of
GOD, and ſpiritual newnes of lyfe might
more and more increaſe in them. But the body
being once dead, the remnauntes of ſinne are
aboliſhed. And Paule ſayth manifeſtly. That
the ſpirite liueth for righteouſnes ſake. That
life of the ſpirite iuſtified, is not feare, or feeling
of Gods wrath, But is ioy in the holy
Ghoſt, as Paule ſayeth. Rom. 15. Therfore
there are no paines of Purgatory.
               Chriſt ſaide vnto the conuerted theefe,
This day, thou ſhalt bee with mee in Paradyſe,

that is, in a peaceable and bleſſed life,
and not in paynes or horrour. Therefore
the Soules of the iuſt doe not goe downe too
tormentes, but aſcende vp vnto ſpirituall ioy
and peace. In this life the godly are ſtill exerciſed
with horrible afflictions, bycauſe
GOD by a woonderfull determination wil
haue his Churche Subiecte vntoo the croſſe
and too taſte ſuch afflictions as Chriſte hymſelfe
did. So Adam, Iſaack, Iacob, Ioſeph,
Dauid, Eſayas, Hieremias, Iohn Baptiſt, and
others the lightes of the Churche were in calamities
and perplexities,The iuſt and righteous are euer exerciſed with afflictions in this life. the greateneſſe
whereof no man can declare. Therefore
Peter ſayeth: Humble your ſelues vnder the
mighty hande of God. 1. Pet.
                   5. For although
ſuche are the afflictions which the Godlye
ſuffer in this life, whyle they are in the fleſh,
yet notwithſtanding this, after they be once
dead, why is it ſayed that there are ſuche
puniſhments? For as muche as theſe afflictions
are by GOD preordayned too acknowledge
the remnaunte of ſinnes in the
fleſhe, and to worke repentaunce of ſinnes euen
in this life.
               But after death, there is then no place
of repentaunce: Like as Paule playnelie

affirmeth. 2. Cor 5. Euery one ſhall carry
with him thoſe thinges which he hath done in
the body.
                   And the Pſalmes doe alſo teache vs
this moreouer: The dead ſhall not prayſe thee,
Lorde. Againe, Bicauſe ther is none is death,
which ſhal remēber thee 112. Therfore it cānot
bee affirmed,Confutation of Purgatory. that any after death are yet
tormented, to the end they might repent them
of their ſinnes.
               If our Aduerſaryes doe ſay, That thoſe
tormentes are not therefore layed vppon
them, that thereby repentaunce might grow:
but that they ſhoulde bee as ſatiſfactions for
ſinnes here committed, this opiniō is a great
deale more too be refuſed. For the doctrine
of Satiſfactions, which the Sentenciaries
haue deuiſed, is both falſe and vngodly.Confutation of Satiſfactions. And
truely very many lyes & falſe imaginations
haue byn heaped togeather into thoſe diſputations,
euen as it were into a ſinkehole and filthy
puddle, namely, of Purgatory, of vowes,
of oblatiō for the dead, & many others. Seing
therfore, that purgatory (as they cal it,) cānot
be affirmed, it is a kind of vngodlines ſo to inſtitute
an oblatiō, to deliuer ye dead out of torments.
Although yet if there were any purgatory,
yet coulde not the ſupper of the Lorde be
tranſferred for the dead.
               
                  
But why doe I here diſpute? The firſte
mention of Purgatory began of ſightes or viſions,From whence Purgatorie tooke his originall.
and afterwardes for lucre ſake was cō
                  firmed,
and is now defended and mayntayned
of the Popes Cardinalles, Byſhoppes, and
Chanons, which are manifeſt Epicures, and
with great ſecurity doe contemne the iudgement
of God. And whatſoeuer touching puniſhmentes
after death ſuche perſons reade,
they accept them as Poets fables of Ixion,
Siſiphus, Tantalus, or ſuche like, and doe deride
the fooliſhnes of others which affirme
that God hath appoynted euerlaſting puniſhmentes
for the wicked.
               At this preſēt,The Greeks oration exhibited touching Purgatorie which is referred vnto repentance in this life. therfore I let paſſe any further
to diſpute. The Grecians exhibited vp an
oratiō, touching Purgatory, at the Councel of
Baſil, wc oration at this day is extant in the Library
of Phortia, wherin they diſpute tuching
that place of S. Paule 1. Cor. 3. Which place
the latter age hath wreſted to confirme purgatorie.
Whereas it is manifeſt, that the
ſame place intreteth vpon repentance: namely,
Hee ſhall bee ſaued, ſo yet, as it were by
fire. 1. Cor. 3. Ergo, he woulde that the offender
ſhoulde be corrected or amended by repē
                  taunce.
Wherefore, hee ſpeaketh touching
this preſent life, wherein is the place of repentance.

Surely it is true that is ſayde, The
Speech of trueth is ſimple and playne. When
Paule ſpeaketh of repentaunce:Euripides. this place cā
                  not
be wreſted to the paynes or tormentes after
death.
               Touching that place in the booke of the
Machabees, there is alſo a moſte playne aunſweare:
The trueth is not the more corrupted
by the errours of thinges done, ſayeth the man
of lawe. And Demoſthenes diſputing agaynſt
Ariſtocrates reprehending lewde examples,
ſayeth, Suffer vs not to ſay that this hath beene
done, but that it is meet and righte to be done.
               
               The ſacrifices offered by the Leuites did
not take away ſinnes from before the face of
God:Sacrifices of the Leuites did not take away ſinnes before God. moreouer there was none at all then inſtituted
for the dead: Ergo this hath beene an
error in later times, too offer ſacrifice for the
ſinnes of the dead, as the Iewes receaued oftentimes
other corrupt & lewde traditions amongſt
themſelues. For the nature of men is
prone vnto ſuperſtitiōs, euē in all ages.Tradition of the Iewes. Therfore
in as much as that example is repugnant
to the ſcriptures it is not to be cited at all too
confirme ſuperſtitions in the Churche. Theſe
for the moſt part are the chiefeſt things which
are cited touching Purgatory. And therefore
I haue heere placed this diſputation that it

may the more appeare that Gregories faulte
or errour euidently (which hath confirmed the
oblation of ſacrifice for the dead) is manifeſtly
repugnante vntoo the Apoſtolicall doctrine.
               VVhich thing ſeeing it is ſo, the Canon
alſo of the Maſſe (as they call it) is to be
reprehended, wherin is mentioned, That oblation
of ſacrifice, was made too redeeme the
quicke and the dead. VVhat boldeneſſe was
this to tranſferre the Sacrament for the dead?
when the inſtitution therof ſpeaketh ſo plainly
of them which bee liuing, and of the remembrannce,
of the death of Chriſt?
               
                  Gregory writeth that one Scholaſticus (as
he nameth him) did make this Canon.Note touching the Autor of the Cannon of the Maſſe. But
whoſoeuer was the authour therof, and which
compyled this Rapſody, that cannot be denied,
that the Latin Canon differeth from both
the Greek Canōs, although neither yet do the
Greeke Canons agree with themſelues, but
they doe differ in notable places.
               Thus muche haue I ſpoken touching
Gregorie. Neyther will I adde heerevntoo
the VVritres of later ages. For the doctrine
of the Churche afterwardes wente further

out of courſe. And the Tyranny of
the Biſhoppes of Rome encreaſed alſo, when
as Gregory euen yet himſelfe refuſed and
greately diſprayſed the name of the vniuerſall
Byſhoppe,Name of the vniuerſal Biſhop refuſed and diſprayſed by Gregory.
                   as certeyne his Epiſtles
in his thirde booke of Epiſtles doe teſtifie the
ſame.
               I coulde annexe herevntoo the complaints
of auncient writers touching the couetuouſneſſe
of Biſhoppes and the ignoraunce of
them,Teſtimonies of abuſes in the Church of former time. in times paſte, which if there were
no other thing, yet in this pointe they admoniſhe
vs. That the Churche oughte not
too bee gouerned according too the Example
and ſtate of that tyme. But in the
reuelation of Saynct Iohn,
                  The reuelation of S. Iohn a teſtimonie for the Church in all ages. there are horrible
Figures expreſſed, which no doubte
ſignifie the ages of the Church, and doe ſhew
that wicked Teachers ſhall forthwith ſwarm
in the Churche, and ſhall with Tyrannicall
rule oppreſſe the trueth.
               And the Hyſtories of Councelles doe
ſhewe howe greate rage hath poſſeſſed the
myndes of verie manye Byſhoppes,Teſtimonies of Councelles againſt ambitious and ſubtill enimies of the Church. which
too defende their vngodlineſſe, haue by
woonderfull Subtilties kyndled the hearts
of Princes, and of the Common peopeople,

as nowe the Biſhoppes of Rome, and
other Biſhoppes by all cunning ſleightes endeuour
themſelues to prouoke the mindes of
Kinges to rayſe vp ciuill warres in theyr territories
and dominions.
               
                  Baſilius in the ende of his booke De Spiritu
Sancto,
                  Complaint of Baſilius vpon the Biſhops and ſtate of the Church in his time. Anno. 370. with what tragicall complaynt he doeth
bewayle the fury of thoſe Biſhops in hys
tyme and theyr impiety: Hee declareth, that
they ſought to defende theyr wicked doctrine
by ſeditions, and by ſlaughter of the people.
And hee writeth vnto the Italian and French
Biſhops in this maner.
               
                  Euerſa ſunt veritatis dogmata, Confuſae leges
pietatis, Ambitio non timentium Deum, rapit
gubernationem Eccleſiarum. Nec additus
eſt ad honores, niſiper impietatem, vt quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eſt
ratiociſſimus & audaciſſimus, in lacerandis
p
                        •
                     js & veris dogmatibus, ita maxime dignus
Epiſcopi honore iudicatur. Perijt grauitas ſacerdotibus
conueniens: deſunt Paſtores, qui eruditione
gregem Domini paſcant. which may
thus be engliſhed.
                     Baſilius in libro de Spiritu Sancto Touching abuſes in his time. The doctrines of trueth
and religion are turned vpſide downe, the
lawes of Godlineſſe are confounded, deſire of
promotion in thoſe that feare not God, greedily
catcheth houlde vpon the gouernment of
the Churches. Neyther is there anye other

way vnto honour and dignity, but vp vngodlineſſe.
And as euery one is moſte rauenous,
and fierce in diſmembring and rending in peeces
the godly & true doctrines of the churche,
ſo is he ſpecially iudged woorthy too enioy the
dignity of a Biſhop. Grauity befitting the
Miniſtery, is vtterly gone: And the Sheap-heardes
that ſhoulde feede the flocke of the
Lorde with learning, are wanting.
               So and in ſuch manner doeth he deſcribe
the Biſhoppes in his time: vnto whoſe vices
the latter ages haue added Lordly rule and
Tyrannies.
               Seyng therfore it is manifeſt,The Church muſt aſke counſell at the word of God. that that
age was not without faults, we muſt graunt
vnto the Church, that touching doctrine ſhee
woulde aſke Councell at the woorde of God,
as the heauenly Father hath commaunded,
That we ſhoulde heare his Sonne. Mat.
                   17. And
Dauid ſayeth in his 119. Pſalme, Thy worde
is a Lanterne vnto my feete. &c.
               
               Theſe teſtimonies touching the faultes of
auncient writers,Proteſtation of the Author touching the fore ſayd Teſtimonies. (although I haue ouerpaſſed
many abſurdities) I haue not gathered
to that ende that ſomewhat of their true prayſes
might bee thereby diminiſhed. For I beleeue
the moſt part of them in thoſe pointes,
were both godly and excellent men, and cer
                  
                     •
                  eyne

of them no doubt haue well deſerued, to
be well thought of. But yet they themſelues
woulde not that theyr owne wordes ſhould be
preferred before the doctrine of Chriſt. Moreouer
euen theſe our aduerſaries wc obiecte
vnto vs the autority of ye fathers,Aduerſaries obiecting the autorities of the Fathers doe very much abuſe them. do alſo abuſe
very much the teſtimonies of thē. Although
in thoſe dayes the ſeedes of errours were firſt
ſowen abroade, yet ſo pernicious abuſes had
not as yet crept intoo the Churche. There
was at the beginning a certayn maner of calling
vpon Sayntes: But afterwardes how
muche wickedneſſe followed? Therefore
the declamation of Nazianzen is not too bee
cited, for ſo muche as that Age of his was
ignoraunte of this newe deuiſed Idolatry.
               But why doe the Aduerſaries lay for
themſelues the autority of the Churche,Aduerſaries allegations and contention. when
as they contende not with vs, touching doctrine,
nor touching Religion, but concerning
their ſenſualities, and promotions, they
will not haue theyr peaceable eſtate too
be troubled? This is one and the onelye
cauſe why they deſire our ſubuerſion. For
there are certaine opinions more clearer then
the Noone day. And yet becauſe they would
oppreſſe the ſame, they put in practize open

crueltie,Aduerſaries in ſeeking to oppreſſe the truth, kill and ſlay innocent perſon
                        •
                      for marriage ſake. they kill and ſley the Godlie, learned
and good men, yea and the Miniſters of
the Churche for marriage ſake. Where
ſhall a man reade this in any place, as touching
any barbarous fury, that men ſhoulde
be killed and ſlaine for honeſt marriage ſake?
If they allowe the auncient Churche, why
doe they not followe the firſte tymes? Doe
they thinke that either Ambroſe or Auguſtine
woulde haue allowed of this crueltie in puniſhing
the Innocent Perſons? No ſure,
they vtterly abhorred this beaſtlie crueltie,
and openlie witneſſed that theſe chiefe Biſhoppes
the Autors of this crueltie were not
the members of the Churche, but the
Inſtrumentes of the Diuell: and without
all doubte the ſaide Fathers, Ambroſe and
Auguſtine tooke vppon them, the defence of
Godlie Miniſters, women, children, and againe
of ſo many nations which are of affinitie
or liable vnto this cauſe.
               But after that I haue nowe declared,
which is the true Churche, and that it
is manifeſt that wee faythfully retayne
ſtill and mayntayne the Doctrine of the
Catholique churche of Chriſte,The totall ſūm and ſcope of th
                        •
                      Autor
                        •
                      purpo
                        •
                      in this woork
                        •
                     
                   ſette
downe in the Propheticall and Apoſtolicall
Scriptures, and in the Symbolles or

Creedes: yt is playne that wee beleeue and
holde opinion, as the Catholike Churche of
Chriſt doth. Alſo I adde here this alſo that
the chiefe writers, viz. Ambroſe, Auguſtine,
and a fewe others, doe holde all one and the
ſelfeſame opinion, if they be aptly vnderſtood,
and if a fewe certayne thinges be borne withall
in them, which in theyr time came not into
controuerſy at all.
               Touching the Lyturgy or publike ſeruice
it is nothing to bee doubted,
                     
                        •
                     iturgiae. that there
neyther was any priuate Maſſes more to bee
ſolde for monye, nor yet Funerall Maſſes, before
Gregories time,
                     
                        •
                     o kinde of Maſſes before 
                        
                           •
                        regories tyme. neither began the manner
of calling vpon Saintes too bee had in eſtimation
a long time before Gregories daies.
               And the Lawe of perpetuall ſingle life, is
very lately ordayned,Single lyfe 
                        ••
                     tely ordained. which is not defended,
nor mayntayned for any other cauſe, but that
ſingle life is more commodious to mainteyne
worldly wealth. And they offer manifeſt iniury
vntoo the woorde of God, which affirme
that marriage of Prieſtes is repugnant vnto
Gods worde.
               Concerning Repentaunce, Forgiueneſſe
of ſinnes,
                     Repentance 
                     
                        ••
                     rgiuenes of 
                        ••
                     nnes and Iu
                     
                        ••
                     ification. and iuſtification, which we ſay men
for Chriſtes ſake doe attaine: and not by
meanes of their workes: Alſo concerning

ſatiſfactions, touching the keyes, touching
mans traditions, and politike affayres, our
VVriters haue diſputed many thinges more
playne, then the auncient writers haue done.
VVhich notwithſtanding (as it appeareth)
are agreeable vnto the perpetuall myndes of
them, which were more learned and more
ſkilfull then others in ſpirituall matters, who
indeede if they had read this expoſition and
methode, according too their Godly zeale,
woulde ſincerely haue allowed the ſame. As
I heare ſay a certaine excellent Diuine of
Paris, confeſſed that he better vnderſtood Auguſtines
mynde touching Iuſtification, by the
expoſition of our writers.
               I know there may many things differing
and diſagreeing from our opinions,Out of the auncient writers ſome bees gather Hony, and ſome ſpiders ſucke out poyſon. be gathered
out of the Auncient writers: And euerie
man for his owne purpoſe borroweth ther
as ſeemeth to him commodious, ſo as The
Bees gather hony, and the Spiders ſucke poyſon
out of the ſelfe ſame flowers. But be it farre
from Eccleſiaſtical Iudgements to vſe Sycophāſies,
or better, inuectiues, I doe not appele
vnto all writers, but vnto the beſt, as Ambroſe
Auguſtine, and ſo farre foorth as others agree
with theſe, which ſeyng themſelues now and
then too haue ſpoken thinges repugnaunt,

they ſhall heere pardon vs if wee reprehende
certaine thinges in them. To the ende we
woulde followe the manifeſt and true meaning
of the woorde of GOD, and that
wee woulde not departe or ſtarte from the
Symbolles or Creedes: But holde ſtill
firmely that which they both behelde and deſired
too retaine, but yet nowe and then
coulde not expounde the ſame. For it is
nothing at all too bee doubted, that this
kynde of Doctrine, which wee profeſſe, is
the ſelfe ſame true conſent and agreement of
The Catholike Churche of Chriſte, as the Symbolles,
the more ſincere Councelles, and the
better learned Fathers doe ſhewe the ſame effectually.
Theſe thinges doe I aunſweare
vntoo the more diſcreeter ſorte of Readers,
which obiecte vntoo vs the autority of the
Churche or of the Fathers.Newfangled ſorte of Philoſophicall Diuines and wiſe worldlinges.
               
               But there is a certayne newfangled
ſorte of wiſe men ſtarte vppe, who
ſeeyng they be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Men of no religion,
yet they will not haue any controuerſiee to
be handled touching Religion: they can commende
well peace and concorde, they abhorre
all thoſe which by any manner meanes ſowe
diſcords, theſe they iudge worthily as a peſtilent
or filthy kind of people, & as the plagues

amongſt men to be vtterly remoued. This is
that one Philoſophye of the Popes Cardinalles,
Kinges, Religious Monkes and very
many others, which will be compted politike,
who will not haue theyr leiſure too bee
once interrupted, they will not haue their dignity
to be diminiſhed or empaired, they hate
the doctrine which ſeemeth too hinder
theyr profite, and agayne euery one hath
his ſundrye deuiſe. Of all theſe, this is
one voice in the counſels of Princes, namely,
That there ſhoulde be no chaunges made:
That the concorde of the churche, and the autoritie
of ordinary power is ſtil too be retayned
Moreouer they haue their Rhetoricians,
                     Omphalius a flug and ſubtill ſupporter of the Bhurche of Rome and common wealth in theſe later daies
and eloquent Oratoures which ſet foor the
moſt earneſt ſpeeches, and writinges to that
purpoſe, which too be named here, is no need
at all. For the writinges of many are extant:
but amongeſt all them, Omphalius hath lately
prouided him his patched fragmentes. In
his beginning he handleth his matters likeas
if he were Solon, or ſome Areopagita, he declameth
of the dignitie of lawes, he diſpraiſeth ſeditions
and the contempt of the lawes, he rehearſeth
how ſweet the hermonie of order and
good gouernement is in the common wealth,
which the lawes do cauſe.
               
                  
Furthermore although hee nameth vs certayne
things, yet notwithſtanding he ſheweth
ſufficiently whom they are which he ſpecially
inueigheth againſt. He declaimeth againſt vs
which haue ſhaken of from vs certaine Tyrannicall
and vngodly lawes of the Popes.
And although indeede I thinke that he ſpake
not theſe thinges without rewarde: Yet
notwithſtanding ſeeyng the ſame thinges are
ſpoken of many notable and eloquent men, I
will not here diſpute what this fellow ſeeketh
or goeth about.
               All this kinde of Orations or ſpeches doeth
belong onely too confirme the mindes of
mighty men that no modeſt and godly Councelles
ſhoulde be hearde:The Aduerſaries captions preaching inſtigate the minds of mightie perſonages againſt the truth. Pſal. 8. and moreouer, that
beyng inflamed by them, they may then exerciſe
vniuſt cruelty ouer the people. But as
Dauid required of the Lorde, That the Councelles
of Achitophel ſhoulde note preuayle: So
do we pray to God that the eloquence of theſe
Rhetoricians may neuer be able to oppreſſe
the trueth and glory of Chriſte. And ſeeyng
it is written, Out of the mouthes of infantes &
ſucking babes, haſt thou made perfect thy praiſe.
&c.
                  Luke. 23. VVe wil hope well, that God wil vouchſafe
not to be abſent from vs in refuting theſe
ſlaunders, and in aduauncing of the glory of

Chriſt.
               I know it is plauſibly ſpoken of ſome touching
the dignity of lawes,Dignity of good lawes in the Church and commō wealth. of peace and common
tranquility. I am not ſo voyde of learning,
nor ſo vnſkilfull in the cuſtome of ciuill
life. But I thinke alſo that in the common
wealth, thoſe burdens are to be borne withall
touching common tranquility which may be
tollerate without impietie. Touching that
kinde of burdens let theſe ſentences bee of effect,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , That an
inconuenience which is wel placed, let it not
be remoued. And as Plato ſaid, That as of the
doting father, ſo, of the fond fooliſh country, are
the faſhions to be borne withal. Theſe thinges
are rightly ſpoken touching charges or functions
in the ciuil ſociety of men, which beeing
without vngodlyneſſe are borne withal: But
this Philoſophy is not tranſpoſed or applyed
to ſubuert the glory of god. Errors of doctrin,
& Idolatry ought not to be diſſembled:Gods comm
                        ••
                     
                     demnent, how to be preserred. Lyke
as our ſauiour Chriſte ſayth, If any man ſhal
deny mee, I wil confounde him.
               
               The firſt precept ſayth, Thou ſhal haue none
other Gods but me. Exod. 20. This is too bee
preferred farre beyonde all humane matters,
lawes of men, gouernemēts, ordinary power,
peace, country and concorde. There is nothing

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
more honorable then theſe tytles, but
yet the name of God ought to be preferred before
al theſe.
               The Prophets and the Apoſtles,The Prophets and the apoſtles loued their country and the welfare thereof. without
doubte, (if euer any did) loued ſpecially their
countrie and tranquillitey therof. And yet notwithſtanding
they were euen compelled to reprehend
vngodly traditions, and wicked opinions.
And ſurely Chriſt confeſſeth of himſelf,
That he doth bring a kind of doctrine intoo the
worlde, which ſhoulde bee as a fire, which
ſhoulde kindle greate diſcordes, &c.
                  Needful it is that there bee conflicts in confirming the trueth. For it is
needful that there ſhoulde bee conflictes touching
the confirming of the right ordethowe
to worſhip and ſerue God, bicauſe the Diuel
burneth with horrible hatred againſt god, and
ſo much as in him lyeth, endeuours himſelfe
to extinguiſh the word of God, and ſtirreth vp
vngodly men againſt God, and with himſelfe
draweth moſt floriſhing kingdomes vntoo deſtruction.
With theſe enemies hath Chriſte
continual warrefare.
               Wherefore, ſeeing it is needful that godlynnes
muſt reprehende and aboliſhe vngodly
traditions, the Prophetes and Apoſtles
can not chuſe but bee the autors of mutations.
Although in deede politike wiſdom abhorreth
the name of ſuch mutation. And the godly

(which doubtles are not all fooles or vnwyſe)
do vnderſtand how much difficulties or daungers,
theſe mutations doo bring with them,
yet a Chriſtian harte preferreth the commaū
                  dement
of God,A Chriſtiā har
                        •
                      what it doth in tyme of 
                        〈◊〉
                     . and with a heauenly courage
receaueth thankfully al controuerſies, and vnderſtandeth
well that theſe are gouerned by
Chriſt, vnto whome, (as the Prophete ſaieth)
al things are in ſubiection.
               Theſe things briefly do I aunſwere, not
ſo much vntoo the Oration of Omphalius, as
vnto the arguments of theſe wiſe men,Anſwere of the autor vnto Omphalius & other newefangled wyſe men. which
in al their determinations, doo preache as
concerning eſchewing of mutations, and the
retayning of concorde. And although theſe
godleſſe men nowe adayes doo make a teſt of
this aunſwere, yet is it profitable for the godly
to conſider theſe arguments: leaſt that fayned
ſhewe of wyſedome terrifie mens mindes
from Godlyneſſe, and the profeſſion of
trueth.
               And I wryte theſe too the ende that youth
ſhoulde bee heereby ſpecially admoniſhed.
Ungodly people whereas they doo enſnare
the mindes of many nowadaies, with
their intyſementes, with prefermēt to riches,
& other worldly commodities: So do they alſo
againe keepe them faſt intangled with theſe

perſuaſions, namely that mutations are to be
eſehewed, that mē ought to embrace & brooke
wel ordinary power, and maintayne the preſent
ſtate of their common wealth. Theſe (how
far they are to be commended) Chriſtiā muſt
bee premoniſhed, that they doo not forget this
precept: Thou ſhalt haue none other Gods
but mee. Exod.
                   20.
               I am ſory too ſee that certayne excellent
wittes,Wyſe worldelinges men pleaſers. do togither conſpire with the vngodly
of our age, and are as very firebrandes, to
inflame Chrſtian Kinges vntoo cruelty, and
to the ſtabliſhment of vngodlyneſſe. That is
a vertue woorthely befitting mighty perſonnages
and excellent men, chiefly too beſtowe
their induſtry and whole power, and
autority in ſetting foorth the prayſe and glory
of God.The true purpoſed ſcope wherein all men ought to beſtow theyr tyme & trauel. This ought to bee the purpoſed ſcope
wherein al men ought too beſtowe their tyme
and trauel, that euery one in his place or calling
ſo much as in him lyeth, beſtowe ſome
diligence towardes the preſeruation and conſeruation
of the Heauenly worde of GOD.
As for other abiect Paraſytes which ſet
foorth taunting and reprochefull bookes, I
will not as heere ſpeake of them, which are
of that ſorte of flatterers, ſuch as Dionyſius
Siculus Foſtered in his Courte which toke

vp the Tyrantes ſpicle from the grounde, and
licking it with theyr tounges, declared abroade
that it was more ſweeter than that
ſame Nectar. I returne nowe vnto thoſe wyſe
men of our tyme, of whome ſome fayning
too bee of the true religion, after that they
ſee abſurde ſuperſtitions of former tymes can
not bee excuſed, they apply more ſmoother interpretations,
vnto theyr alleadged rytes and
decrees, bycauſe they may couertly eſtabliſhe
vngodlyneſſe by reſeruing ſtil cuſtomes and
corrupt decrees.
               Such a booke is there nowe ſet foorth at
Colen vnder the tytle of Reformation. And I
beare reporte,Cardinal Contarenus his wordes againſt the Lutherans. that in Italy the Cardinal Contarenus
was wonte too ſay, theſe Lutheranes
had doone iniury vntoo the ſtates of Rome,
when they aſcribe vntoo them the offences of
the common wryters, as of the legends, written,
of that woorke called Dormi ſecurè, and of
ſuch other lyke wryters and their woorkes:
That the chiefe prelates of Rome were neuer
of that iudgement, or elſe allowed thoſe foliſh
fables. So nowe, they turne quyte from them
theſe faultes. And I know that there are very
many euery where, which by this newe and
ſtraunge kind of comming, do ſeeke to themſelues
commendation of ſingular, wiſedome,

which for that cauſe are ſpecially iniurious
towards vs, that where many thinges are borowed
by them out of our bookes wt wee haue
corrected, & they deck themſelues with our fethers,
to the ende they may bleare the eyes of
the ignoraūt, yet notwithſtanding they allow
vs euil recōpence for their teaching. For they
reaſe not to exerciſe cruelty towardes vs, and
again, they thinke not that this new ſophiſtry
may in tyme to come be the extreeme and vtter
deſtruction of the true religion.
               If malapert wits may haue liberty to deuiſe
gloſes & falſe interpretations after their owne
mind,
                     
                        •
                     loſes inuented by the Aduerſaries, and for what purpoſes. what ſhal then come to paſſe? Manifeſt
is the Idolatry in worſhipping of ſainctes, in
vſing maſſes for the dead. And yet notwithſtā
                  ding
theſe gloſes do they alledge for the retaining
of cuſtomes & traditions, which of themſelues
are corrupt & faulty. So within a while
after, peraduēture they wil excuſe the very ſuperſtitions
of Egypt. Be it far from the church
therfore, to retaine this vngodly & pernicious
ſophiſtry, which is a proteſtation cleane contrary
to their dooing. And kinde of worſhipping
god, not inſtituted by the expreſſe worde
of god, of it ſelf is vile & corrupt, yea although
a man imagine what gloſe ſoeuer hee wil. As
the praying vntoo Sainctes of it ſelfe is corrupt,

and vile,Praying vnto
                        •
                      ſainctes is corrupt and vyle. and vile, bicauſe it is not ordained by
GOD: yea and againe it is corrupt and vile
for this cauſe, for that this ſelfe ſome cuſtome,
yea though a man thinke it other wiſe, dooth
attribute honour vntoo Sainctes which is
properly due vnto GOD, as euery man may
heare the ſame.
               I coulde rehearſe many examples,The autors exhortation for the deteſtation of the aduerſaries ſophiſtry. 2. Chronicorū ca▪ 29 and 31. Ezechias a notable example of a good and godly Prince. True godlynes how it ought to be employed. but I
ſurceaſe and I exhorte al thoſe that are godly,
to abhorre this miſchieuous ſophiſtry of the
aduerſaries. Ezechias king of Hieruſalem, did
not only redreſſe thoſe ſuperſtitious errours
and opinions, touching woorſhipping of the
braſen Serpent, but hee vtterly deſtroyed the
very Image it ſelfe. So it is a point of true
godlyneſſe to caſt a way the traditions themſelues
togither with their vngodly opinions,
which traditions are not in proper nature
politike cuſtomes. Lyke as the Scripture
commaundeth, Idolles to be deſtroyed,
So thoſe ſame traditions of priuate Maſſes,
praying vntoo Sainctes, obſeruing of
vowes, ſuperſtitious Apparel, religious orders
of brotherhood, the bonde of ſingle life,
difference of meates, and ſuch other lyke
fooliſhe traditions proceeding of ſuperſtitions,
ought vtterly too bee taken away and aboliſhed.
               
                  
But what doo I diſpute? They which deſcribe
theyr faulty and corrupt traditiōs,The aduerſaries in deſcrybing their corrupt traditions do defende their autority, &c. with
this ſophiſtical doctrine, do not this vnfainedly,
to take away errors out of the Churche, but
that they might by al meanes defend theyr autority,
& by their comming eſtabliſhe this vngodlyneſſe.
For, lewde opinions doo eaſely afreſh
bude againe, if the very cuſtomes do remaine.
Wherefore needful it is that the godly
ſhould be watchful, for the deuil ſtubbornly reſiſteth
the Goſpel, not only prouoking tyrants
vnto cruelty, but alſo craftely laying ſnares,
vnder a pretence of wyſedome, and powring
forth pleaſant perſwaſions, of the which to beware,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      ſhew of wiſedom in ſome of the aduerſaries of the latter 
                        〈◊〉
                     . oftentymes the holy Ghoſte commaundeth
vs. As the Apoſtle Paule wryting vntoo
Timothy ſaith, That there ſhould come diſſembling
ſpirits, cap. 4. & he ſaith wryting vntoo the
Coloſ. cap. 2. That the traditions of me ſhal haue
in them a ſhew of wiſdom.
                   Whereby not onely
manifeſt dreames of men ſhall bee ſpread abroade,
ſuch as for the moſt part were both
they of former & later age, like as a little before
the crafty dealings of pardons, were manifeſt,
but alſo ſubtil & crafty felowes ſhal cū
                  ningly
depaint out falſe doctrine & vngodly
traditiōs, to the end they may be entertained
with great ioy, to the ende they may bee beloued

& retained in great eſtimation. For, hath
not the vngodlynes of Samoſatenus a certaine
ſhew of wiſdome?
                     Samoſatenus 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Heretyke had his ſhewe of wiſdome. Is not the error of Pelagius
plauſible too prophane wittes? So haue theſe
things a ſhew of wiſedome: it is profitable for
peace & tranquility (ſay the aduerſaries) to retaine
the accuſtomed maners: Therfore let the
more abſurde or inconuenient opinions be taken
away, & let better interpretations or meanings
be giuen vnto them: but the rytes or cuſtomes
themſelues let them be retained. This
kind of ſpeech maketh a fayre ſhewe when in
deede they practiſe far otherwyſe.
               Theſe ſycophancies or ſcoffing kinde of
ſpeeches are much alyke ſignified in the Hiſtory
of Chriſte, whome when the Iewes had
blindfilded,Examples of the Iewes ſcoffing ſpeeches againſt Chriſt. & his enimies which bounde him,
ſcoffingly buffetted him, they bid him then
prophecy who he was that ſtrick him: ſo theſe
excuſers of vngodly traditions haue Chriſt &
his church in deriſion,Mark. 14. at this day. After that
they haue imagined ſome one vnſauery
ſtraunge phraſe,A relation the
                        •
                      of vntoo the a
                        •
                     uerſaries of t
                        •
                      true Church the latter age
                        •
                     
                   they nowe thinke they haue
ſufficiently blindfilded Chriſt, & after this they
fal to buffetting of him, that is, they eſtabliſhe
vngodlynes, they inflame the harts of Kinges
vnto cruelty, & they triūphe ouer vs, as though
they nowe had vtterly extinguiſht the trueth.

Themſelues in their owne Theatre carry away
the conqueſt, they are prayſed of the vngodly,
they are beloued of Kinges, whoſe
appetites and affections they ſerue. But God
is in prayer to be called vpon, that hee woulde
vouchſafe to reſtraine and brydle this kinde of
ſycophanty.
               
                  Nicander ſayeth,The aduerſa
                     
                        •
                     ies peruerſe & 
                        •
                     orrupt dea
                     
                        •
                     inges in the Church com
                     
                        •
                     ared too the 
                        •
                     oyſon of the 
                        •
                     erpentes called 
                        
                           •
                        emorrhoides.
                   there is a kinde of
Serpentes which he calleth Hemorrhoydes,
and they are very litle beaſtes, of one foote
length, but they haue ſuch force of Poyſon in
them, that ſweate moſt blooddy burſteth out
of him, which is ſtoonge with one of them,
yea from out his whole body, out of his
mouth, noſethrilſes, and out of his bladder
iſſeweth greate ſtreames of blood, ſo
as his eyes ſende foorth ſparkling teares of
blood, and ſo that all his whole body
burneth with incredible heate thereby. This
kinde of beaſt, when as one of them had in
Egypt deſtroyed a Mariner of Helens: The
noble and hauty woman trode her vnder her
foote, wherevppon alſo the poſterity of Haemorrhoides,
is ſaide to halte and bee maymed
by the loſſe of their ſting.
               For the euent declareth that this ſtraunge
ſophiſticall doctrine of interpreting traditions,

is a poyſon not vnlyke the poyſon of theſe
Hemorrhoides. The vnlearned although they
are our aduerſaries, yet notwithſtanding
they fight againſt vs with wilful boldnes and
hatred.
               Theſe Hemorrhoydes (hy the reaſon of the
defence of their doctrine, by meanes of theſe
Sophiſtries and as Paule calleth them by
reaſon of a certaine outwarde ſhewe of wiſdome,
which they woulde haue too bee in
them) are helde in admiration, and prouoke
the mindes of mighty perſonages to oppreſſe
the trueth.
               Princes beeing enflamed with this poyſon,
doo conceaue and kindle in their hartes
flames of hatred, are made bloodſuckers; and
cruelly raging beyonde meaſure.Tyranny of 
                        〈◊〉
                      malignant Churche. But
Chriſt wil not ſuffer the light of his Goſpel to
be extinguiſhed accordingly as it is written,
Whatſoeuer is of GOD, ſhal not bee aboliſhed.
Therefore ſhall the Churche (wherein
ſhyneth true doctrine) at length vtterly
deſtroy the ſtinges from thoſe Hemorrhoydes.
Thoſe ſophiſticall interpretations ſhall not
oppreſſe the trueth, neyther ſhall the crafty
and cruel counſelles of the vngodly preuayle
them.
               
                  
But whereas ſome men deſirous of cōcord
doo dayly looke for,relation vnto 
                        •
                     e ſuppoſed & 
                        •
                     pected con
                     
                        •
                     rde of the 
                        •
                     hurch in Me
                        
                           ••
                        ctb
                           •
                        ns tyme. that councels ſhoulde bee
called by Biſhoppes, and that they hope theſe
ſhal heale vp the woundes of the Churche, or
redreſſe enormities in the ſame, they are far
deceaued. For the Biſhops of Rome, & theyr
champions, confederate with them wil neuer
ſtinte from warrying againſt Chriſte, which
that I may ſo thinke, I am not onely moued
by mans coniectures, which are many and no
flender cauſes: I am, thorowly mooued with
the ſayinges of Chriſte: Furthermore by the
examples of all ages. For Chriſte denyeth,
that blaſphemers ſhall bee ſaued, which contrary
to theyr owne conſcience ſtryue againſt
the trueth, defende open Idolatry, & embrewe
themſelues in the blood of the godly ones. No
doubte, fury is allwaies accompanied with
blaſphemies, and murder: like as the hiſtories
of Cain, Pharao, Saule, and the children of Iſrael
do witneſſe the ſame. And God himſelfe
threatneth blindnes vnto blaſphemers, as the
Pſalme ſayeth, Let theyr eyes bee darkened.
Therefore, dayly doo they encreaſe their tormentes,
and they with vngodly leagues doo
binde Princes, vntoo themſelues. Neither
doo they onely openly ſwarme abroade, but
primly lay ſnares for the lyues of godly Princes.

Is it not to bee ſuppoſed, that theſe will
admit moderate or godly councels? And other
whyles wee haue prooued very many which
haue fained a moderation, and yet in very
deede haue wrought nothing ſo, but that they
might catche theyr vauntage howe too ſubuert
vs, if they had once enſnared vs: and ſo
extinguiſhe al kinde of good doctrine.Autors godl
                        •
                      aduertizemen
                        •
                      vnto the godl
                        •
                      in his tyme 
                        〈◊〉
                      plyable too th
                        •
                      latter dayes. I doo
knowe there are a fewe certaine perſons in
the worlde more ſoundely liuing in the ſocieties
of our enimies, which doo lament the
wilful boldeneſſe of ſome Princes, and
mighty perſonages: but the opinions and
meaninges of theſe men, are ſhutte out as
comming from ſchollers. Theſe, when
they are ſo, it is the point of a godly mynde,
& of one which thinketh of his ſoules health,Luk. 11.
and of the glory of Chriſte, too ſeeke foorth,
which is the true Churche, that hee may
heerevntoo adioyne himſelfe, that hee may
bee a member of this ſociety, and of the flock
of Chriſte, as Chriſte himſelfe ſaieth, Hee
that is not with mee, is againſt mee. Againe
let him knowe that the Churche conſiſteth
not in the power of Tyrantes, and
perſecutors of Chriſt, and in them which doo
eyther helpe forwardes, or allowe of theyr
cruelty.
               
                  
Touching theſe, let vs holde faſt the aſſured
rule of S. Paule, where hee ſaieth, If any
man teach any other doctrine, let him bee holden
as accurſed.
                  The woord is 
                        
                           •
                        nat
                           •
                        ema.
                   1. Ga
                        ••
                     th. And when he ſaieth,
* Let him be holden as accurſed: let vs not think,
that hee vſed this as a ſlender or common
curſe, when hee ſaieth accurſed, Hee
ſignifieth heereby, that GOD, hath caſt
out of the Churche, the enimies of the true
doctrine, and that they are too bee eſchewed
as the grieuous plagues which GOD abhorreth.
               Let good men wel knowe, that by keeping
felloweſhip and company with thoſe that are
defyled,
                     
                        •
                     leſſon for 
                        •
                     d men of Churche. they ſhal ſurely ſuffer great plagues,
for their friendſhip and for their ſociety. The
Pſalme ſaieth of this kinde of enimies, Hee
hath put on blaſphemy, as a garment vpon him,
and: it hath pearced through him, as water
through his inwarde partes, and as oyle in his
bones: Pſal.
                   108. The infection of this curſe
hurteth others, which are of their affinity in
nature, which doo alſo stryue againſt the
trueth, and doo exerciſe cruelty againſt the
godly ones.
               Let vs not therefore, thinke, that this commaundement
is but of ſmal effect, too ſay (If
any man ſhall teache any other doctrine, let

him bee holden as accurſed. 1. Gal.
                   They are
not Biſhops they are not the members of the
Churche,Enimies of th
                        •
                      Church aduo
                        ••
                     ched by the Au
                        ••
                     tor. but the enemies of Chriſte, who
ſith they bee throughly mooued with furyes,
doo not thinke vppon concorde and peare of
the Churche but of eſtabliſhing tyranny, doo
not bende their indeuoures too heale vppe the
woundes of the Churche,The chief inde
                        •
                     uour & practyſ
                        •
                      of the Popiſhe clergy. but they buſie
themſelues about ciuill broyles, the deſolation
of Churches, ſlaughter of thoſe godly
Miniſters, and of thoſe godly women members
of the ſame. Wherefore, wee muſt
not looke for any reformation of the Church
from theſe enimies:What the god
                        •
                     ly ought too auoyde. But wee muſt thinke,
that in iudgement, minde, and will, euery
man ſhoulde ſeparate himſelfe from them,
ſhoulde flee away from their Idolatry, ſhould
not abide to heare their blaſphemies againſt
the true doctrine, neither ſhoulde helpe forwardes
nor allowe their counſels, nor yet confirme
their autority.
               Saint Paule ſayeth, eſchewe Idolatry.
Theſe preceptes are not to be ſlenderly made
accompte vppon.An exhortatio
                        •
                      too all men to
                        •
                      ſeeke for the true church. Let vs therefore ſeeke for
the true Churche, let vs knowe, that in
this our Prayers are hearde, let vs knowe,
that in this Church, wee are the members of

Chriſt; and let vs alſo knowe, that vntoo this
Churche, do the promiſes of Chriſte appertaine:
namely, thoſe which hee ſpeaketh of in
his Goſpel. Thoſe promiſes pertayne not vnto
the enimies of the Goſpel, lyke as they neither
appertayne vnto the Iewes, nor vnto the
Mahometiſtes, as God himſelfe oftentymes
witneſſeth, and as our chiefe Prieſt Chriſte
ſpeaketh by his Prophete in the 16. Pſalme,
ſaying thus, I will not offer vp their ſacrifices,
neyther will I make mention of them in my
lippes. Whome may not this ſo heauy commination
or threatning perſwade and moue to
eſchewe the company of thoſe which are enimies
vnto the true Churche.
               IN concluſion, The woorde of GOD is
full of ſuch Sermons or perſwaſions, for
both partes which commaundeth vs too flee
from the enimies of the true doctrine, and of
the true Churche: and too embrace the true
doctrine, too loue, helpe, and adorne the true
Churche.
               And let vs not onely thinke, that this
Churche is ſuch a Citie as that whereof Plato
ſpeaketh. This ſociety is the true churche,
wherein ſhyneth the ſincere and pure doctrine
of the Goſpel, and wherein the ſacramentes

are rightly adminiſtred, as they are deliuered
from GOD.Concluded affirmation which is the true Church who they be and how they bee members therof. In ſuch a ſociety, there muſt
needes bee ſome lyuely members of the
Churche which perfourme vntoo God, true
woorſhipping of him, which truely repent
them, which with a true fayth call vppon
God, beſtowe theyr ſtudy and diligence,
too the aduauncement of the Goſpel, ſhewe
their confeſſion of ſinnes, doo accompliſh the
charge of their vocation: and finally performe
thoſe godly offices by God enioyned them,
are exerciſed in al kindes of daungers, wherby
they may vſe prayer and inuocation vppon
God, and other good woorkes.
               This doo I affirme too bee the true
Churche, with whome too bee ioyned in
minde, wil, and purpoſe, it behooueth all good
men euery where. And ſuch (doo I perceaue
by the benefite of GOD) are oure
Churches, which profeſſe the true doctrine
of the Goſpel, which without all doubte is the
conſent and agreement of the doctrine of the
Catholyke churche of Chriſt.
               Woulde to God that good mindes woulde
conſider howe much it ſtandeth them in hande
not too bee conuerſaunt in the Tentes of the
enimies of the Churche, but too bee a Citizen
of the true Churche of Chriſt, for whoſe

ſake God would haue himſelfe kuowen in the
worlde,Commendation of the ſtate of Gods Churche. for whoſe ſake he created all thinges,
whome hee ſanctified with the blood of his
ſonne, wherein hee manifeſted himſelfe by his
wonderful woorkes, by the fathers, Noah, Abraham,
Ioſeph, Moyſes, Dauid, Elias, Fliſeus,
his Apoſtles, and other the lightes of the
Churche, finally which ſhall inherite life and
glory euerlaſting, & ſhal inioy the felloweſhip
of God, and of his holy Angelles.
               What a glory and bleſſedneſſe is it, to bee
a fellowe of this ſociety, to bee ſeene in this
flocke, which Chriſt himſelf leadeth as guide
where the godly Angelles enuyron them
round about, wherein go the Princes Adam,
Noah, Abraham, Moyſes, Elias, and other notable
men endewed with excellent gifts? And
in this flocke,Who are meek 
                        •
                     ſociates in the true Church of God. thou haſt aſſured place, if thou
helpeſt not, if thou alloweſt not the vngodlineſſe
and cruelty of the enemies of the church,
but doeſt embrace the true doctrine, confeſſe
ye ſame, & adorne the ſame with godlymaners.
               
                  Dauid in his. 120. Pſalme ſayth, Pray
for the peace of Hieruſalem. Bleſſed are all
they which loue the ſame. O ſweet and pleaſāt
ſentence: Hee exhorteth all men, by all kind
of dueties to helpe the Church, to defend the
purity & agreemēt of the doctrine in the ſame,

to do wel vnto thoſe which teach in the church
with their prayers,An exhortation to pray for the proſperitie of the Church and deſerue well towardes the ſame. and deſires too commende
the common welfare or ſafety thereof to God,
to driue away wicked teachers and Tyrantes
from the ſame.
               And from my heart I wiſh, that Politike
men which ought and are able too helpe the
Churche, would conſider the greatnes of theſe
dueties. Let them haue an eye vnto their poſterity:
For whom as they haue a deſire to
leaue a well ordained common wealth,The godly care of the Autor for the poſterity. ſo much
more ought they deliuer true knowledge of
God, vncorrupte religion, ſincere doctrine of
the Goſpel, and after this maner well gouerned
Churches. Like as Paule writing vnto
Timothy ſaith thus, commaunding him, Faithfuly
to kepe that which is committed vnto him,
that the ſame may come whole and vncorrupt
vnto the poſterity. VVith this care nothing
at al we ſee the Biſhops of Rome, either Biſhoppes
of theyr affinity, either any Monkes
or Chanons to be any way mooued,1. Tim. 6. but they
contend touching worldly wealth and promotions
which they woulde haue,The contrary care and careleſneſſe of the aduerſaries. not touching.
Doctrine. Therefore let others in ſchoole, and
gouernment of Cities take this care in hand.
This ſacrifice eſpecially dooth God require
of all men, as Peter ſayth, We are called to the

ende we ſhould celebrate the benefites of God
towardes vs 2. Pet. 1.
               This ought to be the ende in all Councels
and enterpriſes of wiſe men,God requireth euery, man in his vocation to ſeeke the aduauncement of Gods glory in his Church. to ſet forth and
aduance the glory of Chriſt. For the performance
of this duetie, God himſelfe promiſeth
great rewardes in this little verſe, Bleſſed ſhal
they be which ſhall loue the Church. Pſal. 120.
               Hee promiſeth them ſure defence, good
proſperitie, and euerlaſting felicitie which
loue the true church. With this voyce, let
the godly ones ſtirre vp their mindes to the
care of aduauncing and adorning the church,
and not onely confirm them ſelues againſt the
threatning of Tyrantes,Gods promiſed rewardes too thoſe that ſo doe. but alſo let them fortifie
themſelues, as armed agaynſt the ſub till
Sophyſtrie of thoſe which falſely alleadge
theyr teſtimonies of Antiquity, and of the
churche, for the defence of their wicked opynions,
which to refute and vanquiſhe, I
haue ſomewhat here thought good to inſtruct
the mindes of godly diſpoſed perſons.
            
            Soli Deo Gloria.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧Imprinted
at London at the three
Cranes in the Vinetree, by
Thomas Dawſon.
1580.
         
      
   