
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  The most Famous and
renowned Historie, of that
woorthie and illustrous Knight
Meruine, sonne to that rare and excellent
Mirror of Princely prowesse, Oger
the Dane, and one of that royall bond
of vnmatchable Knighthoode,
the twelue Peeres of
France.
                  Wherein is declared, his rare birth, and
stranger bringing vp, with his most honorable
conquest of Ierusalem, Babilon,
and diuers other Cities from the pagan
Infidels: with many other memorable
accidents of wonderous consequence.
                  By I. M. Gent.
                  ¶Printed at London by R. Blower
and Val. Sims. 1612.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Readers whosoeuer
they be.
                  
                     GEntle Reader, I am to deale
with thee in this Historie of
Meruine, as those which bid
men to a great feast, that is,
to present them first, with
that which may procure an
appetite to meate, and worke
a desire to eate: so giue I thee
the first part, to cause thee to haue a more longing
desire vnto the second part, that shall in the full
conclusion of this Historie giue thy desire his expected
satisfaction, the which, the next Terme
(and if I liue) I will not let to performe. Thus
committing thee to thy delight in reading, and
thy fauourable acceptance in allowing
my Labour, I bid thee well to fare,
till I fairely performe
my promise.
(⸪)
                  Thine euer ready to pleasure.
I. M.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Table of the
first Part.
                  
                     
                        THe famous Historie of the noble and valiant
Knight Meruine, and first of his birth, and the
gifts giuen him by the fairies. Chap. 1.
                     The Fairie Gratiana repented her selfe for
the carrying away of Meruine: 2 how shee
found a 
                           •
                        ermit keeping three goates: 3 how
hee shewed her the way to find the port of the sea. chap. 2
                     The Fairie Gratiana accorded to the desire of Barbin: 2
Barbin caried her to M
                           •
                        ntment vnto his house: 3 how hee
made his wife beleeue that Meruine was his sonne. chap. 3
                     
                        Berea daughter of the king of Mermont fell in loue with
Meruine, being at schoole: 2 of the loue-paine she indured,
and other accidents. chap. 4
                     
                        Meurmont the king proclaimeth a great Iust for triall of
his knights: 2 Meruine doth great wonders. chap. 5
                     The treason of Brohars against Basina sister to Minea the
great daughter of Basina. chap. 6
                     
                        Meruine promiseth Minea to fight the combate for her
sister: 2 of his great daughters in Brandis: 3 how he behaued
himselfe: 4 how Minea deliuered him from death to
imprisonment. chap. 7
                     How Minea, Meruine, Iacob, Tyrus, and other marchants
with the 200. pagans departed from Brandi
                           •
                         to deliuer
Basina to Montesteure: 2 and of the battell fough▪ be
                           •
                        ween
                           •
                        
                        Meruine and Brohars and the eu
                           •
                        nt. chap. 8
                     Of the honors done to Meruine for his victory: 2 how

                        Minea bronght him backe againe to Brandis: 3 his imprisonment,
and other aduentures. chap. 9
                     
                        Iacobs report to king Mermont of the acts of Meruine:
2 Bereas ioy: 3 the priuate conference betweene Berea
and Iacob. chap. 10
                     Of the dispatch of Baucamonts two knights to Mermont:
2 Mermont in despight of Baucamont imprisoneth them:
3 of the assault, and death of Clarissa the coward. chap. 11
                     The arriuall of Iacob and Barbin at Brandis: 2 the presenting
of the letter to the Court: 3 Meruine is deliuered
to them: 4 Minea perswaded Croysant to accompany Meruine,
which he did with 400. horsemen. chap. 12
                     The incounter betweene Galien Rotherus the sonne of
Oliuer and Meruine: 2 of the good knight Drohes, who
yeelded himselfe to Meruine. chap. 13
                     The great battell before Montment: 2 Mermont taken
prisoner: 3 Meruins arriuall and recouerie of Mermont:
4 Meruins exploits in the battell: 5 his second deliuerie of
Mermont, and other accidents. chap. 14
                     The honours Mermont did to Meruine: 2 Meruine
made chamberlaine of the Court: 3 Gratiana for his sake
made lady of the chamber of Berea with other accidents. chap. 15.
                     The priuate discourse betweene Marant and Berea, and of
her answere: 2 how she came to the vnderstanding of Marants
enuie to Meruine: 3 the treason he intended, which
he had procured Calix his cosin to execute. chap. 16
                     
                        Berea hiding her selfe, came to vnderstand the treason: 2
her reuealing it to Drohes chalengeth Calix before the king,
and pawneth his gage. chap. 17
                     King Mermont went to the forrest to find out Meruin: 2
the occasion and maner of his finding: 3 how he brought
him to Montment, &c. chap. 18
                     Of Pimons embassage from Esclamart to Baucamont,
touching the foure sonnes of Gaultier of Denmarke: 2 and

how the peace was concluded betweene Mermont and Baucamont. chap. 19
                     
                        Florion the youngest brother was taken prisoner by king
Bandus: 2 how the pagans were ouerthrowne: 3 how Florion
was giuen in exchange for king Goham Gaifiers brother. chap. 20
                     King Mermont, Baucamont, Meruine, and 200000.
pagans arriued before Damascus: 2 the losse the Christians
receiued by the valour of Meruine. chap. 21
                     The Christians were vanquished by Meruine: 2 how
Guyon, Bertran, Thyerrie, Florion and Huon of Burdeaux
were taken prisoners, & carried to Damascus. chap. 22
                     
                        Charlemaine departing from France to see the holy sepulchre,
arriued at Babylon, and was receiued of king Gaultier:
2 of the embassage two Pagans brought from Meruine
and Gaudisse: 3 a counsell holden by the Christians, who
demaunded day of king Karaheu, of Florion, &c. chap. 23
                     
                        Charlemaine and all the Christian army sallied out of
Babylon: 2 of the great battell: 3 and how Meruine slew
Guyon of Denmarke his vnknowne vncle: 4 how Charlemaine,
Gaultier, and the twelue peeres were taken prisoners,
and their army discomfited. chap. 24
                     
                        Meruine and the pagan hoste came before Ierusalem: 2
how the Citizens rendred vp the towne, &c. chap. 25
                     
                        Meruine would not consent to the death of the Christians:
2 the great battell which fell out in the pal
                           •
                        ace: 3 how the
Christians aided Meruine, and how the pagans came and
cried him mercie. chap. 26
                     
                        Meruine departing from Babylon brought Charlemaine
and the other Christians to the castle of Turgon: 2 of the
appar it in of the Angell vnto Charles: 3 how Meruine
knew himselfe to be the sonne of Oger, and the Fairie Morgue. chap. 27
                     
                        Meruine deliuered Charlemaine and the twelue peeres:

                           〈…〉
                         
                        Drohes instructed him in the points of religion: 3 how

                        Berea was baptized with the rest of the city, and was 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        Mathaburna. Chap. 28
                     That by meanes of Guyda the daughter of Baucamont,
Bettran and his brothers escaped imprisonment: how king
Bandus dangerously assailed them, and how they wonderfully
defended themselues. chap. 29
                     How Meruine after the conquest of many cities went to
Damascus to deliuer the foure brethren, &c. chap. 30
                     The Pagans were ouerthrowne, and the Christians went
and conuerted Damascus, &c. chap. 31
                     
                        Mermont by treason brought Meruin to Minor: how
Gaultier after the departure of Meruine went with all his
army to Montment, where he found Mathaburna, to whom
he told how her father was become a Christian, &c. chap. 32
                     How Meruin was tr
                           •
                        iterously imprisond, and the description
thereof: how by the perswasion of Mermont Butor
went with an hundred thousand pagans to Montment: how
Minea aduertised Gautier and thother christians. cha. 33
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The most ancient famous mother
of Histories, the exquisite Historie of
Prince MERVINE, the sonne of OGER the Dane,
who conquered Ierusalem, Babylon, and diuers
other Cities from the Pagans▪
with many memorable accidents of
wondrous consequence.
                  
                     CHAP. I.
                     ¶The famous History of the noble and valiant knight
Meruine, 1 and first of his birth, 2 and the giftes
giuen him by the Fairies.
                     
                        YOu may reade in the historie making
mētion of Oger duke of Denmarke
(a country neare adioyning
vnto France) how that after by his
prowesse he had conquerd from the
Turks, Pagans, and Infidels, Babylon,
Ierusalem, and many other
townes▪ (countries imp
                           •
                        gning our
holy Christian faith) hee the same

                           〈…〉
                        
                        
discourse much too long, and finish vp may book onely with
descriptions. But many tedious nights nor daies had not
runne out the labouring circuit of their minutes, before the
beautiful Morgue, sister to king Artus, became all inuir
                           •
                        
                        ned
with his loue, and by the excellencie of her subtill skill
intangled him as much or more with her affection, in so vehement
sort, that the Lady who was passing wise, prophet
like knowing what in after time should be
                           •
                        all them two,
purchased so much her own blessednes, that she was carnally
accompanied of the good duke Oger, & that in so good an
houre, that by the prouidence of the Highest, she became
with child, the very sight wherof added an vnspeakable ioy
to the heart of Oger: and all the fairies of princely estimation,
holding a counsell amongst themselues, said one to an
other: Now, and not too soone, is it sufficiently apparant that
the Fairie Morgue hath not euer in vnprofitable 
                           •
                        lumber
consumed her time with Oger, because by her waking
déed she hath giuen testimony to vs all, that now she hath
conceiued, and is great with childe. If it prooue a sonne,
it is reason that for his chiualrie hee be more estéemed than
any liuing in his time, because his brith is more honorable
than any of former age hath bin. Thus argued the Fairies
about Morgue their companion, who naturally bare her
fruit nine moneths, and in the extreme end of the last, with
great trauell she was deliuered of a beautifull sonne, such,
and so faire, as vntill then had not any eye beheld. To his
birth came many haughty and excelling Fairie dames, who
beholding the eie-inchanting beauty of the Babe, blessed it,
and gaue it to the mother, who with an ouerflowing heart
tide-full of most deare affection, seeing his incomparabl
                           •
                        
features, wherein true beautie had onely sworne to hold
his habitation, kissed and rekissed it, as if numberlesse salutes
should make his happy fortunes numberlesse in account,
and then lifting her eies to heauen, thus or in this

maner prayed: True God of glory quoth she, I humbly
implore and require thée, that of thy holy bountie thou wilt
bestow such or so much more diuine spirite, puissance, and
true magnanimitie on this Babe, happily begotten on me,
as thou didst inspire in my deare loue Oger, his princely
lord and father, and that he may alonely resemble or excéed
him in the glorious actions of euerliuing knighthoode. So
swéetly spake Morgue these swéet orizons that the God of
heauen exhaled her prayers, and registred in the 
                           〈◊〉
                        
of the skie, that he should become the most redoubted in the
world. After came king Artus into the chamber of the Lady,
with him Oger and many other barons, to sée the new
child: at whose approach came to Oger a fairie Lady, who
being of a glorious and renowned spirite, was famous for
her vertues thorow the Fairie land: her name was Meruina,
and she said vnto him, Good duke of Denmarke honour
me in giuing my name vnto thy sonne▪ and make me
eternally happy, by being his happy godmother. 
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        y qd
Oger, I consent. After these speaches was the infant carried
to be baptised, and was named Meruin, Artus and Orient,
two mighty kings being his godfathers: who after
the Sacrament performed, gaue him rich gifts.
                     2 Which so soone as Meruina perceiued, she said vnto
them: My Lords, you haue inriched this infant with the
treasure of this world, but I will make him wealthy with
the 
                           ••
                        wels of Heauen. Your gifts handmaids to Fortune,
by 
                           •
                        ischance may 
                           〈◊〉
                         from him: my gift the controller of

                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ 
                        
                           •
                        hall for no decrée forsake him. I will therefore,

                           〈◊〉
                         will is my gift, for I giue my will, that he be euer

                           〈◊〉
                         the eies of all creatures, and especially amongst
Ladies, who during his life, shall h
                           •
                        ld him dearer than
their owne liues. At these speaches the Fairie Gratiana,
(who all the while leaned on the fountaine) grew wroth,

as well for enuy of the giftes giuen to the little Meruine,
as for a priuate indignation that she bare vnto Morgue, in
that she had not enioyed some of those 
                           •
                        ient night-pleasing
delights, which she enioyed with her excellent Oger,
and therfore answering an vntuned thought with an high

                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ring voyce, saide: And I from that great God which
created the vniuerse, and man to his owne image, giue him
this gift, that Meruine shal
                           •
                         faile in the assault of one battell,
and be taken prisoner with such enda
                           •
                        agement, that
no fortitude shall euer release him, till a man whose mother
died in her childbirth be his deliuerer. Such words as these
vtterd the false fairy Gratiana, which effected according to
her wish, because he was deliuered (as saieth the Historie)
from Minor, with whom he was fiue yéeres prisoner, by
Robastus, as shal h
                           ••
                        eafter appeare in processe of the story.
Meruina hearing Gratianaes hate-vomiting words, she
grew excéeding sorrowfull, till sorrow comming to rage,
made her with her fist giue Gratiana such a blowe on her
face, that the blood which should haue made hir chéeks blush
for her immodesty now sought to drown thearth for sustainin
                           •
                        
her▪ This 
                           ••
                        m
                           •
                        lt bred 
                           〈◊〉
                         among the Fairies,

                           〈◊〉
                         with a world of euills on the noble Christians. Dispitefully
sad was Gratiana for the blow receiued, but in regard
at that instant she could not do what she would (tutored
by patience) she would not what she wished, yet in her
soule made a solemne protestation solemnely to reuenge her
iniurie, as indéed she did. After a fairi
                           •
                         named Galiana, de
                        
                           ••
                        rous
to moli
                           ••
                        e the angry Meruina, came to her, saying,
Swéet sister, why should fury haue such furious superioritie
in thy faire selfe, as to bathe they hand in a bl
                           ••
                        dy ocean?
Belieue me, d
                           •
                        are creature, thou oughtest rather to haue
wash
                           •
                         with patience in white lillies: but be milde, appea
                           ••
                        
thine anger, and I will giue to thy little sonne a gift shall

                           〈◊〉
                         all thy i
                           •
                        ies▪ and this it is▪ what pri
                           •
                        cesse, lady, or

woman in the world he shall daine to kisse, that and the selfe
same ioy shal she possesse by that outward imbracement, as
if he had consumed whole nights in those pleasures, which
to nature is only priuate: and sith I am ascertained he shal
be furnisht with incomparable valure, I giue him this gift,
that he shal neuer be slaine or vanquisht in prinate or publike
battell: and when he hath liued till marriage hath made
him father of a sonne of twelue yeares old, then my will is
that he returne into Fairia, and hauing kissed me before all
the Ladies of our land, make me his especiall loue, who neuer
had nor will haue any till his returne. When Meruinaes
eares had receiued the musicke of Galianaes spéech,
she gaue her infinite thanks, and caused king Artus, king
Orient, and all the lady Fairies to doe the like, only Gratiana
excepted, who stood sorrowfully dumbe for her blow receiued.
The childe (as you haue heard) was baptized, and
rebrought into the Chamber of his mother, who notwithstanding
the torment of her trauell, yet thorow the loue of
her faire infant, she forgate thexcéeding passion of her more
than great sorrow: and when the Ladies came in, they
found her fast asléepe, whom they being loth to awake from
out her slumber, they gently laid the childe in her bosome,
and so departed without any noise making, onely the false
Fairie Gratiana staid behind, who had alonging desire to
imbesell the infant Meruin, of whom the other Fairies had
no regard, neither that she staid vnder any false intent: but
when al the Ladies were gone, vnkind Gratiana took litle
Meruine from his mothers breasts, and holding him in
her armes, said, Now doe I wish, and I would I wore in
the selfe same maner that at this present I am, at the port
of Luterne, which standeth vpon the Sea: and so soone as
euer she had spoken, instantly she and the infant were in
the same place, whence issued the neuer to be abated sorow
of Morgue: when she awakd and found not by her the best

of her deare selfe, I m
                           ••
                        ne her deare Meruin. Whereupon
she demanded of her attendants whether he had bin broght
backe vnto her, or no: Yes Madam, said one of them, Madam
Mer
                              •
                           ina his godmother, laid him close by your selfe.
Alas said Morgue, and where is he then become? Then
began the good Lady greatly to lament, and to powre such
vncontrolled oceans of teares from the heauenly windows
of her eies, that the roaring tempests of her languor was
easily heard of Artus her brother, Orient, Orger and all the
Fairie Ladies, who incontinently rusht into her chamber,
the renowned Oger asking her what she ailed, auowing
that the greatest monarch in the world should not dare to
do hir that wr
                           •
                        ng, which his sword should not redeliuer
and reuenge. Then her attendants (for dumbe sorrow kept
her silent) tolde him how Gratiana whom Meruina had
striken, in reuenge of her disgrace had stollen the childe,
and borne him to some vnhabitable climate. Oger hearing
this, gaue displeasure leaue to tyrannize vpon his hart,
and by the gréedinesse of his passion robbed his loue the fairie
Morgue of some of her lamentations: for after consideration
had recalled her reason, and hope assured her that no
power would vnworthily be against her, she gaue a comma
(though no period) to her mourning, and recomforted her
only lord Oger with this or like oratorie: Oger my loue
said she, that diuine power which hath sent vs Meruine,
will (if it please him) preserue our Meruine, and when the
winter daies of our extreame fortunes hath fully bound vp
our hopes in forzen ribs of ice, we shall againe regréet the
chéerefull Aprill of our Summerioyes, and gather new
blossoms from our drowned plants. Thus spake Morgue
to the good Oger, whom we will leaue, and speake of the
Fairie Gratiana, who (as you haue heard) cari
                           •
                        ed away
Meruine.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. II.
                     1 How the Fairie Gratiana repented her selfe for the
carrying away of Meruine, 2 how she found a hermit
keeping three goats, 3 how he shewed her the
way to find the port of the sea.
                     
                        
                           GRatiana (by her wish) sodainely arriued in a
wood neighbouring the port of Luterne, but
being in a place so desolately solitary, tainted
with remorse in her owne conscience, heartily
she repented herselfe, aswell for hauing stollen
the only hope of that age, prince Meruine, as also for
hauing exiled her selfe from Fairia her natiue Countrey:
wherefore desirous to returne, and holding the infant in hir
armes, she said, Now do I wish (and be my wish auailable
for my woes sake) would I were in Fairia in mine owne
pallace, so, and in such maner, that I neither doe nor shall
need aske pardon for my misdéed. Thus spake reuengefull
Gratiana: but the storie replieth that because she had reuenged
her selfe▪ by her vnlawfull stealth, the God of the
Christians grew offended with her, and took from her both
her power of wishes and wishing: which when the Fairie
perceiued, she fell on her knées and said, alas, only merciful
God▪ I know I haue gréeuously offended against thée, yet
notwithstanding thy pity greater than thy power, may pardon
my misdéed, which both repents and displeaseth me, and
then turnd she her speech to Meruine, saying; Ay me, swéet

childe, that mine offence to thine infancie hath lost mée the
delight of my life, and yet shall the burden of more then my
sorrow (vnlesse 
                           〈◊〉
                         gracious power preuent) bee borne
on thy tender shoulders: woe is me▪ what had I in my head
when I conceiued this wickednesse against thée, nothing but
euill? yet despight these eu
                           ••
                        s ought some good thing befall
me, in that I will nourish the childe so long as I shalbe able
with such ac
                           ••
                        es as God or fortune shall send me.
                     2 Gratiana in this manner repenting her selfe, rose vp,
and beganne to go to a valley beneath the wood, with the infant
in her armes, and in her passage a long, she perceiued a
holy hermit, who reposed himselfe in the same wood, kéeping
thrée goates in that forrest. When the Fairie came nere him
she saluted him, and sayd, Graue wise man (for so thy white
haires, heralds of experience, tell mée) where, I pray thée,
standeth the next town or village? or where may I find any
woman to giue sucke to this faire childe, which is almost pined
to death with extreme hunger, whilest, alas, I haue nothing
to giue it but my teares, too vnsauorie a firrop for so
princely a taste. Hardly had she ended this last word, but by
the will of some almighty willer, one of the thrée goates left
the hermit, and came to the Lady, making not bestiall, but
rather diuine signes, that she would suckle thinfant: which
the Fairy ouerioyd to behold, thanked God, and kissing the
babe, laid it on the ground, and the goat placed hirselfe néere
to the child, that it might quietly suck, for such was the wil
of the Greatest. When the hermit saw this myracle, and
saw diuine charitie much greater than Nature, haue ruling
in a si
                           •
                        ple goat, grew much abashed, asking the Fairie if
she were a Christian. Father (qd she) I am a true Christian:
and then she began to discourse vnto him all the story of
her euill, how she had stolne Meruine, and for that cause,
briefly to speake, she told him from point to point all before

written. Whilest the hermit sate amazed, and many times
signed himselfe with the crosse, in token of wonder, than sayd
he vnto her: Faire loue know that I am a baptised Christiā,
liuing in this forest yet are all the inhabitants of this climat
none other but pagans a
                           •
                        d Infidels, which neither loue nor
adore the name of Christ I
                           •
                        sus: and therfore to thend you
may be circumspect in your affaires, know that if you confesse
your selfe a Christian, you and this Fairie childe shall
die the death.
                     3 Therefore be wisely warie, and I will shewe thée the
way which leadeth to the port Luterne, where ariue many
marchants of forren lands: and to the end that this faire creature,
which you name Meruine, shall sustaine no want, I
will giue you the goate which hath offered it selfe vnto him:
for such is the will of him that willeth all goodnesse. After
this spéech, the hermit, named Crespin, which all his time
had bene holy, and holy Crespin intituled, hauing shewed
her the port, tooke leaue▪ and Gratiana addressed her selfe to
her way, commending to God her and her intention. So
parted they, the Fairy carying the child, and the goat attending
both: at length she came vnto the port where she perceiued
a small barke, that with ho
                           •
                        sed sailes was euen then
in departing: whereupon she cried, Lordes, for Mahomet
and his temple Mecas sake stay, and let we passe with you.
When the master vnderstood her, and that she spake of Mahomet:
(for they were Painims) he replied, Haste thée then
loue, and if thou haste, we will stay a little for thée. At these
words the Fairie added such wings to her féet, that immediatly
she entred into the ship, and with her entrance the ship
departed, plowing so spéedily through the furrows of the salt
waues, that in short space Gratiana perceiued a verie faire
citti
                           •
                        . Gentlemen (sayd she to the Pagans) I perceiue yonder
below a very strong citie, I pray you tell me what towne

it is, whether it be Christian or Paynim? When the iealous
Pagans heard the demaund of the Fairie ladie they
mistrusted in themselues that she was a Christian: wherefore
one of them fiercely aunswered her: Ladie, art thou a
Christian, or one of our law? Reuerend sir (sayd she) I was
neuer Christian, but am a Pagan. Then one who was of
Montment, by calling a marchant, amazedly viewed, and
often reuiewed Meruine, whom the oftener he beheld, the oftener
he saw his beauties redouble. Whereupon inamored
of the infants perfection, he came to the ladie, and asked her
if she would sell her child? In good faith (quoth the Fairie)
no: for it is the sonne of my sister: for whose loue (so farre
as I am able, if Mahomet giue me leaue) I will carefully
nourish it. Madam (sayd this marchant, whose names was
Barbin) from what countrey is your iourney deriued? Sir
(sayd shée) from Antioch, where infinite misfortune hath
chanced to my kindred, who haue béene traiterously slaine by
a false Christian, on whom I beséech Mahomet raine
an eternall curse: for he hath despoiled mée of all my
goods, and left me no comfort, but this sillie infant,
my nephew, whom by the diuine ayd
of Mahound I nourish, that hée
may be my glorie in my
decaying and ruined
age.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. III.
                     1. The Fairie Gratiana accorded to the desire of Barbin
2. Barbin carried her to Montment vnto his house.
3. How he made his wife beleeue that Meruine was
his sonne.
                     
                        
                           BArbin the Pagan finding the Fairy would
by no meanes sell the princely Meruine,
yet inly beholding the necessitie wherein
she stood, sayd vnto her, What age (deare
lady) hath this childe aspired vnto? By
Mahomet (answered she) it hath not fully
accomplished three dayes. Trust me (sayd the Painim) if
you will goe with me vnto Montment, you shall be so well
intreated as your degrée requireth, and your childe nourished
aecording to the excellencies of his beauty: onely to one
thing you must accord which though it carrie falshood in the
forehead, yet shall it keepe danger from your heart: and that
is, to affirme this childe is mine: for which report I will
raine shewers of golde and siluer into your bosome, & guard
yourperson and fortunes safer then the waking dragons the
Hesperian Cytrons. To these wordes Gratiana inclined
her eares, whilest her thoughts to her thoughts thus whispered:
Since it pleaseth the God of heauen, and that destinie is
my director, euen as I haue stollen this most excellent infant
(for which I know I haue grieuously sinned, lost my freedome,
and am vtterly banisht from those dignities I inioyed

as being a Fairie) so will I now doe my greatest endeuour
for this princely orphant. And for I know nothing in me to
reobteine my losses, I will what he will, more bequeathi
                           •
                        g
our fortunes into the hands of God then according to the desire
of this Pagan: and then exalting her wordes which before
were silent, she said: Faire sir, from whom I behold a
diuine affection, issuing vnto my forsaken nephew: tell me,
are you married, or no? Madam, I am (sayd hée) and haue
bene this fourtie yéeres, and more: so haue I also one faire
sonne, not far from hence, whose name is Tirus Sir (quoth
she) since it pleaseth you to offer vs the good wée can desire,
we will euer obey you, and go where you shall please to dispose
vs. In such discourses as this they consumed the night
till the next morning, who had no sooner saluted the Sun, but
they arriued on the shoare, impouerishing the shippe to make
the land more wealthie.
                     2 Barbin and Gratiana bearing the little Meruine in
her armes, marched together, and the goate followed them,
the which whensoeuer the childe cried, was readie with her
dugge to appease his wéeping. And as they went Barbin
sayd vnto her: Excéedingly am I delighted with the beautie
of this infant, therefore deare ladie forget not to affirme
as you haue promised. Of that she bade him take no care, for
her care should be, that no fault should issue form her but
carefulnesse, He highly commended her answere, and then
further sayd: Ladie, diuers discourses haue I had with you,
and yet haue I not demanded the name of this childe: let it
not then be offensiue that I now importune it. Sir (quoth
she) he is called Meruin, and so shall you name him in your
owne house, when you come to your wife: but woe is mée, a
mightie suspition throbbeth in mine heart, lest your wife
should imagine you haue begot this childe of mée, and so by
that meanes turne an vndeserued wrong vpon my life. Lady

(said he) abandon that suspition, and be dreadlesse of such euill:
for my wife by nature is so simple, that in an hundred
yeares, she would not be mistresse of such an imagination:
trust me, she is noue of those diuellish creatures, who ouerlooke
the fortunes of their husbands, but only wise, in that
she wants the depth of such in-searching wisedome. In this
sort, clipping Times wings with the tediousnesse of talke.
they entered into the faire City of Montment, in whose
streetes Barbin stayed not, till he came to his owne house,
where he found his wife, who ouer-ioyed with the ioy of his
sight, ranne and threw her armes about his necke, saying:
Swéet loue, deare life, all my comforter, welcome all welcome:
that I sée thee I am satisfied: and thy life sufficeth
me. Loue (said he) thanks to Mahomet, I liue, and haue
happily well made exchange of my marchandise: for I haue
brought home spices, drugges, and oiles and with them richer
much than all them, this fairechild, and this yong ladie,
whose birth is renowmed, yet her vertues much more
magnificent: therefore for my loues sake, do to her and her
vertues seruice. Sir (said his wife) haue you indéed brought
home this infant?
                     3 By Mahomet (said he) I haue, neither wil I di
                           ••
                        emble
with thee, he is mine owne, begot by me of a yong lady
of Milan in Lumbardy, who was triumphant faire, for faire
in her only triumphed, but in this childs birth she died: and
here behold her sister, who hath promised to liue with me.
Wherefore sweet loue and onely companion of my bed, be
kinde to it, which is the glory of my kinde, neither let them
want what is behoouefull for their extremities. Also let my
sonne Tirus know as much, because he is his brother, and
command him to come vnto me. Loue (said she) for a trueth,
thy sonne is at the schoole, but no sooner shall the morning
prepare way for the sunnes beams, but I will send for him

vnto thée: meane space I hold it conuenient we séeke for
some Nurse for this faire infant. But he tolde her it was
néedlesse, because that gentle goat supplied the place of such
a louing foster-mother. All that hee tolde her she belieued.
So the Fairie and Meruine remained in the house of that
marchant, and was nursed with the milke of the goate: for
such was the prouidence of the Greatest, who had predestinated
him to conquer a monster with thrée heads, named
Logrus, which was begot by a diuell on the fairy Gratiana:
which diuell made earnest petition, that this Logrus should
neuer die, but by a mortall man, that neuer was norished
with the milke of a woman: for he thought it impossible to
bring vp a childe without womans milke. But the gentle
Meruine, whose fame is renowmed in the marble 
                           ••
                        rmament,
slew him, and cut off his thrée heads: as ye shal read
in the end of this present history: till when we will returne
to our former matter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IIII.
                     1. Berea daughter of the King of Meurmont, fel in loue
with Meruine, being at schoole. 2. Of the loue-paine
she indured. 3. and other accidents.
                     
                        OUr present historie, which anciently hath been
extracted out of the Librarie in the holie monastery
of Saint Dennis in France, demonstrateth,
that Meruine the sonne of the wise
excelling Duke Oger, was so rarely nursed

by the goat, and so carefully maintained by Barbin and his
wife, that among al the breathing starres of beauty within
the city of Montment, nor amongst all the excellent faces of
that countrey, was there found any worthy to be compared
to his, much lesse equall. Being fiue yeares olde. Barbin
prouided him a graue schoolemaster, exactly furnished with
all the liberall Sciences: vnder whom the gentle Meruine
(to whom Nature was neuer found a stepmother) learned
more than all the rest (and there were many) that were in
the Schoole. All which made Barbin, his wife and the fairie
Gratiana exceeding ioyfull. The storie saieth, that the
house of the schoolemaster, vnder whom Meruine learned
the studies of Oratorie and Logike stood next to the house
of the mother of her, who had nursed the Kings daughter,
who at that time gouerned Montment, Tarrarie, and Luterne,
who called himselfe, Mermont, and his wife Marina.
This king Mermont, had sent his daughter to a
castle ealled Turgon, standing within the citie, where a
graue lady instructed her in all the accomplements of vertue:
the name of the princesse was Berea, excelling all the
maiden race of that country in beauty, yet her wisedome equalling
her fairenesse, but her vertues excelling both. This
virgine Berea often times went vnto Meruines Schoolemaster,
to learne the hidden secrets of Art (for she was wholy
dedicated to philosophy) & one day (fatall aboue the rest)
as Meruine was before his master recording his lesson, the
virgine with an affectionate desire (for Loue at that instant
had armed himselfe to surprise Perfection, cast her eies vpon
him, whose beauty in her eies like the Sunne reflecting
on a rocke of cristall, redoubled each feature, and of vnions
made so many infinites, that her desire grew more innumerable,
and loues wounds in her hart altogether numberles.
                     2 At that instant the princely maid was not aboue ten

yeares old, and Meruine was fully as much: yet was her
constancie, discretion and wisedome so agedly graue, and of
so excellent a temper, that albeit continually she suffred the
extreamest extreame of loues martyrdome, as a troubled
thought, a tormented heart, a di
                           •
                        temperd braine, and a dying
spirit, yet did she neuer in any sort, either to her father,
mother, or most priuate companion, by the smallest shadow
giue testimony of her hugest torment: notwithstanding,
when louelinesse drew her selfe from her selfe, only to be alone,
then would she sommon her conceits, and muster vp
whole armies of cogitations, to think▪ confirme, and maintaine
the beauties of her Meruine, and to euery conclusiue
argument, swore by Mahomet, he only should be her loue:
yet had she no sooner decreed that excellent iudgement, but
when she remembred him to be the son of Barbin the marchant,
then found she contrary motions, auowing faultines
in her election. But loue, who is as reasonlesse as he is infinit,
drew her from those doubts, and only taught her thus,
I wil, because I must. Then was her loue such & so great,
that for the space of tenne dayes she left the vse of meate or
drinke▪ and found no ease but in the sight of Meruine, so intollerable
was her frensie, and so impatient her desire, desiring
Meruine, who all the while had not one thought of either
her, or of her passion: only when he perceiued her ernest
regard of him▪ he being full of princely curtesie, would humbly
salute her. All which salutations were torments to increase
her paine and woes that held her wounds more open:
for why, she durst not discouer that, which all her wits could
hardly couer, no though in it she had beene assured of a safe
recouerie.
                     3 Thus remained she the space of fiue yeres: in thend
whereof came an ambassadour to Montment, who ascending
the pallace, and entering the hall, where he found the

mightie King Mermont accompanied with his Queene,
his princely daughter Berea, and many of his priuate Barons,
before whome prostrate on his knees he fell and said:
Mahomet the Great, all-holder of our estate, saue and defend
the mightie Baucamont King of Damas, who by mee
wisheth thee health, and thine owne wishes, regreeting thy
puissance with this letter, which I humbly intreat thy maiestie
to accept. When the redoubted King Mermont
heard the speech of the embassadour, hee stoode amazed to
thinke what businesse Baucamont should haue with him:
but taking the letter, and breaking opne the seale, he read
the tenure thereof, which instantly sent a displeasing sorrow
to his heart, because the King of Damas in prow
                           •
                        
wordes commaunded his daughter the faire Berea in marriage.
But Mermont calling the messenger saide: By
Mahomet, thy maister is much too saw
                           •
                        y and arrogant to
commaund me to giue him my daughter; the which notwithstanding
her yong yeares I had doone, but that in despite
he hath sent so meane an embassade for hir. Wherefore
be wel ascertained, he shall neuer possesse her, though it c
                           •
                        st
me a hundred thousand of my choisest subiects. Is there any
colourable shewe in thy maister, to marry my daughter,
when he sendeth no greater a peere of his countrey then thy
selfe to demaund her? But what he hath done is but an index
of the pride with which his heart is furnished; say so to
him, for if thou so saist it not, & what besides else I haue said,
by Mahomet in despite or thy King, I will make thy head
poore, in taking away thine ears, two dulauditors Mighty
King, answered the messenger (whose feare-shaken heart
made all his body tremble) be well assured I will deliuer
all that you haue spoken, or what else your maiestie shall
please to commaund me. Be gone then (quoth the King)
and bid thy maister seeke him a wife in some other climate:
for Berea soareth higher then the sunne hath power to carry

his eielight. Thus parted the messenger, on whom no rest
either by night or day dared to aduenture till he came before
Baucamont his Lord and Soueraigne, to whom he saide:
By Apollo, great King of Damas and my liege Lorde, in
vaine is thy care to entertaine loue, when thou hast lost
Berea, whose eies onely create loue: in briefe, her must
thou neuer enioy, for so her father hath sworne, nor I in despight
of thée mine eares, vnlesse I tell thée that so he hath
sworne. More would not Baucamont endure to heare, but
all inraged with fury, swore by Mahomet, Alcheron, and the
shrine of Meca, hée would enioy Berea, yea though shée
were the sole paramor to Iupiter, or garded with an Herculean
army: all which to performe, hee instantly sent foorth
summons to muster all his people, and to commaund all
his tributaries to serue him, protesting with force of armes
to finde that ioy which by force of words he could not enioy.
But only to desteny are the decrées of heauen knowen, for
he erred in his conceits, sith into the world was borne a creature
excellent enough to defend Berea, I meane rarely accomplished
Meruine the sonne of Oger, supposed the sonne
of Barbin, who at that instant was growne mighty in body,
more in minde, most in beauty. Barbin who tendered
him excéedingly, shewed him the trade of marchandise,
and how to exchange for the greatest profite: but the bent of
his mind was contrary to that course, for his minde wholly
was addicted to ride horses, tosse pikes, plant battels, and
other feates of famous chiualrie, to which a while
we will leaue him, and will speake of
the king Mermont.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. V.
                     1 Mermont the king proclaimeth a great Iust for triall
of his Knights. 2 Meruiue doth great wonders.
                     
                        WHen the King of Damas Embassadour was
departed, ye mighty King Mermont (not without
cause) fearing that Baucamont would
make warre vpon him, proclaimed a solemne
tourneament to be held within the citie of
Montment, for triall of all his knights, whi
                           •
                        her assembled
an innumerable company of kings, princes, barons, and
knights, all subiects vnto him; amongest the rest came a
wealthy Prince named Clarissa much more beholden to Fortune
for his riches, then to Nature for his valure: for though
he was not reputed a coward, yet those which knew him
knew he durst not fight. This Clarissa lodged in the house
of Barbin. And when the first day of triumphes came, which
by decrée were to continue thrée dayes, and a massie cuppe
of golde proposed for a prize to the Uictor, euery one armed
himselfe, and Clarissa also armed himselfe outwardly more
rich then any, though inwardly his heart was tattered with
a trustlesse resolution. When Meruine beheld him armed,
he humbly intreated the Pagan that hée might attend his
person to the Tilt-yard. Clarissa when he beheld through
the reflexion of the yong mans beuty an vnmatchable splendor
of concealed valure, he exchanged his feare to hopefull

audacitie and condescended to his intreaty, des
                           •
                        ring the
youth that if he sawe (as doubtlesse he should) any colde
streames of fountaines engirdle his temple, that he would
s
                           •
                        eke with the fire of his infant vertue to drie vp those vndoing
ouerflowes. Meruine coragiously bade him take courage,
for there was no doubt of hard measure, onely (saide
he) it is conuenient that I haue a horse to runne after you,
by which I may sustaine you in the greatest danger: sweete
are thy words and reasonable (answered Clarissa) and forthwith
commaunded, and a horse was deliuered to Meruine,
on which hee mounted and attended Clarissa, o
                           •
                         whome
spurres were not spared till he came to the tilt-yard. When
the Lady virgin Berea, who was enuironed with her mother
and the other Ladies beheld the gallant yong Meruine
enter into the listes, her heart daunced in her cristall bosome,
as if not there, but in him was her onely paradise.
Wo alas she loued him dearely, who neglected her wholly,
and often whispered to her soule, so Mahomet would, I
would Meruine, to whom onely I am a prisoner, whose
beautie onely hath surprised mine affection, were the sonne
of some pagan potentate, then would I follow him, then
would I be his handmaide then would I serue him, then
would I go with him; but if hee would espouse me, O my
soule! how happy were my loue in such a happy requitall,
other then himselfe no goddesse would wish for: for pouerty
with him is richer then the pallace of the greatest Emperor
in Turkie. Thus would the excellent Berea often dispute
with her selfe, imagining Meruine still the sonne of Barbin
the marchant. Anone the tourney beganne, wher
                           •
                        
staues flew in the aire like dust, and dust like smoakie 
                           ••
                        aues
threatned the element; at length a pagan fierce and strong
ranne with his launce in his rest against Clarissa, to whom
he gaue such an vnkind blow, that had not yoong Meruine
bin, he had tumbled to the ground: but the princely youthes

vertue sustained him, yet so heauy was the incounter, that
Clarissa as much or more scared than wounded, returned to
his lodging, where being disarmed, hee laied that heauie
complaint on Fortune which iustly should haue bin intituled
to his owne weakens. Meruine seeing him disarmed,
his heart tickled, and his blood fiered with an emulation of
honour, which set an insatiate longing on his thoughts to
giue some blowes and to prooue his bodie: wherefore hee
fell vppon his knées to Clarissa and saide, I beséech you
faire prince, for the honor of Mahomet, bestow your armes
vpon me, to the end I may goe to the triumph, and approoue
my 
                           •
                        rength. And here do I solemnely protest, that
if I can incounter him whose proud arme hatgh dained you
this indignitie, to do mine vttermost indeuour, to humble
him a low or lower then the earth. After Clarissa with astonishment
had heard the yong princes desire, he willingly
accorded to his wish: yet so, that Meruine should not accuse
him: but when the Iusts were ended, if Fortune made
him conquerour, he should leaue the honour, not to himselfe,
but to Clarissa. Meruine to all most willingly agréed,
saying further: Beléeue mée prince, I will do my
best to gaine the wealthy cup of the King, which also you
shall haue for my desire is knowledge, no honour. At this
Clarissa commaunded his chamberlaine to arme Meruine
with his owne armes, which hée so secretly did, that the
squiers of Clarissa knew it not. When he was armed,
they brought him a most puissant and fierce courser, on
which he mounted, and so departed, attended on by many
squiers, who fully imagined him to be their Lord Clarissa,
who slept in his chamber like a dromedary with his
cowardise. Meruine, whose spurres were Honour, and
Desire, rode so speedily that in the end hee entred the lists,
where valiantly hée meant to winne or conquere his fortune.
                     
                        
2 In the end charging his launce, he ran like a whirlewind
against him who had hurt Clarissa: to whom he gaue
a requitall blow, with such puissance, that he cast horse and
man to the ground, so furiously, as for fiftéene dayes after
he lay without motion. Then another Pagan of his consort,
turned towardes Meruine, on whom he brake his
launce: but Meruine, who tooke pleasure in that martiall
excercise, behaued himselfe with such vertue, that with the
trunchion which remained in his hand, hée gaue him such a
counterbuffe, that breaking his heart in his bosome, the
Pagan died instantly in the place. What shall I néede to
make a tedious discourse of a hastie conflict? In briefe,
Meruine so couragiously behaued himselfe, that ere his
thoughts could bée capable of rest, with his broken launce
he threw tenne to the ground, of which not one euer rose againe,
to the wondrous amazement of all the beholders.
Then began the crie of the multitude, to exalt him, thinking
it had bin Clarissa, euery one exclaiming aloude, Clarissa of
Affrike is he who ought onely to be estéemed. At this exclamation,
a Pagan▪ on whose helme all the day before. Honour
sate twining her golden tresses, now enuious that Clarissa
had courted his mistresse, swore by Mahomet, he should
neuer enioy her fauour: and forthwith pricked towardes
Meruine, who had newly recouered a launce from one of
his squires, and turning his horse, either incountred other
with such a violent incounter, that their staues flying into
small pieces, straue which piece should first flie into heauen
to report neuer like séene vigour. But for all the Pagans
force, it was impossible to mooue Meruine in his saddle,
who sate like a tower against a tempest, or a rocke against
the rage of the seas furie. But Meruins assault of a cleane
contrary nature, lift the Pagan vppe into the aire with his
launce, and thence let him fall with such violence, that he
brake his right arme: and yet Meruine brake not his staffe,

but with the same ouerthrew foure more dead to the ground.
At this began a greater crie amongst the knights, then before,
saying: Clarissa of Affrike is onely inuincible, and
Conquest herselfe is to him a handmaid. Then the king caused
a retreat, and the triumphes to cease, for so a king intreted:
and euery one departed to his pauilion, and Meruine
to his fathers house, with the squires of Clarissa: in whom
ioy shewed the excéedingnesse of ioy, because their lord had
gained the honour of the day. But Meruine made great
haste to come to the chamber, which he ascended in all secret
maner, for he had an excéeding great care that Barbin should
not know any thing. When hée was come there Clarissa
lay solely accompanied with the chamberlaine, who before
had deliuered to Clarissa all what Meruine had done, he
tooke him kindely about the necke, and kissing him, sayde:
Mine honours crowne, and my liues garland, liue euer in
this circle of mine armes, as thou shalt euer be in the compasse
of my heart: for by thée am I renowmed in the court
of king Mermont, and exalted for most valiant thorow th
                           •
                        
Pagan prouinces. Many other spéeches he vsed of kindnes,
all which Meruine either excused or requited. To stand
longer on accomplements, were tedious, and tediousnesse
wearinesse: therefore in a word, all the honour of the thrée
dayes triumphes, and the cup of golde, the reward of the victor,
were by the valour of Meruine, giuen to Clarissa, as
most wise, & most valiant. And he was receiued by the king
Mermont, to beare in battell, if any assailed him, the masters
banner of Mahomet. So had vnknowen resolution exalted
well knowen cowardise: and though Meruine, in nothing
was more carefull then in secret kéeping this secret,
yet the most excellent virgin Berea afterwards attained the
knowledge thereof by Clarissas chamberlaine, which alter
serued Meruine, who as you haue heard, knightly beganne,
and against Bau
                              •
                           mont continued with greater marueiles:

for he recouered king Mermount from his enemies. But let
vs leaue those high actions, till they fall more fitly for our
historie, and let vs a little speake of Barbin, who sent Meruine
to traff
                           •
                        que with another marchant, named Iacob▪
                         and
with Tyrus his sonne, to whom he gaue great meanes for
trade, and foure thousand poundes, which he ought another
marchant in exchange of war
                           •
                        s he had before bought. Whē
                        Iacob and the other marchant knewe Meruine should goe
with them, they were vnwoontedly reioyced (for hée was
dearely beloued of all men) and sayd, if Mahomet would
but grant them safe conduct, they doubted not, but now to
attaine the full perfection of wealth. Then they departed,
Meruine, his brother Tyrus, and the good marchant Iacob,
to whom Barbin committed his children: for he had auowed
to them his best endeuours: and at length came to
the port, where being imbarkt, they found the windes so agreeable
to their course, that in short space, they all arriued
at the port of Brandis, and went to lodge at the signe of the
Harts horne, where Iacob was accustomed to inne: and
found the hostesse sitting sadde and alone at the doore, whom
Iacob saluted, and inquired if hée might there be lodged.
The hostesse, whose name was Minea, answered: you may,
and then sighed: for great was the inward trouble of her
heart. Then the tables being couered, they fate downe: and
the hostesse with regardfull eyes beheld Meruine, rarely
surprised with the incomparable beautie, and wondrous
furnisht lineaments of his body, which she beheld
in him. But leaue wee them with their
accates, and let vs speake of another
matter.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. VI.
                     1 The great treason of Brohars agaiust Basina sister to
Minea. the great danger of Basina.
                     
                     
                        
                           MInea the Ladie of the house where Iacob,
Meruine▪
                         his brother Tirus, and the other
marchants lay, had a sister named Basina,
whose comely features, & well graced fauor,
had not without desert purchased hir the title
of a Faire creature: besids, to those beauties
was wed so much wisedom, discretion and modest gouernement,
that one without error might well commend
her for most perfect. This Basina had to husband a pagan,
passing wise in their Lawe, and very expert in the Art of
Horsmanship: who altogither frequented the warres, tourneis,
and schooles of chiualry: his name was Croisant, and
he imbraced as the onely iewell of his life, one onely friend
Brohars, whom he loued excéedingly, because he imagined
the other loued him as vehemently, which in troth was but
falshood and dissimulation. For Brohars became mortally
inamored with Basina, the wife of Croisant, insomuch as
he made a vow to his owne s
                           •
                        ule, that vnlesse Destiny it
selfe preuented him, he would that forbidden fruit, which
Nature, and the custome of diuine Lawes most vehemently
prohibiteth. To further which irreligious Oath, a day
happened wherein Croisant went from his house in the

citie Montesteur, to a certaine tower himselfe had newly
erected, and the traiterous Brohars taking aduantage of
his absence, entred his house▪ where he found the Lady Basina,
who receiued him kindly, because she shewed her husband
loued him dearely, and setting his lust-inflamed selfe
close by her, as then accompanied with vertuous imaginations,
he with witty (if witty may be imputed to an act so
vnwitty) and violent arguments, laied open the monstrous
desire of his vncontrolled will: which when the Lady vnderstood
a sooth in the meaning of so bad a meaning, she answered
him, it was against the lawes of hospitalitie to offer
so hard amends for so great a merit, his spéeches being as vnfit,
and his desires frantike: and for herowne part, rather
would she be di
                           •
                        membred piece-meale, then think that her
though
                           •
                        s should thinke of any but her husband. Wherefore,
in conclusion she told him, if euer againe his lips gaue
leaue to his tongue to tell her the like villanie, she would
giue notice vnto her husband, who thenceforth should not
him for most inhumane. Whilest they were thus discoursing,
stood by them one of the gentlewomen of the Lady called
Ysea, who not seeming to regard their parlée, wel vnderstood
and heard all they had vttered, as well his monstrous
assault, as her modest defiance, all which was to her a notable
safegard, as hereafter shall appeare. When Brohars
had receiued this cold comfort to his accu
                           •
                        sed desire, hee left
the Lady might
                           •
                        ly perplexed in heart, and sware by Mahomet,
to bring to ruine both her renowne and vertue. As
the traitor went, he sommoned all the damned parliament
of his senses together, to bethinke some notable treason against
her, whilest the good Lady▪ innocent of all euill, wept
to thinke that men should be so wicked.
                     The story reports that this Brohars had a seruant named
Brison, whom one day when Croisant was at Montesteur,
                        
hée called vnto him, and sayde: Brison, come hither,
long haue I nourisht thee, better then a seruant, and doe loue
thee as deare as my sonne: tell mee, to worke reuenge of
my greatest enemie, wouldest thou not aduenture one fortune?
say yea: Brison sayd yea▪ and I will heape so much
treasure to thy store, that Turkie shall not boast of oue
more wealthie. Sir (quoth Brison) I will performe all
your will, let your will, will what it will: therefore 
                           •
                        peake,
for there res
                           •
                        eth nothing but that you commaund me. Well
doeth thine answere please me (replied Brohars:) then this
it is, Basina the wife of my companion Croisant hath done
mee that iniurie, which poiseth mine heart downe to death
with sorrow: neither shall my soule take rest, till reuenge
rocke me asleepe. The meane I haue thus deuised: thou in
the euening shalt goe to Montesteur, and in the chamber of
Croisant, if possiblie, with all secrecie hide thy selfe till midnight:
at what time I will vndoubtedly call vpon him, who
not for a world will faile my will: then so soone as hée is
issued out, thou like stealing Salmacis shalt lay thée downe
in his pla
                           •
                        e, with all the 
                           •
                        ilent secresie thou canst deuise, to
the end that the false Basina▪
                         whose hate to mée is now infinite,
may without suspect suffer thée. Long shalt thou not
there remaine, but Croisant and I will returne: to whom
I will tell, that of a long time his wife hath liued disloyall
with thée, with many other arguments of her inchastitie.
                     Thus did he set abroach his treasons to Brison, who accorded
in euery point to his masters villanie▪ and for execution
thereof, they parted and went to Montesteur, where
Brohars found Croisant, who did entertaine him as kindly
as hee loued him dearely: and in discourse they wasted the
day till night with yron scepter arrested all creatures to rest:
at what time Brohars tooke leaue of Croisant, and tolde
him, that very eare
                           •
                        y in the morning he was to vse his presence

in an vrgent affaire: to which Croisant said, he was
euer ready to performe the office of a friend and his will.
Thus the false thinking traitour departed and left 
                           
                              •
                           rison.
Croisant and his wife, who when the houre of bed-time
came, betooke them to their rest, thinking of nothing lesse
than that which they neuer knew, to wit, euill. Basina at
that instant was great with childe of a sonne, who in aftertime
highly exalted the Christian faith. Brison, in whom
treason had taken root, and now beganne to blossome, according
to his masters directions, was so close hid in the innocents
chamber, that the cunningest searching eie could
neuer perceiue him: euery minute protesting to himselfe to
accomplish the treason, for which he aduentured. Anon, the
night, as halfe ashamed to beholde such intollerable shame,
whippt her misty waggon with such haste thorow the heauens,
that in the eies of all creatures she had lost hir preheminence,
and yet had day in the skie no preregatiue: so as
of waking eies it was then called twy-light. In this fatall
houre arose Brohars, and comming to the pallace of Croisant,
sent a squire to tell him he stayed for him: at which
first sommons, by the help of the same squire, Croisant attired
himselfe, and so departed without disturbing Basina,
who as then slept soundly, for her innocency kept hir from
care-taking. Scarcely was the good Croisant without the
limits of the Chamber, but Brison the varlet of Brohars,
profaning so holy a receptacle, entred into the bed, and lay
by Basina. By this was Croisant and his false fairs-séeming
friend mounted vpon their horses, and gotten without
the walls of the city, when Brohars thus began to discourse:
Long time is it since (my déerest second selfe) I made th
                           •
                        
disloyalty of thy wife apparant to thy weake vnretaining
eares, yet armed with flinty dulnesse, thou hast denied thy
heart leaue to belieue me: and now therefore, if thou wilt
prooue, by that proofe a more auailing Oratour. And for the

inseparable loue and holie marriage rites of our long 
                           •
                        onioyned
friendship, I will aduise thée, like him that is the
purest part of my being. Yesterday when the declining of
the Sunne made the day deny to be day, as if glory were
gained in being adopted the euening, Brison my seruant
reported to me, that he had enioyed the excellencies of thy
excellent wife, this two yéeres and better: which shamefull
report of a villaine, so galled me, that drawing my rapier
the traitour hardly with life escaped: yet seeing him by flight
repriued, I thought it in some measure my duetie, to let
thée know so high a scandall, both that thou mightest reuenge
and regard it. And by Mahomet he reported further,
that the false woman concealed him many nights in a presse,
in thy withdrawing chamber, where the strength of my
imagination makes mée beléeue hée is at this present▪ which
if thou wilt approoue, and we finde true, by Iupiter he dies,
had he the liues often thousand. Hard it is to say, whether
at this discourse Ielousie or Sorrowe tooke first holde on the
heart of Croisant, yet both so excéedingly tormented him,
that ledde by the furie of his passion, hee and Brohars
leauing their squires behinde them, returned backe to his
house, where entring secretly at a posterne gate, they lighted
a torch, and mounting into his bed chamber found Brison
layd by Basina whome enuious sleepe charmed against this
miserable aduenture. Brohars at the first sight drew his
rapier, and slew Brison in the bedde, ere almost any eie
would haue iudged hee had seene him in the bedde (a iust
reward for so vniust treacherie.) Then sayd Brohars▪
                        
(deare selfe) how sorie am I for thy shame? by Mahomet,
                        
                           •
                        he iudgement of b
                           •
                        rning beareth in it too much lenitie: and
by Iupiter, were she my sister, I would holde it treason against
the gods, if I excused her from being an instant
sacrifice. Ha Croisant, Croisant, Let her be burned, let her
be burned.
                     
                        
2 At these wordes, the no ill-thinking Basina awaked,
and with an amazed shamefastnesse, swéetly blushed to sée
her husband and Brohars so néere her bed: but when she saw
the sheetes not full so white as her cheekes exceede them in
blushing and perceiued them all stained with a warme goarie
liuorie, then shee scricked out aloud, and asked, what
meant that prodigious token of tragedies? Ah strumpet,
false breaker of wedlocke, and woorse then both, (answered
Croisant) burnt shalt thou bee for the sinne wherein this
night I haue found thee: and then drawing his rapier, hee
drew the innocent ladie by the haires, who dead-slaine with
amazment, lay at his feete. Whilest, Brohars (euer damned
for this action) thus proudly insulted ouer her: Basina
(quoth he) many times haue I tolde thee I would manifest
thy sinne, yet wouldest thou not desist to sinne, but euermore
increase thy sinne with Brison my seruant, whom this night
I haue slaine in thy bed, amidst the paradise of his imbraces.
Traitour, sayd the lady (awakened with these words, as
with a cracke of thunder) falsly thou liest. Deare loue and
lord, all dearer then my soule, my Croisant, vouchsafe to
heare me. O for pittie couer thy shining weapon, and let my
words haue thorow thine eares a gentle passage. Neuer
haue I in my thought beene guiltie of that execrable treason
which he vniustly vrgeth, nor would I be, were I tormented
with woorse then fiers torture. All this my false imagined
shame, vilde traitour, thou hast vene authour of, because I
haue neglected thine owne monstrous desires, which (by heauen)
deare husband, he hath more then this whole yeere prosecuted.
Falser then falshood (sayd Croisant) too apparant
is thine euill: and then shaking his sword ouer her, like the
wing of a haggard faulcon ouer a surprised doue, he draw her
from her bed, and had there seuered her guiltlesse head from
her as guiltlesse bodie, had not Isea her gentlewoman come
foorth, who seeing her lord tyrannising our her poore innocent

Lady cried so loud, that many barons which belonged
to Croisant, came forth, and repriued the Lady from the
hands of their then too cruell lord, saying: Alas my lord,
what will you doe against your excellent wife, whose vertuous
wisedome, and wise virtue, is to women an example,
and to men a iust admiration? Lords, said he, her ill is beyond
the bounds of ill, and more than the degrée of ilnesse.
It is prooued, it is prooued: and then he repeated all that
Brohars had reported, and himselfe séene. Lords, said the
Lady, by Mahomet, or what other god soeuer takes true
patronage of our soule, my inward thoughts are innocent
of this accusation. With that Isea, who (as ye haue read)
heard all what had before passed betwéene Brohars and the
lady, both his be
                           ••
                        iall assault, and her diuine repulse, said:
By Iupiter, the god and patron of our country, my lady in
thought and deed is altogether giltlesse: and this treason,
false Brohars, is the inuention of thy braine, because shée
hath euer lothed thée and thy detestable desires. When the
lords heard Iseas constant affirmation, they chid their lord
for too rashly following his owne will: and bade him listen
to Isea, who protested the ladies most pure pure innocencie,
auerring withall, the appeale she made against Brohars.
Whereupon they told him, it was conuenient to vse aduised
meanes in so great an action: which was, that if Brohars
would accuse the ladie of such detestable ilnes and approue
it against some knight in equall combate, that then
the lady should haue respite to finde out a champion to defend
her honour. By Alcheron (said Brohars) which containeth
the law of the holy Mahomet, I consent. And I
(cried out the lady) for purenesse is my Sanctuarie. Then
was Croisant appea
                           •
                        ed, who caused his wife to be imprisoned
in a strong tower, giuing hir one whole yere for quest of
her defender: but in all that time shée could not find anie
knight, who dared incounter Brohars: for he was valiant,

fierce, and couragious, and so excellent a man at armes, that
the world knew not a better, had not the shamefulnes of his
treson poisned the vertue of his prowesse. When Meruine,
Iacob, and thother marchants came to lodge with Minea,
there wanted but thrée dayes of making the yeare accomplished:
so that poore Minea became her owne tormentor,
because her sister Basina in all that space had not found one
that durst vndertake her quarrell: yet it hapned in supper
time, that Iacob troubled to sée her sorrow, desired one to
moue hir to come to him, thinking that meats mirth would
expell mindes melancholie: and she more to satisfie him,
than to please her selfe, came, and set herselfe next to Meruine.
Then they demanded the cause of her griefe: to whom
she reported all the treason of Brohars, and how hir innocent
sister within the spare of thrée dayes should be burned,
if some diuine power vouchsafed her not a knight to defend
her. And when Minea had reported this, she sighed with
such extreame ardencie, that all the company were moued
with an extraordinarie pitie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VII.
                     1 Meruine promiseth Minea to fight the combate for
her sister. 2 of his great dangers in Brandis. 3 how
he behaued himselfe. 4 how Minea deliuered him
from death or imprisonment.
                     
                        When Meruin the renowned issue of Oger had
heard the Ladies discourse, who had in féeling
termes deliuerd the danger wherein her
sister stood, Ho
                           •
                        our that in his first creation

was married to his soule, could no longer he held within the
limits of Obliuion, but as twere chidden by vertue for his
former silence, brake from his hony-breathing tongue, and
swore to the Lady by Mahomet wh
                           •
                        m he adored, he would
be the defender of her sister, and make treason in the death
of Brohars more than most vgly: and then rowsing himselfe
like a princely lion at the Suns approaching, he e
                           ••
                        lted
his voice that all the company might vnderstand him: Lady
(said Meruine) for Mahomets loue, who is our countries
protectour, cléere thy heauenly eyes, that they may no more
distaine thy diuine countenance, for thou hast found out a
champion which delighteth to subdue treason, and will be
prowd to publish to the world thy sisters not offending: the
feare of his fame, which in others ingendreth feare with
cowardise, on me begetteth an inuincible courage, so that I
will either cleare hir reputation, or end the kalends of my
life in enterprising her deliuery. When Minea heard him,
she imbraced him in hir armes, and said, diuine blossome of
some excellent stocke, thou from whom youth hath onely a
glorious title, since first I beheld thée, I did adiudge thée
of an incomparable courage: blessed be therefore that blessed
one which begot thée, and blessed be the wombe which bore
thée, go on faire youth, Iustice shalbe thy warrant and Innocency
thy protector. When Tirus considered the promise
of Meruine, he grew sad and said: Alas faire brother, what
wil you enterprise? what, wil you take in hand nothing but
your owne ouerthrow, and the losse of our fathers busines
which against the houre cannot by you be performed? Brother
(said Meruine) doubt not but our fathers busines shall
be effected, and by Mahomet (which astonisheth the world
with thunder) I will not for all the wealth in Montment,
I wil not forbeare to succor a distressed Lady, the rather for
the loue of th
                           •
                        s Lady to whom we are all be
                           ••
                        lden. At this
they al beholding in him a constancie, halfe angry to be contradicted,

left off further arguing till the next morning. Minea,
throughs excéeding ioy that she had found a champion for
her sister, would not suffer her eies to close with sléepe all
that night, but rising early in the morning, gathered together
200 Turkes to conduct Mernin to Montesteur: who
soone by day had awaked Iacob, & the rest, saying, my deare
friends and consorts, be not wearisome to your selues in attending
my back-returne, neither be displeased with what I
vndertake, but frolike and triumph: for why I will discharge
the charges of you all: if by▪ my want you be a little hinderd,
let pacience mittigate your anger, and whatsoeuer I gaine,
I will willingly giue amongst you. With that came Minea
into the chamber to bid them good morrow, to whom Meruine
said, Lady, prouide me of good armes, and an excellent
horse, and let want of coin be no decay to my fortune, hold,
there is store, disburse & 
                           •
                        pare not. When Tirus perceiued
him, his colour changed, & he grew pale saying, what meane
you brother, so vnnecessarily to spend & imploy our fathers
money which he hath giuen vs to pay to the marchant, to
whom he oweth it. Brother (said Meruine) regard not siluer
and gold more then earth, the loue wherof maketh the minds
of men worse then the worst of earthinesse: better loue I to
be well armed and brauely monnted, then here and there to
consume vertue by exchanging marchandise. Thus spake the
honorable minded Me
                              •
                           uine, whom from his infancie nature
taught to resemble the famous Duke his father. Excellently
excellent young man (said Minea) keepe thy treasure, for in
mine owne coffers do I harbor such store, as shall maintaine
thee an hundred knights to be thine attendants: as for armes
and horse, be carelesse, they long since haue bene readily pro
                        
                           •
                        ided:
for the princely Earle of Brandis to whō my husband
(whom he exceedingly loued) during his life was chamberlaine,
hath giuen me the couragious horse Morbon, on him
shalt thou mount, a seat worthy the worthiest knight the

world containeth: Then would Iacob, Tyrus and the other
marchants needs mount on horsebacke to conduct Meruine
on his way: but he desiring a little respit, said, before I depart
I will approue my armes, my horse, & my body against
someother knight, because on my life relies not my selfe but
anothers fortune. Friend (said a Pagan that had followed
those which had brought his horse and armour) arme your
selfe, for I will arme my selfe and charge you: yo
                           •
                         honour
me (said he) & then Meruine buckled his gorget, cast on his
curats lockt his pouldrons, put on his caske, and armed him
selfe at all points, then demanded he a sword, which was deliuered
him▪ but he refused it for being much too light: wherupon
Minea went into her chamber, f
                           •
                        ō which she brought
a sword, bigge, strong, and massie: this sword sometimes
had bene the sword of King Brandifer a Pagan, whom the
renoumed knight Valentine, Nephew to king Pepin slew
before Angoria, Minea presented this sword to Meruine,
who drew it, and beholding the beautious brightnesse said. O
excellent engine, worthy an inuincible spirit, adde to me as
much fortune as I will lend thee force, and both of vs will
in the tongues of men be immortall. Now false traytor Brohars,
be as wise in defending thy selfe, as thou art wilful in
offending others, else shall thy life wast with thy slander: for
Meruine is armed as himselfe desireth. At that, without the
aide of his stirrope he mounted on the backe of Morbon, and
demaunded a launce, which so soone as he had receiued, he
put him with a princely maiestie forward, passing a swift,
strong, and round ca
                           •
                        iere, with such dexter
                           •
                        tie and nimblenesse
as bred wonder, and commendation in al the beholders,
chiefely in the Earle of Brandis, that beholding him from
his pallace, said to his Barons, behold a noble and victorio
                           •
                        s
warriour, worthie to be adorned with a kings diad
                           •
                        me,
his hand is an ornament for a lance, and his p
                           •
                        rson a receptacle
for all vertues: with that came the Pagan, who

went to arme himselfe, and cried to Meruine, friend, will
you 
                           •
                        eaue those measures and proportioned iumps which
your horse in his comming séems proud of, and try the goodnes
of your arme by a sturdy incounter? It is my desir
                           •
                         and
nothing else replied Meruine, so they retired backe the one
from the other, to take their course with more violence. The
Story saieth this incounter was on a goodly gréene plaine
before the Earles pallace, who as before I said, stood to behold
them, with him his wife, and a gallant young Prince
his sonne and heire apparant. When Meruine and the other
were seuerd more than the length of a good cariere, they
put spurres to their coursers, and cowching their launces,
ranne with such terrour, that the ground trembled at the
chidings of their horses hoofes: and when they ioyned in
the shocke, the Pagan shiuered his launce close to his gantlet,
yet no more stirred the princely Meruine then the gentelest
breath of aire, the strongest pyramide in Egipt. But
Meruines incounter bore death in his launces point, for he
stroke his staffe more than a foot and a halfe thorow the Pagans
body, and pursued it with such vigor, that he bore him
headlong downe dead vnto the ground: then stopping his
horse triumphantly, he said in himselfe: euen as he thus is
ouerthrowne, ouerthrew I all the knights which ranne
for the golden cup which Clarissaes imagined valour enioyeth.
What reason now can deny me knighthood? None
but will, and that will is vniust. Marchandise farewell,
henceforth will I traffike nothing but honour.
                     2 Thus said young Meruine, growne prowd of this
late ouerthrow: but when the Pagans, and the friends
of the Pagan which was slaine, saw him pay Natures last
debt vnto neuer satisfied death, they all at once with one
mad furie assailed Meruine, which though it nothing appalled,
yet at last it bred amaze in his senses (till then vnacquainted

with tumultuous outrage:) but when his vertue
was awaked, he saide: Sith I am assaulted, the defence I
make, offorce must be lawfull: and when he dr
                           •
                        w his sword,
with which hée gaue such a blowe to the brother of the slaine
Pagan, that he claus his skull to his téeth. God of our forefathers,
great Mahomet (said Meruine) beholde an excellent
sword, if I can but maintaine strength to his edge, the
world shall cronicle me for a famous marchant. But the extremitie
of the assault put Meruine from further spéech, for
the whole company assailed him: but being as wise as hee
was valiant, he defended himselfe with vnspeakable ver
                           •
                        ue,
and that in such sort, that hée slewe more then a third part of
them. Yet his foes Hydra-like increasing, by killing, had
mightily indangered him, if the other marchaunts and the
two hundred Pagans which Minea had assembled to conduct
him to Montesteur, beholding his instant perill, had
not taken an othe to die in his su
                           ••
                        or. But the Count Brandis,
knowing this might arise to some grieuous accident, descend
                           •
                        d
from his pallace with fiue hundred horsemen, and
comming to the place where the fight was, cried out to Meruine
and the rest: By Mahomet my god, he that su
                           •
                        ceaseth
not, but st
                           •
                        iketh another blowe, shall die the death. At these
wordes they all retired, but Meruine in the instant of the
spéech layed 
                           •
                        ixe dead at his foot.
                     3 Wherefore the Counte tooke a solemne vow, he should
dearely make vaunt of that dayes chiualrie. But Minea
ranne and caught Meruine by the arme, crying, alas deare
sonne, this enuious day in blood hath drowned all the hope
of our good fortune: forbeare, forbeare, for Gods sake doe
forbeare, for either must weé flie or die for our misd
                           •
                        ing.
Then went Minea towardes the Counte, and falling on
her knées before him, sayd: For Mahomets sake, for Mecas
honour, and thine owne reputation (most excellent

Prince) take pittie vpon me, and my poore innocent sister,
who through treason shall faultlesse consume in fire, if within
this three daies she be not deliuered by this happy nowe
made vnhappie young man. When the Earle saw the constancie
of her teares which issued from the true fountaine of
griefe, he accorded to her desire, with this condition, that
wheresoeuer Meruine should goe, he should yet be his prisoner▪
and that she should deliuer him sufficient hostage for
his returne: whereupon Minea deliuered to the Earle all the
euidences, bondes and titles whatsoeuer belonged to her or
her inheritance: all which he detained till her backe returne
to Brandis, And thus was Meruins peace agreed, who
mightily grieued that he should be troubled or fought with,
for but onely making proofe of his bodie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     1. How Minea, Meruine, Iacob, Tyrus, and the other
Marchants with the two hundred Pagans departed
from Brandis, to deliuer Basina at Montesteur: 2 and
of the batell fought betwee
                           •
                        e Meruine and Brohars,
and the enent.
                     
                        WHen Minea had appeased the tumult, shee
departed from Brandis, and with her Meruine
and the other marchants, with them the band
of two hundred Pagans: and the second day
after, they arriued at Montesteur, where

they found Croisant madde-manlike tormented with griefe
in his soule, for the supposed monstrous indignitie which the
treason of Brohars had rooted in his head against his constant
and loyall wife Basina. When Minea saw him, shee
went to meet him: and he encountering her first, gaue her
this salutation. Faire sister Minea (quoth hee) thy sister
hath falsely betrayed the honour of my bedde and giuen an
immortale scandall to my name: the deed is euident and apparantly
true▪ the rather in this that none can finde a knight,
who will vndertake battaile against Brohars, to defend the
iustne
                           •
                        se of her cause. Wherefore, if I liue till to morrow,
and beholde the Sunne blesse the earth with his countenance,
I will see her burned, according to the execution of
our law Brother Croisant (replied she) fortune, I hope,
hath alo
                           •
                        ted her starres of much better influence: and for
her innocencie I haue brought one, who shall defend it against
Brohars and his treason
                           •
                         whome I hope to see at his
hanging as publike aconuertite, as 
                           •
                        e is now a monstrous
false accuser. At these wordes Meruine, whose countenance
did both apprehend, and discharge a princely king of
maiestie, stood foorth, and sayd vnto Croisant: By the faith
I owe vnto Mahomet, and mine homage to distressed ladies,
I will voluntarily, and with an assurance of vndoubted
guiltinesse, enter battaile against that false traitour, who vnder
my sword shall either publikely 
                           〈◊〉
                         his villanie, or
die for priuate concealing so worthie to be knowen an indignitie.
S
                           •
                        arse had hee finished these wordes, but Brohars
came thronging into the presse, exclaiming against all men,
that none d
                           •
                        rst incounter him: and withall sayde: Brother
Croisant, euen the world, and babes nor yet borne into the
world, will condemne thee for a wittolde, and a wilfull

                           •
                        uckold, sith thus long thou de
                           •
                        errest the burning of that odious
strumpet thy wife, whose implacable sinne n
                           •
                        ne dare
to make seeme vnfaultie. When Meruine heard Brohars,
                        
he scratcht his head, and with a grizlie looke, wherein
vertue shewed her selfe more then impatient, he sayd: False
bastard, son of a most detestable whore: whose hatefull speeches
augment the abomination of thy treason: by Mahomet,
this day I will sée thee hanged, for thy wrongfull accuse,
and vniust slaunder of the vertuous Basina. Brohars more
then wounded with Meruines fierie pointed speeches, grew
madde with wrath: and drawing his sword, st
                           ••
                        cke at Meruine.
But vertue euer awake to defend honour, taught him
how to ward the blowe, and with his fist well armed with
a gauntlet, he returned Brohars such a buffet, that he made
the 
                           •
                        lood gush from his eares and nostrels, saying: Traitour,
beholde the champion for the iust ladie Ba
                              •
                           ina, who
this day will make thy heart as sadde, as thy thoughts are
false, and neither by any to be matched. When Croisant
saw the incomparable valour of Meruine, grew enamoured
of his vertue, and sayd in himselfe: Beleeue me, my
soule, mine eyes haue not seene a frame of youth so faire, so
bigge, and in all parts so excellently accomplisht with all
perfections: by Mahomet, had nature but adorned his chin
with dowlne, I should haue taken him to be (so much he resembled
him) Oger, the renowmed Christian, who 
                           •
                        lew Iustament
before Arius. After these cogitations Croisant
came betweene Mer
                              •
                           ine & Brohars, desiring forbearance of
their furie till the next morrow, & sayd: Lords, let prowesse
slumber, till this next dayes Sunne awaken you to combat,
and then Mahomet giue honour to him that hath the right.
They both a
                           •
                        torded, and then Croisant demanded pledge of
both sides for their appearance. And Minea pledged herselfe

                           •
                        or Meruine, but Brohars could finde neither baron, knight,
nor squire, who would be hostage for his faith. Wherefore
Croisant caused him to be imprisoned for that night in a
strong tower, whither was deliuered all things necessary
for him or his happelesse vndertaken action. Minea with all

her traine went and lodged in a castle heard by, & tooke Meruine,
Iacob, Tyrus and the other marchants with her, who
though they spake not much▪ yet did their heauie countenances
tel long tales of their tedious sorows. But Meruine comforted
them▪ saying, Fear
                           •
                         not my deare companions, neither
let your watry eies any longer woe an euil fortune: for by my
faith (my souls debt to Mahomet if you wil pursue my steps,
you shall no more be marchants, but knights of regard & honour,
& then wil we tread ouer the face of the earth, and by redoubted
fight ennoble and extoll our lawe through all nations.
But one, whose name was Brahā, compact of the coldest
constitution a cowards heart could be engendred of, replyed:
Sir Meruine, for mine owne part, I loue no honour with disturbance,
nor fame with a bloody forhead: let them fight that
are angrie, for my patience is eternall except it be against this
pleasant cuppe of wine, and that conflict may boade my ouerthrow,
but no wounds. At these words they al began to laugh
but Minea whose head at that instant was a Parliament for
grauer matters, went vnto Croysant, & with a graue discontentmēt
in which was figured a modest suffrance, she desired
leaue for her sister Ba
                              •
                           ina to come and suppe with them, that
the burden of her grieues, though they were not vnladed, yet
they might by that recreation be a little eased. He willingly agreed,
&, so sent the iayler to fetch her, who instantly did as he
was commaunded. But when he came where the forsaken lady
was set, & had vnlocked the two vnkind imbracing yrons
that fettered her, he told her of Meruine, & how her sister Minea
had brought him to fight against Brohars in defēce of her
honour. Alas (said she) how vnfortunate is ye vnfortunatenes
of my malitious fortune, and how endlesse the spring of my
teares
                           •
                         Before I wept, because I wanted a champion: now
must I weepe, that hauing a champion, I fear I want fortitude:
for Brohars is inuincible, and who then can conquer the
neuer to be conquered? Here she sighed as if she had neuer before

sig
                           •••
                         while the 
                           •
                        ailer 
                           〈◊〉
                         Lady, imbrace comfort▪ & be
st
                           •
                        ong with an innocent hope▪ for this day hath Mern. giuē
                        Brohars such an vnresistab
                           •
                        e blow, as the blood sprang out
of his veines, and ranne through his ears and nosthrils, A
notable prologu
                           •
                         to a wished trag
                           •
                        dy. The poore lady hearing
this she gaue hope (which before was banished) leaue
once againe to possesse her, and so rose & went with her keeper
till she entered into the Castle hall: but when Minea
saw her first appearance, she ranne to imbrace her, and she
(albeit not with so much fury, for sorrow had weakened hir
indeuours) did the like. And beiug both lockt in each others
infoldings, Basina asked hir sister which was the champion
whose vnspeakable vertue had vowed once againe to make
her happy. Faire sister, qd she, looke ouer all this assembly,
and he is thy new creator who is most high, strongest, and
most excellently furnished in all his lineaments, and yet so
yong that he hath not attained to fiftéene yeres. And as she
was thus speaking, Meruine rose from the place where he
sa
                           •
                        e, 
                           •
                        o go comfort Iacob, whose looks were sad and discomfort
                           •
                        ble▪
and Basina séeing him rise, knew by his proportion,
he onely of that company was likeliest to redéeme her;
wherefore she ranne vnto him, and falling on her knées she
imbraced his legs, making offer to kisse his feet. Meruine
repulsed so much too diuine homage, and demanded of her
what she was. Excellent creature (said she) I am the woful
subiect of vnspeakable misery, euen that vnhappy Basina, in
protection of whose innocencie, as I vnderstand, you are
come to make hazard of your celestiall honour: and as it is
pure, so be the puritie of my redemption wonderfull in the
eies of the beholders: for by him that gaue my soule motion,
there was neuer mouing of vnchaste thought within mee.
What is auerred against me, the traitor falsly suggesteth,
because I truely with stood his lasciuious affection, which he
hath not left for the space of a yeare hourely to solicite, mine

honor guarding what dishonour would violate, but rather
shall a thousand slames dissolue me into cinders, then breach
of my wedlock faith congeale frosty damnation within me.
Now the base slaue, slaue to his 
                           〈◊〉
                         appetite, came to be
lodged by me, neither know I, nor can imagine. A
                           •
                        d more
to make my ignorance perpetuall, he slue him, that by him
might nothing be discouered: blameles are my thoughts, albeit 
                           〈◊〉
                        
fortune faulty. If giltlesnes be any defence be then
assured thou art inuincibly armed. When Meruine heard
her words graced with a gracefull delight of modest speaking,
he recomforted her, promising to die or behold her deliuerance.
By this supper was serued vp, and they set down,
but yet Iacob, Tirus, and the other marchants whispering
one against another, mightily repined at the 
                           •
                        orwardnes of
Meruine: for why, their harts were created in a cold clime,
where the true sunshine of honor neuer shined. By Mahomet,
said Iacob, if we pursue the humors of Meruine, we
but run po
                           •
                        te after our deaths: for say he win the honour of
the field and release the Lady, yet if he escap
                           •
                         with life and
returne to Brandis, there shal he be imprisoned, and for his
late 
                           •
                        utrage aduenture as great a hazard. So that as his desires
are boundles, so shal his quarrels be endles, and we for
being his consorts be disgraced: he is much too couragious
to win wealth by tra
                           •
                        fike, and too mad to be praised vnder
the title of a marchant. Thus they grinded their tongues
against their téeth, with repinings against Meruin, who all
the while ate and drank without respect or héed taking. After
supper they went to rest till the flight of birds gaue assurance
of the sunnes presence, and told them it was morning▪
then arose Croisant, causing the lists to be prepared,
and 200. horsemen to gard it, in the midst whereof a stake
was set vp, at which his wife should be burned, if Meruine
failed in the conflict. Then arose Meruine, and armed him
selfe with all the royall accomplements his soule desired,

and being at al pieces furnisht, he caused Morbon to be sadled,
and couerd al ouer with a costly barb, on whom he leapt:
and though Morbon for strength among horses was onely
excelling yet his chine bended with the weight of the yongling.
Then demaunded Meruine his helmet, which Croisant
deliuerd him, and withall a mighty launce, strong, and
till then vntaught to skirmish. Meruine thus sate like a second
Mars, or an excelling Perseus, he made a solemne and
religious vow to Mahomet, euer after that to be so, and in
such maner, and neuer more to vse or inherite the trade or
name of a Marchant: for (qd he) that trade abaseth an honorable
disposition, and brings slander to the sword and lance
which euer should be adored. Now was Brohars (who before
ye heard to be imprisoned) infranchised and set at liberty,
immediatly causing his attendants to arme him, whilst
his thoghts expostulated with feare, his soule holding argument
with doubtfulnes, yet was he an vnmatchable knight
for valure; onely treason the impoisoner of vertue hauing
got habitation, began to staine resolution. Yet the story saith
that this Brohars was brother to Geffray, whom Karahew
slue in the battel before the wals of Babilon, as is written
in the history of Oger the father of Meruiue. But in no pagan
court durst Karahew euer after meet with Brohars, as
well for feare of his fortitude, as for a generall hate conceiued
agenst him, for offring to haue forced Rabions wife the
son of Antifer. But that which giues Brohars the greatest
title of dignity, and maketh all men feare to incounter him
in combat, is for that he hath fought xiiij-fields, all with the
sword, and preuaild, which euer after made him so fierce and
proud of his fortune, that he held himselfe altogether inuincible,
as if by a parliament of the gods, he alone were deified.
Now was brought to him to mount vpon, a mare of his
owne, which was damme to the good stéed Marcheuall,
which Oger lost vpon the sea: her colour was not black, but

blackish 
                           〈◊〉
                        , he got her of Baucamont king of Damas and
she was 
                           〈◊〉
                         and made ready for the warres to go assaile
Mermont in his city of Mon
                           •
                        ment, thence to win the faire
princely virgin Berea, whom Mermont had denied in mariage.
This mare which was brought Brohars, was called
Mordant, fiery and couragious: one qualitie of crueltie she
had, which was, that no horse, how strong or violent soe
                           •
                        er,
but she would instantly strangle, if there we
                           •
                        e not a more
than v
                           •
                        uall regard had to hir manner of fighting. Brohars
won her in an honorable combat and being mounted thereon,
he took his target and hanged it before his breast, fas
                           •
                        ned
a battle ax to his saddle po
                           •
                        ell, & griped in his strong arme
a mighty lance: thus accoutred, he paced tow
                           •
                        rds the field,
where Meruin attended his comming. Croisant stil inuironed
with ielousie and reuenge, had now fas
                           •
                        ned Basina to
the stake, her executioners garding her, with fire ready so assaile
the wood so soone as Meruine should be ouerthrowne.
By this time was Brohars entred into the lists, on whom
when Meruine had fixed his eies, and saw the portly maiesty
of the princely beast that 
                           •
                        ore him (I meane Mordant
that gallant mare) he fell mightily in loue with her, and
tooke a vow in his owne soule, neuer againe to estéeme him
selfe, if that dayes conquest made him not true possessor of
so highly to be estéemed treasure. Now the time sommoning
an end to these great deuoires, a herald entred the lists,
& after a solemne warning giuen by the sound of trumpets,
he pronounced this charge: Lords and Knights belonging
to the noble lord Croisant, I straitly charge and command
you vpon paine of death, not to speak any word til the combat
be fully ended: and further, vpon the foresaid paine, I
charge, that none, of what estate or conditiō soeuer, do either
assist, resist, impugne or deliuer either by signe or actiō, any
of the comba
                           •
                        ants, but r
                           ••
                        er the triall of their truths, to fortune,
valure, and their swords. At these words the whole assemblie

of infinites silent, and then the Herauld departed.
Then en
                           •
                        ered Croisant to the Champions, and first spake
in this manner to Brohars: by all the allegeance thou owest
to thy earths soueraigne, by thy faith to Mahomet, thy
hope of cōquest▪ & thy spirits redemption, I charge thée 
                           •
                        elme
whether all thine assext
                           •
                        on and accusation auowed against
this lady Basina my wife▪ be tr
                           •
                        e, I or no. Noble Croisant
(answered Brohars) all is true by Iupiter I sweare, and this
day shalt thou see that trueth glorious by my conquest. Meruine
hearing him so obstinat, desired Croisant to desist frō
further speach: for (said he) it is more then time the t
                           •
                        aitour
had made his new re
                           •
                        antation. Knights sayd Croisant) begin
at your pleasures, and this day let trueth preuaile.
                     2 So departed he the lists, and the two combatants putting
downe their beauers departed either from other a good
distance, to adde more violences to their courses: and Basina
with a more then speaking heart (for feare had bound her lips
to silence) cried vpon Mahomet to guard her champion, and
confound the false confounder of her honour. Now were they
farre enough asunder, when turning their 
                           〈◊〉
                         and couching
their launces, they ranne against 
                           •
                        ch other with such
swiftnesse, that they ouerran the windes, which ouerrun all
other mouing creatures: but in the sho
                           •
                        k, when their launces
felt honors seales vpō their curats, Meruin stroke Brohars
so hard (worthy a better name then that by which force is intituled)
that he tumbled him from the back of his good mare
to the ground: & on the other part he likewise assailed Meruine
so couragiously, that both horse & man equally kist the
earth together: but Meruine being quicke & nimble (and neuer
more quicke then in the quicknesse of extremity) quickly
gate vp vnamazed. But Brohars astonished wt falling from
a beast so hie and loftie, arose (th
                           •
                        ugh not so well) yet as wel
as he co
                           •
                        ld, and drawing his 
                           •
                        word came to assault Meruin,
                        
who cried vn
                           •
                        o him, Traitor, this deede this day shall make
thee acte a sory tragedie. Brohars enuiously angry at these
words of Meruin strake at him with almost a more then diuine
courage: but he perceiuing the blowe, retired a little, and
tooke it vpon his target: yet it came from so violent an arme,
that it claue it downe to the ground, cu
                           •
                        ting withal the spur
from his right foot▪ and the sword vnsati
                           •
                        fied entred into the
ground more then afoote and a halfe, whose greedines to conquere,
hindred his conquering: for hee could not recouer it againe
but with much paines taking. Meruine dying to die in
debt of so good paiment, lift vp his sword and strooke the traytour
on the
                           •
                        helmet, from whence the sword sliding, descended
on his thigh, and there cut away a collop sufficient inough to
gorge a faulcon two dayes together and better. Now was
mere then time for Brohars to change his footing, for the
weight of this blowe gaue his hinder legge preheminence to
be better and stronger, to his intollerable griefe & furie, making
him raile on Maho. for suffring him thus of a boy to be
mated. Meruine in whō valor held her residence, & of whom
vertue was onely inamoured, bearing sword point blancke
with the Pagans eye, ranne furiously against him, and in his
course said: Brohars, the execreable treasons that damnedly
thou hast suggested, shall end thy life before the day shall end
his light, else shall my reputation die in his infancie, & truth
hereafter neuer be accounted the Innocents protectresse: and
with that he strooke a blowe (which ye Pagan receiued on his
target) with such violence, that it entering in an vnimagined
way, Meruin by no means could pluck it out againe, though
with sundrie twiches he gaue, hee almost pulled it from the
Pagans necke. Brohars not vnexperienced in any aduantage
occasion could offer▪ in the extreamest of those conflicts, watching
(with a greedy deliuerance of mischiefe in his head) and
when he perceiued Meruine pull with all his sw
                           •
                        y he let the
target 
                           •
                        lip out of his hand, so that Meruine with his owne

force fell backward to the ground, on whom immediately the
Traitor lea
                           •
                        ed, thinking then to finish the end of all his wishes.
All the Barons that beheld this infortunate misaduenture,
murmured amongst themselues and saide, What pitie
is this, that fortune, not 
                           〈◊〉
                         should be the ouerth
                           •
                        ow of vertue, & that this youth vnconquered should not be conquerour:
Minea whose heart daunced liuely on the sword of
Meruine, when she saw this stoure boding euill▪ grew madde
with grie
                           •
                        e, that griefes power held her from beeing madde
and whispered to her selfe. Ha Mahomet, thou which art adored
in our pā
                        
                           •
                        heous, if thou thus giuest our virtue, and leauest
this excelling creature to be slaine by a miscreant, for euer
will I ab
                           •
                        ure thy deitie, rase thy Temples, and ere the sunne
go downe, be baptized a Christian. Whilest thus her waue
                        
                           •
                        ing
thoughts amongest themselues helde a ciuill dissention,
poore Basina her torments excéeded the boundes of tormentings
being runne a degrée beyond the coast of illnes: so that
what others in their priuate selues lamented, shée with loud
shrikes, cries, & clam
                           •
                        rs publikely noted insomuch that ye eccho
of her lamentations pearcing into the eares of Meruine
as he lay, conducted an honourable shame with theirs to his
heart, so that gathering a better strength then that which is
strength, named, by vigour of his spiri
                           •
                        e▪ hée turned Brohars
topsie turu
                           •
                        e vnder him. By this time Meruines horse, who
through the cruelty of his fall, could no sooner get vp, arose,
which Mordant the ma
                           •
                        e perceiuing, came and assailed him:
so that betwéene the beastes beganne a cruell and fierce battell,
but in the end Mordant strangled the good Morbon, to
the small delight of Meruine, who at that instant was bu
                           ••
                        ed
from intending any remedy, so long did Meruin remaine vpon
the traytor, that the whole company were in admiration
at his indurance. But when he perceiued all meanes of release
banished, and that no power hée had, had power to ouerturne
Meruine he said vnto him, Meruine this arest of burdē is an

vnwounding 
                           •
                        omb
                           •
                        t, by whose meanes we can neither win
honour, nor bring our battell to a desired ending. I will offer
thee therefore what in honourable censures shalbe honestly
valiant, arise from this vaine suppressing seruitude, vnburden
me and goe fetch thy sword and I will goe to my mare and
fetch my ba
                           •
                        tell axe which hangeth at my sadle, & with them
let vs e
                           ••
                        her finish our liues, or amend our fortunes. Meruiue
in whom the ragefull fire of youth kindled a diuine valiance,
presently 
                           〈◊〉
                         & arose from Brohars, who found in himselfe
a paine full weakenesse to get vp, through the great losse
of blood which issuing from his wound, had already cald the
earth where he lay in a scarlet mantel
                           •
                        , as if he already had
made it Iudge of his life or destruction. Now had eche of
them taken their weapons according to their agréement; but
Brohars as if his heart wholy dwelt on the edge of his weapon,
hauing the axe in his hand 
                           〈◊〉
                         it into the aire, & cried
to Meruine. This day (boy) shalbe thy liues last day, vnlesse
thou sweare and maintaine that all the articles are true which
I haue imposed against Basina the wife of Croisant. which if
thou doest, wée will no more be foes but companions, and like
men in
                           •
                        in
                           •
                        ible measure the earth, and conquer great Charles
of France, who onely p
                           •
                        rsecuteth ou
                           •
                         law and religion. Guilt
tongued traitor (said Meruine little should I please Mahomet
to be treacherously minded, lesse to be the companion of 
                           •
                        o
base a miscreant▪ wherefore I estéeme both odious. After this
spéech they assaild
                           ••
                        h other on euery side, where there aduantages
lay most aparent and that in such vehement sort and so
tediously, that they both became so exceeding weary as they
were faine for a time to repose themselues. After they had a
while rested themselues, Meruin
                              •
                           
                         called to Brohars and said,
Traitour, this rest is the last Sabboth of thy life: for thou hast
wrongfully accused yonder innocent La
                           •
                        y: and theref
                           •
                        re ere
the euenings eie shut in the day thou shalt dy most miserably
                           •
                        
Sorrow at this reproofe so stopt vp the speaches of Brohars,
                        
that he only gnashd his téeth, and mounting his kéen edged
axe, he strucke such a blow, and with so great might on the
helmet of Meruin, that if the greatest of diuine powers had
not preserued him, and that the 
                           •
                        emper and the liuing were
both more than extraordinary, that day had 
                           •
                        in the last of
his life and fortunes. Notwithstanding al the fauors of his
staues, so strong a poise issued from the blowes falling, that
Meruine was forced to fall vpon his knée, yet was he soon
remounted: and as wise in danger as valiant in his fight,
raising his good sword, strake the traitour with such puissance
on his helmet, that if Brohars had not turned backe
he had clouen him to the shoulder, the sword in his stumbling
fell on the thigh of the Pagan, so as he quite disseuered
it from his body, and with that threw the traitor vnto the
ground, who with the grief of the blow cried, that the eccho
of his clamors were heard afar off. At this Basinas heart
daunced in her body for ioy, so did Mineas, in whom was
an equall sympathie: and all the barons that held either of
the Ladies in regard triumphed saying amoug themselues,
no eie hath seen fortitude accompanied with such true fiercenesse
in any knight, as in this young youth vnconqu
                           •
                        rable
Meruin. Such spéech spake euery one of him. But the traitor
Brohars, who had then lost a leg, took his axe into both
his hands saying, Boy, braggard, and worse than a boyish
braggard, stand but before me, and thou shalt sée this losse
the gaine of my better courage: for I shall neuer aspire my
end or orethrow, til I haue cut thée péece-meale into a thousand
pieces. Meruine smiling at this v
                           •
                        nt▪ stooped to take
him by the other foot, thinking to tra
                           •
                        le him into the midst
of the field▪ but improuidence guided his action, for the traitour
clasping him about his helmet, drew him to him with
such maine strength, as he fellouer and ouer. Great God
of heauen haue mercy vpon him, for if thy pitty be not his
sauiour, death must be his redéemer.) Brohars was mighty

and strong, and so was Meruine, insomuch, that betwéene
them was 
                           •
                        hewed al the triumph and perfection of strength
and agilitie. But in the end, Brohars, through the riuerlike
effusion of his blood, was so excéedingly weakned▪ that
in a happy time, and in despite of Fortunes worst, Meruin
arose, taking from him his battle axe: then houering ouer
him like an vngorged eagle, he said, Traitor, now behold the
last date of thine affliction, confesse therfore the treason thou
hast done against the good lady Basina, or by Mahomet thy
own weapon immediatly shall di
                           •
                        orce thine accu
                           •
                        sed head
from thy shoulders. But he whom villan
                           •
                        e had taught nothing
but villainous replies, answerd: Thou son of a diffamed

                           •
                        urtesan, coward, recreant, I was neuer traitor, nor did
treason euer lodge in my affinity. As he was about to say
more, Meruine impa
                           ••
                        ent to sée such audacious impie
                           •
                        ie,
with the axe gaue him such a blow on thother thigh, tha
                           •
                         he
cut it quite from his body leauing him as leglesse as he was
gracelesse▪ the paine whereof, together with the laboring of
his lifes departure, made him bel
                           •
                        ow out such lamentatiōs,
that all the mountains, and plaines were priuy to his miserable
fortunes. Then called he to Meruine and said, Eu
                           •
                        n
now I find my soule contending for her deliuery: wherfore
if thou hast as much pitty in thy heart, as force in thy hand,
defer
                           •
                        e alittle my iudgement, and call Croisant and Basina
to behold my departure. Meruine forthwith called them,
who willingly came thither. And being come, Meruine said
Brohars, behold, Croisant and the Lady are present, say
what thou hast to say vnto them. Ah Croisant, Croisant,
saide he, euen for Mahomets sake that pardons all, pardon
me, and haue mercy on my miserie, thy wife the vertuous
Basina is most loyall, most true, and most vndefiled not any
betwéene the Poles more honorable. Tis true, tis true,
I haue importuned her long, more than a yeare, but neuer
could obtaine it Tis tr
                           •
                        e, tis true, I only for that haue

hated her. Tis true that this 
                           〈◊〉
                         was mine owne inuention:
I brought Brison to h
                           ••
                        bed, I suggested her disloyaltie,
and I alone deseru
                           •
                         this miserable infortune.
Then he called the lady to him, and said, Diuine Basina,
and excellent Lady, for 
                           
                              •
                           oues sake, who created all things,
create me anew with thy pardon, and from the white veile
of thine innocency, let my misdeed find a shadowing forgiuenes:
for I confesse with a 
                           •••
                        ting soule my monstrous imparted
treasons against t
                           •
                        ee, and will maintaine (whilest
vanishing breath maintains power to maintaine any thing)
my selfe the most falsest tra
                           •
                        tor that euer was recorded amongest
the Pagans. Neuer spakest thou more true than
now, answered Meruine, therefore shalt thou indure the
Law, and I onely will be thine executioner, and with that
lifting vp the axe, he strucke the Pagan betwéene the helmet
and the coller with such forcible vigor, that he compelled
his head to flie from his shoulders. So died the
traitour by the hands of Meruine the sonn
                           •
                        
of Oger, in whom the excellencie
of prowesse was onely
excellent.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IX.
                     1 Of the honours done to Meruine for his victorie. 2
How Minea brought him backe againe to Brand
                              •
                           s. 3
His imprisonment, and other aduentures.
                     
                        AFter the death of Brohars, (whose death was
as a festiual to the beholders, chiefly to Minea
and Basina, who comming to Meruine, did
him great adoration and worship) Croisant
caused the body of the traitor to be drawne to
a paire of gallowes, where it was hanged 
                           •
                        or a spectacle of
monstrous villanie. But Meruine, whose minde was still
making loue to honor, regardlesse of other accomplishments,
went to the goodly mare Mordant, and hauing caught her
as his prize and honors right▪ he mounted vpon her backe,
spurred her, ranne her, leapt her, and so thundred about the
fields, finding in her all the rarest perfections could possibly
be wisht for in such an incomparable creature, that his ioy
reached beyond the bounds of extreamest pleasure & in this
sort made him giue praise to Mahomet. Ah Mahomet, qd
he, behold here a beast of inuincible puissance, I honor thée
for the gift and by her valure will exalt thy name in forren
nations: she is my harts wish▪ & I prize her mor
                           •
                        , then her
weight of the finest gold. Thus spake Meruine, & then rode
on with the pagans, who honored him as a demy-god, 
                           •
                        uen
to the gates of Mōtesteur, where he was receiued with triumphant
ioy & solemnity. After he was ascended the castle,

and had disarmed himselfe, his wounds were found sleight,
and of small importance, yet not withstanding there was an
excellent Surgion appointed him, whose skill in thrée dayes
would haue cured much greater woundings. After hee was

                           •
                        ressed, & had giuen his mind a little recreation with ease hunger
(in that he had fasted all the day) began to seize vpon his
stomack so, that he desired the Barons to make hast with his
supper, assuring them he had not felt so good an appetite before
in his life time. One of ye barons told him all thinge were prepared
for his repaf
                           •
                        , & there wanted nothing but his presence.
Thē sate Meruine and the other marchants down, who were
serued with all pompous magnificence, nothing wanting that
wit, wealth, or wish could accomplish. When they had supped,
they fell to discourse of diuers oc
                           •
                        urrents according to the
time or humor of their opinions: but Minea taking Croisant
vnto her, said: Brother, this princely yōg man hath done thée
great honour, and to my sister an eternall neuer to be requited
fauour, euen as much as her soules redemption. True Madame
(replied he) I acknowledge as much or more from his
valure: wherefore if he please to imploy me, I am all onely at
his seruice, and from this day do I reckon my new natiuiti
                           •
                        ,
binding my life to his dispose, and glorying in nothing more,
then in that I am his subiect. Brother (sayd Minea) thy spéeches
are woorthy of thy vertues, therefore now prepare thy
people and goe with vs to Brandis, for there haue we actions
of hi
                           •
                         importaunce with the Earle thereof, where you must
be aidant and agent, to performe vnto him the weight of our
businesse. Ladie (quoth hée) as willingly is mine agréement,
as your wish is redy, and I am proud of s
                           •
                         happy an occasion.
                     2 Thus after their inter
                           •
                        ourse of speach, they remayned
at Montesteur vntil the next morning & so from thence they
rode to Brandis to the house of Minea wher she feasted them
so ro
                           •
                        ally, as either treasure or friendship could any way purchase:

but after they were all disarmed, and had pleasantly recreated
themselues one with anothers excellencies, on the
sudden they heard one knocking at the gate: wherupon Minea
commaunded the Porter to goe see who knocked, and to
giue them enterance. A way went the Porter, and demanding
the occasion of the noyse, they bade him open the gates, which
he had no sooner done, but there rushed in 14. knights, all well
armed, of whom the nephew of Brandis named Merquier
was one, & thence ascending into the hall, they beheld where
Meruine was playing at the cardes with Croisant, on whō
instantly they sei
                           •
                        ed whilst he by force thinking to purchase
his deliuerie, found that force by their preuention surprised.
When Minea beheld this more then cruell occurrent, she
cried to Merquier, and sayd, yoong lord, for Mahomets sake,
and the loue of vertue, forbeare and suffer this excellent creature
till to morrow, at what time, by thallegeance my soule
oweth to heauen, I will deliuer him to the Counte thy
renowmed vnkle. Lady (replied Merquier) pardon me, for I
wil not, bicau
                           •
                        e if he passe this houre, it is impossible tappe
                           •
                        se
the kinred of them whom he hath slaine. Sixe hath he sent to
communicate with the dead, therefore he may not liue
                           •
                        vnlesse
hee can, as none can, find any means to recoue
                           •
                         the dead.
To make a short tale of a tedious astonishment, this answer
brought the lady to her wits end Sorrow desisting to counsell
her in her disputation, and notwithstanding all the force
Meruine applied for his owne deliuerie, he was taken by
them, bound carried to a strōg castle, fet
                           •
                        redin an iron chaine,
and safely imprisoned, all as vnpleasant to him, as vnpittied
of his enemies, both without bound.
                     3 Being thus all alone, hauing no companions but anger,
& his harmes grieued, began thus to ch
                           ••
                        e himselfe against
reason, improuident man (said he) how much better had it bin
had I trusted Tirus my brother, then mine own thoughts: for

then refusing the battel▪ I had diuorced my selfe from this
mischance, which too vnluckily laies hold on me: but he that
impugns vertuous counsel with wilfulnes, shall be beaten
with repentāce, and haue no pity but his own tears. Thus
spake imprisoned Meruine, while Tirus, Iacob and thother
merchants, desperate to wish him any other good, than goodnes
in his death, prepared them to depart about the effecting
of their foren busines. They calling Minea said: Ladie, we
are sory for this disastrous misfortune which is chanced to
imprisoned Meruine: yet the importance of our businesse
commands our departure for the mart at Boniuant approching
so neare, if we should thence be absent, would highly
redound to our losses: she answered them againe: Gentlemen
depart at your best pleasures, and for all your care of
Meruine, bestow it on my thoughts, which shall so busie
themselues in that action, that before you
                           •
                         returne I doubt
not but purchase his liberty, so that he shall accompany you
home to your country. To be briefe, her spéeches so much satisfied
them, that the next morning they tooke their iourney
towards Boniuant: in which trauel we wil for a while leaue
them, and speake alittle of the great king Baucamont, who
calling Pimon a noble gentleman of his Court to him gaue
him letters to carry to his two nephews, that is to say, to
Brandis in E
                           •
                        clardia, and to Antifer in Tartaria, which
contained hie matter of intreaty in thē, to thend they shold
aid him against the mighty king Meurmont of Montmēt,
who in despite had refused to bestow on him the beautifull
Berea his daughter in marriage. The seruiceable gallant
soone effected the will of the king his master, and the two
kings instantly v
                           •
                        on thintreaty, mustred so many of their
men as were able to b
                           •
                        are armor, and came to Damascus,
where they were royally entertained, and among their discoursings
Beaucamont discouered all the indignities conceiued
against Meurmont, first the deniall of his daughter,

then the disdaine of his embassade, and lastly, his threats of
death to Pimon, whom he estéemed euery way worthie of so
great an imployment: the very encountring whereof so imprisoned
his thoughts with such furie, that he sware by all the
hie titles a king adoreth, not to leaue him a foote of earth in the
world to be ruler of, if with penance he askt not mercie for his
misdoing, (they two ayding him whom hee knew and euer estéemed
inuincible) with others. They quickely bound their
consents to his impatience, and so foorthwith caused all their
nauies to be rigged and thight in most royall manner, which
in short space they committed to the mercie of the mercifull

                           ••
                        ood, hoysting vp their sailes, and sailing with a prosperous
gale for many nights and dayes, til in the end Fortune (who
euer will shew the nature of her condition▪ 
                        
                           ••
                        ost them with
a mighty storme, which was more then grieuously troublesome
vnto them. And to the fauour of that same we wil leaue
them for a while, and returne to poore imprisoned Meruine,
whom Minea & Croysant with their neuer ceasing petitions,
bribes, vowes, and protestations, had by this time deliuered:
at the instant of whose inlargement, Tirus, Iacob, & thother
marchants made their returne from Boniuant, and came directly
to the house of Minea, who entertained thē most kindly:
yet told them with a seeming countenaunce of sorow, that
by no meanes they could haue Meruin backe with them, because
he was adiudged sixe yeeres imprisonment, and till the
end thereof no releasement: and from thence forth an eternal
banishment for euer from that countrey. This (said she is the
agréement we haue made with the parties which pursue him
and proud we are, we haue agréed vnder the price of his most
precious life. Wherfore perswade reuerent Barbin his father
to expell griefe for his absence assuring him, my care shall exc
                           •
                        ede
if possible, the care of a naturall mother, and my purse
shalbe lauishly open to defray all the costs, charges, and hinderances
of Mer
                              •
                           ine from his ar
                           ••
                        es and the famous Mordant
                        
his excellent beast: I will preserue them for him as
trophies wonne by diuine honour. Madam, said Iacob, the
musicke of your 
                           ••
                        ordes become well the vertues of your
mind: wherefore, as reason bindeth vs, we are satisfied. To
mor
                           •
                        ow before the sunne shall blesse the bosome of thearth,
we will begin our iorney, onely with this request, that we
may see and salute Meruine before our departure▪ The heauens
forbid, said Tyrus, Fie Iacob, thy speaches are too
neare a kinne to thy old follies, for it will proue no salutation,
but a prouocation to our owne deaths: sithence thereby
suspect may make vs parties to his actions. This speach
of Tirus made Iacob condemne himselfe of alittle improuidence:
so they rested with Minea for that night, and earely
the next morning went aboord their ships, and sallied with
so fauorable a gust, that in short space they aymed at the
port of Luternia, where they anchored their vessels, and
from thence marched to Montment. The Historie saieth,
that this Iacob the marchant altogether frequented the
court of king Meurmont, who for sundry vertues he sawe
shine in his honest simplicitie, loued him exceedingly, and
tooke and intimate delight in his company. Now is Iacob
entred into his owne gates, where his wife with all obseruances
of true duety, kindly entertained him, and Tyrus
the house of Barbin his father, who séeing him vnaccompanied
of any but his owne presence, blusht, as highly amazed,
and asked him, Faire sonne, where is Meruine thy
brother that he is vnreturned with thée, to make happy my
desires. Deare father, replied Tyrus, he is taken prisoner
at Brandis, which is a strong citie seated vpon the sea: Prisoner,
said his father, tell me quickely for what cause? Sir,
said he, with a fearefull trembling, Meruine whom you
call my brother, is too fierce, proude, and of an ambitious
aspiring spirite, me hath he altogether neglected, and bent
his thoughts onely on impossible indeuours. The cause of

his imprisonment is, for that he hath slaine seuen renowned
knights at one instant with his sword. And from thence
Tirus discoursed to his father all the déeds of Meruine, his
promise to Minea to resuccor her sister, his danger in Brandis,
her deliuering him by meane of hostage, his going to
Monte
                           ••
                        eur, his combat with Brohars, his backe returne
to Brandis, his deliuering Basina, his being there surprised,
and lastly, his deliuery after six yeares imprisonment with
perpetuall banishment, till when there was no expecting his
returne. When Barbin with a grieuing ioy had heard
him recount all these famous exploits of Meruiue, he askt
Tyrus in all these dangers, what aid or help he had done for
Meruine: and Tyrus tolde him, not any at all. Then the
blood of anger started into the face of Barbin, and he said to
Tyrus, False Pagan boy▪ recreant to trus nobilitie, whie
didst thou faile him who would haue failed life for thy loues
cause? Where was thy sleepy sword, that vnsheathing it,
thou didst not hazard to die in his rescue? By Mahomet,
deare father, said he, I dare not fight, my weapons are only
the words of an honest marchant: let Meruine, on whom
the goddesse of warre is inamoured, fight for vs both, whilst
I in a peacefull climate winne honor by my traffike. Thus
disputed Tyrus with his father, to whom Chiualry was
nothing beholding: but Barbin most sadly sorrowfull for
the troubles of Meruine, flung away with great
furie, making a solemne vow to Mahomet,
either spéedily to purchase his deliuery,
or in the pursuiteto spend
his life and
treasure.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP, X.
                     1 Iacobs report to king Meurmont of the acts of Meruine.
2 Bereaes ioy. 3 The priuate confe
                           •
                        ence betweene
Berea and Iacob.
                     
                     
                        AFter Iacob was returned home, and had
by a little rest giuen ease to his sore trauelled
limbs, he demanded of his wife, if
not any from the court had made inquirie
of his returne: and h
                           •
                        s wife told him
yes, a squire, whom as she imagined, belonged
to the beautifull princesse Berea:
therfore she persuaded him as a thing not vnnecessary, forthwith
to goe thither & to take with him from her to th
                           •
                         princesse
a most curiously wrought purse which of selfe purpose
she had made for her. Smal persuasion preuailed. So Iacob
tooke the purse and went to the Court, where being entred
within the hall, he found the mighty king Meurmont, who
was glad to sée him, most gratiously demaunding of his
welfare: to whom Iacob with humble reuerence answerd
as became a loial subiect. By Mahomet (qd the king) I feared
greatly left Baucamont the proud king of Damas had
met with thée, who is now comming to besiege me with so
innumerable an host of men as to our séeming they double
the stars of heauen. Credite me (redoubted soueraigne said
Iacob) if it pleased Mahomet, or your gratious starres were
so fortunate, that you had but to aide you xxx. such knights

euery way as excellent as Meruine the sonne of Barbin the
marchant, not Baucamonts power, nor the worlds infinits
were able to wrong you by sword or violence: for why, Meruine
is euen Uictory itselfe, as fortunate as couragious, and
both admirable, that Wonder it selfe alone sits wondring at
his actions, his valure instru
                           •
                        teth valure, & his equal in euery
vertue hath not issued from ye wombe of a liuing mother,
insomuch that my thoughts rather bind me to adore him as a
god, then estéeme him as the son of Barbin my friend a marchant
Berea, from whose eies loue borrowed a light to illuminate
al the lampes of heauen, hearing Meruin thus highly
eralted by the speech of Iacob, found a ioy excéeding al ioy, as
much beyond compare, as her beauty aboue equalitie, triumphantly
dominering through her royal veines, inriching her
heart with the treasure deliuered to hir parts. wherefore like
babes, gréedy of sweete meates till they euen surfet with delight,
shee further demaunded of Iacob, where hee had beheld
Meruin in that warlike sort, which made him estemd so rare
a Martialist. Diuine Lady, qd Iacob, by that religious faith
I owe our great god Mahomet, I haue séen him in so dangerous
fight, and in such vnspeakeable trouble, that neuer
knight hath indured or performed so mightie a warfare with
such vnspeakeable vertue. And there hée in selfe maner discoursed
al the enploits done by Mernin, as Tyrus before had
reported to his father: which not onely bred an amazement in
the King▪ but an inward intire loue, insomuch that from the
boundlesse humor of his affection, he heartily wished he were
his sonne. And withal said, incomparable Meruine, might
but thy valure ingirdle my fortunes, excellently wouldest
thou reuenge me of these ouerdaring Kings, who come to assail
                           •
                        
me: but woe is me, base is the desert of thy linage, that
should I hold thée as my supporter, dishonour would attach
me with indignitie: yet I am assured, should I send to thée
Count Brandis, he would not for a world deny his deliuery.

Thus reasoned the King in himselfe, diuersly h
                           •
                        lde with the
diuers arguments of feare and desire.
                     2 But Berea in whome the extremitie of pleasure challenged
an intrest of 
                           〈◊〉
                        , gaue ioy the possession of her
heart, and su
                           •
                        rendered al her spirits to the dispose of loue, and
her happie fortune. Yet as a corrector of passion, when hée
he grew too great a Libertine, she would sometimes sigh, and
chide her forgetfull conceits, saying Care to purchase his returne,
ought to busie them from their delight, & then would
she create a thousand thoghts, how to bring him backe wohse
absence diuorst her from her happy longings. Whilest thus
shée and the king were both musing, she of his vertues, hee
how he became so vertuous. Iacob, who perceiued in them
both a dumbe wishing, saide to the king, Trust me (my soueraigne)
if either aff
                           •
                        āce may be had in my true intent, or trust
in my counsel your Maiestie shal vndoubtedly send for him,
sith his presence is an assured conquest, & the gods alone haue
sworne he shall commaund & control victorie, whose like for
mightinesse of shape, & couragious resolution hath not bene
seene in all our former ages. The king to these words would
returne no answer, but as one desino
                           •
                        s to forget his own desires,
talked of other matters, to expel the thoughts of these
proceedings.
                     3 But Berea, who made precious euery time with the precisenesse
of her regarde, now finding opportunitie (a kinde agent
to her hopes) drew Iacob aside into a priuate corner (&
greedy to know an end of that which in her could atteine to
no end) said vnto him, Iacob, by that excellent creator which
created me, thou hast maried my delight to a delight beyond
delight, in thy loues prayses of that delicat yong man whom
we cal Meruin, because I haue knowen him, euen from the
infancie of his infācie to these riper yeres of youth that haue

infra
                           •
                        chised him from the 
                           ••••
                        etnesse of schoole rudiments: yet
in all that time, nor in my time haue I séene a creature more
admirably compact, or in whom valure, and aduenture haue
held more preheminence. Beléeue mée, and by my, soules god
Mahomet I protest, it is a pitie deseruing more thē a pitiful
regard, that he wanteth lands and reuenues worthy to enric
                           •
                        
him with honour: but most of all grieuous, that he is no gentleman,
in whom al the condicions of gentrie chalengeth such
a wonderous prerogatiue. Ha, diuine lady (sayd Iacob) Meruine
hath all whatsoeuer Nature or heauen can infuse into a
mortal creature, or man or woman can bestow of a blessed infant.
As for land, it is as fruitelesse as tastlesse, if labour giue
it not a sweet relish: velure is the mistris of his deuotion, and
hee is exc
                           •
                        llently valiant the heauen climbing conceit, wherof
doubtlesse will mount him on the highest steppe of honor.
If I may well say what in my conceit portendeth to a well
meaning intent, were I king of Hungaria, Calabria, & Polonia,
and for a blessing of those hie dignities, had but one sole
daughter twise fai
                           •
                        er then the fairest euer Mahomet created,
I would giue her and it only to Meruin: yea, and imagin
it a dowrie much too little for the vertue, force, and true magnamitie
with which he is so gloriously adorned. When the
paragon of al perfections, the most beutiful Berea heard the
                           •
                        e
words, first she blusht as afrayd, lest his eyes had st
                           •
                        ept the
                           •
                        r
sight in her inward desires, and then driue away the blusht
with a pale mantle of shamefast reioycing, to heare him so
admired, exchanging white & red so often in her counterance
that the beh
                           •
                        lders might wel grow inchanted with those co
                           •
                        lours,
and yet h
                           •
                        ld them neuer more excellent, & yet the most
excellent when equally m
                           •
                        xt, they bare like soueraigne
                           ••
                        e in
her angel-ex
                           ••
                        lling face. After this contending superioritie
of lookes, she turned as
                           •
                        de, & whispered thus to her selfe, Ha
Mer
                              •••
                           , Mer
                              •
                           illc, the many praises of thy renoune, a
                           •
                        e the

                           〈…〉
                         my hart, leauing

no restraint to my desires, but the palle of vertue: & yet thou
knowest it not, it is now more then sixe yéeres since first loue
tooke flight from thine eies to harbour in my heart, yet thou
knowest it not: onely haue my vowes aspired to heauen for
thée, yet thou k
                           •
                        ewest it not, neither dare I (alas) for the basenesse
of thy linage take away this ignorant mischiefe of my
blisse. Alas thou knowst it not. Yet shuld I liue an exile fro
my fathers countrey (so a diuine vnion, cald mariage, had
made vs one soule) I had rather endure a tormenting euill
with thy presence, thē al the gorgeous aduancement, heauen
or mine own wishes could giue or desire, with the greatest pagan
emperour of the world. Thus spake Berea the glory of
Nature, who when Iacob perceiued so passionat, fearing le
                           ••
                        
the too great liberalitie of his words had offended, in this maner
began to excuse them. Deare lady (sayd he) be not offended
that the height of my praises haue attained no higher a
subiect then Meruine, who is higher in my thoughts, then
heauen in the eie of any man: neither impute error to my speches,
fith by heauen I haue not lied in any thing, neither spoken
to flatter the priuate conceit of any peculiar, nor the publique
auditorie of so gracious an assembly: but what I haue
said, euen the wings of euery wind will whistle. Then gracious
madam bowe not your countenance from me, neither be
displeased with my rude reportings. Ha no quickly answered
Berea, who was willinger to increase volums, then abridge
a letter, thy words moue me no amasement of dislike, therefore
I beséech thée faile not, but come and speake with me in
my chamber before thy departure from the court. At this the
lady and Iacob discouered themselues, and Iacob went againe
vnto the king, who euen then was roially set at dinner,
and commanded Iacob to attend him & the Queene. Then
began the king to discourse the hie malice of Baucamont &
of his warlike expedition towards Montment, with all the
occurrencs of that intended warfare, as a troublesom theam

whereof only his mind noted. After di
                           •••
                        r was ended, and
the king risen Iacob humbly took his leaue to depart, yet ere
he went, he inquired the way to the yong princesse Bereas
lodgings, and thither he went: but she, poore loue-torne lady,
was laid on alitle couch couerd with rich tissue, tormenting
her heart with her thoughts, and her thoughts with loue, so
excéedingly, that the abundance of her sorow gaue l
                           •
                        berty to
her tongue to vtter, and in vttering to double her languor:
ay me, qd she, dearer then the dearest of my selfe to me. O
only absolute Meruine, thy absence is my death, and thy remembrance
the continuall obsequies for my deceased happines:
yet is my death blameles, sith I die for the most wise,
most beautifull, most valiant, and most accomplisht creature
in the world, whose renowne is spread through Galile, and
all the corners of thearth. Ha Meruine, Meruine, when shal
I behold the day of thy arriuall? when shall I bathe my eies
in thy eies, whisper in thy eare, and hang on thy bosome? O
excellent loue vnknowne to thée, thou hast my loue, my vertuous
loue, gouerne me then as thy captiue, and dispose me
as thy seruant. At these wordes beating the pallace of her
breast, she turned and tossed, as if the motion of her bodie
could remoue her passion, but it was impossible. Then calling
an eunuch to her commanding him to marry his voice
to his lute▪ she bade him sing some canzonet that might rather
kil, than increase passion: the eunuch sung as follow
                           ••
                        
                     
                     I doe not now complaine of my disgrace,
                     Though neuer soule of greater griefes could bost:
                     Nor of the houre, season, time nor place.
                     Nor of my foile, for any freedome lost.
                     Nor of my liues ioy by misfortune danted,
                     Nor of my wit, with ouerweening strooke,
                     Nor of my sence with any sound inchanted,
                     Nor of the force of fierie pointed looke.
                     
                        Nor of the steele that strikes within my wound,
                     Nor of my thoughts, by worser thoughts, defacde:
                     Nor of the life I labour to confound
                     But I complaine, that being thus disgracde:
                     Fetterd, feard, frāt
                           •
                        ke, charmd, fierd, shotthrogh, slaine,
                     My death is such, as I may not complaine.
                     On the last clause of this sonet, the noble merchant Iacob
entred her chamber, whom so soon as Berea beheld, she gaue
some respite to her mones, while a séeming ioy ouershadowed
hir face, and an inward resolution (for many good parts
she knew in him) tooke hold on her heart, giuing her assurance
without feare, to make him priuie to her long hid affection.
Wherefore after due reuerence done to her greatnes,
and a gratious welcome deliuerd from her silent looke,
she bade him sit downe by her, and with a trembling voice
the true herald of a vertuous meaning, 
                           •
                        hus said vnto him:
Iacob, let it not séeme strange to thée, that hauing gone one
step beyond wisedome, I seek by danger to ouerrun feare,
and let me coniure thée by that power, to whom in thy deu
                           •
                        
                        tion
thou hast giuen power ouer thy being, to kéep secret in
thine inward soule, wbat my ouerburdned hart shall vnload
vnto thée. Iacob in whom wonder had raised a hie colour of
amazment answered: Lady, by that inuiolate faith due to
our great god Mahomet, I promise to kéepe secret in the
inclosure of my soule whatsoeuer you propound vnto me.
Know then qd she (O chide me not whē thou knowst what
I blush to know) at such time as I lay at Turgon with my
mother nursed▪ not farre from thence the beautifull Meruine
(on whom doating Nature had bestowed all her treasure)
went to schoole, whither I much frequented to learne
the knowledge of diuine philosophy: but alas the knowledge
I learned was the confounding of my vnderstanding: for
there, euen there 
                           ••
                        came I surprised with the beauties of

                        Meruine, and so intangled with the loue of his perfections,
that his thought is my torment, and his absence my death:
so as if his returne be long, my life will be short, so much my
loues martirdome wounds me with intolerable 
                           •
                        orrow: yet
I take Diana to my witnes that al my loue hath bin honorably
chaste, in such sort as became my vertue, or my fathers
daughter, neither is he yet acquainted with my desire,
nor haue I to any but thy self, bemoned my vnhappines, or
discouered my loue. Wherefore I pray thée by the vehemēt
passion of an vnfained louer, make means for his return, fith
many yeares are past in my remembrance since his departure.
Lady said Iacob, it is but x. months the last wéeke
past since his departure. Ten months answered the Lady!
Ay me, euery day is a wo
                           •
                        lds age in the computation of my
mind, so flow is the passage of my sorrowes: wherefore, by
all the vertues of thy mind
                           •
                        , & the loue thou bearest to Meruine,
I coniure thée, ioyne with me in some happy stratageme
by which we may worke his returne to this country.
By Mahomet, qd Iacob, Lady I can not possibly inuent
how. Then haue I deuised the way (repl
                           •
                        ed Berea) & thus
it is: You shall to morrow morning come to my chamber
to speak with me, at what time I will haue written a letter
in my fathers name to the counte Brandis, & hauing this
night priuily taken his scale, signe it therewith in such sort
as you shall haue Mernine deliu
                           •
                        red you. Then shall you
take Barbin with you, but by no means make him priuy to
our complots, but stifly maintaine, it is the act of my father.
When you haue Meruin, at such time as Baucamont who
shortly wil beleager vs, shal detaine his army, bring him armed
at all points into the field, to ioyne with my father, and
doubt not of his intertaine whose succor wil be so gracious.
Iacob accorded to al she could inuent or desire, & so departed,
leauing the lady to herselfe, to study on the inditing of a letter
so weighty, which at length she perfited to hir own contentment,

and then sealed it with the kings owne seale. And
in the morning Iacob came and receiued it, protesting a diligenter
regard in performance of such a royall affaire. The
lady gaue him infinite thanks, with promise of an inspeakeable
reward, and then she deliuered him an C. duckats to
defray his ordinarie charge, and a curious wrought chaine,
of pea
                           •
                        le and gold, which she charged him in hir loues name,
to present to Meruine, and withall to let him vnderstand
the interest he held in her loue. All which with solemne oths
he vowed honestly and zealously to performe. Then Iacob
tooke leaue of the Lady, and came to the house of Barbin, to
whom he said, My best friend Barbin make your selfe ready
with all spéed to go with me from the K. to Brandis, to fetch
your son Meruine home againe. Barbin, to whom no sound
could bring swéeter melody, told him the newes was balme
to his griefes. So dispatching his busines, and taking order
for his home occasions they departed together in great hast,
whom on the seas sailing towards Brandis we will leaue,
and a while speake of king Baucamont, and thother pagan
princes, who after the late storme found so prosprous a gale,
that he arriued at the port of Luternia, a moneth after the
departure of Iacob and Barbin. Thence they marched with
conquest to Montment, which city they be
                           •
                        ieged with two
hundred thousand Turks. After they were lodged and intrenched
Baucamont caled a councel of his chiefest barons,
and consulted among them what was to be done, and whether
it were best to assault it at their first approach, I or no.
To which opinion of assaulting Eclamard dissented, saying,
Rather would I hold the first decrée agréed of amongst vs,
which is, to send 
                           •
                        j. of your approued knights to Mermont,
to shew wherefore we came hither, and what cause hath s
                           •
                        
                        wen
this séed of warfare among vs, requesting hi
                           •
                         daughter
the beautifull Berea, which if he will send to you to be ioined
in the holy bands of mariage, that then we wil return to our

countries, otherwise indure the vttermost worst of warres
afflictions: and this hold I the safest course in our procéedings,
because if here we lengthen out time with a long and
lingring warfare, Gualtier the dane, now raigning in Babylon,
and Guion of Denmarke both brothers to the euer
renowmed Oger, who at this instant beare such eternall
hate to pagans▪ may in our absence exile our peace from our
owne countries. Againe, which is of greatest auaile against
vs, one of great knowledge reuealed to me, that the mighty
emperor king Charles of France, meaneth this season to
visite them, and to adore the holy sepulchre of their god.
Wherefore the spéedier we make our returne, the stronger
our owne peace, and safetie of our countries; for the absence
of kings are the deaths of nations
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XI.
                     1 Of the dispatch of Bauc
                              •
                           monts two knights to Mermont.
2 Mermont in despight of Baucamont imprisoneth
them. 3 Of the assault, 4 and death of Clarissa
the coward.
                     
                        THe counsell of Eclamard, Baucamont and all
his Barons applauded as most excellent,
wherefore at that present was Morgant and
Nigron roially dispatched for the embassade,
who in solemne maner entered into the citie,
and thence were conueied to the pallace, where ascending
a paire of stately staires, they entered into the great chamber▪
                        
where they found the king Mermont accompan
                           •••
                         with
a number of woorthy Barons, to whom Morgant first
speaking, gaue this salutation, That Mahomet the eterna
                           •
                        l
regent and poss
                           •
                        ssor of the whole world, who kéepeth from
euill & lendeth vnending dayes to the mightie Baucamont
king of Damascus, the same Mahomet confound his enemies,
whose weapons mainetaine warre against him. Then
he procéeded thus in his ambassage: King Mermont, the king
my master salutes thée by vs, and Saieth he wondereth whither
thine ancient wisdom is fled, that thou refusest to giue
him thy faire chast daughter, whose euery excellence, the
height of his royall dignities shall counterpoise: therefore
these are his latest summons, either now send her by vs to
make happy his desires, or hereafter it will be too late to repent
thy liues end, ending thy glories: if then now thou wilt
stoup the ambition of thy will, sending her with a frée consent,
the mariage without delay shall be solemnized, and all
his royall army shal depart without damage to thy countrey.
                     2 When Mermont with an often exchanging cheeke had
heard his deliuerie, cholerike anger roused vp his lion spirits
teaching his brow such frowns of displeasure, that Morgant
quaked to behold thē. Then said Mermont, take those insolent
orators of disgrace▪ & cast them into some hideous 
                           •••••
                        
                        couering

                           •
                        ungeon, for that is both my reply and resolution,
where in despight of Baucamont, their woes shall consume
their breathes. At these wordes they were each one on euery
side (hauing nothing to say for themselues, but praiers to
Mahomet for their (protection) taken & cast in most lothsome
imprisonment, where their day was blacknesse, and the
breath they 
                           •
                        rew, the aire of their sighes before breathed.
                     3 After this the king Mermont caused an alarme to be
cried o
                           •
                        er all the city: then calling Clarissa, said vnto him, let

it not be troublesome to thée honorable Clarissa, that this day
I commit into thine inuincible protection, mine ensigne, the
glory and badge of my dignitie, sith to thy woorth the earth
hath refused to beare an equall, as the glory of thy cariage at
our last triumph was a sufficient
                           •
                        witnes, thy wisedom is the
gouerner of my fame, & thy fortitude the hope of my redemption.
My earthes god (answered Clarissa) banish al doubtfull
feare, for I will support thy standard with such resolution as
shal become the greatnesse of so royal a burden, (wo alas, had
but Mermont knowē his extreme cowardise, not the world
could haue made him hazard his honour in so weake handes)
or his imagind reputation was but ye stolne shadow of Meruines
perfection. Now Clarissa w
                           •
                        unded to death with his
own glory, had no succour to flie vnto, but his chamberlaine
that only was priuie to what passed betw
                           •
                        xt Meruin & him,
who at 
                           •
                        hat instant lay exceedingly si
                           •
                        ke of a qua
                           •
                        tane feuer.
Wherefore comming to him, Clarissa sayd, either must thou
now rise and sustaine my falling fortune, or all the honor that
I haue won by ye euer conquering hands of inui
                           •
                        c
                           •
                        ble Mer
                           
                              •
                           ine,
will now vtterly be lost, & I confounded: for the m
                           •
                        ghtie
standard of king Mermōt this day is deliuered to my protection,
and what a neuer dying sham it were thou knowst,
if it be not caried with red
                           •
                        ubted valiancie, when inumerabl
                           •
                        
blowes eternizeth the helmes of deaths tragedians. Sir▪ sayd
the chamberlain (who euene then was piteously ague shaken,
were all the golden mines of the world proposed to me for recompense,
it were impossible to raise me, because in my bodie
wantes vital habilitie. When Clarissa heard him, he stroke
him with so fierce a cowards blow, that two of his téeth flew
out of his mouth & then departed out of the chamber in great
choler, and came to king Mermont whom he intreated with
al the spéed he could to giue an alarme to the tentes of his enimies,
who as yet secure dreamt of no danger, & by that surprise,
doubted not but to attaine infinite renowne. And these

words were vttered with such a trembling spirite, that king
Mermont in that Index, might haue read his cowardise, if
former resolue had not blinded suspect. But he feared him not
so, that at his en
                           •
                        reatie, he withall his Barons sallied from
the towne, being 10000 well ordered souldiers. When as
Baucamont beheld the comelinesse of their march, he called
all his barons together, and sayd. Behold lords in what warlike
pompe king Mermont bringeth the paragon of beautie,
diuine Berea, to be espoused to our greatnesse. I charge therefore
euery soule on alleageance and my loue▪ that they be ready
to receiue them with all ye honour possible can be deuised.
Thus spake he whose thoughts were flowen beyond ye Alpes
farre from the purpose of Mermont for he came accōpanied
with the king of Calabria named Sallames, and of his brother
Marandus, to whom he vsed contrary eloquence, saying
Ualiant and heroike commanders, we are but a point to the
great circle of our enemies, a handfull to a boundlesse masse,
let vs kéepe together, and making of our many but one true
strength, fight like a not to be sundred mountain, that when
the great hoste of our foes is conuicted▪ we may with smal or
no losse, make an honorable r
                           •
                        trait to Montment. To these
words the whole armie gaue a shoute of consent, and withall
spurring their horses, gaue a gallant charge on the face of
their enemies: but Clarissa, whose heart was then benumd
witha cold palsy, durst not carie ye standard vpright, least the
viewe of that marke of honour should encline the ambitious
minded mighty ons to assaile his faint hardines which al the
armie of Montment. to their grief perceiued, so yt 
                        Mermont
with his fellowes in vnspe
                           •
                        ble furie, thrust himselfe amōgst
his enimies, euen amongst their tents which they cut & hewed
down in admirable maner, killing their foes as they went
in huge multitudes. There was neuer a turke that Mermōt
met, but he stroke him dead to the earth, crying to al his host;
Lords and renowmed fellowes, strike couragiously, & neither

feare king, prince nor peasant, for this day haue I taken conquest
my prisoner. At these wordes, a pleasant angry Turk
went to Baucamont, & sayd: Glory my soueraigne be to thy
wedding day, for Mermont hath brought his daughter on
his sword, and tendered her vnto the priest, with such memorable
blowes, that if you s
                           ••
                        ne acknowledge not satisfaction,
his paiment will impouerish you of all your attendants.
Baucamont hearing, & angry to heare this, tooke his lance,
and swore by all the deitie of Mahomet, to bée gloriously reuenged
on Mermont, and the
                           •
                         like a stormie whirlewind he
ran into the hoste of Montment, crying Damas, Damas, for
the glory of Damas. Then began the 
                           •
                        ight to renue his age,
and to shew himselfe in his lustiest youth, doubling the
deaths and wounds, of the both sides pursuing pagans. Anone
Baucamont being maunted on his steed Marcheuall,
which sometimes belongd to the euer renowned duke Oger,
the father of Meruine, he peceiued where Mermont rode
triumphing in the conquest of his sword, whom he pursued
with a valiant emulation, till Mermont beholding him,
turned to encounter him, and sayd: Now Baucamont receiue
from my sword the loue salute of Berea, whom before
thou shalt enioy, this earth, the commō receptacle of the dead,
shal be mine instant ha
                           •
                        itation. Then with their wounding
héeles spurring their horses▪ they encountred either other so
furiously, that both flew from their horses to the ground.
                     4 Assoone as Clarissa beheld the king his master ouerthrowen,
as if his coward heart had a symp
                           •
                        thie of euery
mans afflictions, he betooke himselfe to flight, but far had not
the wings his woe borne him, but a pagan, who all the day
had obserued his faint hartednes, came upon him, and gaue
him such a blow with his sword, that he fell soone dead from
his horse▪ yéelding to a shamefull life, a sodaine death. But al
this while Mermont & Baucamont assailed ech other with

such kingly magnificence, that al the army stood in an amaze
to behold them. In the end Mermont by the helpe of many
handes was remounted, after which he assailed Baucamont
with inestimable cruelty, yet he by the miraculous aide of his
powers, which were infinite, defended himselfe, & despight of
spight got on the backe of March
                              •
                           ual. Then began the battel,
as if til then it had not begun, during which lamentable
effusion, the king Sallames perceiuing Eclamard who had
flaine a countlesse number of his host, came running against
him & gaue him such a well wishing blowe, that if the pagan
had not spéedily turnd, he had neuer turnd more than the last
turne which turneth to life eternall: notwithstanding, the
blowe was sent from so willing a spirit of anger, that glancing
downe, it disseuerd his hand from his arme, which when
Eclamard felt, he spurred his horse, and betooke his flight to
his tent, whilest the whole armie which then were sadly discomforted,
aduised him to returne and inclose Mermont,
which Sallames vnderstanding, foorthwith gaue counsell to
retrait, lest that a sodaine inclosure should defeit their gotten
happinesse, which they did most honorably, retiring pace by
pace to the towne, their faces still fixt on their enemies: but
in this retraite Mermont lost much, because Baucamont folowed
excéeding close, yet neuerthelesse, the other side lost
much more, who returned to their tents discontented, because
vnreuenged. Now was Mermont brought to his pallace,
where his Quéene and daughter roially receiued him,
demaunding both his health and successe in battell, which he
reported in doubtfull maner, saying, both sides had lost, yet
assuring them that Baucamont should neuer liue to enioy
Berea: to which words Berea gaue humble thanks with
princely reuerence. Then demanded Berea what was become
of Clarissa, to whom the king sayd, If thou louest me
daughter, name not the base traitor, whose cowardise would
neuer giue him leaue to strike one blowe, either with sword

or lance, till he was slayne by the hands of a common souldier.
Many other discourses the king and his barons held, til
supper being serued, they sate downe: which no sooner finished,
but Berea went to the chamber of Clarissas chamberlain,
to whom shée reported his masters death. Lady (sayd he)
griene not for his destinie, for why, his merite was of al men
least deseruing, & he altogether vnméete, either for skirmish
or battell. And there he discoursed vnto her all his stolne glory,
how the prize he had before wonne, was not his, but the
prowesse of young Meruine, and that he himselfe had bene
many times armed in his name. And lastly, of the vngentlemanly
blow he gaue him, because he refused to weare his armour,
& beare the standard of Mermon in that last battell.
                  
                  
                     CHAP, XII.
                     1 The arriual of Iacob, and Barbin at Brandis. 2 The presenting
of the letter to the Counte. 3 Meruine is deliuered
to them. 4 Mineae perswaded Croisant to accompany
Meruine, which he did, with 400. horsemen.
                     
                        WHen all the worlds beauteous eie, beautifull
Berea vnderstood, that Clarissa had got the
honour of the Ioust, and the prized cup, not by
himselfe, but by the diuine valiant hand of her
best beloued Meruine, modestly her heart
capred in her bosome, and shee vnable to containe her
thoughts, departed to her chamber, where first throwing
her selfe vpon her bed, and then taking a well speaking

lute, she apparelled her voice to the sounding strings, and
sung in this maner:
                     
                        Eyes with your teares, blind if you bee,
                        Why haue those teares such eyes to see?
                        Poore eyes, if your teares can mooue
                        My teares, eyes then must moane my loue:
                        Then eyes since you haue lost your sight,
                        Weepe still, and teares shall lend you light,
                        Till both dissolue, and both want night.
                     
                     
                        No, no cleare eyes, you are not blind,
                        But in your teares discerne my mind,
                        Teares is the language which you speake,
                        Which my heart counting, it must breake:
                        Then cease ill tongue to t
                              •
                           ll my wrongs,
                        My sighes shall get them better tongs,
                        To tell what heauen to loue belongs.
                     
                     After she had sung this, as if the lute doubled her imaginations,
she threw it from her, & with erected hands & beteared
eyes, she sayd. Thou onely honour to beautie, exellent Meruine,
be gratious to my thrall, and retorte my miserie, & you
gentle windes, quickly and with easie murmure, conuey my
passions into his eares, whereas yet neuer entred my lamentations:
be spéedie honourable Iacob, and assure the honor of
my affections, else shall my de
                           •
                        ires be my death, and loue my
burial: thus lamented she▪ in whom woe was louely, because
adorned with her loue: but Meruin altogether skillesse of her
complaint, led in Brandis a most pleasant and delectable life:
for why? the Countesse thereof did loue him with a most perfit
and sincere loue, so likewise did Minea, whose careful intimacie
so regarded him, that it was more laborsome for him
to wish, then to attaine the end of his wish, but the absolutely

vertuous Meruine neuer had vnchast thought, nor euer accompanied
woman but Berea, whom he married, and begate
of her Orient, the father of the seauen signes, as is written
in the holy histori
                           •
                         of Godfrey of Bullein. But I will leaue
them, and returne to Iacob and Barbin, who ar
                           •
                        iuing at
Brandis, and com
                           •
                        ing to the house of Minea, were solemnely
receiued of her and all her attendants. Then Barbin inquired
of the health of Meruine, and was assured by her,
that he was excellently well, for that she had supped with
him the last night. Then he told her, that his occasions importuned
him to goe to the earles court to deliuer him a letter
for the re
                           •
                        ease of Meruine. The musike of this newes
entred harshly into hereares, for that she wisht nothing lesse
then the departure of Meruine, yet she couered it vnder a
deceitfull shadowe of conten
                           •
                        ment, and then conducted them
to the earles pallace, where they found him with a falcon on
his fist: (for his delight was wholy in hauking) but wh
                           ••
                        
the Counte beheld Minea, he sayd, Lady, what occasion hath
drawen you into these parts? Then Iacob drawing foorth
the letter, gaue the earle this salutation.
                     
                        Mahomet that is our god, and the god of Asia, preserue
the mightie king Meurmont, and blesse you, whom that
good king kindly regréeteth by these letters. Then in most
humble maner, kissing the superscription, he presented
them to his hands, who breaking open
the seales, read them, the tenure
whereof was this.
(⸪)
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              ❧ The letter of king Mermont,
to the Counte Brandis.
                           
                              
                                 MOst thrise excellent and renowmed
Counte Brandis,
                           
                           we haue beene aduertised,
that for an occasion of no
great moment, more then
the defence of a spotlesse reputatiō,
you hold one of our
liege people prisoner. Wherfore,
by vertue of our royall authoritie, wee commaund
you, that without delay, or further prolonging
of excuse, you returne him to our saued
handes, and send vs in writing all the articles of his
imprisonment: and we protest by the holy title of
our Crowne, to make full satisfaction. If otherwise
you repell, and effect the
contrary, expect nothing,
but the vttermost worst
of our indgnation.
                           
                              Written at Mou
                                       •
                                    ment,
                              
                              and signed Merm
                                       •
                                    nt.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        No sooner had the earle read this letter which Berea had
composed and sealed with her fathers seale, but he sayd to Iacob,
honourable sir, your welcome is as good as your owne
desires can intreat, and most willingly shal you haue Meruin
restored, whō, if he had wrongd me a thousand fold more then
he hath, yet would I deliuer him for the loue of the famous
king Mermont, to whom I am in kinred néerest allied: &
assure his highnesse, that if I had knowen him for one of his
subiects, I would not haue detained him for a kingdome.
                     3 Tis vaine to make a long tale of a light subiect: Meruine
was sent for, & deliuered to Iacob, & his father Barbin, who
accepted him with al ioy, and imbraced him with the highest
contentment: and he on thother part did that duetifull reuerence,
which either a son ought, or a father expecteth. Then
the earle sayd vnto him, Meruin
                              •
                           
                         this night will I do thée honor
to sup with me, because for the loue of king Mermont I
haue forgotten thy misdoings: & then the Sewer being ariued,
the kings seruice was sent vp, & they feasted with great
pompe. The solemnitie being ended, Iacob, Barbin & Meruin,
went with Minea, to her house, where they lay for that
night: yet before they went to their rest, Iacob drew Meruin
apart in secret, and told him in wel couched phrases, adorned
with a most graue & staied countenance, that the diuine lady
of all hearts only beautifull Berea saluted him, sending him
that sacred chast affection which no time could outweare,
nor force violate. In briefe, he laid open all the large volume
of her loue, & how she had composed that l
                           •
                        tter which was the
meane of his redemption, with many other testimonies of her
holy desires; euen on the tip of Iacobs tongue, as he was talking,
sate Loue heading new darts, and from thence tooke his

                           •
                        light into the heart of Meruine, where he commented of all
that was spoken, doubling each praise, and redoubling euery
perfection, and in the end, in that religious Sanctuarie, set

downe this immoueable iudgement, that Berea was most
excellent, worthy of all loue, & therefore by him should euer
be beloued. Hence began the sparkles of loues purest order,
and hence grew an vnlimited desire in Meruine, spéedily to
behold his n
                           •
                        w selected goddesse. Then Iacob presented to
him from hir a paire of gorgeous gloues, on which was imbrodered
a turtle doue in a bower of roses, and this Motto,
Neue
                              •
                            euer alone, which Meruin receiued as kindly, as they
were sent willingly, often kissing and rekissing them, as the
blessed ensigns of a fortunate loue. By this the night grew
old, so that euery one betooke them to their rest: but Meruine
that night indented with his new thoughts that they
should exile sléepe from his eyes, and make his rest the resting
on his loues imaginations: and so they did.
                     4 But when Minea perceiued that Meruine must so
soone depart, she sent a messenger in all haste to Croisant, to
intreate him to bring all his power to conduct Meruine to
his owne country: the which he did, bringing with him to
Brandis foure hundred horsemen his attendants. When
the morning had set open the gates, through which the day
might passe, Meruine arose and desired his father & the rest
to make haste in their departure: he longed excéedingly to
sée his brother Tyrus, and the rest of his kinred: but they
that could haue read on the table of his desires might haue
séene it was Berea to whom his wishes aspired. By this
they were all ready, then Minea brought him his armes,
and his sword, and one of his squires brought him his mare
Mordant, whereon he lightly va
                           •
                        ted without the aide of
stirrop, and said; Ladies, to whom my seruice is bound in
an eternall band, be Mahomet eue
                           •
                         gratious to you, and
graunt you all what you can desire. At this the countesse
and Minea kist him, and then they departed: but the earle
himselfe would néeds be their conduct to their ships, giuing

                        Iacob a letter to deliuer king Mermont, importing that
he had set Meruine quit of all accusations. And further,
that if his maiesty pleased to commaund him or his power
against the enemies of his commonwealth, hee was ready,
and would take it for a grace of vnspeakable kindnes. Thus
hauing brought them to their ships, and séene them aboord,
with triumph he returned to his castle, and Iacob, Barbin,
Meruine, Croisant, and the 400. horsemen bequeathed
themselues to the fauor of the seas and the winds mercy, of
whom we will cease to speake, and treat of other matters.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     1 The incounter betweene G
                              •
                           llien, Rotherus, the sonne of
Oliuer and Meruine, 2 Of the good knight Drohes.
who yeelded himselfe to Meruine.
                     
                     
                        THe euer memorable record of this famous history
maketh mention, that in the same time
that Meruine was departed from Brandis,
as is before written, there was sailing vpon
that sea, vpon which he then daunced, many
French Christian knights, that forsooke the flowrie countrey
of Fraunce, to behold the diuine sepulchre of their holie
Sauiour, amongst whom Oliuer that was exterminated
by Marsilius, had begotten on Iaquelin, whom Oliuer the
beautiful daughter of the rich king named Hugues of Constantinople,
at such time as the truce was made by Charlemaine
and his twelue péeres. There was also with this

                        Galien, Rotherus another knight, the remēbrance of whose
vertue, might excéedingly wel equal the most praise-worthy
reputatiō: he had to name Drohes, who after that time became
friend to Meruin, as shalbe fully mentioned in this present

                           •
                        istory. Behold now these christians chased by the vnmercifull
fury of a violent storm, a
                           •
                        riued néere 
                           •
                        nto Meruin,
who first perceiuing them, cried to his companions, this day
is better then a Sabboth to my desires, for I discouer a ship
laden with christian gallants: if it be rich, be yours the profit
of their wealth, vouchsafe me no bootie but prowesse, and honor
to my sword, which is al I desire to deserue. And at these
words a courageous fire of valiant fury inuironed his heart.
Now if the zealous minded christians, when they beheld the
pagans were ouerrun wieh a doubtfull feare of their successe
wonder not, for they were but thirtie
                           •
                         and those il appointed
both for armour and munition, so that if the eie of heauen behold
them not with a pitying aspect, their liues and honours
are all in ieopardy by the valiancy of Meruin. Cosin Gallien
said Drohes, behold how these pagans draw néere to assault
vs, if Iehouah looke not from heauen, he
                           •
                        e shal our liues pay
their last forf
                           •
                        t. Feare not cosine (replied Gallien) for by that
faith I owe to th
                           •
                        lmightie, so long as I can hold my battel
ax in my hand▪ so long wil I maintain my liberty, and doubt
not but to send thousands of them to hell. Ha co
                           •
                        ine, against
the foes of religion we ought to be eternaly valiāt, yet if God
in his great booke of destinie haue set downe our tragedies in
this cōflict, let vs receiue with ioyfulnes what we cannot repel
with vnwillingnes: Yet I protest to you by the greatest
protestation of a christian soule, that before I be taken, ile
infranchise so many pagan
                           •
                         soules from their cursed bodies,
that the cr
                           •
                        mosin cur
                           •
                        ents of their blood, shall vouchsafe my
hands a perpetuall couerture. While Gallien was speaking
this, Meruine and his companions, being already prepard
for the battel, boorded Gallien, to whom Meruine ha
                           •
                        led &

demanded whence, and what they were, whose white cros
                        
                           •
                        es
were (said he) the signes of christianity which he had vowed
to root from the face of all nations. Scarcely was his
last wordended, but the pagan mariners assaulted the christians
whom Meruine & the rest with their swords in their
fists, violently seconded, making almost the beginning and
ending one moment. There might the eie of man behold a
lamentable spectacle; for of xxx Christian soules in a trice
were xxvj. breathlesse, only iiij. suruiuing, which▪ were Gallien
Drohes, and ij. others, which breathed scarse a breath,
before their breaths vanished but Drohes turning aloft his
stéelehewing sword (which the counte of Meulant had giuen
him, when he fought against Sodonas) slew an infinit number
of the valiantest Sarazens but Gallien caried himselfe
so couragiously that he neuer stroke blow with his axe, but
he disseuered the life from the body. When Croisant sawe
the prowesse of Gallien, he cried vnto his people, that they
should not for a world kil him, bicause he would present him
as a great estimate to king Mermont: but that word of lifes
safety cost him more by much than he desired to tender: for
Gallien smote so thicke with his axe, that the Pagans in
aboundance tumbled into the sea, Gallien still crying S.
George and me; and withall crying; Thou holy Lamb of
Iuda, comfort thy people. All this while the valiant acts of
Meruine the son of Oger did, were wonders beyond wonder,
and more than words haue power to deliuer: yet what
he did, he ill did, sith it was to exalt Mahomet, & shew himselfe
an inuincible pagan, yet ought he not be hated for his
misbeliefe, but curse with immortall malediction, that false
fairy Gratiana, who stealing him, told not the trueth of his
birth and being. Gallien and Drohes made great resistance
against the Pagans, but the highest valure is profitlesse against
an higher resolution. Wherefore cosin Drohes, said
Gallien, let me kisse thee, and bid thée farewell, for here shal

our bodies vnsundered, sunder their acquaintance, but our
soule I hope, imbrace in the highest pallace of heauen. Well
dost thou know, O that we had such cause to know! how
Ganelon the traitor by his treason deliuered vnto the king
Marcillius, my father Oliuer, and the famous Orlando,
who died at Ronceualli: O Oliuer my father, thou scourge
of S
                           •
                        razens turne back into heauen. Thus spake the wise
Gallien, whom Meruine beholding with the eies of perfite
anger, and séeing that none of his people durst approach
him, cried, retire thou valurelesse amated nation, whose earthy
spirits are consumd with the fire of this christian, to me
belongs the conflict, to me the rep
                           •
                        tation. Approaching to
Gallien, he said, Traitor, all thy defences are but mists that
vanish from thy safety, great hath bin thy conquest, greater
thy fault for such conquest and greatest now shall be thy ouerthrow:
Yet for thy valure sake, I will contradict my
iudgement, yield, and thy life is saued. Were it not for charitie
(said Gallien) I should hate thy soule, but thy body be
assured, I detest, yet my selfe much more, should I haue
but halfe a thought of submission: neuer was there pagan
borne, to whom I will be obedient: and at that word he
strucke a pagan that approched him with such furie, that he
fell dead before Mernin. Mer
                              •
                           in beholding this true magnanimity,
had not euen at that instant wrath thrust pittie
from her soueraignty, he had both saued and loued him, but
being blinded with emulation, he rusht vpon Gallien, and
strucke him vpon the head, that he claue him euen vnto the
girdle. Wo alas Gallien the sonne of Oliuer, as memorable
for his vertues, as famous for his victories, is now
slaine: forgiue him great Ioue that slew him, and yet it
was a wound that wounded all christendome.
                     2 Now is Drohes alone, and yet not alone, for séeing
Gallien dead, he was consorted with infinite perplexities,

and as twere armed with their inuisible tumults, he sware
that before he died, he would reuenge his death, then flew
he amongst the proudest Sarazins▪ sending infinites to attend
him whom he loued, but alas their courses were contrary,
for Gallien ascending, they descended. So like a
carelesse mad man, only discréetly wise in the waies of prowesses
did Drohes behaue himselfe, that leauing his own,
he boorded the ship where the Pagans were inhaused, and
there defended and offended with such vnspeakable corage,
that not any but started backe and refused to assaile him.
Iesus, said Drohes, that madest the crosse glorious by thy
passion, shall I, O must I die here, and thus vnreuenged,
with that word he leapt into a litle boate that was behind
at the st
                           •
                        rn of the ship and swore by holy Mary, that who so
entred there, he would be his deaths man: for sithence he
was alone, he would sell his owne▪ & his fellowes liues, at
the rate of a bloody tribute. Then came Meruin all amazed,
saying; Christian, for pure loue only of thy vertue, if thou
wilt yield, and trust mine honorable reputation, by Mahomet,
and him thou callest thy redéemer, thou shalt haue no
harme, only the title of my prisoner, and for the renowne of
thy valiancie shalt goe whither fortune shall conduct mée:
this do, and so do, otherwise by Alcaron, my honour and
my sword, instantly either thou or I will be entertained
into de
                           •
                        ths mansion. Drohes hearing the thunder, yet the
swéet thunder of Meruins speach, albeit it made but a dolefull
melody in his eares, yet entring into many souldierlike
considerations, both of after aduenture, and present danger,
guided by the grace of God and his good Angell, he accepted
a will to accept those conditions▪ saying to himselfe:
By that celestial virgin who bare the fruit of life, it is better
to be in prison, and prolong life with some hope, then presently
die, and the soule vnsatisfied. Then raising his voice
aloft; Noble pagan, qd he to Meruine, on these conditions,

that neither my life be violated, nor I vrged to deny my religion,
I yeeld my selfe, Christian qd Meruin I assure it thée:
then Drohes deliuerd vp his sword, and Meruine receiued
it. At the instant of this aduenture, there stood by a pagan,
who boiled to shew himselfe a notable varlet, and séeing
Drohes without armes, he smote him ouer the face, saying
Uillaine, thy death is sworne. With that Meruine turned
back, in whom rage by desert challenged an interest, bicause
both his faith and honour was profaned, saying to the Pagan,
Thou son of a common vnsatisfied whore, proue why
thou smotest this Christian, who is yielded my prisoner, and
to whom by warranty my reputation is ingaged: with that
Meruine lifted vp Drohes sword being naked in his hand,
and stroke the Pagan, that he claue him to the teeth: then
amplifying his protestation, said, By Mahomet, if there be
any man, of what estate soeuer, that impeacheth my promise,
or doth my word wrong to any christian, this hand,
and this sword shall minister reuenge: for all my déeds shal
be iust and religious. O immortall creator (said Drohes to
himselfe) how well worthy is this Pagan to rule a monarchie!
I haue not séene a creature more wise, gracious, nor
more valiant. O thou that disposest all things, dispose and
conuert his thoughts to christianity▪ so shal he be well worthy
of all honours, otherwise my thoughts are prophets,
presaging an vnspeakeable losse to ensue by his chiualrie.
These praises whispered Drohes of Meruine, being but the
first sacrifices of a greater loue which ensued. Now came
Barbin to Meruine saying, My beloued sonne, too strong a
a witnes is this blow of thy heauy displeasure, I pray thée
of loue▪ giue not to thy followers matter of indignation, as
you haue done to him you haue slaine. Father qd Meruine,
dissimulation is a branch of cowardise, I will be plaine and
iust, if the greatest monarch vnder heauen wrong me, my
sword shall right me. Yea but (said Barbin) feare is fellow

with tyrannie & souldiers must be preserued with affabilitie.
By Mahomet answered he againe, I will be feared throughout
the world, & who so is not feared, is not truly beloued▪ of
whatsoeuer is gotten by the conquest of these christians, I
desire nothing part it amongst you, saue onely this prisoner:
wherefore let none doe him villanie, for it is mine indignitie.
This sayd: al the pagans trembled, till with a chéerefull countenance
he gaue new life to their terror: such effects of wonder
was in his beholding. Now all troubles being appeased,
the pagans diuided the bootie amongst them, and Meruine
withdrawing himselfe into his cabin, onely made himselfe
rich, with heaping to himselfe infinite wishes to behold and
enioy the most admirable Berea: and in these cogitations he
sayled with such prosperous successe, that in few dayes they
arriued at the port Luternia, where they landed, two leagues
from the host of king Baucamont, who as you haue heard,
had besiedged Mermont within Montment, with two hundred
thousand men, and had so continued fiue moneths, from
the time that Barbin and Iacob departed in quest for the only
valiant Meruine, whom they brought with 300. fighting
men, 400. they had at their departure from Brandis, but in
the conflict at sea, they lost 100. Now as they marched, it
was told Meruin that the next morning should a great battell
be fought betwéene the kings, wherefore Meruine sayd
vnto Iacob, I pray you let vs adde wings to our féete, that
we may flie to the beginning of the battel, for in it shal Berea
behold me either honoured or intombed. Thus, and in these
discourses, they shortned the tiresome way, passing by a little
cottage, and thence entred into a small village, but there they
found nothing to eate, for Baucamont had destroied al. Thus
will I leaue to speake of Meruine, and will returne
to Mermont, and his fortunes in the
next dayes mighty battell.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIIII.
                     1 Of the great battell before Montment. 2 Merm
                              •
                           nt
taken prisoner. 3 Meruines arriuall and recouerie
of Mermont, 4 Meruines exploites in the battell. 5
His second deliuery of Mermont, & other accidents.
                     
                        AS sonne as the sun had put on the dayes golden
armour, Mermout arose and commanded
proclamation through the towne that euery
one armed should mount on horsback,
for that day he would giue battell to Baucamont:
and when all the host was assembled,
he ordered his battalions according to the customs of the
most ancient Romanes: which done, he gaue his standard
to be caried by a notable pagan, the sonne of his sister, named
Tufer, who had in his regiment. 20000. h
                           •
                        rsemen. The
second batalion was commaunded by a most fierce Sarazen
called Arufait, who also had 20000. Murgaffier his brother
conducted the third: the fourth was led by the high Admirall,
a man both proud and valiant: and the fift, the king
himselfe commanded euery regiment being 20000. frō rank
to ranke. Mermont the king in great maiesty pased, admonishing
his people with excellent persuasions, saying, Lords
and my fellows in this high worke of fortitude, behold now
the prize of the most excellent resolution, make her the aime
of your thoughts, and winne her by your almighty actions:
right is your assistant, and Mahomet your guide, the thing

you defend, is your inheritāce, & the man offending is Baucamont
a st
                           •
                        āger, an vsurper, and worst of all▪ a tyrant: be
then valiant, and spare none, sith his malice spareth not to
roote out you and your families. Many other arguments of
incouragement he vsed and then issued out of the towne in a
well ordered march, and pace for pace, in as orderly equipage
approched their enemies, who staied, for them ranged and ordered
in most formall, proportion. When Baucamont beheld
the power of Mermont so well deraind and deuided, he
went from ranke to ranke, & cheared his men with these spéeches:
My Lordes and Barons, for the honour of your names
euer till now eternized, lap vp in obliuion the remembrance
of your wiues and children, and saue honor alone, kéepe nothing
secret: our enemies are but few in number, it is impossible
for them to hold long, if euery one do his indeuour: O 
                           •
                        e
then wondered at for valure, for the easier to attaine, the
greater dishonor not attaining. Sir, replied the chiefe commanders
of his armie, be resolued, that this day we wil either
win Berea, or al be dissolued and in that hope set forward to
fortune & our conquest. At those words Baucamont mounted
on Marcheuall, which somtimes was Ogers, whose
damme Meruin conquered, when he slew the traitour Brohars
(as you haue before heard) and when Baucamont was
mounted, he caused a charge to be sounded: & his foes on the
other side, answerd with like musick, O how gallant a thing
it was, to heare the reuiuing clamors, to sée the ioyning of the
hostes, to behold the shot of one and other side, in such abundance
that it seemed like a snow descending from heauen:
when the shot ceased, then began they to fight hand to hand,
Mermont, crying Montment, and Baucamont, Damas.
There might you sée a fierce skirmish, as well of the 
                           •
                        laine
pagans, as the dying wounded: there ran the horses vp and
downe, trailing their reines in contempt, after them that but
ere while ruled them. There might you sée a hand holding a

sword, but wanting a body to rule it: a man that but now
fought to keepe away death, now lamenting for nothing, but
that he could not haue death, all things confused, all things
tumultuous: for such and no other is warres beauty. Mermont
being valiant, prickt amongst his enimies, exclaiming
against Baucamont, and threatning reuenge for the wrongs
both to come & perfited. And in this furie he smote a pagan
named Malcuidant, that he tumbled dead before him: thence
he passed and incoun
                           •
                        red Affricant, whom he slew likewise.
Why shall I make laboursome my discourse? Mermont, before
he ceased, slew fiue, & then cryed on his standard 
                           •
                        earer,
whom he brought to the strength of his battell. Then Artifalt
of Luterne, and Murgaffier his brother folowed him:
on the other side Baucamont cried to his armie, come on gallants,
if any haue courage, let him follow me, and he shal not
onely win gold, but kingdoms. With Baucamonts speaches
his sou
                           •
                        diers tooke such courage, that in despight of fortune,
Mermont and his hoste were compelled to retire. During
the blacke sunne-shine of this contagions day▪ 
                        Berea was at
Turgon standing on a tower, from whence shee beheld the
battell: & when she saw her fathers army retire, with a pitying
sigh shée sayd, Ah Mahomet, that ou
                           •
                         men had new
strengths, or better fortunes: with that with entered the
thoughts of Meruine into her memorie, for whom she excéedingly
lamented, saying Deare loue most excellent, because
onely worthy to be excellent, O how tardie are thy plumes,
that conuey thée with no more spéed to our afflictiō? thou staiest
too long, O thou staiest too long, come spéedily my loue, or
these iron blowes of our enemies will confound vs, O blesse
mine eyes once againe with the sight of thy 
                           •
                        alure, els shall
my soule leaue my body, because my body shal be compelled
to forsake thée. Thus, and with these teares of lamentation,
complained she for her absent loue, who staied in the village
where we left him, euen vntill morning, at which time he

arose, armed himselfe, and gorgeously adorned the top of his
helmet, by fastning thereon the gloues sent him from Berea▪
                        
Thus armed, he mounted on Mordant, and pacing foorth,
found all his troupe ready attending his comming, and so in
warlike maner they all departed, but in their marching Meruine
called Drohes to him, a
                           •
                        d sayd, Christian, if by that
faith which so much thou holdest inuiolate, thou wilt this
day aide vs in the battell, to which we are marching, I will
both doe thée honour, command thee armes, and reuerence
thy reputation. In faith (replyed he) or what els thou canst
imagine I estéeme déerer, I will: neither doubt mee for disloialtie,
sith if all thine army should renounce thée, Drohes
would die faithfully by thee. At those wordes Meruine commanded
him armes; and when Drohes was armed, he made
a vow, that if that day he encountred the pagans, then the
Discipline and Iustice issuing from his sword, should testifie,
that the death of Gallien Rothorus should not sleepe
vnreuenged. Now had they ridden so farre, that by the giantbegotten
cloudes, and the murmuring rumor of the troubled
aire, they might see they were not farre from the battell: anone
they might heare the noise, the cries and the incounters,
all which assured their former imaginations.
                     2 Then pricking more eagerly forward, they hasted to b
                           •
                        
made parties in the con
                           ••
                        ict, yet ere they could approch, by ill
chance Mermont was ouerthrown by Baucamont, & in despight
of his followers, taken prisoner: to whom Baucamont
with reuiling words, sayd, Uassale to my fortune, this day is
the last of thy lifes date, and thy death shall be shamefull, thy
daughter in spight will I teare from thy possession, yet wil I
lie with her but one sole night, for after I will bestow her on
Pimon mine embassador to whō thou threatnedst death for
bringing my message: such shame will I heap on thy crown,
such scandal to thy fortune. This said, Baucamont calld Antifer,
                        
and commanded him to conuey Mermont to his tent,
til he had vtterly discomfited the rest of his army. Then took
they Mermont and bound him with strong cords, and muffling
his eies lest he shuld see any alteration in that base maner,
haled him to their tents.
                     3▪ But as Mer
                              •
                           ine rid aside discoursing with Iacob, the
good merchant Iacob perceiued how pittilesly his king was
martired with his tormentors: wherefore, as if his eies had
wounded his heart, he cried to Meruine, O saue him, saue
him: behold, king Mermont taken, dishonored & tormented.
Meruin, as if awaked from a slumber, at such exclaiming,
looking about, and seeing him, smote the mare with his
spurs, who like a whirlewind carried him against Antifer.
He approaching so neare that the sound of his words might
be retained, he cried, Mermont my king, feare not thy ill
fortune, for in despite of these villaines, I will recarry thée
into Montment, at that word he encountred a pagan called
Esclardy, nephew to Baucamont, and with such commanding
violence, that no stéele durst withstand it, but the head
of his lance made a passage both through his hart and body:
he dead, Meruine chéered his followers, chiefly Drohes, to
whom he said; Absolutely valiant Christian, I challenge
thée, make good the couenant betwixt vs, spare neither king
nor prince, commander nor follower: then spurred they two
in amongst the pagans, in such sort, that as the ripe corne
before the shearers, so fell they before them. Then Meruin
approching to Mermont, whom a Turk holding, Meruine
gaue him a blow that claue him to the girdle. After v
                           •
                        loosing
the kings bonds, and giuing him liberty to sée his redemption,
said vnto him, famous king, and my loues soueraigne,
my work is but the work of duty, command my life
for thy ransome. As Mermont was about to reply and imbrace
him, Meruine stayd him, saying, what I do, I ought

do, hereafter shall write mine allegeance: hold, lace on your
helmet, and I will prouide you a horse to mount on.
                     4 With that he beheld Antifer, who was princely mounted,
& came thus to him; Pagan, of necessity you must present
me your horse for the king my soueraigne: and for a
ful point to his speach, he gaue him a blowe crosse the beuer,
as he fell downe mortally wounded. Meruine tooke his
horse, and theron mounted king Mermont, whose ioy none
can speake of▪ but those that haue tasted his affliction. Now
began a maruelous battell, wherein all did very well, yet euery
one couetous to do more: pleasant and louely it was
to behold Drohes, who thinking euery pagan he mette the
murderer of Gallien, sent thousands to hell, that had not
seen Gallien, but aboue all, Meruine surpassed, who neuer
lifted vp his hand, but death followed the falling. At these
two Mermont wondred, swearing within himselfe the one
was Mahomet, the other Apollo, and that they were come,
the one to shew deity, thother to attaine a greater conquest
than the death of Pithon. In fine he said, both were his assistants,
bicause his quarrell was lawfull. In such sort did
Meruine and Drohes behaue themselues, that of 3000 that
caried away Mermont, not one escaped, but either slaine or
sore wounded. A Sarazen beholding this fight, séeing two
thus triumphant o
                           •
                        er so many thousands, smote his horse
with his spurs, and came running to Baucamont, crying,
King of Damascus retire for euen Mahomet and Iehouah
are come to fight against thée, Mermont is recouerd and thy
men discomfited, two for two millions are much too mightie,
retire then, retire, for saue death thou canst haue no companion.
Night-rauen, quoth Baucamont) care for thine owne
soule, I scorne thy prophesies, yet tell me from whom, or
from what part are those people arriued. Instantly (said he)
you shall sée them ascending from yonder valley, flie, flie, for

death is in their foreheads. Traitor said Baucamont, turn
thée and bring me to them. Not for the wealth of the world
answerd he againe, for by Iupiter I had rather mountaines
should fall vpon me, then the wrath of those inraged people
should by aduenture find me: and in this saying, he stroke
his horse and
                           •
                         flew ouer the field, feare giuing him wings and
flight bearing him beyond the compasse of eies prospect. No
sooner was he gone, but Baucamont perceiued the approach
of Meruine. Then mustred he his people together, saying,
Neuer till now houered the crowne of Glorie ouer vs, win

                           〈◊〉
                        , and weare it: for sée, he that commands it, coms vnto vs
to present it, and with that he smote Marcheuall, and charged
Meruine. Meruine on thother side gaue Mordant the
reine to incounter with Baucamont: their carier was like
the méeting of two tempests from two seuerall corners of
the earth: but Meruine hit Baucamont such a blow, that
he fel from his courser to the ground, neither had he euer raised
his head from the earths pillow, had not a band of 4000
come in to his rescue. Betwixt him and them, a singular to
an infinit plurall began a fierce, doubtful and vndying combate.
Iacob this while the good merchant valiantly behaued
himselfe, so also did Croisant and Barbin, whose swordes
bare liueries of their Lords wages: yet when I thinke on
Meruine and Drohes, the déeds of the others were but as
margent notes to their h
                           •
                        ge volums: there might one sée cō
                        fusion
in her royalty, heads without hands, hands without
bodies, legs without féet, thighs like feet moouing: there you
might see stones broken with bodies burden, yea burdened
bodies by stones broken: all things horrible, yet nothing but
honorable: there lay pagan slain on pagan, misbeliefe on vnbelieuing,
while Drohes smiled to sée selfe religion, selfe discipline
and law confound one another, and b
                           •
                        ganne to pride
himselfe, that that day his déeds should be eternized. But at
this time what Meruin did is impossible to describe, because

they ascended higher than mortall capacity. He incountered
Africant, and slue him, so did he thadmirall, whom horse and
man he bare down to the ground. What shal I say more? al
force was no force, when his force gainestood it, as Hares
from drun
                           •
                        s, Lambs from lions. Fawnes from tygers, so
flew the pagans before him. What he did, what his power
sought to do, was all this while beheld both by Berea and
her mother, who stood next her, and from the tickling spirit
of her heart, said to her daughter: Faire soule, seest thou not
yonder pagan, whose armes are like sunne shine▪ and his
deeds better then the sunnes beauty: in his helm he wears
two gloues, a swimming swan in a bower of roses: on my
soule he is not mortall, for his deeds are celestiall▪ his prowesse
is heroicall, and his cariage like the god of warrefare.
Berea hea
                           •
                        ing her mothers speaches it seemed the Roses in
Meruines headpiece were fled thence to her cheeks; for she
prettily blushed, and thought of her loue Meruine, and as
she looked downe toward him, her thoughts, the truest heralds
of a 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        ing conceit, told her it was he alone that so gallantly
behaued himselfe to the wonder of all men. O how
with that imagination loue gaue new fire to his old flame,
and surprised her with delicate thinkings: then grew shee
dumbe with admiring, sighing because she was dumbe, blushing
to heare her selfe sigh, & then grew pale, lest hir dumbnes,
sighing and blushing, should of other than her own eies
be perceiued. After this war of maiden lookes had taken alittle
truce with her intentions, thus to her heart her heart
whisperd. Thou God of my forefathers, how excellent hast
thou made my loue! death being most fierce, fearing, is become
his vassaile, attend him death, but touch him not. As
she was imagining more, her mother turned about, and perceiuing
her distraught in countenance, challenging the distemperature
of lookes, asked what she ailed, and desired nothing
to be hidden from her. Madame (said she) I felt a torment

of such vehemencie take hold on me, as no creature can
imagine. Mahomet defend my father, for I feare some euil.
Thus dissembled she with her mother, Meruine being the
loadstarre by which all her lodgings were guided. All this
while fell destruction from the sword of Meruine vpon the
pagans who like larkes vnder the wings of a hobby, sought
holes in the earth to hide them. Drohes pursued his footesteppes,
and the nearest of any imitated his vertues. Now
was Baucamont remounted once more, and passing thorow
his ranks, gaue them new incoragement, reuiling the
new come strangers, and disabling their actions, though his
wounds bare bléeding witnes of their worths.
                     5 When he had done, he charged afresh vpon Mermont,
and that with such impregnable violence, as he ouerthrew
him horse and man to the ground, but with nimble agilitie,
he soone recouered his féete, and drawing his sword, brandished
it for his defence. All that shew of magnanimity had
but little auailed to his profit, if Meruin had not againe by
chance come to his rescue, who cried aloud, Mermont my
king, deferre thy fortune but a moment, and ile yield succor
to thy life: and then rushing amongst the thickest, he strake
Gyrion on the head, cleauing him to the waste. After him,
the next, and the next, sparing none that was within his incounter.
When Baucamont sawe death and destiny lie in
Meruins sword, like a man made desperat, bicause his estate
was desperate, he ioyned himselfe to Meruine, striking
so violent a blowe, as he claue insunder the crest of his helmet,
but to his head did no harme but amazement. Meruin
displeased at his entertainement, drew Entrant his sword,
and without o
                           •
                        her salutation stroke at Baucamont withal
his puissance. The pagan king fearing the blow, retired alittle:
yet had hee neuer breathed anie more malice, if the
sword had not turned in the hand of Meruine, which like a

thunderbolt fell on the arme of Baucamont, and that in such
heauy maner, that the armor, shoulder, & all, were cut asunder,
When Meruine saw him thus spoiled of his defender, in
iesting maner he sayd, king Baucamont, it is time now the
world excuse you from these martiall occurrents, sith the fittest
for you is a monasticall function: say hencefoorth for the
loue of Mahomet you will abiure your folly, hauing paied to
this good king your right arme for a ransome. Thus hauing
sayd, he returned to Mermont, & remounted him the second
time, but Mermont in whom was ingrafted a strong beliefe,
that Mer
                              •
                           ine was Mahomet, with prostrate humblenesse
sayd vnto him, great and almighty God of most excellent authoirtie,
this day hath thy goodnesse newly created me, and
made my life more happy then the liues of my forefathers,
hencefoorth be gratious to my proceedings great lord of our
religion, and I wil make thy name be rung through all natious,
thy temple I wil multiply, & all thine ornaments shall
be of purest siluer. Meruin séeing the blindnesse of his amazement,
raised him from his prostracie, saying, no, but you are
deceiued, you are deceiued, I honor him & you: and with that
he rusht agayne into the battel. Thus while Drohes and the
other behaued themselues valiantly, effecting such feates of
knightly chiualrie, that force▪ perforce, they draue to retraite
the hoste of Baucamont, many flying, none abiding till the
mightie king Esclamart caused all his troupes which came
for the succour of Baucamont, being 10000 Sarazens, all
fresh and vnfoiled, hauing as yet not striken one blowe, to
turne vpon their enemies like a storme begotten by a storme
in the moneth of Aprill. When Mermont perceiued them,
and considering his people and horses were wearie, vnable to
withstand them being fresh, caused a retraite to be sounded,
and in honorable s
                           •
                        rt retired into the ci
                           •
                        ie: but when he came
to enter, Esclamart and his men, being swift and nimble, had
gained the port, had not Meruine & Drohes withstood them,

who marched behind, and Meruine in that last incounter
slew the nephew of Esclamart, with many other pagans,
and they so well defended themselues, that king Mermont
and his host entered into the cittie, & Meruine and Drohes
after them, to the confusion and dishonor of Esclamart, who
returned sorrowfull for his nephewes slaughter, whom hée
caused to bée brought with great solemnitie into his tent,
vowing to Mahomet his god, reuenge for his misfortune.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV.
                     1 Of the honours Mermont did to Meruine. 2 Me
                              •
                           uine
made chamberlaine of the Court. 3 Gratiana for his
sake made lady of the chamber of Berea with other
accidents.
                     
                        KIng Mermont and all his knights, being
entred into Montment▪ were most roially receiued
both of the quéene his wife, and the
most beautifull lady Berea his daughter, to
whom he said, thou golden planet of mine age,
my dearest daughter, I beseech thée honor with all the excellencies
thou canst imagine, this admirable creature who sits
armed and mounted on this mightie mare, I once imagined
him to be our great god Mahomet, so godlike was he in mine
vnderstanding, and so impossible it was for the force of man
to enterprise what he hath effected. When Iacob came and
heard the kings spéeches, pleasantly he replied: My gracious

soueraigne, it is a common saying, that a fooles bolt sometimes
as wel hits the marke, as the wise mans arrowe. True
said the king, but I pray thée, to what ende doest thou cite
this adage: to this my liege lord (answered he) I who am
basely vnworthy to counsell kings, yet anciently experienced
in warres doubtfulnesse, went in your maiesties name to
Brandis, and thence brought this Meruin, the sonne of Barbin,
who this day by his most celestiall prowesse hath twise
preserued you from death, aud the dangerous hand of your
enemies. Now if the actor be worthy his honour, is not the
agent for the acte worthy to be rewarded? els let my fortune
refuse me, said the king. Iacob I will heape wealth vpon thy
wealth▪ and on Meruine I will double a thousand honours
of knighthood: for by Mahomet▪
                         I imagined him to haue
bene Mahomet, so farre excelled he all creatures, yea euen
Bruhier, and Iustament his valiant brother, who were slaine
by that renowned Oger, the scourge of our religion. O Meruine,
if Mahomet continue gratious to thy procéedings, our
law shall be by thee exalted as much aboue christianitie, as
the first moouer is resident aboue the earths center. Woe alas,
this prohesie was too true, for with the eyes of infants
shall be watered with teares, as hereafter shall be declared.
Now Mermont looking vpon Drohes, asked Iacob what
he was, and Iacob in euery point described him both their
méeting, conflict, and conquest, and how he was a christian,
whose name was Drohes, adding withall, that if any myracle
could make him renounce his religion, that then the law
of paganisme by him more then by any christian, but Oger,
would be raised & admired, but this wisedom is so great that
no will can remooue him. Then Mermont asked Iacob from
whence, & by what meane Meruin had gotten that band of
men which he had brought to the battel. Then Iacob shewed
the king Croisant, who then was busie in talke with Meruine,
& from point to point declared his fortunes, both how

                        
                           
                              •
                           a was accused, Meruin ingaged, Brohars flaine, and Croisant
restored from his vnbeléeuing: the king hearing all this,
his heart danced for ioy, and he solemnly vowd to raise Meruine
higher in authoritie, then the conceite of man could aspire
vnto. Whereupon, calling the gallant yong knight before
him, who came with all the reuerence belonging to so
great a maiestie, the king with a dumb, but speaking countenance
amazedly, as if in a maner skared at his beauty, and
with his long looking and intimate searching in euery lineament
of his proportion, he suddenly apprehended in his memory
the diuine features of Oger. Wherefore he sayd, beléeue
me Meruine, by that Alcheron in which I trust, thou
resemblest both in body, figure, and beautie, the famousest
of all christians, renoumed Oger the duke of Denmarke,
whose fortunes if thou counteruaile, the pennes of all men
shall write thée most happy. By this time the day had exchanged
the coulour of his garment, and put on the nightes
vesture, wherefore al the tables being roially apparelled, and
supper set on the boorde, water was brought for the king,
he sate downe to eate: but because all his studie was to doe
honor to Meruine, he commanded him to sit downe before
him, after him Drohes, swearing by the faith of a christian,
that he would neuer part or obscure himselfe; vnlesse it were
by the commandement and 
                           •
                        onsent of Meruine, and for that
vowes sake, he was neither restrained nor imprisoned, but
suffered to goe and dispose himselfe round about the towne
at his own pleasure▪ the roialty and solemnity of that nights
seruice, I will leaue to speake of, because tediousnesse inuenometh
a willing hearer. Supper being ended, and euery
ceremonie performed to a kingly magnificence, the king called
Barbin, and spake to him: Barbin, I bind thée by thy
fealtie, neither deceiue me in thine answere, nor restraine
from the knowledge of that I intend to demand of thée: who,
and on whom diddest thou beget this wonder, this Meruine,
                        
trust me he resembleth thée in nothing, neither bée his
déeds the fruits of a merchant-like generation? My dread
soueraigne (answerd Barbin) I begot him of a noble & renoumed
Sarazen lady, as great in dignity, as the house of Ottoman,
who through her paine in childe-birth, piteously died.
After whose decease I tooke the infant & a most delicat lady
(the sister of my dead loue) who sware to hir in hir last pangs
neuer to depart from him til terme of yeres had brought him
to manhood, & transported them with me into these parts: if
now your maiestie misdoubt my protestation, I haue the lady
at my house, who is both an eie, and an eate-witnes. Let the
lady be commanded before vs said the king, which imediately
was done. To herlikewise the king propounded these articles,
with many other egressions as he had done to Barbin,
and she in euery point answerd without differing, insomuch
that the king beleeued them, so artificall was their cunning.
                     2 The king demanding her name, she told him it was Gratiana:
                        
                           •
                        hen said the kin
                           •
                        ; fair
                           •
                         damosel descended of a diuine
issue, for loue of Meruin thy nephew▪ whom al loue that haue
any splendor in them, how sacred a thing loue, is my pleasure
is, that henceforth thou be lady of the chamber of Berea mine
only daughter: by thée be she disposed by thée he her 
                           〈◊〉
                        
increased, loue her and liue with her, for thou canst teach 
                           〈◊〉
                        
both excellencie & honour: thus was the fai
                           ••
                        e lady Gratiana
borne vp to the cloudes in hono
                           •
                        r for the loue of 
                           
                              •
                           eruine,
whom falsely she had stolne, as wa
                           •
                         before mentioned.
                     3 When this was done, the king called Meruine and asked
him if he found no declining in his memory from that hie
staire of vertue, which hitherto he scaled, but that he would
perseuer in his beginning, and bear the glory of Mahomet,
as far as the sunne was born in his chariot. My earthly god
(sayd he) and the next in my loue to Mahomet, my whole desire

is to make famous my religion, and the aime of my content
to proue my force greater than any christians: this I
loue, in this I liue and thus shall my life consummate. The
king hearing this, was very ioyfull: wherefore embracing
him in his armes, he said, Dearer than my kingdome, Meruine
my champion, henceforth for thy prowesse, valure, and
magnanimity, and for thou didst twice restore me fro death
to my former being, I create thée the principal chamberlaine
of my court, be thy rule like thy selfe, righteous, and let all obey
thée. The thankes which Meruine gaue the king for
these honors, were such as made glorious the giuer, yet the
receiuer seemed only glorified. Thus in great pomp Meruine
continued in the kings house, beloued and feared of all
men, except of the traitor Marant, nephew to the king, being
his sisters son, and espoused to Butor that gouernd Minor,
where Meurine was imprisoned fiue yeares, as hereafter
you shall heare. This Marrant could by no possible
meanes loue Meruine, so hugely had enuy taken possession
on his soule, to behold the honor the king his vnkle had done
him, wherefore he watched to do him villany, for villanie is
euer waking. It hapned one day, Meruine rising earely in
the morning euen with the sunne, there came to him a certain
spie, who gaue him intelligence that king Baucamont,
with 800 of his approued warriers was intended to hunt
the stagge in the great forrest, bordering vpon the citie. As
soone as Meruine heard it, he called Drohes, the traitor Marant,
and 500 expert souldiers, and with them priuily issued
out of the city, taking an vsuall path, through which he paced
so long, till at length he perceiued where Baucamont
with his hoste returned from the chase, his arme as then
healed, and he mounted on his steed. Meruin ambushed him
selfe and his men within a little groue, whence he intended
to charge Baucamont, holding both his lāce redy in his fist,
and hauing vnder him his mare Mordant: anone when

                        Baucamont was approched so neare, that he was hopelesse
of retiring, Meruine caused his men to march against him,
saying, fellows in armes, think not of fortune, but victorie,
for in my selfe there is no other imagination.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     1 How Baucamont and 800 souldiers were discomfited,
and himselfe taken prisoner. 2 With him the King
Antifer & 24. pagans, all by Meruine. 3 How he deliuered
them to the traitor Marant, to present to king
Merm
                              •
                           nt his vnckle, in Meruins name the conqueror.
                     
                        WHen Baucamont beheld Meruine, whom he
knew by his helmet, bicause in many battels,
which I leaue to speake of, he had taken notice
of the same, he turning to his traine vsed
these speaches: You folowers of me and my
fortunes, reuiue your selues▪ and in the name of Mahomet,
be now or neuer courageous, battel
                           •
                         surely we shalbe offered,
be fortune as auspicious as please her, for behold an enemie
whom my soule hateth, euen he whose single sword did me
more hurt then Mermont or his huge hoste could haue effected
by a godlike incoragement, yet is he no other then the
base son of a ware-exchanging merchant, whom some diuell
hath nursed for a damned execution. At this word he tooke a

tell axe in his hand, & broching Marcheual with his spurres,
charged coragiously, Meruin on the other side, as nimble as
lightning, ran to intertain him, their running, méeting, & coniunctiō,
being louder thē thunder, & stronger then a northern
tempest, & when in midst of the ass
                           •
                        mbly, they had discharged
vpō either other, the wonders of chiualrie, Meruine hauing
broken his lance▪ drew Entrant his sword, and therwith assailed
Baucamont with such furie, that he threw him from
Marcheual his gallant beast to the ground, & that with such
incomparable prowesse, that he lay a long time on the ground
in a deadly passion. Meruin descending, vnlaced his helmet,
and was euen ready to diuide the long coniunction betwixt
his head and body, whē 
                        Baucamont awaking frō his trance
and beholding himself vtterly exiled from the hope of longer
liuing with erected hands cried vnto him: thou flower of chiualrie,
and the bed-mate to fortune, be as honourable as thou
art valiant, & take me to thy presence: then turning his sword
in his hand, he deliuerd the hilts to Meruin, who perceiuing
it, deliuered him vnto the traitour Marrant saying, Prince
Marrant, take king Baucamont to your charge, and guard
him safely because I know the king your vnkle wil estéeme
this fortune much better then the gift of an empire. Marrant
accepted him ioyfully. This while Drohes and the rest were
in the midst of their enemies, where the déeds they did were
worthy of immortal memorie. Now after Meruine had lef
                           •
                        
his royall prisoner in safe keeping, he flang himselfe into the
heart of the battell, like a hunger-starued wolfe amongest
a flocke of shéepe, the first he met, he stroke dead to the
ground: so did he the second, the third the fourth, and the
fifth: why should I bee tedious in description? tenne to their
deaths he sent with one breathing. Drohes seeing him doe
these excellent feates of knighthood, grew inamored of him,
& praised him in his heart next his creator: but God of heauen
(said hee) how wonderfull beyond conceit are these actions!

if his thréed of life lengthen like his courage, and some pittiing
powder of heauen alter not his vnhappy misbeléeuing al
christendome shal quake, and the house of Dauid be forsaken:
thus from the anguish of his soule spake the most righteous
Drohes, whose valure and feates of armes were boundeoo in
no limite, augmenting hourely; the rather to beholde the examples
of Meruine laide before him.
                     2. All this while was the sonne of religious Oger furroying
through the middest of the army, & had euen now ouerthrown
                           •
                        
king Antifer to the ground, whose head had payed
his ransome if fearefull, humblenesse had not made him submit
to mercie: him likewise hee gaue to the kéeping of Marant.
Now had Drohes incountred a giant-like pagan▪ with
whom he maintained a dreadfull battell, but in the end hée
smote him a blowe with such vigour, that he claue his head
to his téeth. Which another pagan beholding, ranne at Drohes,
and with his launce strake his horse through the heart,
that he fell downe dead at the instant. But with great agilitie
Drohes recouered himselfe, and flourishing his sworde,
vowed vengeance for his iniurie. But Meruine séeing the
pagan by such dishonour had slaine the horse of Drohes, preuented
his intent, and with one blowe stricke the pagans
head from his shoulders. As this was in doing, the gallant
horse Marcheuall came gallopping masterlesse by them, running
here and there, hauing his reines at his owne randon.
When Meruine sawe him, hée thrust his spurres against
Mordant, and flew after him, and that with such voilent
swiftnesse, that in short time he tooke him, and deliuered him
to Drohes, who being mounted thereon, sware by him that
with blood washed the world from her transgressions, that if
euer Meruines fortunes stoode in néede of his imployment,
his life should be wa
                           •
                        ted in his seruice. Then againe Drohes
thrust himselfe into the middest of his enemies, of whom

he made infinite destruction, that both pen and wit are too
blunt to describe them, and yet were they to bée ioyned with
Meruine in no degrée of comparison, no more then the night
to the daies glorie, for he neuer lift his sword aloft but he
kild either horse or man, or both horse and man together. Let
mee not dull your eares with a heauie tale: such excellent
feates of armes were performed by Meruine, that of 800.
which went with their king on hunting, there were left aliue
but twentie & fower, which with Baucamout and Antifer
were likewise taken priso
                           •
                        ers▪ great was the bootie and
riches which there was taken, but Meruin refusing to touch
it, caused it to be equally diuided among his souldiers. Then
commaunding a retraite, and summoning his band together
they marched in souldier like manner to Montment. But amongst
the rest a Pagan, whose name was Hebie, thrust
spurres to his horse, and posted from the troupe with such
swiftnes, that he ranne to Montment before the rest a long
season: assoone as he was lighted he ascended the pallace, and
knéeling before the king he said. My dread soueraigne, more
ought you to adore our God Mahomet & greater incense to
throw vpon his Altars, then any Monarke whatsoeuer: for
Meruine this day by his neuer fayling prowesse, bringeth
bound in triumph Baucamont, Antifer, and twentie foure
of the most couragious Pagans, taken al prisoners by his only
sword: when the Paragon of al ages (diuine Berea) heard
this, if her ioy exceeded her beautie,) and yet than her beautie
was nothing more amiable, (let no man wonder nor demand
the reason, si
                           •
                        h loue is beyond ye bond of a larger limit.
                     3 Now whilest the king and his nobles were increasing
their conceites of pleasure with imagination of these aduentures,
the Prince Marant, with Baucamont, Antifer & the

                           •
                        4. Pagans entered into the hall, & knéeling before the king
with a stiffe knée, faintly, as vnwilling his tongue should be

guiltie of any vertue, he vttered these spéeches, Faire vnckle
and my liege Lord highly may you (if you please) honor Me
                              •
                           
                           uine
your great chamberlaine, whose renowned prowesse &
true valure hath taken these mighteous prisoners, in whose
name, and with al humble reuerence, I present them to your
Maiestie, assuring you the déedes hée hath this day doone,
are more then the wisest hath power to describe, or the strongest
force to counteruaile. Then whispring his malice to his
owne soule, he said: Meruine, these praises which in giuing
I haue giuen mine owne desires the lie, I wil shortly heape
vpon thée with an eternall vengeance. Now heauen that saueth
al things saue the renowned Meruine, against whom
the thunderbolts of priuate enuie threaten destruction: whē
                        Mermont beheld Baucamont, Antifer and the other prisoners,
his ioyes excéeded in greatnesse his kingdome, and hée
repeated the wrongs their vnlawfull armies had begotten
in his countries, threatning a requital for these indignities.
But Baucamont regardlesse of all mistrusting fortunes,
without any amazement in his countenance, made a petition
to Mermont, that all the twentie foure prisoners might be
deliuered, onely himselfe and Antifer detained for the satisfaction:
which if it would please him to vouchsafe them, would
restore him recompence for all the indmagements, they or
their warre had procured, and that their mightie armie as yet
not wholly vanquished, shuld returne to Damas. Upon these
Articles the king concluded, so the 24. were infranchised and
with them also the two imprisoned Ambassadors of Baucamont,
to wit Morgant, & Nygron, who as then had béene
prisoners the space of a whole yéere, during which time the
war had continued. Now when they were returned backe to
their tents, they found the king Esclamart mightily perplexed
with sorrowe for the taking of Baucamont, and
Antifer his brother: yet notwithstanding they tolde him
the conditions of compromise agreed vppon betweene the

kings of each party, vpon which report hée▪ made proclamation
for the raising of his tentes▪ and leauing the siege
in perfit manner, departed without further trouble to Mermont
or his country: and betaking himselfe to the seas, sailed
so prosperou
                           •
                        ly, that in short time they ariued at Damascus,
where they reported to the state their vnhappy occurrēts
which had befallen them. Thus will wee leaue them to the
sorrowes of forsaken subiects, and returne vnto king Mermont,
whose ioy was the greatest of all ioy, to sée himselfe
hold in his subiection Baucamont and Antifer, two of the
greatest kings of all Asia, whom he had sworne upon Alcheron
& a kings maiestie, that they should not pretend any
flight or escape without his royall will and licence. All this
while was Meruin in the court no lesse honored, exalted, and
admired of the king, the queene, and the nobles, than of the
basest vassall liuing by the graces of his fauour. The reason,
because as he was valiant, maiesticall, and inuincible: so was
he sweete, courteous, affable and pleasant in the eyes of all
creatures. Yet Marrant, in whose heart enuy had built her a
blacke sepulchre, increast his malice, and hated him the more,
because no man else hated him. Thus being great with child
of damnable imaginations, he grew thought-full and sicke,
how hee should be deliuered: anone hee bethought himselfe
there was no so ready meane to heape ruine on the rich daies
of Merui
                              •
                           es prospe
                           •
                        itie, as to come to the true vnderstanding
of the loue betweene him and Berea, wherefore to
that marke hee aymed all his thoughts, but yet
his leauell carried him farre away, and
his labour in that point was vtterly
frustrate, as you shall
heare in the next
Chapter
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     Of the priuate discourse betweene Marant and Be
                              •
                           ea,
and of her answere. 2. How she came to the vnderstanding
of Marants enuie to Meruine. 3. The treason
he intended, which he had procured Calix his Cosin
to exec
                           •
                        te.
                     
                        IT happened on a day that Marant espied the
princesse Berea, set all alone in her chamber
without other comfort then her owne cogitations,
wherefore drawing néere vnto her, and
saluting her with an humble dissembled reuerence
he said: my most excellent cosin, and the ornament of
your sex, excuse me to speake boldly what loue and nature
carefully stirr
                           •
                        s in me; I find no profit, in more liberall sorte
abound to this nation then the happy counion of you in a
lawfull 
                           •
                        arriage, which if the king mine vnckle neglect, he
robbeth both his yeeres and this kingdome of their greatest
felicitie. And in mine opinion (if the loue of vertue leade me
not into a blindfold path of forgetfulnes) there is not any
whose excellencies better meriteth, who
                           •
                        e wisedome can
reach to higher desert of gouernment, nor whose v
                           •
                        lure after
the decease of my most gracio
                           •
                        s vnckle, coulde better
defend this Realme from disquiet, than incomparable Meruine,
the glorie of mankind, and the loa
                           •
                        starre to all honourable
actions: now tell mee my dearest diuine cos
                           •
                        n▪ can
you not loue his person, whose inward goodnesse flies beyond

common admiration. Berea whose naturall wisedome
had taught her a politicke dissembling, answere: Cosine,
wert thou not in iest, I should be angrie in earnest, or if thou
bée
                           •
                        t in earnest I must néeds iest at thy extreame folly: fie,
that thy tongue is so loose to deliuer words without thoghts:
counsell of better aduisement: Belieue me thine error is inexcusable,
and thy punishment worthy no ending: alas, imaginest
thou me, bicause a woman, therefore a foole, or that I
am so infinitly poore of vnderstanding as to build the hope of
my life, I meane mine affection vpon Meruine, which is but
the bastard son of a silie Marchant? Belieue me, belieue me,
rather would I be torne in péeces: neither is my loue augmented
to you for this perswasion, but rather abated for prophecying
my dishonour. Thus with an angrie countenance
spake she to the traitour, who many daies before had watcht
to behold their proceeding. But so wise were they in the
course of their affections, that not any creature, more then
Iacob, and Gratiana: no, scarce Cupid himselfe knew of their
selfe likings, yet all their loue was honourable, chaste, and
holy, without touch of an vnlawful imagination, onely kisses
the harts heralds, and imbracings, the knots of sacred affections,
with which they consumed two yeres in vnspeakeable
contentment. When Marant beheld with what affia
                           •
                        nce
she had deliuerd him her answer, he imagined she spake from
her heart, as indéede she did, for such thoughts neuer lodged
in that habitation: wherefore he replied. By Mahomet
(swéete Princesse) thou hast answered excellently to my motion,
and in nothing art more wise, than in not louing Meruine.
Alas, what is he but a boy, whose descent not any
knoweth, saue that one saith he is the bastard of Barbin the
poore marchant: as for his honour, I thinke all the deuilles
in hell haue conspired to make him famous: but if I liue, I
will bring to an end all his glorie. Berea hearing this, was
stricken dumbe, and had not power to answere a word.
                     
                        2 Then the Traitour taking his leaue, departed: but she
into whose breast Sorrow was 
                           ••
                        owne to make sweete his
lamentation, stayed, and with beteared eyes cried out in this
manner: Alas, alas (said she) now may I well say that Meruine
my loue, he that in all loues alonely is gratious, he in
whom my loue liueth, liueth to liue vnhappy: ay me 
                           •
                         now
goe my ioyes on their last date: and Meruine must die by
vndying treason. Forsaken that I am, what shall I doe? I
know not. Help me memorie: O thou w
                           •
                        lt helpe me, but to
record whose horror? If I discouer what I conceiue, I am
guiltie of my kinsmans tragedie, for that nothing but his life
can make Meruine satisfaction. If I hide what I haue
heard, Meruine my Lord shall be my Lord no longer: woe
alas: misery in my minde hath made a perpetuall dwelling.
If Marant die, Berea is dishonoured: if Meruine die, Berea
is forsaken. Liue Marant, so Meruine liue, and die Berea
to saue them both from misfortune. Thus argued the virgin,
whose heart by this occasion was helde with a thousand sorrowes:
and in the middest of the agonies, Meruin entred into
the chamber, who beholding her in that confl
                           •
                        ct of passion,
grew wonderously amazed, and demaunded both a reason for
her sighes and the cause of that infinite torment, vowing by
all the zeale of his vnspotted loue, that if any creature, of
what estate soeuer, had eyther in déede or word giuen occasion
to those teares, that he would die or wonderfully reuenge
it.
                     When Berea heard him, shee was at her witts end
                           •
                        ,
what aunswere to reply vnto him: yet on the sodaine shee
apprehended this fiction, and thus excused them: My most
deere loue (said she) mistake not my woe, which is no other
but an entire desire to enioy thy company, which I
am afraide will too soone vanish from my happinesse. sith
one told me, not long since, thou wert determined to depart

from my fathers Court to séeke aduentures in strange countries:
this is the reason of my teares and cause of my mourning,
no other thing at all afflicteth me, thee and thy losse is
my whole lamentation. Deare Lady mistresse of my life (answered
hee) falsely they lie that haue so falsely blazed my
thoughts into thy bosome, by Mahomet in whom I affie, my
loue shall neuer be dislodgd from the sacred tents of thy Celestiall
eyes, till an eternall night ouershadow the Element,
and then imbracing her in his armes, with a world of inumerable
kisses, he sealed the déedes of his perpetuall possession.
My deare loue, said Berea, I beséech thée (not for knowledge,
but for suspition sake) that thou haue alwaies a regardfull
respect to the déedes of my cosin, prince Marant, for hée is
false and full of insupportable pride, & withall, the sonne of a
mightie King, euen Butor of Minor, that is so strong & impregnable.
Madam (replied he) all that is nothing in my estimation:
and by this right hand of yours▪ in whose Spheare
my hart is contained, & Alcheron so worthy as shall neuer be
prophaned, if your cosin Marant doe me the least touch of
honour may be imagined, his life shall make good mine indignitie,
neither will I desist for his parentage, sith the mightines
of the man makes the art of dishonor almightie, when
receiued. Thus spake valiant Meruine, but Marant stil notwithstanding
continued, both in thanking & contriuing how
to bring a domes day on his praises so manfully atchi
                           •
                        ed.
                     3 It hapned on a day that king Mermont for his recreation
intended to ride a hunting, & took Baucamont & Antifer
with him: which whē the traitor Marant vnderstood, he was
excéeding glad, and instantly assembled a band of traytours
together, to the number of 500. all nobly borne and 
                           •
                        f his
owne linage, to whom he made this short preamble: Lords &
Princes, you are royally descended from the same stemme of
which my selfe am issued: in you then either doth or should remaine

a liueall thréed of amitie to support mine honour, and
reuenge me of my protested enemies. Cosin answered one,
whose name was Calix, tis true, therefore without ceremonie,
where loue and nature bindeth allegeance, display thy
griefes, and be it right or wrong, we are thexecuti
                           •
                        ners of
thy vengeance. Calix (quoth Marrant) thy loue is flowen
into my bosome, and there shall find an immortall residence:
the thing whereof I complaine, is of that honor-deuouring
Meruine, whose pride if it take roote, and his life flourish,
the king will giue account to no man, but him, for happines:
but if my wits faile me not▪ that as yet neuer quailed in like
stra
                           •
                        agems, this day will I bring his praises to a full point,
and in
                           •
                        ombe his body in a graue of destruction. And thus it
is, the king my vnkle intends this day to hunt in the forest,
it is néedfull then that you lie in an ambush in some priuate
bordering groue, vntill such time as you shall sée Meruine
passe along by you: for which purpose there shalbe an espial
to giue notice of his passage: then when you haue him within
your power, he being naked, & you armed, shall dismount
him from his loftie mare, and with cordes bind him to the
body of some oake, growing in some desart & 
                           •
                        orlorne place,
to whose abiding traceth the footestepps of no humane creature,
and so leauing him without more torment, because by
that meanes, if you shall be examined vpon any point of his
misfortune, you may iustly swear you were no agents of his
death or fu
                           •
                        erall. And I doubt not but in a moments space,
the wild beasts of the forrest, which so abound in this region,
will soone be the actors of this wished tragedie. This is
the reuenge I haue inuented, and the meane I would pursue
for his affliction. Cosin, said Calix) you haue spoken excellently,
and by my life all shalbe performed. ss you haue
deuised. Upon this traitors conclusion, they shakt hands and
departed, he to the king, and the band of 500 to the woods,
where they ambusht themselues in a couert, through whose

thicknes, as yet the sunne had neuer pieped. Now earely in
the morning before Meruin went tattend the king on hunting,
he went to the chamber of lady Berea, who that night
dreamt a fearefull and strange dreame, which had not onely
put her sences in amazement, but drowned her heart in a
deluge of extreame sorrow, yet when she beheld Meruine
like a flame, she threw her selfe about his necke, heaping vpon
infinit kisses infinit redoublings▪ said: Ah Meruine my
loue my deare loue Meruine, for thee my soule breaks, and
for thée my heart dieth. This night I dreamed a dismall
dreame the solution whereof belongeth, I feare to thy fortunes.
Me thought I had a most delicate and princely grey
hound, so swift, so nimble, so deliuer, that it was impossible
for Nature to conceiue how to forme such an other. This
greyhound me thought, went into a chamber, where were
many serpents, who with in
                           •
                        enomed malice so inclosed
and assailed him on euery side, that it was impossible for him
any more to returne to my company: the griefe for his wāt
made teares burst from mine eyes, and those teares inuited
fadder lamentations, that striuing to make knowen my
languor, I awakned with my sorrow: what this pretends,
I know not, only I beséech thée for the honor of Mahomet,
that aboue all men thou beware of mine vnkind cosin Marant,
for he is traiterous, and treachery hateth alwaies the
vertuous. Is it possible qd Meruine, that in Marants faire
countenance should lodge such distemperate malice? Ha my
one onely excellent loue (said she) trust him not, lookes are
liers, and his chéeks are a table of falshood. Madame replied
he, I trust none but my sword, and that in extreames shalbe
mine onely redéemer: what shall be shalbe, onely deare lady,
I beseech you commaund some carefull attendance to be
giuen to my neuer-failing friend Drohes, who is fallen exceedingly
sicke of a feuer, for his like inconstancie and manhood,
is not to be found among liuing creatures. To this she

gaue him assurance with many protestations, and so after
diuers kisses and imbraces, they departed either frō other.
But when Berea was alone, her sorrowes gaue a new onset
on her soule, and put all her hopes to slaughter, and that
not without good cause: for before her eies again shall giue
salutation to his forhead, his life and honor shalbe both indangerd,
if God himselfe, and the virgin mother of the greatest
moouer, with a gratious eie pity not his huge misfortune.
Mermont with Baucamont, Antifer, Meruin, Marant
and other noble gallants, departed from Montment,
and came to the forest, where they had kingly pastime, and
killed many wild beasts, continuing their sports iij. dayes
without thought of returning: all which space, an espiall of
Marrants attended foot, by foot vpon Meruine. The fourth
day approaching, Mermont prepared to go home againe to
the city, which he did, but Meruin staid behind: the reason
was, he had that morning found out a daintie spotted yong
goate, whose colour and beauty so well pleased him, that he
sware he would haue it to bestow on his ladie Berea: but
no sooner offred he to assaile it, but it fled, and with all spéed
pursued it, euen till in the maine chase, he had vtterly l
                           •
                        st
sight of it, which not alitle grieued him, but when wisedom
told him there was no auaile in anger, he sought te return,
but the greedines of his sport had expelled the knowledge
of his way from his memorie, and w
                           •
                        s he knew not where.
The spie whose eies neuer forsooke him▪ perceiuing his ignorance,
thwarting through strange paths, placed himselfe
in a way through which Meruin of force must passe. When
Meruine saw the spie, he was more than well pleased and
demaunded of him: which way king Mermont his Lord
rode: Sir said the spie, if it please you to follow me, I will
conduct you: so the spie led the way, and Meruine folowed
him, whose hart was thoughtles of any treason. After they
had traueled long in a nightconcealing corner, Meruin said,

friend, I feare me we are both out of our way. O sir, (replied
he) feare not, I will bring you to the king my master prelently.
And as he was thus saying, they were arriued in the
place where the traitors were ambushed: and as soone as
Calix beheld him, hee, and with him fortie lanciers charged
Meruin behinde him, not speaking any word, and that with
such violence, that ere he dreamed of disaduantage, they had
throwen him to the ground from his mare foreward: but
like the flower of all knightly chiualrie in a trice he remounted
himselfe vpon his féete, and drawing Entrant his sword,
flew vpon the spie, and gaue him such a blow that he cleaue
his head & chaps in two pieces, saying: Uillaine thou which
hast led me to my death, in death shalt be my first companion.
But scarce were his words ended, before he was assailed on
euery side, with all fiue hundred: but he defended himselfe
more like a god then a mortall man: and questionlesse, had he
bene armed, as he was naked, twise so many as they, had not
taken him prisoner, for before he remoued his right foote, he
had laine an hundred dead before him. But now faint heat
ingendering within the torment of his incessant labour, distilled
such a weakenesse through his all too extreme trauelled
members, that his handes began to wéepe in sweatie drops,
that they had power to weld his sword no longer, and his
bodie faultered, as most willing to die, sith it had least
strength to relieue his master: when they perceiued this, all
at once they cast themselues vpon him, and like a tempest against
a princely forsaken building, ouerturned him to the
earth: then, as if too few, they all lay vpon him, some taking
from him his sword, some blinding his eyes, and some binding
his handes behind him: this done. violently they dragd
him to a forsaken pine, whose mansion was so horrible, that
no liuing eye till then, had seene where he was planted. Against
it they bound him, and so leauing him, returned to
Montment. When Meruine beheld his pitilesse estate, he

said; Ha diuine prophetesse of the world, faire Berea, excellently
didst thou foretell my danger, and the hatred of kinred,
but my deafe resolution would neuer, till too late, beléeue
my, misfortune Thus said Meruine, and in thus saying,
sighed out such heart-killing lamentations, that if the most
barbarous vplandish pesant, had but heard his meanes, he
would not onely haue melted, but haue beene partner of his
afflictions
                           •
                         All night continued Meruine in this wofulnes,
who in a moment had bin deuoured of sauage beasts, if som
heauenly power had not inspired his galant mare Mordant
with a man-like vnderstanding, who defended and preserued
him from a thousand deadly daugers. Mermont who
was returned to his court in Montment, and vnderstanding
Meruine was absent, grew excéedingly sorie: but the
traiterous Marrant tolde him, he was ridden alittle out of
the way to visite a gentlewoman, who dwelt neare vnto
the forrest, and that no other occasion withheld him. Which
report, although it satisfied the king at that present, yet 
                           •
                        otwithstanding,
it was nothing sufficient to quiet Berea, who
incessantly inquired for her Meruine, and that not without
aboundance of teares, and intollerable sorrow, which when
her heart, too publike a tell-tale of her loue could with no
more patience conceale, she went into the chamber▪ there
to publish the mountaine of her cares, which else would
wound her body by her hearts breaking, and thus she beganne:
Thou patron of our countrey, thou great God Mahomet,
con
                           •
                        entedst thou alas, so soone to diuorce me from
that most diuine creature, in the temple of whose eies, my
heart and thoughts are inshrined? Ha, speake, speake thou
immortall prophet: and at that word she wrong her li
                           •
                        lie
fingers, and tare her haire, her haire more fine than the golden
thréed of Diana: and as she was in this lunatike trance
of complaining, the Fairie Gratiana entred into her chamber,
who séeing her perplexitie, grew more than her selfe amazed

saying: Madame, what wonders wrought griefe in
your countenance? trust me, they did him wrong that lodged
him in so rare a receptacle of beauty. Ha, peace, peace,
said Berea, my moanes are worthy no measure, and then
she declared how Meruine her Lord and loue was not returned
from the forest, and that not any could tell newes of
his absence, and then she began afresh to wéepe, as if these
winter cloudes of sorrow had but then ouercast her faces element:
but Gratiana with not to be refelled arguments,
lent such comfort to her comfortlesse imaginations, that she
deferred, though took not away the worst of her extremity,
and with a dissembling countenance of contentment. Berea
went into the hall to supper, for the king her father was
then set at the table, about the middest of supper, Calix
and diuers others of his traiterous consorts, entred into the
hall, whom as soone as Berea saw, she said in her selfe, this
is the cosin of Marrant, and in his lookes are written
tyranny and treason. O my heart presageth
that some notable villany by them is
wrought against my louing
Lord thrise singular
Meruine.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     1 How Berea hiding her selfe, came to vnderstand the
treason. 2 Her reuealing it to Drohes. 3 Drohes chalengeth
Calix before the king, and pawneth his gage.
                     
                        
                           B
                           
                              •
                           reas thoughts were the true augures of hir
loues mischances, which so vehemently vex
                        
                           •
                        d
her, that she sware by Mahomet, her eies

                           •
                        hould neuer close in rest, till she knew the
trueth of her presages: whereof priuately
vnseene of any, she went into a secret chamber,
whither Marrant when he had any priuate occurrents

                           •
                        o discourse of, vsually repa
                           •
                        red: and vnder a cupboord ouer
the which hung a rich 
                           〈◊〉
                         carpet, she closely conueied her
selfe: but no sooner was she inclosed in that forgetfull cell, but
Marrant and Calix entr
                           •
                        d, and Marrant leaping vpon the
cupboord, there sate to vnderstand all the misfortunes of
Meruine, which Calix described altogether, as fearefully as
it was done 
                           •
                        uthlesly, and how before he could be taken, an
hundred were slaine. My deare cosin (said Marrant) well
haue you performed my wish, no more shal that boyes great
pride pester the courts of princes, and for your exploit assure
your selfe it is more full of honors▪ than midnight of stars.
After this was said, Marrant and Calix went to their bedchambers,
and the heart-consuming carefull Berea rose from
her blacke lodging, déeply vowing that this damnable practise
should be declared to the king hir father, and so she went

vnto her owne chamber, where the Fairy Gratiana attended
her comming, and when the Fairy beheld her, she said;
Madame, your lookes are gastly and dispairefull, how fareth
your Ladieship? or where haue you bin? At that demaund
Berea with a sad countenance reported from point to point
all the treason committed against hor Meruine, and with
such féeling protestations, that all her amazement flew to
Grariana, and she looked with a greater terrour. At length
gathering her sences together, she said, It behoueth vs madame
to be wise how we manage this mischieuous action.
By heauen, said Berea, I will tell it to the king my father.
Not for a kingdom quoth Gratiana, for so may you draw
your selfe in danger.
                     2 Rather let vs accuse false Calix, and lay the treason on
his shoulders, but because we will not be vncircumspect; let
vs go to the vertuous Drohes & take his counsell, to which
they agréed, and so came into the chamber of Drohes, who
had lien long sick of a burning feuer, whom when he beheld
he knightly saluted, and demanded what occasion they had,
that so late an houre brought them from their rest. Berea
without circumstance, in plaine, but pittifull speaches, denounced
vnto him both the reason and the treason: which
when he heard, his manly heart was mad at the misaduenture,
for Meruine was as deare to him as his soules safety.
Yet with a staid countenance he said: Lady, banish al feare:
for to morrow I will not faile, but before the king I wil call
Calix to account for the treason and euen so God deliuer me
from my extreame malady, as I will without dissimulation
shew the true loue I beare vnto the princely Meruine.
Thanks good Drohes, said Berea, and so departed to hir bed,
but no rest could draw the motions of her sunny eies, but al
night she wept and lamented for the losss of hir only beloued
Meruine. As soone as the morning had thrust his forehead

ouer the mo
                           ••
                        taines, Drohes in whom could slumber no
forget fulnesse, arose with a l
                           •
                        on-like resolution, to combat
against Calix, and make him confesse his treason: but alas
he had lien vij. wéeks sick of a fierie ague, & through want
of food, was now weak and feeb
                           •
                        e: now God be his guide,
for his attempt is dangerous. When Drohes was ready,
he went into the great h
                           •
                        ll, where he found K. M
                              •
                           rmont,
Iacob the Marchant, and Barbin: inco
                           •
                        inently when
Drohes saw the king, he said: King of Montment, iustly
maiest thou be accounted vnwise, and traiterous to thine
owne maiestie, when thou sufferest the death of the most
wise and valiantest creature of the world, who had done
thée so great honour and pro
                           •
                        ite, as to the like may nothing
be compa
                           •
                        ed, whose sword twise in one day hath ransomed
thee from thine enemies, and whose prowesse hath
deiluered captiue to thee, the kings of the greatest nations.
Alas, how little right or lawe is backe repaied him, when
he is traiterously murdered? It is Meruine of whom
I speake, he in whom valure is proude to haue an habtiation,
he that took Baucamont and Antifer, who yet are thy
prisoners. Wh
                           •
                        n Mermont beheld with what a setled and
displeased count
                           •
                        nance of discontentment Drohes spake, he
said; I pray thée desist thy speach, for there is neither king
nor prince vnder the cope of heauen, who shall wrong the
gentle Meruine, but ile die or worke a mighty reuengement.
Yea said Drohes, these speaches are of royall value,
know then he is in your house that hath murdred Meruin
in the forest where yesterday you hunted: name him (said
the king:) tis Calix said Drohes. At that word the King
changed his colour, and calling before him a Sergeant at
armes, commaunding him to take a band of souldiers with
him, and fetch Calix before him, which immediately was
done, the rumor whereof astonished Marant, who went
after to behold the occurrents.
                     
                        3 No sooner approched Calix before the king, but Drohes
said: Traitor thou, euen thy false selfe, who hast murdred
renowned Meruine in the woords, which if thou deniest,
my sword shall make thée confesse with repentance, before
this day be fully vanisht: in signe whereof there is my
gage, which I pawne to prooue all my assertion truer than
thy religion▪ When Calix heard him, he beganne to waxe
pale, bowing his head to his breast, without speaking any
word: which the king perceiuing he said: false traitor, why
takest thou not the gage which he offereth? by the saith I
beare vnto Mahomet, if thou be guilty, all the golde in the
world shall not ransome thée from a shameful death. I refuse
it not qd Calix, and then lifting aloft his head, took vp
his gage. Marant séeing what had passed, aduising himselfe
said to the king: Now your maiesty must assigne vs a day
of combate, to the end we may assemble our friends and
kinred together, to behold the combate, and my selfe will be
pledge for the fealtie of Calix my kinsman. By Mahomet
saith the king, I vnderstand not your intention, but as I
am king of this region, I will not eate, till I sée an end of
this dissention. Then forthwith was Calix commaunded
to be armed, and Iacob carried Drohes to the chamber of
Berea, who gaue him the most excellentest wines, and rarest
conserues, that time or experience had found out, of all
which he tasted with good appetite, making himselfe strong
and lusty. Then was he armed in euery péece according
to his owne liking, and when he was readily prepared, he
mounted on his horse Marcheuall, which sometimes was
belonging to the famous duke Oger, then taking a launce
in his hand, trotted in stately maner into the great court,
ioyning on the castle of Turgon, which the king had then
caused to be prepared for that dreadfull battell, a world of
gallant cheualiers attended Drohes into the lists. And a
short space after Marant brought Calix, whom he ernestly

besought, that if he were discomfited, yet that he would not
accuse him, and he would quickely procure his peace with
the king. Calix agréed, giuing his faith thereunto, and entred
the field where Drohes attended him, whose bodi
                           •
                        ,
though sickenes had made weake, yet his courage as inuincible,
was most mighty, albeit he knew Calix to be renowmed
for faith of chi
                           •
                        alrie. When both the combatants
were in a readines, the king said, Champions stand forth,
for I will that the occasion of this battell be published vnto
euery one, say therfore Drohes of what thou accusest him.
I say qd Drohes, and what I say, this sword and arme
shal witnes to be true, that this traitor Calik here present,
hath murdred Meruine in the forest, where your highnes
yesterday hunted, as I will proue vpon his body before it
be night. It is a false he said Calix, I neuer had thought of
so monstrous treason, in signe whereof, I defie thee, and
craue no other redéemer than this hand and the combat.
This said, retiring themselues, the trumpets sounded, and
they putting spurs to their horses, charged ech other. Calix
valiantly assailed Drohes, breaking his launce into manie
shiuers, but Drohes answerd him with so strong a counterbuffe,
that he threw him to the ground backeward: but in
a moment be rose againe, and drawing his sword, saide to
him▪ Traitor, if thou dismountest not thy selfe, I will kill
thy horse: at that word Drohes alighted, & with his sword
charged Calix so mightily, that had not his weapon turnd,
it had bin the first & last of the battel: yet for all this ill hap, it
fell with so huge a power▪ as hewing away his pouldrons &
laces, it pierced his flesh so far, as the traitor shrunke. Then
said Drohes, villaine, ere thou and I depart, I will make
thée dance before the K. a Morisco galliard. Calix, as much
ashamed at the contempt, as grieued with the blow, rushed
vpon Drohes, and strucke him with so manly a puissance,
as thearth and flowers thereon trembled, and withall, the

sword glauncing downe, cutte away one of Drohes spurs,
and alittle of the flesh with it, insomuch, that he wanted litle
of falling ouer and ouer: and let no man thinke it anie
dishonour, considering his weaknes, and the long liuing
paine of his sicknes. Then Drohes lifting his heart to heauen,
said; Swéet Iesus, thou diuine sauiour of the world,
look downe from heauen vpon me, and lend strength to my
weake arme to vanquish this miscreant, sith all the end of
my act is to exalt thy diuine Godhead. As he was thus
speaking, Calix strucke him againe with such mercilesse vigor,
as he turned about and staggerd iij. times in amazement.
Then said Calix (whose pride lifted him higher then
his fortune:) by the allegeance I owe to our great prophet,
if thou doest not immediately confesse before the king, that
thou hast accused me falsely of this treason, ere the sunn
                           •
                        
descend from the heauens. I will diuorce thy head from
thy shoulders. U
                           •
                        ilaine (qd he) I estéem thée not a pin, then
mounting his sword, he smote Calix on the helmet▪ that he
fell to the ground: yet instantly he rose vp againe, but by
the glauncing of the blade, was cut from his right thigh a
piece of flesh enough to haue gorged a cast of Falcons for a
whole day. Calix made mad with this ill misfortune, grasping
his sword in both his hands came right against Drohes,
meaning with that blow to make an end of the combate:
but Drohes turning himselfe sodainely, for the sword
came as thunder or lightning, wisely slipt aside, & the sword
vnstaied by any interception, droue into the ground more
than a foot and a halfe, and that with such vnusuall violence,
that by no power he had, could it be drawne backe againe.
Drohes sé
                           •
                        ing this leapt before Calix, and strucke
him in such maner, that he cut off the arme which then was
contending with the sword for mastery: the anguish wherof
made him fall to the earth. But Drohes striking, in his
falling, cut one of his legges off also: the 
                           •
                        orment whereof

made him cry that the whole assembly heard him. When
the traiterous Marant saw Calix thus vanquished, in a
moment he mounted himselfe on horseback, and neuer gaue
ouer flying, till he came into the strong city of Minor that
was gouerned by king Butor his father, Drohes now
séeing there was no power left in Calix to defend himselfe
any longer, said, Traitor, this mischiefe hath thy sinne heaped
vpon thée, know then I wil kil thee in the sight of this
assembly, if thou confessest not thy treason, and the murder
of Meruine. Now by Mahomet said Calix, my thoughts
are guiltlesse of his euill: at that word Drohes cut off his
other arme. Then said Calix, ha excellent knight Drohes,
be no more my tormenter, but call the king, and to him I
will report all things touching Meruine. Then came the
king, and with him many barons to heare his confession, to
whom he told all their committed treason: the first complotting▪
the continuing, and executing: lastly, how, and
in what maner they left him, & the place where his sword
was hidden. Then to the king he said, My liege, lay hands
on your kinseman Marrant, for it was he alone wrought
vs all the mischiefe, for which now my heart is inwardly
sory. When the king had heard all he could say, he caused
him to be dragged by the strength of horses into the field,
where he was hanged according vnto the custome of
traitors in those countries. And thus will we
leaue to speake of him, and returne to
our former matter.
¶
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP, XIX.
                     1 How king Mermont went to the forest to find Meruin.
2 The occasion & maner of his finding. 3 How
he brought him to Montment, & other aduentures.
                     
                        AFter the death of the notable traitor Calix,
Drohes was carried into the chamber of Berea,
where he disarmed himselfe: then calling
for the skilfullest of the kings surgeons,
he had his wounds bound vp & drest, which
with carefull regard, were 
                           •
                        péedily healed. Now Mermont
who was piteously perplexed for the losse of Meruine, commanded
Iacob, Barbin, and diuers of his chiefest nobilitie,
to mount themselues on horsebacke, for he would instantly
to the forest in quest of Meruine, to which they all accorded,
and being come to the woods, they ranged a long
time, but could not find the fatall place of his abiding.
                     2 But at last Mordant the courageous mare, neighed
so lowd, and with such an vnusuall shrilnes, as the K. hearing
her, said: without doubt I heare the cry of Meruines
mare in these parts: let vs ride towards her with all spéed,
which doing, they found the mare in the midst of the high
way, but Meruine by no means could their eyes recouer.
Then halowed the king alowd, saying: Ha, my dearest and
best friend Meruine, where art thou? I pray thée speake, if
thou be neare me, conceale not thy selfe from him, who so loueth
thée. When Meruine heard the king, whose voice he
knew by the resounding, hee turned his head with great

paine, and said: Come hither my lord to this vnhappy trée,
and behold how I am tormented. Then went the king to
him, whose eies ranne ouer with pitie, neither was there any
flinty heart so obdurate, which would not haue relented
to sée Meruine so neare the doore of miserie: for he was
bound with such straitnesse, that his nose gusht out of blood
abundantly, and his necke, his armes and legs were swolne
and coloured like a man in leprosie. The vertuous King
Mermont quickly cut his bands in sunder, and Iacob and
Barbin held him vp, for his legs were not able to sustaine
him: whereat Barbin wept grieuously. But Meruin recompenced
him, saying: Father appease your sorrow, for albeit
my body be thus tormented, yet my mind is so frée frō
bondage, that at this instant I could incounter with xx.
knights well armed, could I find Entrant my good sword,
which vnmanly the traitors tooke from me. Meruine, saide
the king, thou shalt soone haue thy sword, and then went to
the place where Calix had assignd him, and brought Meruine
his sword again. My gratious liege said Meruin, how
knew your highnes where my sword was hidden? Then
reported the king vnto him all the circumstances of Drohes
chalenge and victory against Calix. To what purpose shall
I double my discourse? the king forgate not any point of
the story, Meruine was well contented with the historie,
and loued Drohes, if possible, more than he did before.
                     3 Then being mounted on his mare, be returned with them
in gallant maner to Montment, where all the burgesses and
rulers of the towne ran foorth to méete him, for Meruin was
estéemed the patron of peace, and highly loued amongst them:
then was he brought to the pallace where he was most roially
receiued of the quéene, and more then may bespoken, of the
beautifull Berea, whose ioy to see him aliue, like the highest
heauen, had no circomference: yet durst she not proclaime i
                           •
                        
                        
but oft sighed, that vnder clouds she was compelled to containe
it. Which when he perceiued, he smild, & loued▪ for she
was wonderous faire, and withall most wise and prudent.
Of her Meruine begat Orient, who was father of the seuen
signes, of which one had 
                           •
                        o name Elias, who begat Ydaim,
from whom issued G
                              •
                           df
                              •
                           ey of Bullen, which conquered
Ierusalem, as it is written in the famous historie of
the same Godfrey. Meruine at that instant was of all men
most ioyfully receiued▪ and the king commanded his phisitions
& surgeons carefully to attend, who in one moneth, thorow
their art & diligence, deliuered him safely recouered: for
which the king being glad, both praised & rewarded them.
After Meruine was healed, make no question but he ouerslipt
no time or occasion to visit his hearts goddesse Berea,
who to either other read al the legends of their misfortuns,
he making her, she him, a cabinet where they stord vp their
chiefest treasures: after they deuised of their loues, whose
last hope and conclusion, was, chastely to espouse one an other,
which before they could bring to passe, they passed thorow
many worlds of greater troubles: for Meruine after
he was returned to be a Christian, he was fiue yéeres detained
in Minor prisoner, during which season Berea indured
infinite mischances, being twice enforced for her lifes
safetie to renounce the redéemer Christ Iesus: yet not by
any meanes would she adore Mahomet, but what shée
did, was womans weaknes, and her lifes loue: for always
the true God of heauen was mighty in her memorie,
as shalbe declared hereafter in this history. And
thus will we a while leaue to speake of
them, and intreate of an other
occurrent.
¶
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XX.
                     1 Of Pimons embassage from Esclamart to Baucamont,
touching the 4. sonnes of Gualtier of Denmarke, 2 and
how the peace was concluded betweene Mermont and
Baucamont.
                     
                     
                        SOone after Meruine was recouered of his
late misfortune, as Mermont was sitting at
the table with Baucamont, and Antifer, Pimon
the embassador of Baucamont entered
into the hall, and after humble reuerences
performed, knéeling vpon his knées, thus saluted the kings:
That Mahomet which gouerneth the vni
                           •
                        erse, saue and
defend the puissant king Baucamont, my lord and so
                           •
                        eraigne,
the good king Mermont, and Esclamart, that hither
hath sent me. Know then you mightie kings of the most
mightiest nations, that king Esclamart desires you, & in the
name of Mahomet, commands you to knit an eternal peace
betwéen you, both for the profit of our religion, & the maintenance
of al your kingdoms: which if obstinatly you refuse,
all your dominions are in hazard, and Baucamont my soueraigne
shal assuredly loose Damascus: for the false christians,
who séeke to confound our great prophet, are entred into his
confines with sword and fire, consuming his territories, not
spacing infants, or taking any paganto mercy, that willingly
without compulsion falleth not downe, and adoreth their
God the God of heauen, as your maiestie shall more plainly
behold, by the contents of this letter which king Esclamart
by me hath sent you, then kissing the letter, he deliuered it
Baucamont, which contained this that ensueth.
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              
                                 ❧ To the king of Damascus,
health.
                           
                           
                              THrise hie and mightie king of
Damascus, my soueraigne
vnkle: sithence these three
yeeres that your sacred maiestie
hath vnhappily bene detained
prisoner, I haue not
budgde my foote, nor remoued
from this citie, which I
haue gouerned and ruled in most peacceable quiet,
vntill the end of this last moneth, at what time the
hare-braind sonnes of Gualtier of Denmarke, inuaded
thy dominions, the names whereof ensueth:
The eldest as it is reported to mee, is named Guion:
the second Bertran, whose valure not any creature
is able to resist: the third, Thyerry, and the foureh,
Florion, all exiles, and banished their countreys:
wherefore I intreate your excellencie, finde some
meane to giue an end to your trouble, and come
home to defend your owne nation and if possible,
bring some aide, for your foes are mightie.
                           
                              From Damas, Esclamart
                        
                     
                     
                        When Baucamont had read this letter, he sayd to Mermont:
behold, king of Montmēt, if this newes be not a rea
                           •
                        y
meane to thy fauour, assure thée it is a hie tract to my vtter
desolation: for sith these foure brethren are entered into my
countrey, I know them so redoubted in armes, that nothing
is able to withstand them. By these foure brethren in one
yéere, was the most famous Gratiana, and fiue other kings,
before renowmed for chiualrie, vtterly discomfited. Besides,
Brandis hath written to me in inclosed letters, that they are
the most renounmed conquerors this day vnder the firmament.
These things considered, I beséech your highnesse let
vs conclude vpon agréement, and leaue the hostilitie we haue
maintained one against another: the beginning whereof is
my griefe, and the ending that I aske thy mercy.
                     2 Baucamont, sayd Mermont, more to defend the law of
our religion, then for any other zeale I haue to thy kindnes,
I fréely pardon thée the forfeit of thy life and kingdome, and
withall promise thee by a kingly protestation, to aid & defend
thée against thine enimies. Thus with diuers other ceremonies
of st
                           •
                        icter combining, was the truce concluded betwéene
the kings, and instantly edicts sent abroad into euery 
                           ••
                        untrey
for the assembling together of an infinite nu
                           ••
                        be of pagans,
to make an vnuanquishable army: which being mustred
& enrolled, instantly there betooke themselues to the sea,
King Mermont, Antifer, Baucamont, & the wise al conquering
Meruin where for a while we wil leaue them, & return
to the 4. brethrē, to wit Guion Bertran, Thietry, & Florion,
& noble Huon of Burdeaux, who at that time was in the armie
with them In their host was 20000. good christians by
whose prowesse they had marched so farre, that now they had
laied their fledge to Damascus, which then swarmed full
of mis-beléeuing infidels, because since the returne of Esclamart,
he had still in that place detained the ancient armie:

there was also with him in the towne the king Brandus,
Herades, and Isay the king of Iuda. In briefe, there was fiue
kings, and their powers at that time in the citie of Damascus.
When Esclamart sawe how gallantly the Danes
had besieged him, hée called Bandus and the other kings,
and sayde vnto them, You kings of Asia, and defenders of
Alcheron, let vs issue out courageously. and visite these christians,
and I doubt not, but if wée vertuously shew our resolutions,
we shall before the Sunne touch the highest point
in the heauens, vanquish and amaze them: for they imagined
to haue found vs altogether vnprouide
                           •
                        , because mine
vnkle king Baucamont is at Montment prisoner, and so in
his absence, thought suddenly to surprise vs. Tis true, sayd
Bandus, therefore you haue my consent, to sallie out immediately.
To this stratageme euery one concluded, therewith
arming themselues, and then with a crie able to deafen thunder,
they sallied out of the gates, and in a trice, cast themselues
into battalion order. Bandus (sayde Esclamart,)
beare you the standard, and for your garde, take twentie
thousand of the best souldiours. You Herades shall haue
other twētie thousand, and incompasse them about, through
yonder valley, my selfe with the rest will charge them in the
faces, and doubt not, but soone to behold th
                           •
                        ir destructions.
In this politike sorte, Esclamart trained his troupes, who
burnt with desire to bring our good christians to confusions:
but they as too wise to bee foyled by inuention, had
aduertisement by their espials of this approching, wherefore
Guion called his brothers and sayd
                           •
                        , Princes, remember
you the blood from whence wée are descended, and the
vertues of our famous father Gualtier, whose backe was
neuer turned to the face of the proudest pagan. Remember
you also our renowmed vnkles, whose almightie prowesses
haue conquered the realmes which they now gouerne: euen
now is the time for vs to imitate their vertues, and with lik
                           •
                        
                        
prowesse to obtaine to our selues crownes of perpetuall indurance.
And for mine owne part, I vowe by him that
died for me, this day to giue my name such life amongst the
pagans, that the rumor of mine honour, shall indure beyond
all ages. To this they all answered, with an equall desire of
honour, whose courageous spirites like lions, were neuer
tamed, yet they were all excéeding yoong, the oldest amongst
them hauing not as yet attained to the age of xxj. yéeres.
Now God of his goodnesse prosper their procéedings, for immediately
begins the battell, which will be both fierce and
dangerous. When ensignes were displaied on all sides, and
the signe of battel giuen by the trumpets sounding, Bertran
tooke a mightie lance in his hand, and spurring his horse,
was the first that charged: whom, when a Turke named
Butor, who was king of Ecalion, beheld, he d
                           •
                        sranged himselfe,
and ranne to encounter him, but Bertran who tooke his
flight like a tempest, came against him after such a fashion,
that at one blow, both horse and man tumbled to the ground,
which when Bertran had perfourmed, he returned with his
sword drawen vpon the Turke, who with the blowe was
so astonished, that locking his hands together, and li
                           ••
                        ing
them vp, basely begged life, and pardon. Then Bertran
dema
                           •
                        nded if hee would renounce Mahomet, and beléeue
thence
                           •
                        foorth one onely Iesus Christ: to this the Turke answered,
no. Then by heauen, sayd hée, in me thou shalt
finde no mercie, and at that word strake his head from his
shoulders: then turning to his brother Guion, who 
                           •
                        hen
was come vnto him, h
                           •
                        e sayd: Brother, if to euery one I
pay this payment, I beléeue the pagans will game nothing
by my tendure. Nowe began the batttell to bee mightie on
both sides, and Guion leauing his brother, thrust himselfe
amongst the middest of the pagans, where the first hée met,
he threw dead to the gronnd, and in like maner made an end
of the second. Briefly, before his lance was broken, he sent

some to the earth to acompany their forefathers: but when
his lance was broken, then he drew his sword, and méeting
with a pagan▪ he cla
                           •
                        e his head to his teeth and then pursued
another. Bertran this while being amongst the thickest
bandes of his enemies, encountred a pagan, who was the
cosin to Esclamart, to whom he lent such a salutation, that
he claue him downe euen to the girdle, which another pagan
beholding, ran to Esclamart, and sayd, Generall, thy
noble cosine is slaine by a christian, see where he lieth, and
see where his foe rangeth. When as Esclamart saw Bertran
possessed with a fellonious rage of immortall reuenge, hee
thrust spurres to his horse, and assailed Bertran with such
puissance, that with the force of his present blowe, he strake
his horse dead vnder him: but Bertran quickly vawted on
his feete againe, and with his sword in his hand, ranne against
the pagan, against whom he boyled to obtaine but one
straight blow, but by any meanes, he could not for the prease:
yet notwithstanding reaching one, he light so violently on
the head of his horse, that it was more then time for Esclamart
to beare him companie on foote also: and Bertran then
running against him, had there slaine him, but there swarmed
such innumerable troupes of pagans about him, that if
God himselfe had not bene his defender, Bertran then had
breathed no longer. Yet for all this, the gentle yong gallant
miraculously behaued himselfe, for he strake not any pagan,
but he seuered the life from the body. Isay the king of Iuda
seing Bertran thus courageous, thrust himselfe against him,
but there was mightie follie in his worke, for Bertran met
him in the middest of his carier with such a blowe, that hee
claue his head to his collar. O Mahomet, said Esclamart,
this christian is possessed with some deuill, what mischiefe he
doeth me: and then he cried to all his souldiers, promising
prizes of great worth to him that could take him. Then was
the famous gallant assayled on euery side, but like an inraged

bore, he ranged amongst them, and in such sort defended himselfe,
that the pagans like larkes fell vnder the houerings of
his wings. But yet alas, all his prowesse had profited him
but litle, and he was at the point of taking or killing, when
Thyery & Florion his brothers, with Huon of Burdeaux,
with diuors christians, by great chance came to his rescue.
Brother Bertran (said Florion) now or neuer remember
who you are, and banish the feare of a pagan infidell, and
with that word he thrust into the prease, ouerturning and
killing al that stood betweene him and his brother. When
Bertran saw him, he tooke new courage, and like a lion rouzed
himselfe with greater furie: in so much, that he strake Esclamart
to the earth, whom Florion like a gripe seized vpon,
and deliuered him to two stoute christians, who bare
him to their tents. Then began the battell Hydra-like to
renew, in which the pagans died without number, for whom
soeuer Bertran touched, neuer more stood need of the phisition:
on the other side his brother Guion did wonders who
encountred a king named Afriquant, who was exceeding
strong and valiant, him Guion ouerthrew to the ground,
but a band of Sarazens despight his head, mounted him againe,
and assailed Guion in cruell maner: but like a wise and
valiant knight, he defended himselfe from their furie. Then
came Huon of Burdeaux, who like a valiant knight of vnspeakable
vertue, 
                           •
                        lew infinite troupes of the pagans: but
when he saw yong Guion in hazard, he turn
                           •
                        d vnto him, &
in a moment, deliuered him from the swords of 
                           •
                        hose miscreants.
Atal this, the battell weakened no deale, yet might you
haue seene as many knights lie dead on the earth, as starres
in a winters night shine in the heauens, and so many masterlesse
horses posting about the fieldes, as atomies playing
in the sunnes beauty: yea, so valiantly our christians bare
themselues in that conflict, that in the end the pagans were
discomfited, as you shall heare hereafter.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     1 How Florion the yongest brother was taken prisoner
by K. Brandus. 2 How the pagans were ouerthrown.
3 How Florion was giuen in exchange for king Goham
                        Gaifiers brother, and other aduentures.
                     
                        MIghtie was the s
                           •
                        urre, and most dreadfull
the battell, in which our christians shewed
the renoume of their valiancies, but aboue
all, the price of victory seized on the helmet of
Bertran, for the number which he slew, were
accounted numberlesse: euen the yongest of
the brothers, most delicate Florion, did that day marueilous
acts, who beholding a pagan in his presence to kill a christian,
swore deuoutly, his hand shold be his reuenge: but the
pagan flying before him, thrust himself to a batalion of Sarazens,
where Florion ouertaking him, slew him in his enterance.
But euill befell that chaunce to the yoong gallant,
who imagining to returne, found himself inclosed on euery
side with the power of king Brandus, which thē were twentie
thousand pagans: all with one violence they laied siege against
Florion, but preuailed nothing against him, vntill by
an euill misfortune, they killed his horse, who in his falling,
fell vpon him: by which meane, and no other, they tooke him
prisoner, and sent him to Damascus. Then Brandus brought
his armie into the heart of the batel, with whose sight, it recouered

new life, became sharper then at the beginning.
                     2 Yet was Bertra
                              •
                           
                         so feared amongst the pagans, that
not any durst stand before him, but if any by chance did, they
neuer after were beholden to their surgeon: so mightie and
inuincible was his force that day, that by him king Goham
the brother of Gaifier was taken prisoner, whom he commaunded
to be brought to his tentes. Not farre from 
                           •
                        im,
his brother Guion, like a demie-god of armes, incouraged
his souldiours, charging them for the honour of I
                           •
                        sus
Christ, and his deare passion, that day to be inuincible: for
though the pagans be infinite, yet their flight is shamefull.
To this renowned Guion belonged a squire, whose name
was Regnier the sonne of his sister, who with a battell-ax
which hee held, strucke a pagan named Tufier, thwart the
helmet, with such vertue, that he c
                           •
                        aue his head to his shoulders.
When Guion sawe the mightinesse of his blowe, he
went vnto him, and embracing him, gaue him the second
order of knighthood, saying. Thou branch of the stocke from
whence I am descended, continue thy magnanimitie, & by
that honour, to which I couet to aspire, I will make thee
the commander of a towne, or a stat
                           •
                        ly castle. Euen in his
greatest mightinesse was the battell, when Bandus had
ioyned his armie with the others. There might you haue
séene so many lost heads, so many forsaken bodies, so many
ouerthrowne knights, so many vnbckt horses, who trailing
their bridles vnder them, 
                           ••
                        ode their masters to pieces:
that since the Lamb of Glory was shadowed vnder the
spotlesse wombe of a virgine, the like hath not bene seene,
nor heard tel of, nor that so great resistance could be made by
so few as our poore christians: For the pagans were in number
one hundred thousand and more▪ but our christians by
their valure, lest but ten thousand which were not slaine or
taken. The king Bandus was in the m
                           •
                        dst of the christian

armie, of whom he made mighty destruction. Among whom
he thrust one noble christ
                           •
                        an to the hart: and after him, like
a wolfe in a flocke, sent a number to follow him. On the
other side of the field was Bertran triumphāt with victory,
ranging to seeke his brethren. Two of them hee quickely
found out, who were ioyfull to behold their conquest. Brothers,
said Bertran, where is Florion? I know not, quoth
Guyon, it is conuenient that we goe séeke him. Then put
they themselues into the battell to search him out, but could
not find him: and there was reason, for he was straightly
imprisoned at Damascus in a strong tower. When Bertran
saw he could not find him, he took a solemne oath, that
nothing but the extreame darknes of the night should driue
him from the field, and with that he beganne a new conflict,
proposing his body against a world of swords: but how many
soeuer he dismounted, neuer rose againe to become armed.
Amongst the rest he encountred Croniquant, vnto
whom he gaue such a blow, as he cl
                           •
                        ue him in two pieces.
Now began the Pagans to recoi
                           •
                        e, & flie 
                           •
                        oward the towne,
whereof when Bandus was aduertised, be vsed all his force
and eloquence to returne. But it was in vaine, for they reported
how king Esclamart, Goham, and diuers others
were taken prisoners, an
                           •
                         carried to the Christians tents:
which so soone as he heard, he betooke himselfe to flight also,
wh
                           •
                        m Bertran, Guion, Thyerry, and Huon chased so
fiercely, that they put many of them to the sword, as they
ent
                           •
                        ed the gates of the citie. Reignier in this chase, whom
Guion had newly made knight, behaued himselfe so valiantly,
that he was named the Pagan
                           •
                         tormentor. Thus
entred king Bandus into the towne, with tenne thousand
that suruiued of an hundred thousand and better. Thus the
Sarazens were ouerthrowne by the valure of our Barons:
who as the storie reports, were so noble in their conquests,
that nothing could resist them. They in this battel lost but

foure thousand men, and the wealth they gained was so innumerable,
that the basest in the Christian army, was able
to purchase a castle. Besides kings, they had an hundred of
the greatest pagans prisoners. Yet for all this, the generals
were not committed, but sorrowed for the losse of their brother
Florion, to whose fortune they knew not what had
chaunced. Briefly, their woe was so great, that no tong
is able to report it. But leauing them in their doubtfulnesse,
let vs returne vnto king Bandus, who being entered
into the citie, and sad for his discomfiture, commanding
Florion to be brought before him, saide: Christian, I
charge thée without any dissembling, tell me thy name.
Pagan, answered he, in whom it was impossible for feare
to haue anie residence, I hate the thing from which thou
bindest me: know then I am called Florion, and so they
baptized me, as those know that are acquainted with me.
I haue thrée brethren whom thou oughtest excéedingly to
hate, for they haue vowed neuer to part or turne aside, vntill
they haue taken the city of Damascus, and conuerted hir
people vnto our Religion. But I wonder much, I sawe
not Baucamont all this day, surely he either ouersléepeth
his glorie, or wanteth courage to sustaine himselfe in combate.
Christian (said Bandus) he is at Montment, and
from thence is comming with a mightie hoste, to chastise
your follies, amongst whom is a Pagan named Meruine,
whose very rumour of excellencie, will daunt you with amazement.
But letting those things passe, tell me I pray
thée, from what line art thou descended? My fathers name,
said he) is Gualtier of Denmarke, that now ruleth Babilon,
whose mightie prowesse hath conuerted millions of
your faith, to a perfit and true religion. Duke Oger also is
mine vnckle, who conuerted king Moysant, and that worthy
sonne of his called Florion, who as the fruit of baptisme
gaue me the name I now carry: know then, if by thée my

death be procured, not all the kingdoms of the world can
shilter thee from vengeance. Be therefore aduised by me, and
let me returne to my brethren, so shalt thou please them, and
rescue thy fortune from a greater mischiefe. By Mahomet
(replied 
                           
                              •
                           andus) though thy youth and smiling eloquence
might in a milder regard then mine, pay thy ransome, yet
know, I am so farre at 
                           〈◊〉
                         with relenting clemencie,
that before the sunne decline an hower lower, thy head shall
bée twentie score from thy body.
                     3 But when Gaifier heard him, he sayd, remember king
Bandus the famous prisoners & our fellow kings who bide
within the christians iurisdictions. In my conceite it were
more wisedom to exchange him, then by his death to hazard
al their fortunes: & I beseech you, if they will render my brother
Goham for him▪ that you will yeeld and be pleased. I am
most willing answered Bandus, t
                           •
                        y your fortune in the affaire.
Then departed Gaifier, and came to the tents of the
chri
                           •
                        tians, at such time as our barons were set downe to
supper, whom in this maner he saluted. The great god Mahomet
preserue king Bandus, and direct his counsels▪ and
that God which you adore, soone dispatch you from the borders
of th
                           •
                        se countreys. Guion, & you other commaunders
of this christian societie, Bandus by me demaunds if you
well ransome your brother from imprisonment for one of
those kings you haue taken, which I shall nominate▪ With
all my he art (sayd Guion) whose heart for ioy would haue
leapt from his bosome, when he heard Florion was not
dead: name whom thou wilt, and he shall bée giuen for his
ransome. Then deliuer (said he) Goham my brother. Immediately
was Goham fetcht, and his forfeit armes deliuered
him, and so conducted by Guion, Bertran, Thierrie
and Huon, euen vnto the wals of the ci
                           •
                        ie. And Florion
armed stood in the port where the exchange was solemnly

finished: Gaifier and Goham entring in, and Florion issu
                           ••
                        g
forth, who vowed by the g
                           •
                        ory of his Sauiour, to pay
his hoste a round payment for his short entertainement.
Then came his brothers who imbraced him, and pompoufly
brought him to their tents, where still remained many
Pagan prisoners, vnto whom Bertran saide, that if they

                           〈◊〉
                         not remoue then false idall Mahomet, and be willin
                           •••
                        
b
                           •
                        ptiz
                           •
                        d, they should 
                           〈◊〉
                        : but they like diuels hardener

                           〈◊〉
                         their m
                           •
                        schiefe, r
                           •
                        fused. Then said Guion, Brother

                           〈…〉
                         these kings safely in prison, vntill the
emperour Charles returne from the holy S
                           •
                        pulchre, who

                           〈…〉
                         with our father: so shal the emperour

                           〈◊〉
                         with our gift, and applaud the honour of our
swor
                           •
                        s. It plea
                           •
                        eth me excellently, saide Bertran: so dispa
                           •
                        ching
their prisoners into strong 
                           〈◊〉
                        , they went to
their 
                           •
                        est, till earely in the next morning, at what time
they valiantly assaul
                           •
                        ed the towne, but with fruitlesse successe:
for why the city was strong
                           •
                        y fortified and peopled,
with aboundance of all nations, who defended it (
                           〈◊〉
                        
with losse) to their hie admiration. And in that do
                           •••
                        full
manner we will leaue them, and speake of King
Mermont, and the euer to be feared
Meruine.
¶
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     1 How King Mermont, Baueamont, Meruine, and two
hundred thousand Pagans ariued before Damascus.
2 The losse the Christians receiued by the valure of
Meruine.
                     
                     
                        THis while was Mermont vpon the
Seas accompanyed with Baucamont,
Antifer, and the puissant
Meruine, but not with the good
Knight sir Drohes, for when hee
knew the expedition was made against
the Christians, he refused
the Kings colours, and staied with
the Angell of women, diuine Berea,
who was richer in nothing than in the riches of his
company: so prosperous were the windes to their sailing,
that within a very sh
                           •
                        rt space, they attained to the sight
of Dam
                           •
                        scus, where they landed about two leagues from
the citie.
                     Now the Historie reporteth, that there was a certaine
espiall, who beholding their landing, ranne to the tents
of the Generall, and cried out, My lords, why haue you
neglected to defend yonder hate-nourishing hauen, where
euen now there is landed so many Pagans, as it is impossible

to number. Bertran more angry to feare, then heare
his words, said Anaunt villaine, thunder thy threats in the
ea
                           •
                        es of dead men, we feare no Pagans a pinn
                           •
                        . Sir, said
the spie, belieue me for certaine, I haue seene an hundred
thousand or more. When the rest heard, and saw his constancie,
they said, let vs arme our selues, prouidence auoideth
had-I-wist. When they were all armed, Guion called
Bertran and Thierry, and said, I pray you stay behinde
with fiue thousand souldiers, to this end, that if they of the
citie issue vpon vs, you may preuent them from inclosing
vs behinde: to this they were agreed. So Guion and the
rest went against the Pagans, who beganne to approach a
little before the euening. The rig
                           •
                        t renowmed Meruine
marched before the rest, and with him onely Croisant, and
Iacob, whose conference was the praysing of Drohes, in
that he had refused to beare armes against his owne religion,
to which praise Meruine lent double commendations,
affirming him as well worthy the title of a King, as
the honour of Knighthoode. All the while that they were in
praysing Drohes, Mermont was encouraging his souldiers,
saying: Now was the time for them or neuer, to raise
on high their god Mahomet. In these discourses they did
march alongest a riuer, which led them to a broade and
spacious field, where the Christians were ready to charge
them.
                     2 Amongest whom, Huon with his launce in his rest,
dis
                           •
                        anged himselfe against Meruine, vpon whom he broke
his staffe with such fury, that the more Meruine was astonished,
the more he highly esteemed him, tha
                           •
                         lent him
the cause of amazement, yet not accustomed or willing to
die in any debt to so good a creditor, he assailed Huon so valiantly,
that hee bare him from the crupper of his horse
backe: the shame of which fall, lent sorrow to the soule of

                        Huon, because till that houre, not any, how puissan
                           •
                         soeuer,
had power to make him loose his stirrops. When as
Meruine had thus dismounted him, he turned to Huon,
and deliuering him his horse, said Noble Christian, mount
thy selfe againe, for so excellently haue I tasted of thy vertue,
that I will not wrong thée to purchase a kingdome.
Then va
                           •
                        ted Huon vppe into his saddle, eased with this
hope, that a world of Pagans that same day should pay
for the shame which Meruine had done vnto him. Now
by this time was Meruine like vnto lightning flowen into
the middest of the armie, and Mermont like him, was
amongst the strongest battallions, whom the gentle Florion
at the first encounter ouerthrew euen vnto the verie
ground, and had in the same moment cut off his head, if he
had not béene relieued by a strong band of Sarazens, who
mounting their Lord againe, flew all vpon the infant, but
so gallantly did he defend himselfe, that they all started
backe, and the boldest du
                           •
                        st not giue another onset. Then
cried he aloft. Denmarke, and victory, which as soone as
Huon hea
                           •
                        d, like a madde man he ranne into the battell,
and the first he encountred, was Marquant, whom he so
saluted, that his head flew in two pieces: and after him, a
second, a third, and a fourth fell dead to the ground before
him, so mightily he sought to reuenge the shame Meruine
had giuen him. And in briefe, such was his prowesse that
he soone deliuered Florion from the throng of his enemies.
Not farre from them was Guion, who had made a great
sl
                           •
                        ughter of the Pagans, for from one at a blow he strake
his eare from his head, and his head from his shoulders.
Then old Baucamont aduance himselfe, who had but one
arme, in which he held a strong launce, wherewithall hee
was inflamed to assaile Guion, but he 
                           •
                        ailed of his intent,
though Guion failed not at all of his purpose, for with his
sword, as he passed by, he strucke that arme also from his

shoulder, to the terrour of the beholders, and torment of
Baucamont, who hauing neuer an arme left, cryed o
                           •
                        t:
Now am I the most misera
                           •
                        le 
                           〈◊〉
                         raigning vnder the
sunne, who am as hatefull to my selfe as fortune: and with
that passed through his army, who sorrowed in beholde his
misfortune. When they of the Citie heard the rumo
                           •
                        r of this
battell they issued out of the towne, but were immediately
intercepted by Bertran, Thyerie, and fiue thousand christians,
who brauely set vpon them. Bertran, who was most
hardy was the first that charged, and méeting with a noble
Sarazin, named Moysant, stroke him dead from his horse:
after him foure more in the same ranke he after the same sorte
serued, and then cried: This day (trai
                           •
                        ors) shalbe Doomes
day to your generation. At which wordes his brother Thyerie
and all the army gaue a most courag
                           •
                        us charge, and ouerthrew
a thousand Pagans that neuer rose againe to draw
sword in anger. What shal I write more? Bertran his brother,
and their souldiors (though not without great perill) so
behaued themselues against the citizens that if they had bin
any more then fiue thousand▪ the Pagans had neuer passed
to ioyne with the great new landed army. But now the day
failed, and the night beganne to shut in the sunnes windowes,
which was propitious for our christians because, if
the day had endured, the valour of Meruin had ouerthrowne
their reputation: but now, by reason of the darkenesse, a retreite
was sounded: for which Meruine was g
                           ••
                        eued, and
said, they had coniured vp cloudes to shadowe their flying.
But notwithstanding, all parts were content to vse the present
benefite. Now Guion and Bertran are returned vnto
their tentes hugely inraged▪ and Bertran said: Brothers 
                           •
                        nd
Lords, this might hath the Pagans worst vs, but if I liue
til the morrowe (God being mine ayder) I will atchieue
such wonders, that the bloody liuery my sword shall put on,
shall last longer then their religion. Now the Tables being

couered, the noble company sate downe to supper, where
they were honourably serued. After supper, as soone as the
tables were taken away, and the watch set, the Generals
went to their rest, til the morning starre awakened the sun
from slumber: then rising and arming themselues, they martialled
their army into a warlike proportion, intending to
assault the pagans, who on the other side were euery deale so
watchfull, and stoode ready to behold the signall. Guion the
vertuous Dane beholding both parties equall preparation,
fell downe vpon his knées, and thus prayed: Thou true
God of vs and our forefathers, I beséech thée in this battell
be our guide and our defender: lift high the glorie of thine
owne name, and bruze the armes of thy professed enemies,
increase in vs euerlasting spirites of courage, that no scandalous
report of our misfortune, bring our aged fathers
haires to the graue with disquiet: if otherwise it be thy wil,
that our death shall this day giue an end to our aspirings,
yet thou Lambe of Redemption, and thou God of Israell,
vouchsafe that our soules may be placed with thy saints in
Paradice. As soone as he had thus said, bowing his head, he
kissed the earth 3 times for remembrance of the holy Trinity.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     1 How the Christians were vanquished by Meruine,
2 How Guion, Bertran, Thyerrie, Florion and Huou of
Buraeaux were taken prisoners and carried to Damascus.
                     
                     
                        AFter Guion had ended his Prayer and ceremony,
he came to his brethren, and saide: Princes, I beseech
you in the honour of the holy passion of our
great God, blot from your thoughts, the remembrances

of all worldly action▪ out 
                           〈◊〉
                         all your vnderstandings
he applied to the axaltation of our true religion, and the
destruction of these faithlesse miscreants. This said, they
marched towards their enimies. And the Pagans rāged on
the other side, came prowdly against them. But now by this
time was sprung vp in Mermont and the other Pagan
princes, a mightie enuy against Meruine, as if his glorie
darkened their praise, and it seemed to them, that without
his assistance they were able to vanquish the christiās wherfore
Mermont came vnto him and said: Meruine, thou
art too valiant and ouer daring, to march thus before continually
in the hazard of all chances, I pray thee stay behind
with two and twentie thou
                           •
                        and, and approch not vntil the
extremitie of our last fortunes call thee, because, in thée consists
our hope, and thy losse will giue an assuraunce to their
conquest. I will (said Meruine) doe what your Maiestie
commaunds me; but of my lif
                           •
                        , there is no wisedome in this
pollicie, for I know by proofe that all your mightines is not
able to resist their prowesses: yet notwithstanding approue
your imagination, & if fortune proue contrary, mine aide shal
not be far distant, though what you do in my conceite) is but
to gaine that which I regard not. I meane this dayes glory,
and not as you pretend, my safetie. And it was true he prophesied,
for they enuied he should beare away the prize in ech
battel, and he but the son of Barbin the marchant. Now began
the allarum to lighten in the eares of ech army▪ & a resolued
pagan named Turquant was the first that charged, whō
                        Bertran separating himselfe, incountred with such violence,
that his lance making way through both his sides▪ caried him
to the ground, his first and last mother: at this the battel
                           •
                        es
ioyned, like the outrageous méeting of many confused waters,
where the Christians bare themselues most valiantly,
and in the first shocke ouerthrew a thousand Pagans dead to
the ground. Bertran, who as yet had not broken his launce,

méeting with M
                              •
                           rbrom, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         him to the heart, and brake
his launce with the incounter. Then drew he his sword,
with which he excellently knew wh
                           •
                        n to aide, when to def
                           •
                        nd,
and when to assaile▪ and with it did wonders. Guion
his brother strake Acquilant▪
                         but not he of Lucerne, but an
other, whom at the first blowe he diuided to the girdle, and
then c
                           •
                        ied, Forward in the name of 
                           •
                        od, you christi
                           •
                        n nations,
the day is o
                           ••
                        s. Thus said Guion, whilest Thyerie,
who held his sword in both his han
                           •
                        s, was with his brother
Florion in the middest of the army, making an admirable
slaughter. Now 
                           •
                        eganne the 
                           ••
                        ttell to be strong and fearefull,
in which the Pagans died innumerably: and the christians
increased so highly in their resolutions, that the Saraze
                           •
                        s
began, from a little recoyling to betake themselues to
a maine flight, in which Baucamont 
                        
                           •
                        as slaine by Bertran
and Mermont taken pris
                           •
                        ner, and with him diuers
o
                           •
                        hers of the greatest estimation, who were carried to the
tents to accompany Esclamart, that had runne the way of
dishonour before them. 
                           •
                        ut now beholde the exchange of
immortall fortune, our thrice renowned christians, in whom
Conquest seemed to be prowd, because shée liued, and who
r
                           •
                        turned victors from euery battell, shall vnluckily bee vanquished
and ouerthrowne by the hand of their néearest cohsine,
most absolute Meruine.
                     
                     You haue heard before, how Meruine staied behind with
twenty thousand, according to the commandement of Mermont,
to whom as soone as a Pagan had declared the mightie
o
                           •
                        erthrowe that was befallen them, with a smiling anger
he said: 
                           •
                        he King and his Princes imagined to subdue the
christians without Mernine, in despight of Meruine, but it
is happened otherwise, and themselues are forsaken for forsaking
Meruine. Well, now shal they know my power, and
the woorth o
                           •
                         my seruice, for before the euening shall call
foorth the Moo
                           •
                        e to appeare in the great Starre-chamber, I

wil reuenge them on their enemies, and restore their liberty.
This saide, he broached his renowmed beast, and with his
army gaue a hote charge on the christians, who when they
beheld Meruine (though not discoraged) yet were they wo
                           •
                        
                        derously
amazed: and not without good cause▪ for his men
were fresh, and Meruine the best knight that in the worlde
then liued, and they both ouerto
                           •
                        de and weary. Which
when Bertran sawe, hée saide, Courage immortal spirites,
and be not dismayed to beholde these Pagans: as I beare
faith to my Sauiour, they are no more to be este
                           •
                        med then
the withered grasse in a medo
                           •
                         or the stalkes of corne in the
hand of a shearer. By my life saide Huon) I thinke those
we haue slaine haue purchased a new resu
                           •
                        rection. Not so
(saide Guion] beholde how they lie in heepes one vpon an other.
After this talke they prepared themselues, and incountred
their enemies, whome they assailed with vnspeakeable
resolution, but to too little profit, for their wearinesse had
so much weakened them, that the Pagans slewe them most
p
                           •
                        teously: and Meruine so victoriously tr
                           ••
                        mphed where he
went, that not any escaped with life, on wh
                           •
                        me the weight
of his arme descended. He slew Reignier, Guyons young
knight, and after him another, and another, and al whosoeuer
was within the reach of his 
                           •
                        urie. Our barons were astonished
to behold his resolution: and yet more great incombrances
immediately fell vpon them: for why, the citizens issued
againe, and the rather, at the 
                           ••
                        reaty of Guyda w
                           •
                        o besought
them to ayde her to tak
                           •
                         him aliue, who had slaine her
father: to whome Pimon declared, that Bertran was he that
slew him in the great battell, whome Guyda mightily desired,
and inwardly loued, imagining her selfe happy if shee
might but behold him. The Pagans assured her her wish,
and so sallied out vpon the christians, on whom Meruin had
raigned lamentable misfortunes.
                     
                        
                        
                           •
                         Now were the gallants of christendome inclosed on euery
side, they of the citie behinde them, and Meruine before
them, who alone was the planet of their destruction:
for why, no force was proofe against his magnanimitie.
When Florion sawe that he alone held in his hand their destinies,
he prest vnto him, and gaue him such a blow, thwart
the helme, that he closed his eyes from the day light. But
Meruine recouering himselfe, payed him backe so heauy
a requitall, that hée strake the infant from his horse to the
ground backeward, who was no sooner downe, but Sarazens
eagerly le
                           •
                        pt vpon him: to whome Meruine saide,
Kill him not (souldiours) on your liues, for he that wounds
him, woundeth my soule also. Thus was one of the foure
brethren taken, for whome was made piteous lamentations.
                     There was at this instant left of the Christians but ten
thousand, who with one voyce cryed on God to be their ayder:
and Bertran sayd, follow mée (my hearts) one God, one
honour, and one graue: and then like a tempest of thunder
he cast himselfe into the bosome of his enemies, confounding
and killing all betwéene him and the goale of Honour. Meruine
this while chased the Christians to the gates of desolation:
at the which Guion grew madde thorough anger:
and setting himselfe against Meruin, gaue him such a blowe,
that he made him bowe his head to the creast of the great
mare Mordant. But Meruine vnaccustomed to haue any
such manner of regréetings, stroke Thyerrie (who then had
thrust himselfe betwéene them) so mighti
                           •
                         a blowe, that hée

                           •
                        ell to the earth, and was instantly taken prisoner by the
common souldiours.
                     After that Meruine had thus ouerthrowne Thyerrie,
there came a Pagan vnto him, and tolde him, there wer
                           •
                        
two Christians yet suruiuing, whom it was impossible to
take without great effusion, for on whomsoeuer their hands

fall, death followeth. And then hee brought Meruine
where he found Bertran and Huon of Burdeaux, who hauing
ioyned backe to backe, shewed such discipline in armes,
as might well haue remained a myracle to all ages. When
Meruine viewed their couragious resolutions, he grew inamoured
with their vertues: yet for all that, with Entrant
his good sword he strake so manfully at Bertran, that albeit
he neuer bended but to heauen, yet now he was forced to
bow one of his knées to the earth. Then leauing him, he
charged Huon, who seeing the blow, by recoiling backward,
escaped the violence: but the Pagans came swarming so fast
behinde him, that he was able no longer to defend himselfe
against Meruine. Now were all the noble christians
taken, except Guion, who alone with fiue hundred, did defend
himselfe, and they were all that sur
                           •
                        ued. Like a wilde
Bore against a tree inuironed with a kennell of hungry
dagges, so stoode Guion defending his life, and teaching
his followers how to die brauely. But in a trice Meruine
put those fiftie to the sworde, and tooke Guion prisoner,
whom he deliuered to the Pagans, whome he charged vpon
their allegeaunce, and his displeasure, to vse those vertuous
prisoners honourably.
                     When this was done, he went vnto their 
                           •
                        ents, where
hee founde King Mermont, and foure of his consortes:
also King Esclamart and sundrie other Pagans. When
Meruine beheld them, hee sayd: Kinges and Princes,
what make you heere? I imagined you had ouerthrowne
the Christian army, but I see it is otherwise. Ah Meruine
(sayd Mermont) euen for thy countries sake, and the honour
of Mahomet, deliuer vs from this thraldome. Thou
art onely wise, onely valiant, and onely most fortunate.
Mermont (sayd Meraine) thy freedome is already paid
for, and then cutting their bandes in sunder, made them
free from their af
                           ••
                        ictions. This done, M
                              •
                           ruine commanded

the tentes t
                           •
                         be ransacked, and all the wealth there of which
was exceeding much, to be brought into the city. Then when
al was performed▪ and they returned into the pallace in Damascus,
Meruine commaunded all the prisoners whom he
had taken to be brought before him, and the other Pagan
princes: which being accordingly effected, Guyda lookt vpon
Bertran with a burning eye of desire, and an amorous amazement
sayi
                           •
                        g to Mermont, can your Maiestie possibly
behold a semblance that more exquisitly resembleth the gallant
features of our most famous Meruine then this christian,
if his lineaments were as bigge and as largely shaped?
It is most true Madam (saide Bandus) and the more I beholde
him, the more I beholde him in him: How Princesse,
(replied Meruine) is there in euery place one like me? Heretofore
you said I did resemble Duke Oger, and am I now
become like this christian? what, is hee also of Ogers li
                           •
                        e?
Then turning to Bertran, he saide: Christian, I beseech
thee without dissembling tell me the name of thy father, and
the descent of thy predigree. Pagan, said Bertran, we whom
you behold are the foure brethren that haue tormented Paganisme,
and yet hope to be the last end of their destruction,
Gautier of Denmarke is our father, who wanne his crowne
with his sworde: and Oger whom you so renowne, and
whom Enuie her selfe dare not but extoll, is brother to Guion
our grandfather, who now ruleth Ierusalem: It is m
                           •
                        st
true, said a Pagan standing by, Guion king of Ierusalem
is brother to Oger, whom I beheld in excellent combate to
kill Bruhier before the walles of Laon, and his brother Iustament
before Accre so fierce and valiant is the descent of
their pedig
                           ••
                        e. By Mahomet (said Meruine) sith I resemble
Oger, I would I were also of his issue: and so hee
was, though mischiefe and euil 
                           〈…〉
                         it from his knowledge:
but the time commeth, in which he shall know himselfe
and his of-spring. Thus (as you haue heard) questioned

the Pagans with Bertran, who most stoutly made replies.
Then Mermont rising vp saide to Bertran: All thy
linage hath béene the scourge and ruine of our religion: and
I am too well assured, that nothing but your deaths can giue
peace to our quiet: wherefore (Meruine) it is most necessarie
they die, to excuse our further trouble. Not so my
Lorde (aunswered Meruine againe) wee will not wedde
Tyranny and Conquest together: besides, I vowed in my
selfe, not to doe them indignitie, till I haue taken, as them,
their father Gautier prisoner: which done, I will in a royall
nauy crosse the 
                           •
                        eas, & lay siege to the flourishing citie of Paris,
and giue battel to the emperor Charles that is surnamed
Great: and by the aid of Mahomet I doubt not to bring
all France to my subiection. When Meruine had thus said,
he commanded the foure brethren and all thother christian
prisoners to be strongly imprisoned in an impregnable tower,
where Bertran consumed his time in lamentation for his
royall father and mother. It hapned that Guyda, & Goham
the brother of Gaifier, being one day vnder the turret, they
heard the complaints of the haplesse Christians. Sir (saide
Guyda) what is he that now speaketh, know you his voice?
Madam (saide Goham) it is the mightiest of the 4 brethren,
and the most absolute knight in the world next Meruine, &
his name (as I take it) is Bertran, whose linage is as great
as his minde, both incomprehensible. After these speeches
they departed: but from Guyda neuer departed the remembraunce
of those speeches: wherefore as she went, she said to
her selfe that▪ 
                        Bertran from her loue should finde an inuincible
army to release him, and that her desires should atend on
him whilest her heart entertained a sympathy of his afflictions.
Now were they returned to the pallace, where all the
Pagan princes were set, who both honoured, and scared
Meruine greatly, be
                           •
                        ause, when he was angry, he spa
                           •
                        ed
no creature, of what estate soeuer, but dealt his almes alike

to all that maligne him. When supper was ended, Meruine
commaunded that all the slaine Pagans should haue souldier-like
buriall: which being doone, amongest the dead was
found king Baucamont, whom Meruine inter
                           •
                        d r
                           •
                        yally, offering
in his obsequies, honorable lamentations. As soone as
the next day appeared aboue the mountaines, Meruine commaunded
all his army to be mustred, for he would instantly
march towards Babylon. Wherefore calling king Bandus
vnto him, he gaue him the charge and gouernement of that
citie of Damascus, swearing him to his allegeance, and
with carefull respect to nourish and guard the honourable
christian prisoners, and also with all the reuerent obseruances
appertaining to so great a Maiestie, to adore and renowne
the excellent princesse Guida. When euery ceremony
of his charge was ended, he, king Mermont, and a
thousand Pagans tooke shipping for Babylon, where
we will leaue them, and a while discourse
of other matters.
¶
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIIII.
                     How Charlemaine departing from France to see the holy
sepulchre, arriued at Babylon, and was royally receiued
of King Gualtier. 2 Of the Embassage two Pagans
brought from Meruine and Gaudisse. 3 A Councill
holden by the Christians, who demanded day of king
Karaheu, of Florion, of Mesque, and of his father Maysan
                              •
                           ,
at their comming to Babylon.
                     
                        THe Historie reporteth, that in this time the
most famous Emperor Charlemaine would
néedes goe to Ierusalem, to adore the holy
sepulchre, and to that end demaunded of duke
Naymes if he would accompany him in the
voyage, who most willingly agréed, aduising his Maiestie
withall, that it were good to take with him also the reuerent
archbishop Turpin, who had a longing desire to the iorney,
the twelue Péeres, and fiue thousand resolued souldiers, to
the end, that if in that expedition they were incountred with
any Pagan princes, they might yet be able to defend themselues
from mischiefe. Thy counsell pleaseth mée (sayde
Charles) yet I can assure thee we may vnresisted passe euen
vnto Samaria and Damascus, for that the rule of the Christians
runneth euen vnto their citie walls. To be briefe in
my Discourse, after Charlemaine had gathered his traine
together, hée betooke him to the seas, where the gentle
windes lent him so prosperous breath, that in few dayes hée

arriued at a Cape called the Arme of Saint George, where
they landed, and the
                           •
                        ce marched to Babylon, whither they
ranne a little before dinner, where they found Gautier the
nephew of Oger, and with him Claretta his quéene, who
had no vnderstanding of Charlemaines approach till they
beheld him in their pallace. The ioy at their first meeting
was vnspeakable, and their entertainement so royall as
made al 
                           〈◊〉
                         wonder. After many ceremoniall obseruances,
and some repo
                           •
                        e taken, Charlemaine asked Gautier for his
foure w
                           •
                        rr
                           •
                        ly sonnes, whom all the world made so famous
for their 
                           〈◊〉
                        . He replied▪ that they were euen then before
the w
                           •
                        lls of Damascus with a puissant host, where they
had taken Goham and diuers other Kings and prisoners,
and giuen the Pagans a mightie ouerthrow as he was certified
by letters not long since receiued from their 
                           •
                        ents, and
many other discourses they had, which I omit.
                     2 Anone, as the two Kings, Duke Naymes, and the
twelue péeres were deuising of sundry recreations, there entred
into the hall, in prowd and maiesticall manner, tow Pagans,
the one had to name Iuorin Montbrant, the other
Malegrap. A
                           •
                        d when they came iust before Gautier, without
reuerence, the first thus spake: Gautier of Denmarke,
first vnderstand, that we are sent to thée from the puissant
king Mermont, from Gaudisse his royall admirall, from
king Manuel, from Goham king of Egypt, and from fiue
other mightie kings: lastly, though deseruing a title before
al other for the vnvanquishable wonder of knighthood, from
a vassall of king Mermonts named Meruine, who hath vowed
to make all christendome acknowledge no god but Mahomet:
and to that end, by the exquisite perfection of his
magnanimitie, he hath taken thy foure sonnes prisoners,
and slaine all their host, except themselues and thirtie others,
who with them are detained at Damas, whom againe thou

shalt neuer behold, but with sorrow. Now these royall Pagan kings,
and thiefly Mermont, by vs commaundeth that
Pilgrim-like thou appeare before them at Montbrant,
(where they are landed) and on thy knées hum
                           •
                        ly implore
their fauours, so shalt thou purchase thy selfe grace, and
know their pleasures: if otherwise thou resist, with sworde
and fire▪ they will instantly besiege thy cittie. When Gualtier
had heard this thunder of a dismall oracle, his heart
trembled in the armes of griefe and disple
                           •
                        sure: at last,
though it were long ere wordes could find way from amazement,
he said: How can this be true which thou reportest,
when thou saist, my sonnes are detained prisoners? Gualtier
(replied the Pagan) it is most true: then leaue to wonder,
and giue answere to mine embassage.
                     3 At this, for a space they dismist the Pagans whilest the
christians betooke themselues to counsell, where Gualtier demaunded
what course was to be taken in these times of extremitie.
Great princes (said Duke Naymes) this is my
opinion: to the embassadours should no indignitie be offred,
both because they are but the tongues of others hearts, and
also because our barons whom they detaine, are subiect to the
like vengeance, wherefore let vs demaund aide of the Christian
King Karaheu of Iuda, and of the king Moysant, and
his sonne Florion, intreating them, to whose religion and
land it as nearely concerneth, spéedily to repaire with their
forces, and maintaine the Temples of our God, and our
owne liberties. To this counsell euery one concluded. Then
sending for the Pagans againe, thus Gualtier made them
answere: Pagans, returne to your Lordes at your pleasure,
and say to Mermont and the others, that I am heartily
sorie for the thraldome of my sonnes yet can I not alter
their fortunes: as for their inuasion, if they come to ex
                           •
                        le
me▪ my sworde shall defend mée, whilest there is eyther

natiue honour in mée, or till the glorious God of my creation
forsake mée. Say hée saide thus, who will doe thus?
With this answere the Pagans reparted, and Gualtier
dispatched Letters to King Karaheu: and the Emperour
Charles and Gualtier himselfe went to Ierusalem, where
they found the good king Moysant, who entertained them
with royalty beyond expectation. To him Gualtier receunted
his sonnes misfortunes▪ and the threats of his own ouerthrowe
to whome Moysant promised all the aide and succours
of his kingdome. Then went they to the holy sepulchre,
where they offered vp their vowes, gifts, and protestations,
and then with all spéede returned backe to Babylon,
where they found Claretta the Quéene in great perplexitie
of sorrow for the losse of her foure sonnes. The same daie
arriued king Karaheu with seuentéene thousand knights of
estimation, all which were gallantly receiued. The next
morning came Florion of Mesque with fiue thousand, and
his father Moysant with as many: olde Guyon of Denmarke,
the brother of Oger, and the father of Gualtier
was not yet dead, he brought with him foure thousand: so
there was in 
                           •
                        abilon of strange nations thréescore thousand
besides fiue thousand which the Emperour Charles brought
with him. Al which receiued an othe before the throne of the
true God, not to leaue Gualtier till the death. Now let vs
leaue them a while, and returne we to Iuorim, and Malegrap,
the two Embassadours, who returning to Mermont
and the other Pagan Kings, declared their answere the estate
of Babylon, the presence of Charlemaine, and the generall
resolution of the whole nation. Mermont at the first,
with silence beganne to wonder, til Meruine awaking him
saide: What dreame yon of (my Lorde?) my heart is set
on fire with their wordes. I beséech you for honours sake,
let vs march away presently. Héereupon a trumpet was
sounded, and they all departed till they came within halfe a

league of Babylon, their whole army being three hundred
thousand, amongst whom were foure giants, which were
the brothers of Bruhier, whom Oger had slaine before the
walles of Laon. When the Emperour vnderstoode they
were come, he said, it would be a mighty indignitie, if
they should molest him in the towne, wherefore he would
néeds issue foorth, though all the dangers of the world hung
on the aduenture.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     How Charlemaine and all the christian army sallied out
of Babylon. 2 
                           •
                        Of the great battell, and how Meruine
flew Guion of Denmarke his vnknowne vnckle,
3 Also how Charlemaine, Gaultior, and all the twelue
Peers were taken prisoners, and their army discomfited.
                     
                        NOw beganne Charlemaine, by the
summons of the trumpets to gather
together of the christian army
60000, and planting them in a
souldierly proportion for the sally,

                           •
                        ode about the troupes with these
incouragements: You sinewes of
Kings, and vpholders of Mona 
                           •
                        ichies,
I beseech you this day be almightyrn
re
                           •
                        olu
                           •
                        ion and combat agenst that coward Fear,

if he whisper in your heartes a thought of retiring imagine
now the glorie of heauen (for so it is) is to be gotten by the
conquest: and that the height of felicitie, for which from your
infancies you haue made endlesse imprecations, is sent from
aboue, and on this day by your valours to bée atchieued:
that done, angel-like contend for your perpetuall happinesse,
and that crowne of immortall recommendations, which the
God of our forefathers will bestow on euery one that raiseth
his trueth aboue these misbeleeuing, infidels. Behold then,
(you champions of the highest) howe like hunger-starued
beastes they come rauening, and hare alreadie before your
faces deuoured your owne suppers: wherefore reuenge that
indignitie, and maintaine the fréedome of your Religion.
These and manie other spéeches the Emperour Charles vsed,
to which the people answered with shoutinges and reioyeings.
Then might ye haue heard a world of trumpets sound,
double so manie drummes, tabors and tamburins: after
which they marched against the Pagans, who in like maner
came ordered and aranged to the encounter, king Mermont,
with Meruine, being two of the formost leaders.
                     2 When Guion of Denmarke, who was the brother
of Oger and father to Gualtier, beheld Meruine, he charged
his launce and ranne against him, whom Meruin with the
same accomplement regreeted in the incounter: the good old
Guion brake his launce, but without hazard to Meruine,
who on the contrarie part smote him with such fur
                           •
                        e, tha
                           •
                         he
ouerthrew him dead to the ground without motion. When
Gui
                              •
                           ns band beheld that misfortune, they al at once 
                           •••
                        ailed
Meruine seriously: but his defence was gallant, that he slew
all whō he touched. Now ioyned the battel on euery side perillous,
strong, & greeuous against the christians and 
                           ••
                        uel,
& desperat against ye pagans. Mermont Gaudisse & Brandis
that day wondred, for they were at the beginning of the mischiefe:

but aboue all was Meruine highly feared, for death
vpon his sword had taken an euerlasting lodging: he as he
posted, brake their rankes asunder, for not any Christian
durst dare to assaile him. On the other side, Charles the
great, king of Fraunce, duke Naymes and the twelue
peeres, did such admirable exploits by their chiual
                           •
                        ie, that
had it not béene for the inuincible prowesse of Meruine, the
Pagans had not stood one houre before them, albeit they
were thrée hundred thousand: so exp
                           •
                        rt and wise in warrelike
actions was Charles. All this while the battel encreased:
at last Charles incountered with Malegrape, to whom
with Ioyous his excellent sword, he gaue such a blowe that
he diuided him to the nauell, and withall cried, Courage
Mountioy, Saint Denis. When Iuorin beheld Malegrape,
slaine, he thrust himselfe against Charles: but the
emperor gaue him such entertainment, as he fel dead to the
earth backward: after him, another and another. The duke
Naymes imitated themperor as néere as might be, who incountring
Gaifier, cut off one of his armes, & Gautier that
had but newly séene the death of his father, like a mad man
did wonderfull actions: neither was Moysant nor his son
florion short of praise worthy commendations. As for the
good king Karaheu, he was in the midst of the battel, where
he incountred king Mermont, vnto whom he gaue such a
blow▪ that he killed his horse vnder him, and he had then bin
taken prisoner, had he not cried Montment, so lowde, that
Meruine heard him, who thrusting his mare forward, orethrew
all betweene him and Mermont. No sooner was he
séene but all souldiours gaue him place, so wel they kn
                           •
                        w,
and were acquainted with him, only king Karaheu stowtly
withstood him, and strake so mighty a blow on his target,
that in the middest he cl
                           •
                        ue 
                           〈◊〉
                         asunder. Whereat Meruine
was much grieued, and in qu
                           ••
                        al gaue him such a blow with
Entrant, that he claue him to the iawes. Thus was king

                        Karaheu (whose like hardly suru
                           •
                        ued) flaine by Meruine:
who afterward was by a generall Counsell canonized a S.
and called saint Karaheu. Many miracles were done after
the battell, which I may not report, but must returne to
Meruine, who still conquered where he came. Amongest
the rest, he slew a kinseman of Charlemaines, for which
the emperour being displeased, and seeking reuengement,
encountred a pagan whom he ouerthrew, and had flaine,
but for the rescue of many soul
                           •
                        iours. Terrible was the
battell, both of the one side and the other. Notwithstanding
that our Christians were few in number, yet their spirits
so oft redoubled, that their hands were bathed in blood
continually, Gautier straue 
                           •
                        till to reuenge his fathers
death. Meruine to increase his conquest, by hap he incountred
with therie of Dampmartin, throwing horse and man
to thearth▪ and taking him prisoner, bound him with cords.
Then came the earle of Labrec to reuenge Dampmartin:
but the gentle Meruine soone vnhorsed him, and tooke him
prisoner.
                     3 At which Mermont reioyced, because he was the
xv. prisoner Meruine had taken: so greatly were the 
                           •
                        hristians
viscoraged by the prowesse of Meruine, as they now
began shamefully to flie for their safetie, and saue twentie
thousand that still were re
                           •
                        olued, not a man would staie to
sustaine battell. Whereat Charlemaine sorrowed greatly
saying, their shames should not follow him but their owne
confusions: which done, desperately he ran into the midst of
the battell and D. Naimes after him, effecting greater miracles
than before. Meruine rode triumphantly, and in the
end met with the Counte Villiers, the earle of Flanders,
and the 
                           〈◊〉
                         péeres: amongst them began along fearfull, and
a doubtfull battell, but in the end, for all things are subiect
to fortune, they were euery one taken prisoners: so as of the

christian hoste remained no moe commanders but themperor
Charles, and duke Naimes, who defended themselues
gallantly against their enemies. Meruine séeing Charlemaine,
he fell in loue with his vertues, saying: O Mahomet,
bow downe thine eies, and behold 
                           〈◊〉
                         inuincible christians:
and then moued with one enuious loue, and alone,
le
                           •
                        t enuy should wrong so excellent perfection, cried to the
common souldiers, vpon paine of death not to touch them:
which cōmandement they obeyed, for they durst not gainestand.
Then Meruine opposing himselfe against them with
honorable spéeches, the true badges o
                           •
                        perfect magnanimitie,
he said: Princes, yield your selues, when Fortune can
auaile to no more conquest, and inrich me with your names
bicause many pagans haue told me the armes you beare do
belong to France, and that one of you also is the emperour.
Thou saiest true, (said Charles) and know, my name for
dread of any Sarazen was neuer changed: Charles is my
name, Charles that ruleth Rome, Fraunce, and all Christendome:
and 
                           •
                        his is duke Naymes, the nearest to me in
counsell and affection, therefore stand vpon thy guard, and
approch vs not, for here wil we liue, and here will we lear
                           •
                        
to die. Who first presents himselfe to be our tutor, shal neuer
haue other priest, surgeon, or sepulchre. At this speach a
pagan king rusht to duke Naimes, giuing him such a blow
as he strake him to the ground: but the duke quickly recouered
his féete againe, and mad with that amazement, sent
him backe such a requitall, that the Pagan thereof died.
And then were the Emperour and the Duke assailed on euery
side freshly: who notwithstanding defended themselues
valiantly: insomuch that Meruine pitied them, and
stoode in doubt whether it were better he should preuaile, or
they perish. At this he descended from his mare, and embraced
king Charles, to whom he saide, Thou excellent
wonder of Knighthood, alas, thy defence is bootlesse, & I die,

to thinke thy fortune should perish: yield to him, whose pity
thou ha
                           ••
                         taken prisoner in beholding thy vertue. Charls
hearing this, and such honor in his enemy, said: Thou glorious
Almighty, that for their sinne exiled Adam and Eue
from paradise, comfort, and coun
                           •
                        ell me: and with that he
yielded himselfe to Meruine, only desiring him to ballance
his honor▪ not by the foile of his ouerthrow. Sacred emperor
(qd Meruine) feare no misfortune, thy thraldome shall
be but thine owne pleasure: then receiuing his sword, and
taking off his helmet, deliuered him to a band of the noblest
Pagans▪ to whom he gaue so speciall charge of adoration &
reuerence, that like a demie-god he was deified. Duke
Naymes séeing Charlemaine taken, deliuerd his sword to
Meruine. Thus was the emperor Charles, duke Naimes,
the xij péeres, and xxxiiij noble christians taken prisoners,
and all bound one to another, except the emperour, who had
ingaged his royall word t
                           •
                         
                        Meruine, not to depart without
his licence. This being done, and that there was not
left a christian which was not slain or taken, Meruin went
instantly, and gaue an assault to Babilon, but the citizens
knowing it folly to withstand, when their chiefe commanders
were imprisoned, came forth, and deliuered the towne
to their mercie, bowing their neekes to the yoke of slauerie,
renouncing the only true God, became misbelieuing miscreants.
As soone as Mermont was entred into the towne
he imprisoned Charlemaine and the other Chr
                           •
                        stians, in a
tower where they were safely garded, as prizes of inestimable
                           •
                        
value: but king Charles spent all his time in teares
and such like lamentations. Alas, thou maiden mother of
the worlds saluations ought I alone to be the subiect of all
misfortune? must my long admired honor die in so shameful
a graue of disparagement, and must my rule that stretcht
beyond Europe & Asia, be her selfe contained in a square of
this little compasse. If so it must be, it is my sinne, & happie

I, if it alone be chastised for my transgressions: thus spake
king Charles, whose bird flourished like a white palme tree.
Meruine hauing now alittle repasted himselfe▪ called together
the pagan kings and princes, saying: My lords, this
place we must make no place of repast or banquetting, because
s
                           •
                        uggardise is hatefull to the honour, whereto we couet
to aspire: wherefore prepare your selues presently to
depart, for I will not rest till I haue taken Mesques and
Ierusalem, and brought the whole countries thereabout
to our subiection, and taught the people to adore no god but
Mahomet. Lord Meruine, said Mermont, thy will shalbe
our guide, and thy courses shall direct vs: Then sending
their drummes and trumpets about, and sommoning their
bands together triumphantly, they departed from Babylon,
and so restlesse continued in their marchings▪ that they
shortly appeared before the walles of Me
                           •
                        ques, to which
they laid so fearefull a siege, and gaue such maruelous assaults,
as in few dayes they tooke the towne putting man,
woman, and child to the sword, except those that willingly
fell downe and adored Mahomet. Thus Meruine made
himselfe lord and master of Mesques, dor he had a desire to
rule in that citty: yet he would néedes forward to Ierusalem.
So he made a Pagan his lieutenant to rule
only in his name: and with the greatest
pomp that might be, before his departure,
crowned himselfe king
of Mesques.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     1 How Meruine and the Pagan host came before Ierusalem,
2 How the citizens rendred vp the towne. 3
How Meruine refused to enter into the citie, but returnd
to Babilon, at which many of the pagans murmured.
                     
                        AFter Mesques was conuerted to the damnable beliefe
of Mahomet, and Meruine had established it
for his owne gouernment, he would not sléep anie
occasion, but charged all his army to be in readinesse,
for that forthwith he would march to Ierusalem, to
make himselfe lord of that mighty towne and the countrey
thereto adioyning. When Mermont heard him, and saw
the desire he had to spread their law through all nations, he
said: O Mahomet, how great are thy workes, that from
the loines of the poore merchant Barbin, hast 
                           •
                        aised a glorious
branth, to exalt thine honour, and to bring all Christendome
to subuersion? This spake Mermont in the hearing
of Meruine, to whom he did all the reuerend honours
might be deuised: but in soule, both he and all the Pagan
princes extreamely hated him, because the honors wherewith
they shined, were but borrowed from his splendor.
And for that their labours could neuer attaine to a perfite
end, yet they durst not but obey him, feare, not loue being
their ruler. All things being now prepared, they departed
from Mesques, and marched with such prospe
                           •
                        ous expedition,

that they came before the noble and 
                           •
                        acred towne,
where the Lam
                           •
                        e of 
                           〈◊〉
                         all glorie suffred his death and
passion for the worlds redemption.
                     2 As soone as Meruine behold it he practised it and imm
                           •
                        diatly
prepared for so strong and dreadfull assault: so
that the poore Christians beholding their imminent danger,
held a counsell, and concluded to deliuer vp the keyes of the
citie: wherefore comming forth, and casting themselues
prostrate before Meruine, they said: Dread Lord of our
liues and beings, behold, we the chiefe rulers of this haples
towne, render ourselues to thy gratious mercy▪ deliuering
to thée, as to our liege lord, all our possessions, promising to
serue thée loially, and to hold thy faith lawe, and religion.
Meruine hearing them, replied, Citizens stand vp, and be
courageous, for your peace is concluded in an happy houre.
Assure your selues from the honour of my reputation, neyther
man, woman nor child of this towne shall be damnified:
so returne in all peace, and be loyall: for not a souldier
shall come within your gates, but we will all returne vnto
Babilon: then turning to the hoste, he commanded them to
take vp their pauillions, and march towards Babil
                           •
                        n.
                     3 At this all the Sarazens were mischieuously agr
                           •
                        eued,
and with priuate murmuring, railed vpon Meruine,
who to their troubles would allot no ending but notwithstanding,
all they set forward, and by the restlesse labour of
many dayes and nights, at last they arriued at Babylon,
where they banqueted and reposed themselues, the space of

                           〈◊〉
                         dayes. After it hapned vpon a day, that Iacob the merchant
came to Meruine, and said: How now my lord, how
walks loue in your thoughts? what, is he vtterly exiled? is
there n
                           •
                         remnant of memory left to preserue the perfectiōs
of beutifull Berea? Ha Iacob (said he) more then thy blunt

sences are able to measure▪ but why dost thou now examine
me vpon this holy article? For this (said Iacob) that if absented
time haue not shut excellencie in doubtfulnesse, then
would I haue you, that you may by it binde her loue in a
more eternall band of affection. Take Charles, his twelue
peeres, and the rest of thy prisoners, and as the conquests of
thy sword and her beauty, deliuer them to her sacred maiestie,
that she may dispose them, vntill they returne from
Fraunce, and those other countries, which alredy thou hast
subdued, and of which in ensuing time thou shalt be king
and ruler. Iacob qd Meruine, thou hast tutored me to my
contentment, and thy councelis as an Oracle: for to hir and
no other my selfe and my sword is deuoted. As they were
thus conferring Mermont entred in, who with a lowly, yet
kingly adoration, saluted Meruine, and more would haue
done, if he knew, to haue done, more for feare he stood in towards
him, than for any religious affection he bare him:
and then said; My lord qd Meruine, it behooues you now
to thinke of your expedition into Fraunce, and to dispose of
these christians you haue already taken. Saide Meruine,
if your Maiestie will walke into the great hall, where the
rest of the pagan princes are set in counsell, we wil discusse
of this affaire. Meruine calling the gaoler, commanded him
to fetch the prisoners he had in charge. Instātly the Turk
performed his will, and brought forth Charles, the twelue
Peeres, and all the rest of the christian prisoners. As soone
as Meruine saw them he stood vp and said, kings princes,
and barons, My will is, that these Christian prisoners be
conueyed to the castle of Turgon, vntill by my prowesse I
haue conquered France, and all the famous countries bordering
her territories. How (said Gaudisse) or wherefore
shall they be thither haled? O what reason is in so doing?
I tell you, their liues are dangerous death they haue deserued,
and death by my wil shal they haue. Scarce were his

words ended, but another pagan rose vp, saying: Meruine
attend my words. This many yee
                           •
                        s haue I traueld my body,
and wasted my reuenues to effect these conquests, and
shall I now loose my g
                           •
                        erdon? part haue I wonne of these
prisoners, my part will I haue, and that part shall part with
their liues at this present. And I also, said another pagan,
who was both rich in wealth and strong in friends, and his
name was Gratian: tis reason I haue my part and profite
of these prisoners, otherwise princes, let vs ioyne together,
and with our swords diuide them.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     1 How Merui
                              •
                           e would not consent to the death of the
christians. 2 The great battell which fell out in the
palace. 3 How the christians aided Meruine, and how
the pagans came and cried him mercy.
                     
                        WHen Meruin (and not without 
                           〈◊〉
                         saw
the arrogancie of the pagans, and that 
                           〈◊〉
                        
force they would diuide those spoiles 
                           〈◊〉
                        
them, which his sword onely had obtained,
he was almightily displeased, and with a fierie
countenaunce of anger, told them, it should not be as
they had deemed, but that in despight of the proudest in that
assembly, he would beare the christians to Montment:
and as diuine trophees of his affection, he would present thē
                        
to his celestiall Lady and mistr
                           •
                        sse, (as Iacob before had giuen
him counsell) wherefore (sayd he) if there bée any pagan,
of what estate soeuer, that speaks another word of resistanc
                           •
                        ,
Entrant my sword shall be so equall a iudge twixt him & me,
of my vengeance, that the rest shall be warned by his misforture:
and then raising his voyce more higher, What (said he)
will you diuide the things belong to mee at your pleasure? I
sweare by mine homage to Mahomet, the proudst pa
                           •
                        ā that
dares to contradict my wil, or mislikes the intents of mine actions,
shal forfeit his head to my sword presently. As he thus
spake, K▪ 
                        Gratian rose vp who had about him a mighty band
of sarazens, and sware by Mahomet, he would kill Charlemaine,
for he hath bene the scourger & tormenter of our religion.
Therfore (said he) this day wil I take vengeance on his
head▪ and not be withstood by threates, or denied my pleasure
by a boy, ye base son of a silly marchāt. At this word he went
to king Charles, and tooke him by the beard, which was whiter
then snow, saying: false traiterous king, this day will I
hang thee like a thiefe, and withal stroke him with a cudgel.
                     2 Which was so vnpleasant to the eyes of Mer
                              •
                           ine, that
drawing Entrant his sword, he strake king Gratian twixt
the necke and the eare▪ with s
                           •
                        ch violence, that he chined him
euen to the girdle: but no sooner was that fatal blow deliuered
but the whole armie assailed Meruin with infinite violence:
yet miraculously defending himselfe▪ neuer striking in vaine,
so that from euery blow death ensued. There was amongst
them another king, & cosin to Gratian, who was the greatest
setter forward of the sedition him Meruine ouerthrew dead
to the ground, and then began the battell to increase with
huge horrour against Meruine, who like a mad-man laied
about him here and there not sparing any.
                     3 When our christian princes perceiued, that for their safetie

                        Meruin had thrust himselfe into this dāgerous aduētu
                           •••
                        
they concluded among themselues, either to aide him, or p
                           ••
                        rish
in attempting: and thē thrusting themselues before him
they said, courage prince Meruine, this day we will die for
thée, for thou hast beene gracious to our misfortunes, and we
will partake thine ex
                           •
                        remitie. With that, they thrust them
selues against the pagans with euery one a sword in his fist,
making a fearefull and bloudie skirmish, from one they cut
his head, from another his armes, legs from the third, and
generally, life from the most they encountred. Charles in
this battel behaued himselfe most couragiously, but Meruine
more enraged then a long hunted bore, without regard,
made slaughter of al before him, and by the ayde of the christians,
quickly win
                           •
                        wed the hall of liuing creatures. Meruine
seeing this, sayd to the christians: Lards, beware that by
you no treason be
                           •
                        ide my fortune, for then shal your vniustnes
giue shame to your valu
                           •
                        es. Prince Meruin qd Charls,
doubt not our trustinesse, who whilst we breath, wil not faile
thy fortune, & when thou art conqueror be iudge of our liues
& deaths as please thée. After these speeches they al issued out
of the hal, & assailed the pagans on euery side, who with feare
were so s
                           •
                        rprised, that they 
                           〈◊〉
                         not to what fortune to betake
thē
                        ▪ but cried out: woe alas, Meruin is inraged, he hath
forgot, Mahomet, & is become a christian. Notwithstanding
this Meruine and the christians pursued them, aud as the historie
saieth, slew 64. in a moment, which not a litle grieued
Mermont, who now could not record any meane how to appease
Meruine. At last he called Barbin, and with teares besought
him to coole the fi
                           •
                        e of his sonn
                           •
                        s wrath: & then they
two ioining together, went, & on their knees cast themselues
before him, whilest Mermont said: 
                           •
                        rince Meruine▪
                         for the
loue of Mahomet and Barbin thy father, and in ruth of my
teares whom sometimes thou hast called thy soueragine▪ appease
thy iust indignation, and Ile sweare vnto thée by the

hoste of Mahomet to performe thy wil in al things, & if it be
pleas
                           •
                        ng in thy sight, henceforth become thy subiect. By Iupiter,
said Meruine, thou hast spoken in a happy houre, Rise
father▪ and rise king of Montment, mine anger shal breake,
if my wrongs be amended. Then turning to the christians,
he sayd, Princes, returne into the hal, for a t
                           •
                        uce shalbe concluded,
& my wil no more neglected. No sooner had he spoken,
but Charles & his peers, retur
                           •
                        ed into the pallace, and Meruine
with an angry looke sayd to the pagans: Princes, imagine
mée not satisfied, though I shew a relenting: for by my
right hand, my seruants death shall not be dismissed, till the
proudest of you all, vpon your knées▪ come & cry me mercy.
At this, all the pagans cast themselues on their faces before
him, and with one voy
                           •
                        e cried, haue mercy vpō vs inuincible
prince Meruine, and thy will shall be the law to rule vs and
our nations. Here pitie tooke place in the eyes of Meruine,
and raising them from the earth, gaue to them new peace
and comfort. Which done, he bade them arme themselues
to guard those christians to the castle on Furgon, which is
scituate within Montment, where he intended to detaine
them till his returne from France & her neighbor countreis,
where he ment to ruinate their abbeys, and burne the monasteries
of ancient foundation: this done, they ran & kissed
his féete in signe of their subiection, glorying that by him
they and their lawes should be so highly exalted. Thus triumphed
they with proud hearts, but I fear me within short
space they will haue other resolutions: for euen now almost
is the sacred 
                           ••
                        nger of the diall, vpon the hower in which
Meruine shall know, who is his tru
                           •
                         father, and the
royall descent of his glorious pedegrée: a history
more delectable to heare, then those iarring
tumults already 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        r passed.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     1 How Meruine departing from Babylon, brought
Charlemaine and the other Christians to the castle of
Turgon. 2 Of the apparition of the angel to Charles. 3
How Meruine knew himselfe to be the sonne of Oger,
and the fairy Morgue.
                     
                     
                        THe history reporteth, that during the time that
Meruine was in Babylon (where he brought
the pagans and Sarazens to such subi
                           •
                        ction,
that his very lookes commanded them to all
humblenes) the good king Charles who many
times with zealous admiration beheld Meruine, at last imagined
him so liuely to present the image of Oger, that he
could not chuse▪ but one day sayd vnto him prince Meruine,
I know not thy descent nor generation, but of what or
whence soeuer thou art, beléeue me thou doest so liuely resemble
the most victorious duke of Denmarke prince Oger,
that were but haire discouered vpon thy youthfull ch
                           •
                        nne, I
would haue sayd, thou hadst bene no likelyhood, but the selfsame
most excellent creature: for of my soule there is not the
greatest master painter in the world that can so vere
                           •
                        y 
                           〈◊〉
                        
his per
                           •
                        ra
                           •
                        t as thine owne lookes: neither dis
                           •
                        aine 
                           〈◊〉
                         to
him thou art compared, for that neuer yet in any battell 
                           〈◊〉
                        
there pagan, 
                           〈◊〉
                         or Sarazen, that by manhood was able
to resist him. Tis most true, sayd duke Naimes, and the
twelue péeres also▪
                     
                     When Meruin heard thē, he sayd, I know no
                           •
                         wel my 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
what my selfe am, but many as well Saraze
                           •
                        s as christians,

who haue séene the duke Oger haue euer compared me vnto
him, so that my selfe am in loue with him to whom my selfe
am so often compared. After diuers other such like discourses,
Meruine cōmanded the Christians to mount them
selues on horsebacke, and then comming to Mermont and
Gaudisse, he said, I wil my Lords that you stay here in Babilon
till my re
                           •
                        urne, whilst I conuey these christians to the

                           •
                        astle of 
                           •
                        urgon where they shalbe safely imprisoned, and I
will leaue the keyes with beautifull Berea, whom vntill my
returne I will make their Empresse. Prince Meruine (answered
Mermont) be all things as pleaseth thée, for willingly
we will stay to attend thy pleasure. This spake hee with a
seruile humblenesse, rather inferd from feare, then issuing
from a certaine loue. Thus Meruine and with him 4000.
of the best estéemed Pagans, tooke their iourney towards
Turgon▪ whither the heauens and all the gratious aspects of
wel portending Planets happely guide him, because he shal
neuer returne to Babilon, till he bee made a diuine and religious
Christian, rooting from the face of the earth both
Mahomet and all other false gods, and onely lifting vp in
most hie exaltation the Name of the euer-liuing IESVS.
So prosperously they iourneyd that anon they came within
the sight of Montment, where Meruine calling Iacob, sent
him before taduertise Berea of his approching: who with an
entire zeale performed his cōmandement. And after he was
entred to the towne, he ascended the Pallais, where he found
the only starre of perfection Berea, whom with low humblenesse
he saluted, and reported the comming of Meruine, the
bringing of 
                           •
                        ing Charles of France, the twelue Péeres, and
diuers others whome his inuincible prowesse had made captiues
before the walles of Babilon. Berea hearing this had
al her s
                           •
                        nces so suddenly ouergone with ioy, that from her amazement
issued nothing but great wō
                        
                           •
                        er. But Drohes wh
                           •
                        
sadly had giuen attention to his discourse, dissolued his harts

blood in water from his eyes, and with extremitie of passion
thus exclaimed, O thou true God of glory, how speedily shal
the ruine of France fall vpon her bosome, sith Charles and
the twelue peers, the columnes that sustaind her, are broken
by Meruin, whose vnspeakable magn
                           •
                        ni
                           •
                        itie nothing hath
force to resist
                           •
                         Many other teares of sorrowfull meanings
fell from good knight Drohes, who for the loue of Charles
seemed to pine
                           •
                         with lamenting. Now the day being growne
by many hour
                           •
                        s aged, Meruin and his traine entred the city:
thence he went to the Palace where Berea most royally garded
came down and met him: between them was an incounter
of hie delicacie, their armes locking together their lippes,
and from their lippes interchangeably breathing their so
                           •
                        les
into ech others bosome. Many prettie questions they had of
eche others safetie, many oracles of their fortunes and many
histories of their loues, the legends wherof lasted, till they
were returned into the great hall of the Pallace. Then were
the Christians conueyed to the castel of Turgon, and safely
imprisoned, all the Péeres being most disconsolate.
                     2 Onely king Charles from whom no misfortune would
take away the title of a royal spirit, and whose faith in the liuing
God was euer vnmoueable, cast himselfe on both his
knees to the ground, and with lift vp hands, and erected eyes
thus prayed, Glorious God, that for our sinnes▪ and for our
saluation vouchsafedst thy life by thy death and passion, thou
that the third day rose againe & ascendedst into heauen, thou
that deliueredst Adam & the Prophets which had attended
thy comming also, as this is true, & on it my faith is grounded,
so I beseech thee be my deliuerer from these gates of ill
chance and bondage. When king Charles had made this
short petition in honor of the holy Trinitie, he kist the earth
three times. And then as he was in rising there appeared to

him an angel of light, who blessed him with this happy salu
                        
                           •••••
                        
Noble king Charles, bee not abashed, for that power
which hitherto hath succoured thée will no
                           •
                         now refuse thée,
who by me assures thée, tomorrow thou shalt be deliuered
by Meruine, 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         the sonne of
Oger 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         strong in thy sayth
and take comfort. 
                           •
                        his sayd the heauenly embassador 
                           〈◊〉
                        
from his presence, and the emperour 
                           〈◊〉
                         thanks, rose
vp, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         the vision to the nobles, who called home ioy
to their hearts▪ and gloried in their aduenture. Meruine this

                           〈…〉
                         a priuate chamber with Berea and Iacob the
merchant: & Gratiana the fair
                           ••
                         had withdrawn her selfe to
behold Drohes in another chamber, where he rent his garments,

                           •
                        are his haires, and lamented exceedingly, crying out,
that Meruine, in whom vertue was onely beautifull, would
be the vtter ouerthrow of vertue that had made him beautiful
                           •
                        
Ah (sayd he) now shal Truth sléep againe with Obliuion,
and Time shall consume in mourning for his daughter. Ha,
Charles, Charles, thine affliction is my torment▪ and thy disgrace
the death of our religion. This sayd, he fell downe to
the ground, wr
                           •
                        ng his hands, and with dumbe sorrow exceeded
all speaking lamentation. After Gratiana had beheld
his infinite formentings▪ and with-all entering into consideration,
that from Meruine issued this almightie miserie, and
she the cause why Meruin made them so miserable, without
any word speaking, she departed from the chamber, her heart
euen wounded 
                           •
                        o death with the terror of others mourning,
and comming into an a
                           •
                        bour whither euery morning Berea
was accustomed to come, she there continued all night, vsing
such strange actions of vnusuall sorrow, that if some diuine
power had not guarded her wees, she had there dispaired &
died. Earely in the morning according to her woont, gentle
Berea, came to the arbour, and beholdi
                           •
                        g (ere shee approched)
strange signes of distemperature in Gratiana, staid

alittle to sée the issue, and with that she heard her say, Thou
true God of immortall glory haue mercy vpon me▪ whose
infinite euill deed is almost run beyond the race of all pitie:
and then she swouned, recouered, and freshly lamented▪ After
this Berea came vnto her, and demaunded a reason of
her passion, to whom she said, Ha madam, my torments be
worthy no end, because the ill I haue committed is without
measure. And then she recounted vnto her all she had
done against Meruine, his birth, her enuy, his stealing away,
her arriuall in these parts, and what besides, whence
these ill turnes were succeeded. Alas madam, said she, my
sinne is worthy no redemption▪ nor my sorrow any eie of
pity▪ the rather bicause I haue from him kept euer obscured
this which to you now I haue revealed, neither dare I at
all make knowne his fortune, lest he should kill me for my
treason therefore madam let your heauenly tongue beare
to him the embassage of his birth and linage, whilst from
hence I fl
                           •
                        e into some forsaken desart, where neuer man or
woman shall m
                           •
                        re behold me or my misfortune.
                     3 Not so answered Berea, sith my loue twixt him and
thee shall make a peaceful conclusion if thou wilt stay here
and dilate to his owne eares his of-spring. I will madame,
said the▪ and forthwith Berea went where she found Meruine,
about whose necke when she had foulded her armes,
she said, Sweet loue, I pray thee graunt me one little little
petition. What euer it be said he, it is graunted, be it the
greatest thing the world containeth. Then, said she, I beséech
thee be not offended with any of thy forepassed fortunes,
neither with the causers of thy destiny chiefly with
Gratiana, who wil repeate to thee the truth of thy descent
and pedegree. Why lady (qd she) should I be offended for
my birth? I know I am the sonne of a merchant, neyther
am I ashamed of that linage, because my 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
me higher in the world than the sonne of the greatest
Sowldan. Walking along with these discourses, anone
they entred into the arbour where they found Gratiana,
who repeated such stories of his fortune, as cost the liues of
many hundred thousand pagans and Sarazens: such was
the valure of Meruine, who by his powerfull magnanimitie
descended euen to the gates of hell, and made the diuell
obedient to his sword▪ as shalbe declared hereafter. Gratiana
no sooner saw Meruine, but she fel vpon her knees saying;
Prince Meruine, immortally haue I sinned against
thee, and the li
                           •
                        e whence thou art descended, admire not thē
the wonders thou hast atchieued: for thou art by birth a
Christian, aud the sonne of the most famous that euer drew
sword with resolution, euen the sonne of Duke Oger, the
neuer to be conquered Prince of Denmarke, who begate
thee in the Fairy land of the royall borne Fairie Morgue:
from her I stole thee, hither I brought thee, and here vntil
now haue I kept in couert thy fortunes: wherefore I confesse
my selfe worthy damnation, sith by me, and by mine
occasion thou hast ruined both thine owne bloud, and the
glory of thy fathers religion. When Meruine with great
attention had heard her▪ he grew amazed, & bowing downe
his head, stood dumbe with admiration. At last, desirous to
be better satisfied, he said to Berea, How can this be? Belieue
me, I cannot trust this new borne honor, if it be not
prooued more euident. Meruine (saide the Fairy, be my
soule, which sobs with sorrow in my breast, all that I haue
said is true, thou art the sonne of the most renowmed Conquerour
of the world, who at this instant is in Fairy land
with the princesse thy mother. Now the great diuell (saide
Meruine) that conueied thee hither, conuey thee to hell for
the wrongs thou hast done me, making mine hands the
murders of mine owne kin, viper-like eating my glorie
from mine owne friends destruction: liue henceforth banished

of sun-shine, and neuer 
                           ••
                        nd company but shame and
darknes: how well hath euery one compared me to Oger,
making my looks an index to his vertues, W
                           •
                        l, sith I am
assured of my descent, thankes to the Greatest that hath
sent me this vnderstanding, whom on mine humble knees
I pray to pardon th
                           •
                        rrors of my ignorant euils, and to adde
to my new spirit a new resolution, that these hands of mine
may teare downe the euill I haue exalted. Turning againe
to Gratiana he said, Thou author of my ill fortune,
tell me, am I baptized in the Christian Lawe, or no? She
answered him that he was, king Orient, and king Arius,
and the glorious Meruina, from whom his name was deriued,
being the witnesse to the Sacrament. Meruine hauing
weightily pondered on all the speaches of Graiana,
his displeasure grew mightily impatient, and he said, Malicsous,
auant my sight, and neuer henceforth dare more to
behold me: for were it not my loue and oath bindes me to
this goddesse of my seruice, instantly would I execute on
thee an infinite vengeance. At this angry discharge Gratiana
depa
                           •
                        ted with dying sorrow, from the presence of
Meruine, and as the history reporteth fled to a wast and vnfrequented
wildernesse which bordereth vpon Damatam,
where the rem
                           •
                        ined, and where we wil leaue her till som!
better occurrent reuoke her, and we will proceede with renowmed
Meruine, who espoused Berea, on whom he begate
Orient the father of Helias that begate Idain that bore
Godfrey of Bullen, as it is written in the holy
Legend of the same Godfrey.
(⸪)
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     1 How Drohes instructed Meruine in religion. 2 How
Meruine deliuerd Charlemaine, and the twelue peers.
3 How Berea was baptized with the rest of the cittie,
and was named Mathaburna, & other accidents.
                     
                        IMmortally valiant Meruine, when (as you
haue heard) he was assured of his genealogy,
which bred in him no little comfort, and the
rather, because he was a Christian, and the
sonne of so famous a champion, yet he not a
little grieued, that by him the Christians
were surprised and brought to so streight a doore of misfortune,
wherefore his sorrow strangely increased, which Berea
seeing, she grew troubled, seeking (albeit in vaine) many
wayes to recomfort him: which seeing they auailed not,
she went to Drohes, and discoursed all that had chaunced,
a liuely cordiall that inspird with an inexpressable gladnes,
so as without any tarriance, he went with hir to the a
                           •
                        bour
where Meruine lay prostrate on the ground, beating himselfe
with extreame languor▪ 
                        Drohes beholding the furie of
his passion, though at first amazed, yet ran to him, & with
true zeale o
                           •
                         euer-liuing intimacie, thus kindely chid him:
Ha, qd he, thou glorie of mankind, and flower of chiualrie,
whither is the virtue of thy resolution fled, that th
                           •
                        u lendst
conquest to a weeping passion: What▪ wilt thou in teares
drowne thy body, & consume thy soule? Arise, arise, thou excellentest

of all creatures, and with a liuely faith in the liuing
God of Abraham, aske pardon for thy sinnes, and the lambe
of peace that redéemed the world, wil wipe out thy trangressions,
sith vnder the face of heauen, there is not so boundlesse
an offender, as God in his mercy is an almightie par
                           ••
                        ner.
When Meruine had heard Drohes, he rose vp, & kissing his
hand sayd: thou balm of mine afflictions, & health to my sicke
soule, O pardon mée I beséech thée, the vnlucky slaughter
which on the sea I cōmitted where I slew Galien thy déere
companion, the famous sonne of renowmed Oliuer, & the other
christiās, otherwise I wil sauefist that hand which sauefisted
them in duty I should haue adored. Thrice deare friēd
replied Drohes) my inward soule hath forgiuen thée, and
then Drohes sate downe and expounded to him many places
of holy scripture, & instructed him in all the points of christian
religion, he declared how our sauiour had a diuine residēce
in the sacred womb of the virgin Mary, and how from thence
hee was deliuered, shee being both a mother and a mayd.
Then how at the age of three and thirtie ye
                           •
                        res he suffered
death and passion to deliuet mankind from the gates of hell
and destruction: and the third day arising from the graue,
mounted into the doores of the highest heauen from whence
hee sent downe the holy spirite to inspire and recomfort his
apostles. To be briefe, there was no point appertaining to
saluation, which Drohes did not explane with most heauenly
eloquence. Berea that sate by, as soone as she had heard discouered
the misteries & comforts of our religion, with a constant
and maiesticall modestie, rose vp and sayd: beare witnesse
princes, that here I renounce Mahomet, Tauergant,
and their Alcheron, and desire to be baptized, and imbraced
for a perfite thristian. At this they all clapt their hands for
ioy, & kissed the skirts of her clothing in token of reuerence.
                     2 Then sayd Meruine, who through Drohes instructions

was both resolued and comforted, let vs waste no more
time but go and deliuer Charles the emperor. Forthwith
they went, and comming into the castle, they found all our
Barons heauy and sadde▪ but the emperor recomforting
them with kingly resolutions. Meruine no sooner came in
his sight, but falling vpon his knées, he said, Royall king of
Fraunce, and all you right noble knights of Christendom,
pardon me I beseech you, both mine errour and mine offences,
to you I will be a liege man and a subiect: to these
a neuer failing friend, in the hardest aduentures, whom
in signe of euer liuing amitie, I desire to kisse. Then arose
he vp and kissed both the emperor and the rest, and after he
declared how hee was a Christian borne, and the sonne
of Oger the Duke of Denmarke. Many other discourses
they had, and infinite reioycings, crying, the sonne of Oger
is become a Christian, woe to the Pagans and their
false god Mahomet. Then issued Charles and the rest
out of the Castle, protesting solemnely the sacke of paganisme:
By my redeemer, said Charles, I will not rest, till
I see the Sarazens tremble vnder Ioyous my good sword.
As I am prowd of my birth and progenie (said Meruine)
there is not liuing a pagan, how redoub
                           •
                        ed soeuer but if he
refuse baptisme, he shall also refuse his life and being. This
said, they went into a chamber and armed themselues.
Meruine caused a cornet to be winded▪ at the so
                           •
                        nd whereof,
the 4000. Pagans Meruine had brought with him,
assembled themselues in the base court of the pallace: vnto
whom Meruine made this briefe speach. Fellow souldiers,
admire not my speach but be rea
                           •
                        y in your resolues: My
will is, that euery one of you be baptized, & become a christian,
and he that refuseth, to die the death: chuse either eternall
life or destruction. The wonder was not little▪ that
these words cast amongst them, yet what through f
                           •
                        are of
his prowesse, and terror to behold the christians at euerie

point armed: they agreed to obey him, both in the course
of life and religion. Meruine commended them, and forth
with gaue them charge to range through the citie, and to
put all to the sword, that refused to receiue baptisme. The
christian peeres of France were their fore-leaders, that spared
neither man, woman nor child, that would 
                           •
                        ot be baptized,
so that in lesse than in an houres space, all Montment
was wholy conuerted. These things ended▪ 
                        Charles
called Meruine vnto him, and asked if he would accept at
his hands the honor of knighthood. My lord qd he, it is the
onely thing to which my thoughts haue a longing: then
kneeling downe, Charles drew Ioyous his sword, and
laying it on his shoulder bade him rise vp the most renowmed
knight vnder the firmament: only be thou stedfast in
thy faith, and raise high thy god and religion. Thou earthly
god of Europe (said Meruine) in the maiesty of heauen,
and before thy royall presence, I make a vow, there shall
not a pagan moue his foote vpon the earth, if he renounce
not Mahomet, and put his trust in the liuing God. And
what he vowed, he effected: for his conquests against the
pagans doubled his ouerthrowes against the Christians,
as 
                           〈◊〉
                         shall heare hereafter. Now had the emperor Charls, Meruine, and the p
                           ••
                        res of France▪ so well managed euery
occurrent, that the whole citie of M
                           ••
                        tment was now
wholy in their subiection.
                     3 Then was there a vessell filled with water which the
Archbishop of Rheimes hauing 
                           〈…〉
                         they of the 
                           ••
                        
                        tie
were baptized therein, and the foure thousand. But
before all, and aboue all, the most virtu
                           •
                        us princesse Berea
was baptized, not by her auncient name, but by the name
of Mathaburna. And when all the cere
                           ••
                        nies belonging
to that most blessed sacrament was finished, Meruine with
king Charlemaine & his peeres, made a progresse through

the realme, conuerting all to chr
                           •••
                        ianitie, for not any durst
gainstād Meruin whose valure in those parts was almightily

                           •
                        adord▪ so as euen to the wals of Brandis, was not left a
breathing pagan. After this Meruin returned again to Mōtment,
where he was godlike receiued of Mathaburna, who
amongst other of their priuate conferences, demanded when
he would 
                           〈◊〉
                         pouse her, who returned this answer: Lady goddesse,
and ruler of my thoughts and wishes, I haue made a
solemne oath in the high parliament of heauen, not to marry
any creature, till I haue reconquered backe all that I
haue spoiled from the christians, & haue set at absolute libertie
againe, the foure famous brethren and sonnes to the
good king Gaultier. My lord (replied she) be all thy decrees
as immoueable as desteny, and I will attend the effects of
thy extremst desire. Thus wil we leaue them, king Charlemaine
and the christians, & returne to Bertran, Guion,
Thierrie, and Florion, Gaultiers 4. sonnes, who as you
remember, were prisoners at Damascus.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXX.
                     1 How by meanes of Guida the daughter of Baucamont,
Bertran and his brothers escaped imprisonment. 2 How
king Bandus daungerously assailed them, and how they
maruelousty defended themselues.
                     
                        YOu haue heard in the storie before, how the
foure gallant sonnes of Gualtier were by
Meruine, taken and imprisoned in Damascus:
now further in the same discourse
he saieth, that Baucamont had one faire

daughter named Guyda, who with a most perfite affection
was inamoured vpon Bertran, and for his sake often did repaire
to the prison, to doe them honour and seruice, making
the dayes of their induraunce like the houres of a happy festiuall
insomuch tha
                           •
                         on a time, as the brothers were in consultation,
they said one to another, that if they were but well
armed, they would soone haue the castell at their commaundement,
and doubted not, but the God of h
                           ••
                        uen would so
protect them, that themselues would make themselues lords
of their owne libertie, and in this they f
                           ••
                        nd no impossibilitie,
sith the Princesse Guyda smiled on them with good fortune.
My lordes (said Huon o
                           •
                         
                        Burdeaux) I will tell you
what my soule thinkes: had I but halfe the loue-sicke
thoughts hanging vpon me, which I know that Princesse
powreth into the 
                           •
                        osome of Bertran, or would she, but as
priuately conuerse with me, as I know she secretly wéepeth
her loue to him, I would in one naturall day deliuer both my
selfe and my companions, yet without impeachment of my
loue, or touch to her honour. Scarce was his last word ended
but Guyda entred into the chamber, who with a modest
grauity (the cloud of an impatient loue) saluted them, and demaunded
of their welfare. Madam (said Bertran) my health
is in the hand of thy mercy: and but thou giue end to my
sickenesse, there is no creature can preserue me from a sodaine
dying. When she heard these speeches, with a frosty blush
of a little wonder, she answered, Prince, repose a while,
and immediately you shall know, if helpe bee in my power.
Then she went forth and called the Gaoler vnto her, whose
name was Corbun, and intreated him 
                           •
                        o bring vnto her into
an other chamber the Prince Bertran▪
                         who was a little
sicke, that she might giue physicke to his euill. The not mistrusting
Gaoler, with lowe bowed reuerence▪ tolde her, he
would performe her pleasure, and foorthwith called Bertran,
telling him he must goe to the Princesse Guyda, who attended

for him. The verie ioy of those wordes made him
leape and caper through the chamber, whilest Huon with
like shew of iollitie followed him. Then saide Bertran,
Huon stay here a little till I call thée: Agréed said Huon:
Then went Bertran to Guyda, and intreated that his friend
Huon might participate of his phisicke, for he is not wel also.
Prince Bertran (said the Lady) with all my heart, so he
be secret, for feare of daunger. Feare not excellent Madam
(said he) for Huon is most loiall, most constant, and most religious.
Then shee commaunded Corbun to bring Huon
vnto her. Madam, said Corbun, I dare not, lest I bring the
life of king Bandus in question. Your Ladyship is too bold in
these rash aduentures, and nurse mischiefe in gracing these
christians, I fear some euil wil succeed this hazard: wherfore
if Bertran returne not instantly, I will reueale his being to
the king and your kindred. Lady and my déere loue (saide
Bertran) if not he, then I will performe thy pleasure: and
in so saying, he drew néere to Corbun: to whom with his
fist he gaue so mortall a blow, that he fell dead to the earth,
without anie word speaking. When Guyda saw what hée
had done, she tare her haire, and sorrowed without measure:
but Bertran embracing her in his armes, whispered such reconcilement
into her eares, that hee appeased her passion:
and they slumbered in diuine contentment▪ either from other
taking the delight of long wishing heartes, and most
deere was their delightes to all Christendome: for in that
houre he begat on her a sonne, whose name was called Barrant,
who was father of Dolifern. Was there neuer creture
more cruel
                           •
                         or tyrannicall: for that he slewe both his father
and his mother, and brought vpon Christendome lamentable
fortunes as you shall sée hereafter. But to returne againe
to Bertran: who assoone as he had accomplished his
will vpon Guyda, hee returned to his brethren and saide:
Princes, nowe followe mee, if you will reuenge your selues

as well vpon the Pagans, as I haue done vpon him who in
these walles hath restrained vs. At this they all pressed to
follow him: to whom Guyda said, Ay me Lordes, what
madnesse is in your thought? alas what will you do, but ouerthrow
you selues, and my glory? Madam (said Huon)
content your selfe, I know Prince Bertran so 
                           •
                        xcéedingly
loueth you, that no fortune can diuorce him from you, so you
will renounce Mahomet, and become a Chr
                           •
                        stian. Lord
Huon (said she) there is nothing I more desire: but it is past
my capacitie, how our happinesse shalbe contriued, Madam
                           •
                        
(said Huon) I haue found out the meane: let vs but haue
armour and weapons prouided vs▪ and there is not a Pagan
liuing that shall dare to denie va passage at our pleasure. As
I am true to my Lord and 
                           •
                        oue (said she) that shalbe effected,
and then she brought them into the castle armorie, where
was warre-like prouision. So they armed themselues, and
desired Guyda to condu
                           •
                        t them into the bed-chamber of king
Bandus: to which she consented. But a certaine vassall
Pagan ouer-hearing them, without tarrying ranne to the
kings chamber, who then was a sleepe, and beating at the
doore, cried: My Lord the king, treason, treason: and thy
death, if spéedily thou doest not abandon thy chamber, the
Christians are in armes, who fly with wings of malice to
worke thy desti
                           •
                        ction.
                     2 King Bandus hearing this rauen-song, rose vp, and
calling his Nephew, said: we are betraied; let vs fly for our
succour. At this they ran forth of the chamber, and came into
a garden, where 
                           •
                        inding a little turret, they mounted into it,
& thence hcried, to armes: and raised a mightie alarum, their
voices sounded through all the pallaces. The christians entred
into the kings chamber, but could not find him. Then
went they from chamber to chamber▪ and slew the Pagans,
with whom they encountred: in briefe they slew in their serch

aboue an hundred persons, and then helde the castell at their
owne disposing. After this they descended to the gates, and
thence sallying foorth they were incountred with king Bandus,
who with many bands of approoued souldiers, gaue
them a couragious onset▪ betweene whom beganne a sharp,
fearefull▪ and bloody battell▪ but the multitude of the Pagans
so infinite
                           •
                        y increased, that the christians were inforced
to retire backe into the castell, which in despight of the Pagans
they did: then fortifying their gales they ascended vpon
the walles to defend them, if they should bée assaulted,
which indeede was doone most valiantly on euery part, but
the christians defences were so sharpe and dreadfull, that the
Pagans preuailed not at all in theyr fury: Now God of his
mercy be their defender, for their quarrell is iust and lawfull.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXI.
                     How Meruine after the conquest of many citties went
to Damascus to deliuer the foure brethren. 2 How
Charlemaine refused Meruines company, because of
Huon. 3 Of the great battell betwixt Bandus and the
Christians.
                     
                        SOone after that, Mermont, and the whole
realme about it was by Meruin conuerted to
christian religion: king Charles, the twelue
péeres, together with Meruine, made their
expedition into the other countries bordering

thereabout, where they conquered more then foure hundred
cities and castles, bringing all to the knowledge 
                           〈◊〉
                         Christ
Iesus. Which do
                           •
                        e, they tooke shipping to make 
                           •
                        or Damascus,
and Meruine saide. Flie swift
                           •
                        y you labouring
houres of the day, and bring me with double speede to Damascus,
that I may both confesse my errour, and deliuer
from bondage my thrice excellent kinsmen, the foure famous
brethren, and that renowmed Huon of Burdeaux s
                           •
                         péerelesse
in his actes of chiualry.
                     2 No sooner had Charlemaine 
                        
                           •
                        eard him name Huon,
but a mountaine of distemperature sent an ocean of angry
blood into his fac
                           •
                        . And he said who, is then that monst
                           •
                        ous
traitor Huon, the 
                           〈◊〉
                         murderer of my deare sonne Charlot
in Damascus too? euen by my crowne, and soule of my deceased
father, I wi
                           •
                        l bathe Ioyous my sword in his heart
blood. Brother (said Gautier) will the then world adde a
villainous title to thy glory, because thy selfe bra
                           •
                        est the couenant
thy selfe made. You haue banished him your 
                           •
                        ealme,
and thence he is departed. To m
                           •
                         he came for refuge, and 
                           •
                        o
me he hath doone those immortall seruic
                           ••
                        , th
                           •
                        t whilest I
breathe, I will neuer forsake him. By m
                           •
                         
                        
                           •••
                        pter (saide
Charles) Gautier, thou hast euer beene 
                           〈◊〉
                         v
                           •
                        to me,
neither hath thy selfe, nor any of thy li
                           •
                        e 
                           〈…〉
                         to
my procéedings: wherefore, if I b
                           •
                         
                        Charles of France,
thou shalt not long raigne Gautier of Denmark
                           •
                         M
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        oueraigne
(said Naymes to Charles) why are you thus mightily
vexed? Beleeue me, Huon is a noble gentl
                           •
                        man, both
wi
                           •
                        e and valiant, whom if he did you euill, forgiue h
                           •
                        m because
it was honorable euill. But if your displeasure str
                           ••
                        ch
beyond mittigation, yet smothe
                           •
                         it in this pl
                           •
                        ce▪ because you
are bound to reuenge it not where but in your owne kingd
                           ••
                        ,
and the rather, not now, becau
                           •
                        e wee are but the followers of
Prince Meruine. Naymes (said Charles) thou addest 
                           ••
                        ell

to my fire, because thou thinkest neuer again to returne into
Fraunce: but if thou doest remember, I am Charles Meruine
halfe angry at these ciuill debates▪ went about to appease
them, but finding his labour effectlesse through Charlema
                              •
                           nes
wilfulnesse, he said: My lord and emperor, sith my
oratory is so harsh in your eares, know that neither for you,
nor for your displeasure wil I desist or breake off the enterprise
I haue vndertaken. And then turning about Gaultier,
(who knew the Emperors anger was most against him) intreated
Meruine once more to sollicite Charles to accompany
them to Damascus: but Meruine by no meanes woulde
be perswaded, but raking his colours into his owne hand,
marched away without more speaking. Charlemaine on the
other part who was highly inraged against Duke Naymes,
and the twelue yeeres, because they forsooke him to followe
Meruine, departed an other way, vowing to God and his
own soule, to lay waste and ruinous, the flourishing country
of Denmarke, vnlesse Gaultier on his knees came humbly
to aske him forgiuenesse, and to begge part on for reléeuing
the damned murderer of his sonne: In this agony of high
displeasure, Charles marched so incessantly day and night,
that at length he ariued at Maience, where, in despight of
Gaultier, he began to burne and destroy the country: where
we wil leaue him▪ and procéede with the actes of Meruine.
                     
                     3 After the departure of Charles, Meruine made such
expedition, that in few dayes he ariued in the country adioyning
to Damascus, where he began to conquer and conuert
the nation til he came within the sight of Damas. It hapned
that a certaine currier Pagan, who had beheld the deedes
of the Christians, posted with all his power to Damascus,
and comming before king Bandus, he saide: My lord and
soueraigne, to armes, fo
                           •
                         before the morning starre shall againe
be seene in the heauens, I assure you, you shall be bid

strong and fearefull battell, a mightie army of the christians
I haue discouered, whose lookes and resolutions are both
stowt and valiant. Meruine, who lately hath renonnced our
faction, is the formost leader, with him Gaultier, of Denmarke,
and dluers others, onely king Charles of Fraunce
is absent, who (as I vnderstand) for some prinate displeasure
hath abondoned their companies, and is returned to his
owne territories. Bandus was astonished at these words and
charged the Pagan vpon his life that he spake nothing, but
what trueth would iustifie. My Lord (replied he▪ if I lie, let
me die the death for further, Montment, and with her almost
200 other cities are conuerted to christianitie, euen the
princesse Berea her selfe hath reuounced Mahomet, and is
baptized by the name of Mathaburna. Where then (said
King Bandus) is Mermont her father? At Babilon answered
the Pagan. This while arriued an other Pagan King
named Gorbant▪
                         who hauing incamped his hoste in a meadow,
ariued himselfe at the pallace at such time as the pagan
was discouering the approach of the christians. This Gorbant
came to behold Guyda, the estimatiō of whose beautie
was renowmed through al Asia, whom as soone as Bandus
saw, he solemnly receiued, & the more, because he was known
for the most absolute valiant pagan that thē liued, whose age
then had accomplisht but thirtie: and by his means Bandus
flattered his hopes with assured conquest. After diuers embracings,
seeming knots of true amitie, Bandus declared the
cōming of the christians to besiege Damascus, & with perswasiue
arguments intre
                           •
                        ted his aid, stir
                           •
                        ing him more
with inueying against Meruin▪
                         who so l
                           ••
                        ely had renounced
their god and Alcheron. 
                        
                           •
                        o al his intreaties Gorbant gaue
willing eare, and consented, vowing his vttermost indeuors
for the release of Damas. Al things concluded vpon Bandus
commanded an alarum throughout the cittie, and hauing
assembled his men at armes together, he issued out

of the portes in warre-like maner, and ioyning his troupes
with the troups of king Gorbant, made one almost impregnable
ar
                           ••
                        e. The Christians this while were on the foreside
of a great wood, through which they speedily passed, and ordered
battaile Gautier looking vpon them, and seeing the
diuersitie of their ensignes, he said: Good God, what strange
nations are yond that come to encounter vs? A christian
hearing him, made answere▪ (for he of olde knew the coate
armour he beheld) my Lord yond strange iolious you see, of
my knowledge belong to king Gorbant: hee whose valour
and excellent approoued prowesse, hath placed him higher in
Fames bookes then my Pagan whatsoeuer: whose courage
make dreadlesse of men, though he be assailed with many
legions: Is it true (said Meruine) that he is so woonderfull
in the deedes of chiualrie? Nowe to God I make a solemne
protestation, that if I can but encounter him, I will
teach him such a bloudy Letanie, that he shall willingly become
a christian, and bitterly curse the first houre of my natiuitie:
this said, they marched forward, and the Pagans
likewise: to whom king Gorbant made many orations of
honour valour, and incouragement, debasing Meruine, and
reuiling, his backe-turning from his first knowne religion;
but those railings will beate on his owne crest, and his mind
will be changed if Meruine liue, and Entrant hold his vertue.
When the armies were readie to ioyne: a young squire
named Thyerrie, came vnto Meruine, & made hu
                           •
                        ble petition,
that for the honour of his God, he might be the first to
giue the charge in that battaile. Meruine in loue with his
forwardnesse, bade him passe on, and be fortunate. At that
word Thyerrie thrust spurres to his horse, and comming
euen vnto the face of the Pagans host, he saide: What is
there neuer a Pagan amongst you, that hath the spirite of
valour to incounter me (who haue contemtuously renounced
your false God Mahomet, and sworne to adore no name

but the euerliuing Iesus) or trie the breaking of a lance in
his religious quarrell? Traitour quoth the Pagan Troulart,
who was nephew to Gaifier) Behold, tis I will giue
thee battell, and scourge thée for thine ouer-daring. And
so saying, he disranged himselfe, and brake his launce vpon
Thierrie with a gallant spirite: but Thierrie did returne
him backe such an incounter, that ouerthrowing both horse
and man to the ground, the Turke had neuer againe risen,
if one of his fellow Sarazens had not flowne in to his rescue,
who all at once assailed Thierrie with crueltie▪ while he
defended himselfe gallantly vntill the Christians came to
his succour
                           •
                         then beganne the battell to be fierce and wonderfull.
The renowmed Meruine broaching the braue
mare Mordant, ranged amongst the Pagans like an hunger-starued
wolfe, or an inraged Lionesse. Drohes with
many acts of admriable chiualrie that day seconded him.
There might ye haue heard such clamors, such noyse, and
tempestuous outrage, as if the clouds had resigned to the
earth a greater power, than the power of their thunder. In
the middest of the battell Meruine met with Thierrie, the
valiant son of Bourchier, whom for the valor he expressed
in the first incounter, he embraced about the necke, & after
kissing him, gaue him the sacred order of knighthood, saying:
Hapfull bloome of a happy issue, this houre I giue to
thée vertue: which vertue will cease to flourish, when as it
leaueth to exalt the name of Christ Iesus: and then departing
from him, Thierry thrust himselfe amongest the Pagans,
where he shewed his dalour to be augmented by the
honor he had obtained. Gaultier all this while made great
slaughter of the enemies, being inflamed with a double furie:
the one of reuenge for wrongs forepassed, the other of
desire to sée his foure sonnes, who during this battell were
in the pallace at Damascus, which by the meanes of Guyda,
they lately conquered. Guyda, with whom Bertran inioyed

all the ho
                           •
                        res of loues contentment: and were now
recreating themselues vpon the leades of the Castle, from
whence they might distinctly beare the clamors of the battell.
Insomuch, that calling vp his brothers, he saide:
Princes, what noyse is this I heare about the citie? Is it
not like the meeting of two inuincible armies? Belieue me
I cannot alittle wonder; they all admired as much. Then
ascending vp higher into a heauen-kissing turret, whence
they might meas
                           •
                        re the confines of all the country adioyning▪
they beheld the battell, and knew the ensignes displayed
by each party. Then cried out Bertran, This day
shall we be reputed shepheards, if we conceale our selues
within these walles, whilest our countreymen and kin
                           •
                        e
before the citie, for our sakes maintaine a dr
                           •
                        adfull bat
                           •
                        ell;
for shame let vs issue out, or forsweare our names, and the
auntient disposition of our natures. Guyda hearing this,
wrung her hands, and with beteared eies (then which there
could be no better Orators) besought Bertran to stay: but
he euer resolued in honourable actions, made answere he
would quickely returne. Bu
                           •
                         
                        Guyda from whom all hope
and reliefe was exiled, would not giue credit to his words:
but with teares of the bitterest displeasure could be harbored
in so faire a māsion, said he abused her: but if Mahound
were Mahound, she would reuenge herselfe of his shameful
departure. Leauing her in this agony, the princes departed
easily out of the gates of the castle, because the garders of
the same neither saw or heard her tormentings. And when
they were passed by, the Porters would haue locked the
gates, but Bertran, whose spirit was madde for his loue
Guyda, with his sword drawne, c
                           •
                        me to the chiefest which
bare the keyes, and gaue him such an vnrecouerable blow,
that he fell dead to the earth. Uillaine (said Bertran) the
diuell take thy soule, I will be thy Porter whilest thou takest
thy rest This seene, diuers other Pagans assailed

him: but his brethren, and the valiant Huon, brought to
him such powerfull rescue, that in lesse space than an houre
th
                           •
                        y had sent thirty to sleepe with their forefathers. The
pagans seeing this, fled from their violence, and they marched 
                           •
                        o
the battell: whither as soone as they were come,
they cried with one voice, Unchristned dogges, this is the
doomes day, and last of your glories: and then beganne to
shew the vnspeakable wonders of their high valours, with
such admirable déedes of armes, that the Pagans knew
them as well by their chiual
                           •
                        ie, as if their faces had bin bared.
Now ha
                           •
                         they dispersed the battell, and the Sarazens
beganne to turne their backes: insomuch that the young
Princes beheld and knew their father Gautier; to whom
they came, and falling on their faces, adored him as theyr
earth-god, and second meane of creation. When Gautier
saw his sonnes, his vnspeakable ioy would not let him
speake, onely silence was his best embassadour of boundles
contentment. When Huon saw this equall contention of
Natures purest loue, he brake their passions with these
words: My lords, banish these slow salutes, and
thinke on these deuotres. To armes the pagane
crie, their deathes must be our glories:
that done, we shall haue
time to discourse of passed
fortunes.
¶
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXII.
                     1 How the Pagans were ouerthrowne, and the Christians
went and conuerted Damascus. 2 How Meruine
went after to Babilon, where Mermont and the
other Pagans for feare of him, fained to receiue baptisme.
3 Then how he went to Mequa and Ierusalem,
and conuerted them to Christianitie.
                     
                        AT this spéech of Huons, the foure brethren
departed from their father, and thrust themselues
into the battell: leauing vndying Registers
of their euer-liuing renowne: Yet in
the heat of the conflict there was a pagan called
Gryffoy, of wonderfull great valour, and worthie euery
way, except for that way, which should gouerne all
wayes, all the exquisite titles of a compleat man at armes.
This Pagan well taught by proofe the greatnesse of the
Christians spirites, with a battle-axe which he brandished
in his hand, he stroke a Christian, called Adrian, so
mighty a blow, that he chined him to the breast: and after
him, another, and an other, till he had laid ten breathlesse
vnder him. Bertran giuing aime to this slaughter, grew so
impatient to behold his countrymens effusions, that turning
his sword aloft, he came and assaulted Gryffoy with so
mighty a stroke crosse the helme, that cutting away his
plume▪ he entred more than an inch into his beuer: and with
the blow so astonished the pagan, that at that instant he had
cut 
                           〈◊〉
                         his head, if an infinit 
                           ••
                        mber of pagans had not in
                        
                           •
                        ironed

him, and assailed Bertran with numberles blows,
and desperate resolutions: insomuch that they forced him to
recoile for his safety. Then came Huon, and diuers other
christians, who retaind Bertran, and that in a lucky houre:
for then was the battell most sharpe and doubtfull: there
might you haue seene many knights on euery side ouerturned,
horses wounded, and men at their wittes end: some
flying, some dying, and some amazed. The gentle knight
Meruine, this while on the other side of the field, approoued
his valour to be strange and vnresistable: for he lost
not a blow, in which death had no interest: so resolute were
his proceedings, that now the pagans were at the conclusion
of their glories, and had beene wholy disco
                           •
                        fited, if
the valiant king Gorbant, in that very houre had not ariued
with an armie▪ which by the eyes account could not be
l
                           •
                        sse than a hundred thousand: king Gorbant marched before
his army, mounted vpon the beast Montehaut, which
was valued before all the hor
                           •
                        es in Painime: and like to
lightning gaue a charge vpon our Christians, breaking
their rankes, and dispe
                           •
                        sing their battels, so as in lesse then
an houre the christians had almost lost the hope of their good
fortunes▪ for Gorbant ere he brake his launce, brake the
neckes of vij Christians: and with the strange valour he
was adorned, so gallantly behaued himselfe, that the common
sort of Christians were not able to indure him, but
beganne to flie. But Meruine ashamed to see their dishonours,
demaunded a reason for their flight. To whom one
of them, whose name was Vincent, made answere. My
Lord, there is newly arriued some God or diuell, in the habite
of a Pagan, whose force is so vnresistable, and his
blowes so huge and insupportable, that fr
                           ••
                         his handes
issueth nothing but our deaths and destructions. I pray
thée said Meruine, with all spéed conduct me to the partie.
Not for a kingdome my Lord (said Vincent) for he is altogether

inuincible, and mine eies shall die if they behold him.
At these words Meruine would not stay, but thrust him
selfe amongst the Pagans to finde out Gorbant, who was
then in the prease, and had newly incountered with knight
Drohes, whom he beheld respectiuely, and the rather, for
the beauty of the gallant steed Marcheuall, so that he said
                           •
                        
vnto him: Boy, descend from that worthy horse whereon
thou art mounted, lest while I chasti
                           ••
                         thy folly, I wound
the horse, with whose comelinesse I am highly delighted.
Drohes hearing himselfe so basely intitled, with a reuengefull
furie ioyned himselfe to the Pagan, and strucke him
thwart the helme with all the puissance he was able, yet
made the Pagan moue no more than an oake or a mountaine:
in requitall whereof Gorbant repayed him so heauy
an interest, that the blow slipping from his be
                           •
                        uer, desc
                           •
                        nded
vpon the horse, and cut his head from his shoulders
so that the good beast Marcheuall fell vnto the ground in a
moment Drohes more astonished with wonder than with
feare, lightly raised himselfe againe, & drawing his sword,
said: O God, this pagan is vndoubtedly strong, who hath
slaine my horse, but if I die vnreuenged, let my knighthood
forsake me. This said, he ranne against the Pagan, led by
a tempestuous fury, but was preuented for striking, by
meanes of Monthaut, who with the thundering noyse of
the horses féet, came running thither: and also at the same
time came Gaultier, and sundry other Christians, wh
                           •
                        
with all their powers assailed Gorbant, which with so excellent
resolution defended himselfe, that the slowtest strained
curtesie to approach him: yet notwithstanding, in that
time Drohes had so gallantly borne himselfe, that he had
now recouered another most famous horse, vpon which being
mounted, he came to assaile Gorbant, that euen then
had brought to the ground all that incountred him, giuing
such vigour vnto the dead spirites of the Pagans, that the

christians were almost amazedly vanquisht. During this
homage, Meruine was on the other side of the field, where
he approued his diuine excelencie of valour vpon king Bandus
and his army▪ whose numbers being numberles▪ stroke
the beholders into admiration: whereas alas the christians
were but xxv. thousand at the beginning, and now but ij.
thousand at the co
                           •
                        clu
                           ••
                        on At which Meruin grieued not
alitle, vowing neuer to returne, if either he got not a crown
for victory, or a tomb for buriall. Then doubling strength
vpon strength, he so lion-like ranged among his enemies,
that euen as the corne before the shearers sickle, so 
                           •
                        ell the
pagans one vpon an other, dead and discomfited: not to
dwell long in this discourse, so immortall was his valour
that the pagans were halfe dead with the astonishment of
the glory.
                     In the end, as he ranged to and fro, he arriued in the
place where Marcheuall lay slaine: which when he sawe,
and knowing him both by 
                           •
                        is largenes and beauty, he immediately
imagined Drohes had there written the last end
of his lifes Legend, so that not able to suppresse sorrowe
growne in his breast, Giant-like almightie he cried out,
alas▪ alas, art thou gone my loue, art thou dead my champion?
be my life cursed, and heere vanish the praise of my
knighthood, if I tyrant-like reuenge not this infinite vnhappinesse.
This said, like vnto a peale of thu
                           •
                        der, or to a
stormy tempest in the middest of Winter, he ranne amongest
the Pagans, euen from one side of the field vnto the
other, and where he espied the greatest number, thither
flew his greatest furie, the whi
                           •
                        h he dispersed, so like vnto
a forsaken flocke, that being at their wittes end, they
knew not which way to turne them. In the highest of
this 
                           •
                        urmoile, Meruine espied Bertran to be dismounted
from his horse, who being on foote, maintained a more then
knightly comba
                           •
                        e against Gryffoy, and an hundred other

Pagans, to whom aloofe he hallowed this encoura
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •••
                        
                        ▪
Beauty of thy fathers house, this day shall be th
                           ••
                        e h
                           •••
                        rs
festiuall. Take 
                           •
                        ourage, take courage faire Prince: for the
Pagans flie dist
                           •
                        aught and vanquished. These cordiall
spéeches so liuely vttered, inspired Bertran with such new
spirites, that bearing himselfe against a Pagan, he stroke
horse and man dead to the ground without word speaking.
The next to him he likewise dismounted, and arresting his
horse, leapt into the saddle, effecting wonders in the pagans
destructions▪ who like kids from the wolfe ranue fearefull
at the sight of Meruine, seeking by running, the staine of
Honour, to saue that which should maintaine honor. Meruine,
like himselfe passed from rancke to rancke, and neuer
staied till he met with king Bandus: to whom he gaue a
blow, that he cleft his shield to his fist, and made it fall to
the ground: which the king fearefull to recouer (death being
a greater feare) betooke himselfe to flight also. Princely
Meruine passed along, to find out Gorbant (the onely excellent
amongst his enemies) vowing vpon him to lay the
burthen of his wrath. And as he was searching, he incountred
Thierry the sonne of Bouchier: vnto whom he said,
Faire yong knight, knowst thou if neare hereabout, be that
famous pagan, who this day had beene our vengeance and
halfe destruction. O, if thou canst, shew him me, and make
me happy. Follow me, said Thierrie, and then they went
together, making Death their seruant smoothe their way
to the place where Gorbant was, who had that day béene
the ruine of the Christians. No sooner was Meruines eies
fastned vpon him, but boyling with rage, he thru
                           ••
                         forward
to strike him: but the Pagan turning himselfe from the
blow like the falling of a mountaine, it fell vpon the gentle
knight Thierrie (whose ouer hastie valour bare him twixt
them.) with such and so great infortunacie, that it ouerthrew
the man, yea and claue the horse into two pieces:

which to Meruine was no small griefe, who grew madde
to reuenge his owne m
                           ••••
                        ing: but Gorbant by that witnesse,
knowing his pit
                           •
                        ilesse omnipotencie, and séeing his
army 
                           ••
                        ie from him on euery side, thrust his spurs against
the sides of Monthaut, and in a moment was fled from the
presence of Meruine, who all alone stoode wondring at his
flight, and his own mischances. The pagan made his flight
towardes Damascus, his burning heart desirous to haue
possession of the beautifull Guyda, in whom he had placed
all his affection, whom hee finding, after many embraces,
he mounted her on his hor
                           •
                        e▪ and bare her to his ships.
Guyda not r
                           •
                        pelling much his inforcements, because as
then she was offended with Bertran, both because he had
most vnkindly left her, and was also one of the sonnes that
had slaine her father, and the rest of her royall kinred. Thus
fled king Gorbant, who met with Bandus, Gryffoy, Grisoner,
and with ten thousand Pagans, all which, to saue
their liues, were fled to the seaside, vnto whom Gorbant
cried, Away princes, away, for he that is tardy in flight,
shall be first and swiftest in his death. At this speach, feare
lent wings to their héels, and they al imbarking thēselues,
gaue their safeties to the mercy of the sea. Those which remained
behind, the Christians p
                           •
                        t to the sword. When the
chase was finished, our Christian Princes went towardes
Damascus to assault it, but the Citizens issuing from the
portes, brought the keyes, and with submission deliuered
them to their mercies, so that Meruine, Gautier, and the
rest of the Christians entred, who by means of that battell
were not aboue 200. After they had reposed themselues a
while, Gautier called vnto him his foure sonnes, and said:
Princes, know you to whom the offerings of your honour
is due, or who it is that from the dayes of your vnhappinesse
hath restored you? beholde, it is this princely and heroike
Meruine, th
                           •
                         sonne of your renowmed vnckle duke

                        Oger, and then he discoursed at large to them the wonders
of his prowesse, the taking of Charles, the ouerthrow of
the twelue peeres, and al their imprisonments. To be short,
he ran through all the chronicle of Meruines heroicall actions,
and how Charles discontentedly was returned into
France for the hate of Huon. Huon hearing that word, as
rackt with his owne infortune, he said: O God, when shal
the houre come to bind me in perfit peace with that famous
emperor? Huon hauing thus said, he, Gautier, & the foure
brethren did honor to Meruine, who returned them praise
for praise, thanks for thanks, vowing to aide them against
their enemies. Thus was the ioy vnspeakeable among the
Christians, making houres like minutes vanish by theyr
pleasures. Next morning, Meruine caused all the citizens
of Damascus to be christned, and whose refused, to be put
to the sword. This done, he caused all the countrey adioyning,
to come in, and be baptized: whereto all the nobles accorded.
These things finished, Meruine called Florion, and
said: Cosin, for thy beauties sake, I giue thée this cittie of
Damascus, and the whole realme about it, accept it kindly,
as I giue it willingly: and then he made all the nobles and
citizens sweare homage and fealtie to his Crowne▪ and for
a gard to his person, left him those 200. Christians, which
the sword had preserued, mustering for himselfe out of the
citie and country two thousand that hardly before had born
armes.
                     2 After that nights repast in the citie, Meruine, Gautier,
and the other princes departed from Damascus, and
marched to a village two leagues from Babilon, where remained
Mermont. Gaudisse, who by many intelligences
knew al the famous déeds of Meruin, and how he was then
come to besiege them, of which they stood in feare, called a
counsell together, where they disputed what way was best

for their safeties: Princes said Mermont, our arguments
must be briefe, and out resolutions spéedy, for otherwise we
shall lose our inheritances with our disputations, and our
liues by flouthfulnes, for well we know Meruine is wise
and inuincible: for my owne part, to mee hee did the greatest
indignity, though I were the first that made mountainous
his honor, for he hath slaine my men, baptized my
daughter, yea, and will espouse her, if heauens preuent n
                           •
                        t
my disgraces: yet so I know him replenished with true
fortitude, that it is impossible to withstand him, if treason
be not an agent of our deliuery. Tis true qd Gotham, who
was newly ariued in that city, it behooues vs to search out
any mean for the restitution of our God and religion. The
meane qd Mermont, I haue already inuented, and we wil
all be reuenged so, that babes vnborne shall speake of his
miserie, and this it is: we will all hang forth the ensignes
of peace, and submissiuely yéeld to his pleasure, bow at his
féet, and flatter him with fained obedience: we wil conclude
against our religion, and take vpon vs that they call Christianitie:
and that he may the lesse mistrust vs, shalbe proclaimed
through the city, our conuersion: what will of this
insue, shalbe his ruine. The pagans applauded this resolution,
so they arose, and hauing effected what they would,
took the keys of the city, and marched forth with great ioy
towards Meruine, who so soone as he sawe Mermont and
thother, he turned to Ga
                              •
                           tier and said: Behold with what
ioy the pagans approch vs, bearing in theyr hands witnesses
of peace: How blessed is this conquest that is without
effusion, and how glad am I they are so easily conuerted?
Alas his innocency thought not of the treason they had inuented.
By this they were come eyther to other, whilest
the Pagans falling vpon their knees before Meruine cried,
Welcome, O ten times happily welcome is Meruine, the
sonne of inuincible Oger into this country. Then bespake

                        Mermont: Thou most wise▪ most strong, and valiant
Prince, liuing in this or the immortall world, beholde, we
fall downe before thée, ready to receiue and acknowledge
thy law and rel
                           •
                        igion euery one most desirous of that celestiall
happinesse, who already haue renounced Iupiter, Apollo,
and Mahomet, vnder whose shadows we haue bin
miserably conducted. When Meruine heard these words,
he was ioyfully co
                           •
                        tented, more than at any time before
he had bin, thinking that came from sincerity, which indéed
was nothing but treachery: wherefore imbracing euerie
seuerall prince in his armes, seuerally he said to Mermont:
neuer did your Highnes your selfe so glorious reputation,
as in belieuing in the immortall God immaculate Christ
Iesus. And sith you haue made me the blessed workeman
of this high dignitie, henceforth, as I haue euer bin, holde
me for your owne knight and true subiect. Many other ceremonies
was betweene them: and then they marched on
to Babilon, whose walls were repleate with ioy, triumphs,
and banquetting. Then was a solempne festiuall held, and
the Temples most sumptuously adorned. Then was Mermont
and all the other pagan Kings baptized, who vnwillingly
went willingly to the sacrament, comforted onely
with treason and false infidelitie.
                     3 When al the kings and citizens in Babil
                           •
                        n were baptized,
Meruine went thence to M
                           •
                        qua, where in an houres
space he caused all the country to be bapt
                           •
                        zed. Which done,
he went to Ierusalem, where easily he accorded all the citizens:
for albeit they were conquered, yet they had not forsaken
chr
                           •
                        stian rel
                           •
                        gion only doubtfull at the first, not knowing
Meruins conuersion they fained to adore Mahomet,
but knowing his will, they soone cast away that base beléeuing.
These things thus effected, the gentle Meruine returned
to Babilon, & made all the country bordering there

about become Christians: and whatsoeuer before time he
had grafted in hell, seeking paganisme: for ioy whereof the
Christians made many holy daies, singing hymnes in his
honour, protesting him to be the renowmedst that ere was
borne of a mother. But on the contrary part, Mermont
lay working his imaginations, how to worke vengeance
on him whom the heauens so excéedingly loued.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     How by treason Mermont brought Meruine to Minor.
2 How Gautier after the departure of Meruine went
with al his army to Montment, where he found Mathaburna,
to whom he tolde how her father was become
a christian. 3 How Mermont spake to Butor
to imprison Meruine.
                     
                     
                        IT hapned after Easter, that on a certain day
king Mermont resolued to worke mischiefe
on Meruin: and calling him to him, to blindfold
his eyes, he said: Sonne, it is not vnknowne
to me thaffections twixt thee & my
daughter, the which is an vsuall ioy to my imaginations:

wherefore sith no better good can make better my happines,
I beséech thée let me know the day of thy espousalls, a day,
than which nothing is more desired. My soueraigne king,
said Meruine, let the day be at your Highnes disposing:
and if it so seeme pleasing, let vs to morrow rather than to
day passe to that des
                           •
                        red coniunction. Willingly (qd Meruine:
yet before, of necessitie we must go to Minor vnto
the Queene my sister whom by a solemne oath I haue giuen
assurance, that I will my selfe in person come to inuite
her to those gorgeous nuptialls, because my daughter hath
euer bin most deare in her regarde and estimation: as for
your army, that may K. Gautier conduct before to Montment,
and take order for all preparation worthy in so great
a solemnity. Well hath your Maiestie said (quoth Meruine)
let euery thing be so disposed, and in the morning
they and we will take our seuerall iournies. Willingly qd
Mermont, imagining with himselfe to bring Meruin to a
place whence he should neuer be restored. After this Meruine
called Gautier, to whom he told his resolutions, intreating
him to conuey his army to Montment, his soule
to his Ladie and Mistris, and his happinesse into her bosome.
Gautier at the first stoode amazed, and besought him
not to bee too much too trusty: and Drohes tolde him hee
was suspitious of some euill, vnder this extreame familiaritie.
But Meruine, who adiudged euery thought by his
owne thinking, perswaded them otherwise, insomuch that
Gautier, his wife, his sons, Huon and Drohes, together
with the army, imbarked themselues for Montment: and
Mermont, Meruine, and a troup of traiterous confederats
likewise took shipping for Minor, Fortune being so fauourable
to mischance, that in short time they came to their wished
landing.
                     2 Then mounting vpon their horses, they took the way

that led to the city, in which we will leaue them and return
to Gautier, and the other christians, who doubtfull of the
mischiefes that followed, made such haste▪ both by land and
sea in their iourney, that in short time they came to Montment,
where they found the miracle of Nature Mathaburna,
who reioyced at their comming. But when her eyes
were not halowed with the sight of Meruine, her ioy conuerted
to teares, and she demanded of Gautier, where hir
loue, her life and substance remained: forth with Gautier
reported how her royall father was baptized, and consented
to her espousalls: to which end, he and Meruine were gone
to Minor, to fetch her aunt to be a glory to the festiuall.
When Mathaburna heard this, that her father was baptized,
she praised God: but in that he had carried her loue to
Minor 
                           •
                        hence issued doubts, feare and suspitions: and wo
is me, it was not without strong reason, for the place was
dreadful and impregnable, the description wherof follows,
as is set downe in stories Minor, as antient Chronicles do
testi
                           ••
                        e, from whence this historie is deriued, is very strongly
situate: It hath at the foure corners foure most high
rockes or promontories, of which, one excéedeth all the other
in height and hugenesse, from whence descendeth a
mightie riuer named Orbe, most wonderfull déepe, rough,
and contageons, it is guarded vpon each side with a couple
of rockes, betweene which euery one must passe to the
citie, by a narrow way but fiue foote in breadth at the extreamest,
neither is there any way saue that onely: the history
saith, that in the time of king Pharao, these rocks and
this riuer were made by Magike art, and this city named
Minor founded as a thing impregnable: for it hath before
the entraunce foure ports or passages strongly garded, the
first is Auster, and it hath a Pagan named Auroufe, fell &
powerfull continually to defend and kéepe it. Oueragainst
it is an other of the same strength, defended by one euen as

strong and sufficient. The third is of a more terrible fashion
than these: for the gates are of yron, and next it a tower,
whose height séems to touch the heauens. After one
hath passed that gate, whose name is Tombare: they enter
into Minor, a beautifull citie, washed vpon euery side
with the riuer Orbe. Mermont and Meruine, by this
time were passed through the first port, who was much abashed
to behold so strange a passage, and such workes of
wonderfull resistance demanding diuers questions of their
hugenesse: in the end they incountred with Auroufe, who
knowing Mermont since the bringing of his sister into
those parts, let him passe in peace, and Meruin also. Thence
they came to the second gate called Baucair: which when
Meruine saw▪ he demaunded what diuell of diuelish waies
that was, and when they should come to the city; Faire son
(qd Mermont) you are abashed at the
                           •
                        e entrances: yet be
content, and we shall easily ouerpasse them. Then they
went till they came to T
                              •
                           mbar the last port, whose ghastly
proportion made Meruine wonder more than before:
and demaunded what fury of hell had exalted that Tower
to threaten heauen, sure it must néeds fall, it cannot long
ind
                           •
                        re. Yet (said Meruine) for that the masonary is both
strong and exquisite: and the rockes of each side as supporters
do maintaine it. By my soule (said Meruine) this is a
vilainous situation: for I see not any way to issue or enter
but this only. 
                           •
                        is true qd Mermont. Neither is there any
creature whatsoeuer, that enters within this portcullis,
that can repasse without the leaue of king Butor, or Gaiamy
his sister. This said, they came to the yron gate, thorow
which they passed, al the porters doing them great reuerence.
Thus farre hauing go
                           •
                        e, they came into the fairest
and honourable city: which to behold, Meruine mightily
reioyced, because till then he went in worse than starrelight.
A certaine pagan went before to king Butor, telling

him the approch of Mermont▪
                         wherefore he arose t
                           •
                         go méet
him, but his son Marant would not but withdrawing himselfe
into a priuate chamber, sat musing what occasion should
drawe thither his vncle, one while he thought he was come
to take vengeance vpon him for the treason he had committed
against Meruine at Montment: for which Drohes had
slaine Calix in combat, as was before written: other-whiles
he did imagine other occurrentes: but the traitor Mermont,
as false as himselfe was faultie, hadde not one thought so
néere a kinne to honestie for only his comming w
                           •
                        s to doe
endamagement to Meruine, because he adored the true god,
and renounced their false prophet Mahomet.
                     
                     3 Now was Mermont come into the court euen to the
kings pallace, where he found Butor and diuers of his
Barons that were come forth to greete him. Kingly was their
encounter on both sides, and much ceremonious the largenesse
of their accomplishings. Then came the quéene, being,
sister to Mermont, betweene whom were straite & déere
embraces: with her was also her daughter, one o
                           •
                         beauties
best superlatiues▪ na
                           •
                        ed Singlay: to her was Mermont
kinde and full of obseruance. Gratulations finished, to the
test
                           •
                        monie of welcome, entred, and the pallace rung with
clamours of delightes and contentment. Supper by this
time was readie and royally serued, where full bowles▪ and
rich accates adorned entertainement When supper was ended
and musicke came in and the gallantes of the court betooke
them to da
                           •
                        nsing, amongest them Meruine t
                           •
                        king
Singlay, daunsed with her a stately measure: during which
heauenly motion, Mermont, Butor, and the queene, 
                           •
                        el
                           •
                         a
solempne (though damnable) counsell, about the ruine of the
euer to be regarded Meruine, Mermont auowing the occasion
of his comming, to be for nothing▪ but to beholde his
vtter destruction: and thence he dilated his bringing vp, and

a duentures, his conquestes, triumphes: and lastly, his
backsl
                           •
                        ding f
                           •
                        ō 
                        Mahomet, whom before he had adord, withal
affirming his valiance so boundles, and not to be resisted,
that he would soone sub
                           •
                        ert the whole estate of their religion.
Therefore good king a
                           •
                        d my brother, said Mermont) it
not behoueth (to whom Mahomet hath giuen power of controlement)
to imprison him and k
                           ••
                        pe him safe from further
defacing of his templ
                           •
                        s. But if by anie maanes he wil again
be conuerted to our faction: then assure thée, so strange is
his resolution, that we shall be monarches both of Fraunce
and all Christen dome, with most easie aduentures. All this
while Meruin was dauncing without thought of infidilit
                           •
                        e:
courting most honourably the beautifull Singlay, whose
heart with his excellencie was euen then made a receptacle
of loues brightest fire, and she was inflamed with his loue:
so much preuailed the gift Galliana had giuē him at his first
bearing. Thus we will leaue to speake of them, and pursue
the discourse of Mermont and Butor.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIIII.
                     1 Huon Meruin was most traiterously imprisoned, and
the description therof. 2. How by the persuasion of
Mermont. Butor went with 100000. Pagans to Montment.
3. How Minea aduertised Gautier and the other
Christians.
                     
                        WHen Butor had vnderstoode the vttermost of
Mermonts intreaties, hee replied, my déere
brother, touching the actions of this vassall, be
you as guardlesse, as I am fearelesse: for this
night when he is laide to his rest, & w
                           •
                        arinesse

shall summon sleep vpon his eie-lids, with a band of men he
shalbe strongly assailed, bound and conueied into a care-kéep
                           ••
                        g
dungeon, which sometime was founded by a 
                           •
                        oniurer
diuell, and diuels commander, named Mutafier, where he remained
200. yeares as I haue heard credibly reported, because
he sought to supplant the wise Merline, and frame the
world to his owne liking, into this vast place of misery for
vengeance Merlin damned him: in which there is nothing
but horror, feare and desolation, the botomlesse riuer Orbe
making his current ouer the roufe of the wofull mansion: into
this, if once the vassall come, there is no redemption, nor
hath any creature power of deliuerāce▪ for so Merlin inchanted
it, who bound the diuelish Mutafier beyond the power
of all other coniuration: till such time, that by bloudy vow,
and execrable protestation he sware euer to beat his hest and
commandement, not daring to wrong body or soule, without
his authoritie. And then was Mutafier inlarged, and euer after
made frée from that dungeon. Into this place shall this
Meruine be conueyed: neither will I rest till I sée it fullie
brought to passe and finished. After all reuels were en
                           •
                        ed,
torches wer brought to cōuey the princes to their lodgings:
so euery one seuerally departed; and Meruine was brought
into a most sumptuous chamber where after he was laid,
and had lockt vp his eie
                           •
                        lids with a swéete slumber, thirtie
Sarazens entred his lodging, and armed not so much with
courage, as the sleep▪ death-like sprinkled vpon him, at once
assailed him, and bound him hand and foot, and blindfolded
his eies. At which Meruin awaking was mightily amazed,
but not knowing any remedie, was patient forcibly. Then
began the vassals of shame to remile him, saying: Traytour
thou shalt curse the time that euer thou renoūced Mahomet,
or bathed thy sword in the blood of a pagan: for hence springs
thy ruine, and their delieuerie. Then came Butor, who
caused him to bee cast into the fore-mentioned Dungeon,

where he was chained by the handes and féete, and receiued
his iudgemēt, that he should neuer be frée from that calamitie,
till 
                           •
                        e renounced the eternall God of the Christians. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
which he made answere: Taritours, and no kings my God
will I neuer forsake for affliction: neither shal my life indure
to thinke wearisome these torments which I ind
                           •
                        re for my
Sauiour, whose loue I will not leaue for all the worlds triumphs,
my soule being deare for these deare oppressions.
At this Butor departed, leauing Meruine accompanied
with none but sorrowe onely, with whome hée consor
                           •
                        ed the
space of fiue yeeres in extreame miserie. Now was the gift
giuen by Gratiana at his birth fully accomplished, and hee
pent in that prison where teares were pittilesse though incessant:
after many bemonings he made his prayers vnto God,
& besought him to haue mercy on his af
                           ••
                        ictions. Then came
the deuill Mautafier, and transforming himselfe into many
likenesses, tempted him wieh damnable protestations, promising
if he would renounce his baptisme, to redeeme him
from his wofulnesse. But his faith resolued was euer immoueable,
so that Mautafier 
                        
                           •
                        eeing his perseuerance, left to
expostulate with more temptation. Heere we will leaue to
speake more of him, or his wretchednes, and discourse a little
of Morgua his mother, of Meruina his godmother, & Galiana,
that princeliest Fairies that gouerned in Faeria, whose
griefe abounded for the imprisonment of Meruine, inueying
most mightily against Gratiana, whose gift made him subiect
to this infortune. After many complaints Morgua sayd
to the other ladies: Princesses, you vnderstand the wretchednes
of my sonnes case, euen for vertues sake consent to sweeten
some ho
                           •
                        re of his bitternesse, with delight which I haue
deuised. We three will take ech of vs an instrument of
musicke, and go into his dungeon (the cloister of carefulnes)
euery day an houre, at such time as Mautafier shalbe absent,
and with some chanson of delicacie minister ioy among his

sorrowes, concealing our selues from his eies, onely inriching
his eares with melodie. To this the Ladies gaue a
frée consent: so that doing accordingly, they entred vnseene
into the prison. At whose approch, a most strange light spred
through the dungen, in so ample maner, as it there had bin
an hundred torches burning. At which diuine action, Meruine
was woonderfully amazed: Amazed only to sée that he
saw 
                           •
                        othing. Iustantly after the light, the Fairies began
to play heauenly notes (the moouing aire of celestiall musicke)
that it was impossible for sorrow to abi
                           •
                        e where such
sacred tunes were recorded: and he in whom languor p
                           •
                        otested
to haue tenu
                           •
                        e of fee-simple, prooued the 
                           •
                        lea 
                           •
                        alse:
and that at all he had in him no interest. Afte
                           •
                         they had thus
plaied, and Meruine had shakt handes with extre
                           ••••
                        e,
they returned to their owne habitation, not 
                           •
                        ayling 
                           〈◊〉
                        
day th
                           •
                        s inuis
                           •
                        bly to visite him, to the high amazment of
his sences.
                     2 But againe to returne to the traiterous king Mermont:
I
                           •
                         chaunced that he came to king Butor, and in most
earnest maner in
                           •
                        reated him to muster vp his people: and
with the greatest power he had to march with him to Montment,
for that there lay Gautier of Denmarke, his foure
sonnes, and almost all the floure of Christendome, in expectance
of Meruine, whom vnawares they might ouer
                           •
                        hr
                           •
                        w
and bring 
                           •
                        o finall destruction. 
                           •
                        o this Butor agreed (for
ill by ill is easily tempted:) and forthwith cōmaunded Commissions
to be sent abroad, for the gathering togither of his
power. When there was assembled to the number of an
100000, he armed them a
                           •
                        d departed from Minor, trauelling
so restlesly both by land and by sea, that in twentie
dayes he came to Brandis, and by the will of God, the autho
                           ••
                        
of happie fortune, the two false meaning kinges lodged
in the house of Minea, where they held a solempne and

tedious councell howe they might enter Montment, and in
despight of Meruine put to sword Gautier, and the rest of
the Christians. All which disputations came to the eares of
Mynea, who drawing aside the Lord Chamberlaine of king
Mermonts houshold, in humble-maner intreated of his lordshippe,
to know where, or what was become of the most famous
                           •
                        
                        Meruine.
Madam (sayd the noble man) he is inclosed
in a place from whence hee shall neuer finde deliuerance.
And then (as if he were with child of those troubles) he discoursed
all the estate of infortunate Meruine, both the reuoca
                           •
                        ion
of his first religion, his true parents, and kingly pedegrée,
his conquests and vnluckie betraying, and withall, how
the most principall of his aliance were gathered together at
Montment. expecting the espousals betweene him and Berea,
and how the king his maister, and Butor, meant to prenent
them with a sudden and vnlookt for slaughter.
                     3 When Minea, not without sighes, had heard him comment
of these actions, shee smiled, least her lookes should be
blabbes of her intentions: and then taking leaue, departed
from him, and went to her chamber, where immediately she
indited a letter, that conteined what her eares had receiued:
and deliuering it to a most trustie messenger, gaue him especiall
charge to beare it to Montment, vnto Barbin the marchant.
All which the messenger effected, not ceasing till hée
came vnto the kings pallace in Montment, where finding
Barbin, hee sayd: Reuerent sir, to you I am sent, from the
vertuous Ladie Minea, that so intirely loueth Meruine,
and from her present these lines to your iudgement. When
Mathaburna heard him name Meruin, she started, and inquired
what tidings. To whom Barbin made no replie,
but deliuered the letter to Gautier, who read
it: which conteineth this that
followeth.
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              ❧ To the Princes of Christendome▪
health▪
                           
                           
                              KNow (excellent Lordes) from me vncomfortable
Ladie, that in vaine we expect
the returne of most absolute Meruine,
whom hencefoorth I feare againe
you shall neuer see, the griefe whereof is burdenous
to my weary soule. And further, be aduertised, that
it behoueth you to stand vpon your best guard;
for that foorthwith you shall be infinitely assailed
by an hundred thousand Pagans, conducted by
Mermont, and Butor of Tabarie, who solemnely
haue sworne your death on their religious Alcheron:
looke then to your selues, and loue her that in
dangered her life to do you seruices.
                           
                              Minea of Brandis.
                           
                        
                     
                     VVHen Gautier had read the content
                           •
                         of this letter,
than at that instant he was nere more vehemently
perpl
                           •
                        xed, tearing his garments, and making despaire
and wrath one intire bodie: but better to be resolued,
hee asked the messenger if certainely those ti
                           •
                        ings of miserie
were true or no. Yes my good Lord, replied he, and
the mightie host is euen now at Brandis. Then arose Iacob
and saide; Princesse I am a witnesse of the incomparable
loue the Lady Minea bare to exquisite Meruine: wherefore
I knowe shee writes nothing but truthes fearefulnesse.
The beganne euery one to sorrowe for Meruin:
                        
but farre aboue all and beyond conceit, were Mathaburnas
lamentations, who wringing her handes, breaking the golden
threades of her celestiall haire, and the sacred vestures,
that shrouded the paradise of her features, shée cried: O
sorrow▪ immortall sorrow, what shall I demaund? miserie,
or death? both are too little. True God, in whom my faith
so lately is grounded, giue counsaile to my woes, for my
heart is lost: O more my life, nay most my spirite, nay aboue
all that, the most swéete, most wise and, most louely
creature 
                           •
                        f the world. Harke heauens what I vow before
you, if his loue faile, my loue shall haue ending: for but him,
not any shall harbour in my conceites: if he die, I die: if hée
liue, he shall finde me such as he left me. Thus tormented
she her selfe: but alas, such are her hard starres, that before
she sée him, she shalbe compelled to die, or denie her
religion, which indeede she did: yet it was
but womans faintnesse, as heereafter
shall be at large
declared.
                  
                  FINIS
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  MERVINE;
The second part of
That most famous,
worthie, and auncient Mother of
all Histories, the exquisite Historie of
Prince Meruine, the son of Oger the Dane,
who conquered Ierusalem, Babylon, and diuerse other
Citties from the Pagans, with many memorable
accidents of wondrous
consequence.
                  Qui sera sera.
                  
                  AT LONDON
Printed by Ralph Blower and Valentine Sims.
1612.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Printer to the
Reader.
                  
                     IT is a common custom
among Writers
and Translaters (in
a well penned prologue,
iust like an old
Song, whose burthen goes to,
(I beseech ye beare with vs) to sollicite
their Readers for so much
fauour as to vse good words, and
haue patience, to omit defects, censure
mildely, & so forth. Now I acquainted

with none of these vaines
for excuse, and indeede thinking
them all in vaine, (in the Translators
absence) I keepe the forme
of an Epistle, though follow not the
fashion: onely intreate those that
delight in Sories, to looke on the
delights in Meruine. Which if
they vouchsafe for my profit,
I will venture more
for their pleasures.
               
               
                  
                  The Table of the
second Part.
                  
                     
                        HOw Mermont, Butor, and the Pagans imagining
to enter vnawares within Montment,
were inclosed by the Christians. 2 Of their discomfiture,
and the great battell wherein Bertran
did wonders. Chap. 1.
                     
                        Gautier the Dane with 20000. followed Butor and Mermont
to Minor: 2 of the skirmishes and taking of Nubia,
Turquants death. 3 Bertrans policie of suprizing of Minor. Chap. 2.
                     
                        Bertran passed all the gates, and Drohes with him also:
2 of the prowesses they shewed against the pagans: 3 how they
were taken prisoners; and put to the keeping of the faire
Singlay. Chap. 3.
                     
                        Gautier raysed his Siege from Minor, and came to Nubia,
where hee repayred his Armie: 2 how from thence hee came
to Luternia, where hee found Iocob, who discoursed the fortunes
of Montment: 3 how Gautier went before Montment,
and tooke it againe by meanes of Iacob. Chap. 4.
                     Of the gallant life that Bertran a
                           •
                        d Drohes led in Minor:
2 of the Tourney which was ppoclaimed for the loue of
Singlay: 3 of the priuate wonders Bertran did. Chap. 5.
                     
                        Marant accused his sister Singlay: 2 how Bertran made
the pagans beleeue he would renounce Christianitie: 3 how

he vndertooke to combate against Marant. Chap. 6.
                     
                        Bertran and Drohes (vnder the pretence of paganisme)
brought fortie thousand pagans before Montment: 2 how
the most part of them were there confounded and put to the
sw
                           •
                        rd. chap. 7
                     An Ambassadour came to Gautier, who brought him word,
that the Emperour Charlemaine had destroyed all his country
of Denmarke: 2 how Drohes went to deli
                           •
                        er Meruin:
and how Gautier arriued at Maiance. chap. 8
                     Of the great battel which was betwe
                           •
                        ene the Emperour and
Gautier, in which Charlemaine was taken priosner: 2 how
Loys the sonne of Charles came with a great power against
Maiance to reuenge his father. chap. 9.
                     
                        Barant (surnamed the Cruell) departed from Montment
with three hundred thousand Souldiers, and passed the Seas
towards Maiance: 2 how Charles and Gautier made a
peace, and ioyned against the Pagans. chap. 10
                     
                        Bertran and his brethren, Loys and the other Christians
issued vpon the pagans: 2 the deaths of all the famous christians
except Loys: 3 of the battell betweene Barant the
Cruell, and Bertran of Denmarke. chap. 11.
                     
                        Loys came to Maiance and reported the woful estate of the
Christians, and the sorrowe Gautier made for his sonnes, 2
Singlayes sorrowe, and message Barant sent to Charles; together
with the answere: 3 how Barant 
                        
                           •
                        lew one of the messengers. chap. 12.
                     The Christians gaue battell to the pagans, in which turmoile
the good King Gautier was 
                           •
                        laine, and his hoste ouerthrowne:
2 Charlemaine is forced to retire, and issues out
the second time, 3 The taking of Loys, and Duke Naymes
priso
                           •
                        ers. chap. 13
                     
                        Drohes and Adain trauailed so long in vnfrequented
places, till they found out the true meanes for Meruines deliuerie:
2 how Drohes combated with a Griffon for his

loue Adain. ch
                           •
                        p. 14
                     
                        Drohes spake to Robaster touching the deliuery of Meruin:
2 of Malabeon of Luron Robasters father that gaue
counsel
                           •
                         in the action. chap. 15
                     
                        Robaster deceiued king Butor: 2 how Meruine was
deliuered out of prison, and went to the pallace where he 
                           •
                        iue
Butor, his queene, and diuers other pagans: 3 and of the
great battell he maintained. chap. 16
                     
                        Meruine Robaster, and Drohes arriued in a wood amongst
robbers: 2 of the dangers they were in: 3 how Malabeon
ayded them: 4 how they 
                           •
                        lew the theeues. chap. 17
                     
                        Meruine and Drohe
                              •
                           
                         went to Brandis, and conuerted
the Countrey: 2 how they came before Montment, where
(in the Battaile) Drohes was taken, and brought into the
Citie: 3 how Mathaburna (before the pagans) menaced
him. chap. 18
                     The city of Montment was taken by the meanes of Mathaburna:
2 The deliuery of Drohes out of prison, and
other accidents. chap. 19
                     
                        Barant challenged combat of Charles himselfe alone against
three or fiue: 2 how he ou
                           •
                        rcame all the fi
                           •
                         chap. 20
                     
                        Meruine in countred Baham the sonne of Belmarine with
10000. pagans who were forraging, who were all conquered
except three: 2 how Baham renounced Mahomet: 3 how
the three that escaped reported the action vnto Barant, who
slue one of them for bringing such euill newes. chap. 21
                     
                        Barants hundred thousand were ouerthrowne by Mer
                              •
                           in
                              •
                           
                        
2 how Bertran then came with all his hoast, except thre
                           •
                        
hundred, and marched against the Christians. chap. 22
                     The single Combat betwixt Meruine and Barant, and of
Charles and the other Christians▪ and the ouerthrow of the
pagans. chap. 23
                     
                        Meruine married Mathaburna: 2 And of the great
solemnitie at Maiance for ioy thereof. chap. 24
                     
                        
                        Muta
                              •
                           ier deceiued the Fairie Gratiana, and begotte of her
a monster named Orke, who had three heads: 2 And of other
accidents. chap. 25.
                     The king Turniquant of Oriam assembled a great number
of his people▪ and went in ayde of the Orke: 2 how hee
destroyed all Normandie and Brittaine: 3 and of other occurents. chap. 26.
                     King Charles had intelligence of the King of Englands
comming: 2 of their assault on both sides: 3 how Meruine
came▪ who had reconquered againe all that the Orke had
wonne: 4 how Mathaburna gaue charge, that no man
should speake of the warres before Paris: 5 how an Angell
appeared to Meruine. chap. 27.
                     
                        Meruin vndertooke Combat against the Orke: 2 of the
Fight, and the Orkes death, which brought rest to the
Christians. chap. 28.
                     
                        Meruine tooke leaue of Charles and departed: 2 how
he went to Ierusalem, and thence was conueyed into Fairi
                           ••
                        . chap. 29.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The second part of
The most ancient famous mo her
of Histories, the exquisite Historie of
Prince Meruine, the son of Oger the Dane,
who conquered Ierusalem, Babylon, and diuerse other
Cities from the Pagans, with many memorable
accidents of wondrous
consequence.
                  
                     CHAP, I.
                     How Mermont, Butor, and the Pagans imagining to
enter vnawares within Montment, were inclosed by
the Christians▪ 2 Of their discomfiture, and the
great battell wherein Bertran did wonders.
                     
                        
                           GAutier hauing receued these tidings
(the happie armo
                           •
                        r by the which
they were preserued from a shamefull
death) gaue the messenger in
guerdon of his paines, a cuppe of
golde, desiring him to recommend
the perfection of his seruices, to
the most kind and louing Lady Minea,
whom hee would honour and adore: and after other
complements, dispatched him, and departed. Butor and
Mermont, the waking Dragons of impietie by this time

were departed from Brandis, and now by sea were come
to the port of Luternia, two leagues from Montment, the
wh
                           ••
                        st the christians armed themselues to incounter them,
hauing intelligence by their espialles that passed to and fro
of their neare arriuall: and Bertran comming to his father,
besought his maiesty to deliuer him a regiment of the oldest

                           〈◊〉
                        , whom with himself he would lay in ambushment
in the woods. Bontbras till the Pagans were passed
by, and then at such time as the maine a
                           •
                        my should charge
them in the faces, he behind would equall the incounter,
and not doubt but to put all to the sword in a moment: his
counsell was held currant, and consented vnto. Now came
the pagans marching with silent carefulnes, thinking halfe
in a 
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        mber to surprize the citie, but they were preuented,
for Gautier met them with a well ordered battell: the proportion
consisting of thrée batallions, the first conducted by
Guyon, containing fiue thousand, the second by Huon of
Burdeaux, being fiue thousand, and the last by himselfe
also fiue thousand, so that the maine was fiftéen thousand,
besides ten thousand that lay obscured with Bertran. As
the Pagans passed by the wood, Bertran took a perfit view
of them, and smiling, he saide vnto Drohes who was his
companion in that stratagem, Behold with what hast these
Pagans post to their misery, sée sée Drohes, doest thou
s
                           •
                        e that gallant beast the formost is mounted on? by him
that gaue me life, this day I will giue him thée for a present,
a seate worthier of thy seate than an infidelious miscreant.
At these words Drohes looking carefully, sawe Butor
mounted on the braue mare Mordant, sometimes the
delight of Meruine, which with griefe made him stand as
if he ahd béene thunder-strucke, till rage appeasing sorrow
he saide; To armes, to armes, prince Bertran, let me die
if I doe stay any longer, and sée a traitour in triumph ride
on the gallant Mordant, worthie none but her master inuincible

                        Meruine. This saide they mounted vppon theyr
horses, and sounding a Cornet, which was a signall to
Gautier of their comming, issued out of the woodes, and
charged the rereward of the pagans thorow and thorow,
which Butor beholding, commanded an alarum, and saide,
Courage gallant resolutions, and be not abashed for this
handfull of christians, whose pride, not prowesse makes
them desperate▪ and at this they turned vpon their enemies,
where one might haue séene Bertran beare honour from euery
other creature, and comming to him that rode on the
gallant horse he had promised Drohes, with the first blowe
be smote him dead from his saddle, then taking the stéede
deliuered him to Drohes, saying, My promise this day is
performed, and my word iustified: at that Drohes with
humble thanks dismounted, and mounted on his new gift,
then they two thrust themselues among the pagans, Death
like a gentleman vsher passing before them, giuing to the
battell, a feareful, and miserable beginning.
                     2 Gautier, that on their faces shoulde, now on their
backes was inforst to charge them, in which shocke Huon
shewed his prowesse to be most inuincible, in that Might it

                           •
                        elfe wanted might to resist him, he slew infinites, and left
innumerable wounded amongst the rest he slue the nephew
to king Gautier, whose death whilst his vncle pursued to
reuenge, he made forfait for his owne life. Dreadfull, and
somewhat doubtfull was the battell a long time, because the
pagans were an hundred thousand, and the christians, but
fiue and twentie thousand, who notwithstanding by their
wisedomes (the best weapons in warefare) in the end became
conquerours. Maruellous this day were the actes of
Bertran, making Conquest in loue with her selfe, because hee
loued her. Guyon his brother was not short of infinit praises,
who in the hart of the battell shewed himselfe lord of al
                           •
                        
                        
heartes, and incountring a kinsman of Butors, he slew him,
at the fight whereof a whole band of Sarazens assailed him
crying, thou diest this day, no valor shall release thée, and
then rushing all with one furie, they bare him from his horse
and tooke him prisoner: but as they were intending to present
him to king Butor, Bertran that then was commen into
the strength of the battell, and by the tumults of the pagans,
suspecting they had tane some prisoner, all inraged
and grieued he turned to the prease, making euery hinderer
of his way a companion to his graue, till hee sawe them
who led his brother Guyon bound in honours dishonourable
fetters: which when his eyes affirmed as true witnesses,
led by a vertuous 
                           •
                        unacie, he 
                           •
                        lew in among them, and
strake him that held his brother such a blow, that hee claue
him to the breast, after him, another, and another, til Guyon
was at libertie, then giuing him an excellent sword (the present
of delight) they two brothers beganne a strong battel
against fiftie Pagans. Guyon in reuenge of his wrong
cloathing his sword in the heart blood of the Pagans. By
this time came posting by them the Seneschall of Iabary,
whom as Bertran was about to incounter, he saide to preuent
him: B
                           •
                        y, de
                           •
                        ist, and let me passe by thée, for I will
adiourne thine ill fortune, till I haue slaine him who hath
killed my brother, and then if thy life be weary I will end
thy breathing. Pagan, saide Bertran, thou and thine intents
are so farre asunder, that I must needes talke with
you before your passe so goodly a iourey, and then turning
aloft his sword, hee assailed the Seneschall with such delicate
vertue, that in an instant he sent him to sléepe with his
great great great grandfathers father, then arresting his
horse, he gaue him to his brother Guyon, who mounted
thereon in the battell did most maruelious actions, crying,
Honour for heauen and Denmarke, which wordes gaue
life to their souldiers, and reuiued the halfe dying wounded,

so that he Pagans vnable to resist any longer, betooke
themselues to flight, and were vtterly discomfited: which
when Butor beheld, and comparing his huge hoste with
their slender traine, he called Mermont and said▪ My lord
of Montment, I see it is impossible by fortitude to regaine
your city, so highly are the Christians inraged and so miserable
the chaunces of our euill fortunes. It is true, it is
very true, answered Mermont, the Sunne-shine of our
glorie is wained, therefore let vs fli
                           •
                        , till Time preferre
better aduentures. This being spoken, they betooke themselues
to flight towards the sea coast, which their army beholding,
like distraught men flew here, and there, and euery
where to saue their liues, whilest Bertran, his brothers,
Gautier, and Huon follow the chase, putting to the
sword all that were ouertaken▪ so that of an hundred thousand
that were at the beginning of the flight▪ there escaped
but foure hundred, who with the kings entred into theyr
shippes, and betooke themselues to the Sea, railing and
cursing the great courages of the Chris
                           •
                        ians, who after
the chase ended returned to the place of battell, where it
was admirable to beholde the slaine multitudes, who lay
one vpon another swimming in theyr owne bloodes, whose
current was mighty, like to a flowing riuer: amongest
the Pagans was found vnspeakeable riches, which gathered
together▪ the Conquerors returned victoriously and
triumphantly into Montment, hauing lost of their owne
army but only ten thousand, they were royally receiued
of Mathaburna, who all that day had prayed for the rare
successe of their good fortune, because shee feared it the Pagans
had preuailed, either her life or happy dayes should
vndoubtedly haue quailed. Gautier by certaine prisoners
he had taken, vnderstoode all the manner of Meruines imprisonment
in Minor, whither Butor and Mermont were
fled, wherefore he protested before God and his holy saints

to follow them, to which end he sent proclamations round
about the realme of Montment, to sommon all the princes
thereof in his aide, and the rescue of the most worthy Meruine,
whose loue was so infinite in those parts, that presently
there was numbred twenty thousand absolute approued
knights knowne most valiantly couragious, which
with exceeding ioy Gautier with himselfe imbarked, taking
also with him diuers Pagan prisoners to conduct him the
way to that receptacle of horror, that Academie of misfortune,
damnable Minor.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. II.
                     1 How Gautier the Dane with twenty thousand followed
Butor and Mermont to Minor. 2 Of the skirmishes
and taking of Nubia, and Turquants death,
3 Bertrans policie for surprizing of Minor.
                     
                        
                           GAut
                              •
                           er the Dane, his foure sonnes, Huon of
Burdeaux, Drohes, and with them twenty
thousand redoubted men at armes, being aboord
their ships, hoysed vp sailes, and knitting
all their harts in one thought, protested
in the sight of God to pursue Butor so incessantly, that if
he tooke but a breathing rest in any place, they would ouertake
him and bid him new battell; so on they sailed til they
came by a goodly citie called Nubia, whose gouernor was
king Turquant, who at that instant had left the towne to

conduct and conuey Butor on his way, to whom he was alied
by a knot of affinity, Mermont and the other pagans
being passed by a wéeke before.
                     2 When Gautier vnderstood whose towne it was, and
vnto whom it appertained, hee immediately landed his
men▪ and vowed to assaile it, the which hee did, taking it
with small or no losse to himselfe, but infinit to his enemy▪
for he put man woman and child to the sword, that refused
to be baptized. Which done, he drew out of the new baptized,
a regiment of the best reputed, and left behind a garrison
of his owne souldiers to fortifie and kéepe the Citie,
and then departed on his way towards Minor: in which
expedition he was so sp
                           •
                        edy, that he attained a wood but six
leagues from thence: where, as his army was reposing,
they might beholde the king of Nubia returning from the
conduct of Butor, and with him fiue hundred souldiours,
whom when he saw, they swore, vnlesse they were Christians,
they should neuer escape them. Which a citizen of
Nubia hearing, saide, My Lord, it is Turquant our late
king, that euen now is returning homeward from Minor:
At that
                           •
                         word Gautier set his men in order to charge him.
Whilst Turquant surueying them fetcht a d
                           •
                        epe sigh, and
said, Princes, this day I feare we shall espouse our euill
fortunes, for I see men prepared to giue vs battell, yet are
their nations and colours vnknowne to vs: yet▪ what, or
whosoeuer they are, wee must and will be our defenders.
These words were spoken so faintly, that his armie like
men halfe dying, cried for a tru
                           •
                        e, saying, they were but
réedes, and vnable to indure the stormes of so great an army.
But as they were in speaking, Gautier set vpon them
and flew the most part, the rest flying about the fields here
and there for succour, which they found no where: the sight
whereof was so irkesome to king Turquant, that in a mad

rage he strake a Christian, euen in the presence of Bertran,
such a mighty blow, that he fell dead at his feete. Which
when the vertuous prince beheld, he assailed the pagan so
couragiously, that with the first blow he diuided the vnion
betwixt his head and shoulders: then forthwith were the
poore remnant of the pagans taken prisoners, who for their
liues safetie, promised to receiue their soules safetie, I mean
b
                           •
                        ptisme. Then demaunded Gautier, where they had left
king Butor and Mermont, and they tolde him in Minor,
preparing an inuincible army to returne withall to Montment.
By the health of my soule said Bertran, Ile blocke
vp that way, and, if I liue, feast my selfe in his pallace at
Minor. Alas swéete sonne (said Gautier) how shall wee
possibly be so happy, when the entrance of our passage is
but fiue foote broad, and that most daungerous? Deare father,
answered the Prince, estéeme not fearefull descriptions,
for I haue inuented how and which way, to make
both our selues commanders of the towne, and princes of
their destructions: and thus it is.
                     3 I will arme myselfe in the armour of this dead king▪
and mounted on his horse, spread out his now infortunate
colours, and with such like company as he was attended
with, Ile march towards the towne, into which I know
I shall enter easily, because they will imagine me to be the
king of Nubia: which I will no sooner haue effected, but
I will gard the gates with such carefull resolution, that
famoused, so that in all the haste it was put in practise,
and fiue hundred Christians of the best respect were armed
both your Highnes and your army shal haue easie passage.
This stratagem was much commended, and his wisedome
with the Pagans armours, amongst whom was Gautier,
Huon, and Drohes. When they were come within thrée
leagues of Minor, Gautier left the grose summe of his armie,

and with the fiue hundred marched till they were passed
through the first port of the cittie, which was gouerned
by Aroufle, who taking Bertran that marched on the head
of the troope for the king of Nubia, saide: My Lord, will
your Maiestie returne againe? And Bertran answered, he
would, for he went but only to speake with the King Butor
his kinsman, promising him at his returne, a gift should
for euer make him rich: the pagan gaue him humble thanks
with doglike reuerence, and so let him pa
                           •
                        se. And when his
army was gone by, he turned to Aroufle and drawing his
sword, said: Traitour, this is my treasurie, and here com
                           •
                        s
the reward I promised, and with that 
                           〈◊〉
                         st
                           •
                        ucke him with
such vertue, that well might haue cleft a rocke of Ma
                           •
                        ble:
but to the pagan it 
                           〈◊〉
                         no hurt at all, because he was cloathed
in the hide of a serpent, which sometimes was the armour
of inuincible Robaster, who now liued a Hermit in
the woods there adioyning, where he continued euer since
he forsooke the faire Guerin of Montglai
                           •
                        e at such time
as most famous Charlemaine came before Vienn
                              •
                           a, which
by faire Guerins meanes he conquered, for hate whereof
Robaster would haue slaine him: but that Guerin guarded
him from mischiefe, for griefe whereof he was so inraged
against her, that he swore neuer hereafter to doe her
seruice, and so led by discontentment, came into those woods,
and there building an hermitage▪ liued, and was fostered by
his father Malabeon, casting away his serpents skinne▪ 
                        
                           •
                        s
intending neuer more to be seene in battell: yet he misconceiued,
for he must be the ayder of prince Meruine, as you
haue heard before, when shalbe the will of the heauens. But
letting these digressions passe, we will returne to Bertran,
who after the first blowe, she pagan tooke a bar of yron, and
with it gaue him such a requitall, that he made him reele,
and almost fal from his he
                           •
                        se, had not Drohes vpheld him,
to the no little staine of Bertrans remembrance, who calling

againe his strengths together, gaue the Sarazin such a blow
that he bowed one of his knées to the ground in submission,
yet his body vnwounded could no way be tainted. Drohes
beholding this, charged the pagan, and brake his lance, but
did not hurt him: Huon did asmuch, but as little preuailed,
to their wonder, and his greater pride. Bertran at this amazed,
dismounted himselfe, and closed with the pagan:
whome by cleane strength he threw downe to the ground
backeward: then alighted Drohes, and lifting vp the head
of the serpent, with his sword made a passage through his
body, by which his soul fled downward to eternal darknes.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. III.
                     How Bertran passed all the gates, and Drohes with him
also, 2 Of the prowesses they shewed against the Pagans,
3 How they were taken prisoners; and put to
the keeping of the faire Singlay.
                     
                     
                        When the pagan Aroufle was slaine (a charitable
déede for Christendome) Bertran threw
him into the riuer Orbe, and then marched on
the narrow way till hee came to the second
porte, which he likewise passed, killing the
garde thereof, and throwing them into the riuer, but when
Gautier saw with considerate eyes, the straitenesse and
daunger of those passages, he perswaded the Princes to retire,
saying, Honour lost his honour by daring beyond

the conceite of power: those waies in which none hardly
coulde goe, but indangered, were tell tales of their destructions,
therefore while
                           •
                        t time was, wished them to vse the
time of their deliuerance. My gratious father saide Bertran,
I beséech you bee not so suspitio
                           •
                        s, for if my selfe alone,
and but tenne with me passe, of my life the Towne
shall be surprized. It is too great a masterie saide the king,
therefore be councelled and returne. For shame my gratious
father (said he) let vs not, hauing gone thus farre, returne
scared with imagination, the cittie will take mée for
the King of Nubia, and that 
                           •
                        hadowe will defend vs. At
this both Drohes and the rest cried, Forward young prince,
this day we will be thy followers, and then they passed to
the last gate, at which Bertran knocked desiring entrance,
saying it was shame by day to kéepe their Cittie thus restrained:
and for his owne part▪ ere his Cittie of Nubia
should be feared, he would hazard tenne thousand daungers.
When the Porter heard Bertran, he went vp vnto a
lowpe-hole, and seeing the christians so well ordered, saide
to himselfe, there shall no more en
                           •
                        er but the king of Nubia
himselfe till I haue aduertised King Butor my lord and
maister, and then descending, hée opened the Portall, desiring
Bertran to enter: who saide, Uillaine, why dost thou
not open thy gates for my traine to followe mée? Noble
king of Nubia (saide the Porter) be not displeased, for my
déede is my Kings commaundement, which broken▪ my life
is forfaited, neither may I suffer any to passe, be he of his
nearest linage, but if it please your Maiestie I will aduertise
his Highnesse and bring you answere. Doe saide Bertran,
and tell his Mightinesse I am returned to discourse
of some priuate things I forgate at our departure: at this
the porter closed the gates, and went to the pallace, where
he found Mermont, Gontor and Butor his soueraigne,
to whome he declared the backe returne of the King of Nubia

and his traine, and his desire of entrance. Of my soule
(said Butor) he hath incountred with Gautier▪
                         amd is thus
chas
                           •
                        d backe againe go let him enter, but first sommon all
my men at armes, to be in readines to preuent pals destiny,
and 
                           〈◊〉
                         but one besides himselfe onely haue passage in. At
this away 
                           〈◊〉
                         the por
                           •
                        er, told Bertran the Kings decrée,
neuertheles 
                           •
                        ffe
                           •
                        ing him to passe, hauing before appoynted
certaine souldiers aloft to let downe the port
                           •
                        ullis when
the King and other were gone by, Bertran and Drohes
alone entred, and then the yron gates were closed, which
bred smal contentment in Bertran, who drawing his sword
gaue the porter such a blow, that h
                           •
                        e claue him downe to the teeth.
                     2 Those aloft seeing their companion slaine, they said
not a worde, but fortified the Gates, with all that was in
their power, so that Bertran and Drohes now were lockt
vp in the towne, for whom the christians sorrowed excéedingly,
but they most valiant in the most extremitie, trotted
vp the stréetes most couragiously, Bertran saying to Drohes,
come, let vs to the Kings pallace if none gaine stand
vs, if any doe, be our swordes his b
                           •••
                        all, for so shall w
                           •
                        e
either saue our honours, or escape daunger. This saide,
with their swordes naked in their handes, they passed towardes
the pallace, sending all they met, either to hell or
heauen: which séene, was poyson to King Butor, who
now commaunded all his men at armes to assayle them,
which they did with an entire furie: but Bertran and Drohes
turning their backes to a wall adioyning to the pallace
gates incouraged one an o
                           •
                        her to embrace no mercie, but
their death, and that to be bought at an infinite valew, and
withal, so defended themselues by offending their enemies,
that the proudest stood in awe, and durst not approch them:
in this skirmish Bertran slue Berabem, after him the chamberlaine

to Butor, in like manner a third, a fourth, till the
number infinitely multiplied: Drohes was not short, but
euery way equalles his actions, whilst Mermont in wonder
saide, Ha Mahomet, this is not the king Nubia, for
Nature hath not lent him so almightie a spirite, rather they
are some di
                           ••
                        ls, or diuellish enemies. At this came Butor
amongst his men and saide, Princes and my countrymen,
here shall my loue die, neither will I henceforth count of you
if you deliuer me not these two dead or imprisoned. Scarse
were these wordes fled from his lippes, Gontor with a
launce in his hand ranne against Bertran, but missing him,

                           •
                        lue his horse vnder him, so that falling to the ground, hée
immediately arose againe with his sword in his hand, and
stroke a pagan dead vnder him, 
                           •
                        y this time the Sarazins
so multiplied, that Drohes horse was killed also: and
then standing against the wall, they maintained a fearefull
foote combate like two foaming boares against a kennell of
houndes long hunted. Cruell was the fight beyond measure,
so that the pagans stoode amazed, yet had not God in
pi
                           •
                        tie beheld them, the two princes had there ended theyr
li
                           •
                        es, not praises. So hideous was the noyse the pagans
made about them, that the Quéene and her faire daughter
Singlay came to behold it, who se
                           •
                        ing the not to be conquered
resolution of the two christians spirites most highly este
                           •
                        med
them: the Quéene saide, Faire daughter, beholde
two incomparable creatures, woorthy this day to be immortally
renowmed, was euer séene so 
                           •
                        ew preuaile against
so many?
                     Madam (replied Singlay) it is the King of Nubia

                           〈◊〉
                         actes these wonders of knighthood. Tis true (sayde
the Quéene) for which I am ashamed that thy father & his
hoast should thus p
                           ••
                        tiles assaile him: would God he were
in my chamber, to the end hée might deferre his euill fortune,
and renew his peace thus vnhappily broken. Thus

discoursed the Ladies of the Christians who had now slain
so manie paga
                           •
                        s, that not any could come nere them for the
dead bodies, till Mermont tried, Fie cowards, fi
                           •
                        , how
long shall two thus mightily preuaile against vs? and then
with his sword in his hand comming to assayle them, Bertran
incountred him with such a blowe that▪ 
                        
                           ••
                        bent him on
his kn
                           •
                        es, and had withall slaine him, had hée not retyred
backward.
                     The battaile alreadie had continued an hower and a halfe,
which vexed Butor: who swore he neuer saw so much magnanimitie
in an hoast of 20000. as in those two single
persons; and then calling Mermont hée said: My Lord,
these two will destroy my Citie if I finde not remedie,
counsaile me, for my care exc
                           •
                        edeth. Your Maiestie (saide
Mermont) must assemble together an Armie of your men,
who (laying weapons aside) must rush desperately vppon
them, a
                           •
                        d euen with the confusion of force ouerthrow excellencie,
for otherwise (as you haue well s
                           •
                        ene) they are
inuincible.
                     This instantly was put in practise, and compassing
Drohes about (like the ouer-flowe of manie waters) they
boare him to the earth, and tooke away f
                           •
                        om him all meanes
of resistance. But Bertran so couragiously withstood them,
that whoso toucht him, neuer after had sence of touching.
Infinites hee slew and wounded▪ at length retiring by
degrées, he recouered a payre of stayres, that ascended vp
into a chamber, vp which hee went: and entering into the
chamber, protested to kéepe it: and whosoeuer entred should
pay a liues forfaite. There remained Bertran peaceably
for a little time: the whilest that Drohes was brought to
the Pallace, where he was disarmed: whom Mermont
at the first 
                           •
                        ight knew excéeding well, and said: Drohes,
now thou beholdest thy mischiefe, and life hath no longer
indurance yet we intreate thée, tell vs what Knight is hée

that beareth the Armes of Nubia, for whatsoeuer he bee,
his life is forfaite for his euill dooings. Trayterous King
Mermont (said Drohes) thou hast adiudged what best to
thy selfe appertaineth, who hauing receiued holy Baptisme
in the house of the Diuinest, falsly forswore thy owne
Royaltie, baser than the besest abiect vnder heauen. At those
reuilings, Mermont cried, away with him, and cut off his
head, vnles he make knowne his confederate in this mischiefe.
When Drohes saw there was no meane left him,
but either to acknowledge Bertran or denie himselfe, hee
said, Stay, and I will name him vnto you. Then raising
his voyce, that euery one might vnderstand him, hee said:
Princes, it is the most wise and absolute valiant Bertran
the sonne of Gautier, whose conquests stretch far beyond
these Clymates, and whose death the infants vnborne
hereafter shall bewaile if he miscarrie. When Butor had
heard his words, hee commaunded him to bee strongly imprisoned:
which was done. Then the Kings consulting together,
Mermont saide: My Lord of Minor, now remaineth
vnder your arrest Prince Bertran, so famous for
his valure, and renowmed for the discent of his royall pedegree:
it behooues your maiestie to be most circumspect,
because at this instant you haue in thrall the triumuirate
of vertue, the itj. famous floures of Knighthood meaning
Meruine, Bertran and Drohes. These words when the
beautifull Singlay heard, shee whispered vnto her owne
thouhgts, and swore by Mohomet, that if her power were
powerful, there should no euill befall prince Bertran, more
than the burden of her best loue, because his valure was
more than euer her eyes had seene before that instant time.
Whilst thus she was talking to her thoughts, all the princes
and Barons went out of the pallace, gathering all the
force that they could together to assaile Bertran, who hauing
barrocadoed and fortified the doores of the Chamber,

went with his sword to defend the windowes: where the
first that scaled them, be sent with a blow dead to thearth.
Which Butor beholding, and grieuing to behold▪ commanded
to fetch faggots, and to burne the house, chusing rather
losse of wealth than will: the which was performed
in an instant, the sight whereof brought the wittes of Bertran
to astonishment.
                     3 But ere the fl
                           •
                        me tooke any effect, Singlay fell at her
fathers f
                           •
                        ete, and besought the obtaining of a reasonable
petition: whereto the king consenting, she said: Then my
Lord, spare this noble Christian, and it to me hee will submit
his person, let mee be his gardian, and I doubt not
but easily make him adore Mahomet. Daughter, said the
king, thou art gratious in my sight▪ and thy suite is graunted:
and if it be possible, bring him to honour the shrine of
our Prophet. Ioy would not let the virgin stay to be ceremonious
in thankes, but she went to Betrran, and perswaded
him to lay away his armes, and yield to her, who
had vndertaken for his safety: shewing the daunger otherwise
of his fortune, and the pittilesse regard of fire when it
preuailed: adding to her wordes priuate teares, the witnesses
of her secret good meaning. When as Bertran had
beheld Singlay, and surueied her beauty, vertue, and
maiesticall carriage, when he had noted the gratious aspects
of her eies, and the loue-inticing pitie of her countenance,
immediatly he was inamoured with her perfections, and
wi
                           •
                        h honourable swéetenesse returned her this aunswers.
Madame, so sacred is the beautie of thine heauenly eyes,
that euen me and my heart thou hast taken prisoner: well
maiest thou commaund me, whom thou hast inthralled, and
would God (were the time so gracious) that not here but
in France I might doe you seruice: but sacred Madame,
though my case be desperate, yet doe me a fauour for charitie,

tell me whether my companion be dead, or breathing
with the liuing? Faire prince, quoth she, he liues without
hurt, though without fréedome, and is in my prison, where
your selfe in peace shall liue▪ if you submit to my mercie.
Bertran at this conquered with Beauties Oratorie, gaue
vp his sword into hir siluer hand, protesting that no feare
of death made him yield, but onely the commaundement
of beauty: to which beautie and her pittie he surrendered
his life and fortunes. Bertran now vnlaced his helmet,
and put it off whose former labour had raised so chearefull a
blood in his face, that Singlay esteemed him singuler in euery
perfection, and Loud, ready at her elbow, doubled her
wounds, and redoubled her affection: wherefore she saide:
Come yong prince and follow me, but I pray you speake
to my father grauely and humbly; so shall your thraldome
be lesse streight, and I more able to doe you seruice. Hee
consented to do what euer she would commaund him: and
thus they came before Butor, whose first salutation was,
that immediately hee should loose his head, if hee fell not
downe and adored Mahomet: and Bertran inraged gaue
a reply contrary to his promise, saying: The threates of
the damnedst diuelish pagan in the world should not make
him forsake his God, nor think
                           •
                         one reuerend thought o
                           •
                        
their false man-deceiuing and diuelish protector. When
Singlay heard him speake with this spléene of malice, she
wept bitterly, fearing lest her father (who was subiect to
passion) should subscribe his will to her Loues funerall▪
which to preuent, she came and desired her father to leaue
argument, and to referre him to her, whom she doubted
not but quickely to change from his puritie, and make him
a religious Sarazen. Daughter said the king, I agrée, but
be you watchfull lest hee escape: for wee haue had toon extreame
trial of his valure. With virgin reuerence she thanked
his Maiestie, and forthwith carried Bertran vnto her

prison, wh
                           •
                        re Drohes was hugely perplexed with tormentings,
and bound hand and foote with fetters: but
toone she tooke them off, and hauing them both in her custody,
like a bondslaue to her thrall, swéetened their seruitude
with her seruice. But letting them passe, we will
speake of Gautier, who all this while was before Minor,
continuing a siege against it the space of itj. yeares: but all
was to bootelesse purpose, for hee lost many and gained
nothing, the city was so impregnable. Wherefore holding
a Councell, it was thought expedient to raise theyr siege,
and returne backe vnto Montment, which they did, burning
with fire before they went, the foure straight passages
of Minor: and that was all the reuenge they had for itj.
yeares trouble. Great was the hast Gautier made to come
to Montment, where he had left his vertuous wife Claretta
and Mathaburna: but when he came, hee found
all his hopes ouerturned, for in his absence the cruel king
Gorbant had bin there, taken the towne, put Claretta to
death, and Mathaburna too, had not faint womanish feare
made her forsake her God, and fall once againe brfore Mahomet.
Beside, she did one other déede of great ilnes, that
after was a torment to her: and that was by the means of
Mordant, she trode vppon the Crucifire and the Image of
the virgin Mary: for which with this curse she was punished,
That she would commit high treason against her son
Orient, which she did: for when his wife was deliuered
of seuen sons, she made them away, and perswaded her son
she had brought forth seuen dogges; for which the Ladies
life was hazarded, till God the reuealer of trueth, making
the trueth knowne, Mathaburna was burned deseruingly,
as you may reade in the historie of Godfrey of Bullen.
But leauing those latter déedes, we will againe returne to
our purpose.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IIII.
                     1 How Gautier raised his siege from Minor, and came
to Nubia, where he repaired his army: 2 how from
thence hee came to Luternia, where hee found Iacob,
who discoursed the fortunes of Montment; 3 How
Gautier went before Montment, and retooke it againe
by meanes of Iacob.
                     
                     
                        
                           GAutier and his Armie went before
Minor, and marched to Nubia,
where he selected out ten thousand
choyce men to repayre his losses.
At which time (with great humblenesse)
Huon of Burdeaux tooke his
leaue of the King, and departed to
the great griefe of all the companie:
and of him wee will speake nothing more at this instant.
                     2 The King at that same time departed from Nubia,
and came to Luternia, where he reposed himselfe the space
of foure dayes: during which time Iacob the Marchaunt
came vnto him and saluting him with a most piteous and
fearefull countenaunce, saide; Sacred Lord of a holie Linage,
what shall become of vs most miserable creatures,
sith the valiant Meruine is nnot home returned? Alas,
alas my Lord, Fortune hath doubled her fortunes vpon
vs▪ for in these last two yeares of your absence, the fatall
King Gorbant of Samaria (who was ouerthrowne before
Damascus) and Bandus, came and layde Siege before

                        Montment, haue taken the Cittie, put your Highnesse
Wife to 
                           •
                        eath, and conuerted fearefull Mathaburna to her
former relig
                           •
                        on. When Gautier felt there thunderboltes
strike vpon his soule, and the death of Claretta named,
both he and his Sonnes fell into a great agonie of discontentment:
vowing to God and their soules a déep reuengement
for that monstrous murder; and so forthwith marched
towards Montment But Iacob (staying behinde) assembled
together foure hundred Christians, whom he conducted
after Gautier with such hast, that he ouertooke him
before he had fully got sight of Montment; which instantly
they had entred without resistance, had not a certayne
Pagan espied them: who running into the citie, gaue king
Gorbant warning of t
                           •
                        eir approach. He (vpon the first
notice) mustered all his barons together, and issued out to
méete the Christians, who then were within a league of
the towne walls.
                     3 The Pagans being ordered in battell, said amongst
themselues: Alas, alas, these Christians are come to theyr
funeralles: for sith Meruine is dead, it is impossible for
them euer againe to see a day of conquest. They were to
the number of an hundred thousand, and thus quartered:
Griffoy bare the ensigne of Mahomet, and had thirtie
thousand, King Bandus had other thirty thousand, and
Griffoner with a regiment to second him; Gorbant with
the rest went before. The Christians had ordered themselues,
though not so huge, yet full as strongly: and thus
Gautier, after incouragements to his sonnes, put spurres
to his horse, and gaue the first charge on the Pagans, and
the first he incountred he bare dead to the ground▪ the second
he cut off by the head, after him an other, and an other,
and desi
                           ••
                        ing til x. fel by his sword before him. At this
began a clamorous noise (greater than thunder from heauen,)

and the battell was mightily confused, Gorbant
if his armes had béene excellently imployed, his vertue in
valure had inherited alittle better than excellent.
                     By letting his déed passe, we will speake of Iacob, who
folowing Gautier with foure hundred Christians, and séeing
the fearefulnesse and hugenesse of the battell, said vnto
his souldiers; Gentlemen, this day it behooueth vs to be
most circumspect what we take in hand, you do sée the rare
mightines of the battell, and the equalitie of puissance: let
vs then aduise our selues what way is best for our generall
profit, which (in my conceipt) is this, Whilest the two
armies are thus equally busied, we will assault the towne
now vtterly vndefended, and making our entrance therein,
put man, woman and child to the sword, that will not
fall downe and adore the name of Christ Iesus. To this
(with clamours) they all agréed, and forthwith entred the
Towne which was left vngarded, and beganne to put to

                           •
                        he sword all with whom they incountred. But the fearefull
people soone rendred to mercie, and accepted a second
baptisme. The Iacob went to the castle of Turgon with
his followers, where he found Guyda and Barrant her litle
sonne, surnamed the Cruell, and Berea: to whom Iacob
said, Madame, great and infinite are the mischiefes
that hang houering ouer thy head, if so soone thou hast forgotten
prince Meruine, and renounced the Christian true
lawe of saluation. Ha Iacob (said Mathaburna with a
wéeping face) chide me not, for in my heart I adore nothing
but that true God of my saluation: what else I haue
done, this life (which onely I loue but for his loue) hath
with carefulnesse drawne me hereto. You make me prowd
qd Iacob, with these words: know then, I haue taken
(with these my followers) both the towne and this castle:
wherefore I will leaue two hundred to gard you, and with
the rest returne to the great battell.
                     
                        
This said, he tooke his leaue, and (after safe order taken
for the Towne and Castle) he returned to the tumult,
where he shewed himselfe to be a most resolued and courageous
gentleman, whose resolution when Gautier sawe,
he commended excéedingly▪ with promise of great honors.
My Lord, saide Iacob, my beginning hath béene better
than my procéeding, for I haue taken both the citty, and
Turgon. Wherefore if you doubt your successe, you may
make your retraite therein, for it is your owne assured.
When Gautier heard this he daunced for ioy, and in that
place created him knight, kissing his chéeke, and praying
for his endlesse good fortunes. Iacob so prowd with these
honours, that the first pagan that he met he sent dead to the
ground, and then rushing into the heart of the army, made
wondrous destructions: which king Gorbant beholding,
inraged he ranne against him, and gaue him such a blow,
that he felled him to the earth: by means whereof the good
Iacob was taken prisoner, and now came the battell to the
extreamest hazard, for the Pagans being an hundred thousand,
and the Christians but twelue thousand, the greater
number prenailed, wherefore Gautier commaunded a retrait
to be sounded, and so retired into the citie: at the sight
whereof Gorbant tore his haire and was madly inraged,
not leauing to assault the towne on each side, but in vaine,
for in his despight it was strongly maintained. When as
armes and fury was laid at rest, Gautier went to the pallace,
where reposing himselfe he made inquirie for Iacob,
but not any could tell of him or his fortune. Good God said
he! shall we loose that good knight? is it possible that vertue
should so soone vanish? and with that hee shed teares for
affection. This while Guyon went to Guyda, and taking
her by the hand, said, Faire Lady, how comes your
fortune to hale you into this coast? and whose is this infant
you beare with you? Ah Guyon said she▪ it is my son:

but I pray you, how doth your brother Bertran? O he
was mightily false to me at Damascus, when leauing me
along he estéemed more his sword, than mine honour, for
hatefull reuenge whereof I instantly married king Gorbant
his greatest enemy. Thus she discoursed her aduentures
to Guyon, whilest her husband and Griffoy without
the city, stoode tearing their haires for their losses. After
some consultations held, they sent for Iacob, and tolde
him that if he would go to Montment and persuade Gautier
to send him forth of the city his wife and yong son, he
would deliuer all the christian prisoners that were that day
taken. Iacob glad of these words (for he mightily feared
death) said, willingly I will performe thy desire, so I may
haue sufficient pledge for the trueth of thy promise. Then
Gorbant called Bandus, Griffoy, and Grifoner, and sent
them for hostages of his word: so they came into Montment,
and finding Gautier in the pallace, Iacob deliuered
the message o
                           •
                         
                        Gorbant, which was most welcome to
Gautier, who deliuered to Iacob, Guyda, and Barant, and
detaind the pledges for his returne, who comming to Gorbant
with a comely reuerence, deliuered them to their lord,
who on thother part deliu
                           •
                        red vnto him all the Christians
that were prisoners, whom he brought triumphantly into
the citie, and enfranchised the hostages, who solemynely
swore by Mahomet, neuer to raise their tents till they had
once againe made themselues commaunders of the Cittie:
but their dowes were witnesses against them, for Gautier
night and day so souldier-like defended the towne, that all
their assaults proued vtterly frustrate: and so we wil leaue
a while to speake more of them, and returne to Bertran and
Drohes, whom we left imprisoned at Minor, and had so
continued thrée yeres, during which space they were by the
beautifull Singlay both regarded, fau
                           •
                        ured and estéemed,
hauing their desires accomplished as soone as they could

desire, so mightily did she loue Bertran, and so willing she
was her will should make it manifest, onely their escape
that could not be inuented, so great was the enuie of the
nation against them.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. V.
                     Of the gallant life that Bertran and Drohes led in Minor.
2 Of the Tourney which was proclaimed for
the loue of Singlay, 3 Of the priuate wonders Bertran
did.
                     
                        IOyously, and euen in the height of contentment
liued Bertran and Drohes prisoners in
the citie Minor, seruiceably attended on by
Singlay, and a Lady of hers named Adain,
whose secrecie exceeded the priuatest coniecture.
Singlay was the loue of Bertran, and Adain the
loue of Drohes, for whose sakes they effected whatsoeuer
could be desired. In this same time there arriued at Minor
an Ambassadour from Montment, who reported to
Mermont, the taking of his city by Gorbant, and the losse
of it againe to Gautier and his i
                           •
                        j. sons, which when he vnderstood,
he went to Butor, and held a councill how they
might recouer it: and in thend agréed to craue aid of all the
pagan kings at that time suruiuing; which they did, and
gained infinites, amongst which came one gallant Gentleman
the sonne of king Belmarine of the age of eightéene

yeares, who brought with him eighteene thousand, and had
to name Baham, exceeding wise, and highly renowmed
for deedes of armes, and feates of renowmed chiualrie, he
was mightily inamoured with the beauty of Singlay, and
demaunded her in marriage, but shee neglected his suite, hauing
no other thought, but what she borrowed from the
most excellent Bertran. But Baham not omitting any
thing that might inflame the coldnesse of her affection▪ caused
a solemne tourneament to bee proclaimed before the
chamber of his heartes mistresse the fairest Singlay, to the
end that shee might beholde his prowesse. Thither resorted
many redouted pagans to the iusts that were in the honor
of Singlay, the whilest Marant her euer-hating brother
tormented his thoughtes, with busying them to find
out the reason, why she disdained a man of so good a perfection:
and in the end concluded, that of necessitie. shee, either
loued some pagan prince, or some christian, for shee was a
woman, and women will loue, and no doubt but shee was
in loue. With that Bertran entred into his mind, who then
was his sisters prisoner: so that hee swore by Mahomet it
was so, and no otherwise: wherefore vppon the day of the
tourneament the traitour priuately hid himselfe in his sisters
chamber, not seene of any one.
                     2 Euen now were all the Pagans armed that came to
that gallant sport of honour, and all the Ladies flocked
to the windowes, to the end they might beholde the aduentures;
amongst whom Singlay would not consort her selfe,
but saide, for that time her chamber should be her scaffolde▪
thither she went, and thither she brought Bertran and Drohes,
to behold and laugh at what her selfe derided: no sooner
was Bertran in her chamber, but taking Singlay in his
armes, he cast her vpon a rich embrodered cowch, where h
                           •
                        
made loue rich with the richest of loues pleasures, and saidee

Goddesse that guidest loues world in my bosome, let the
combat of our 
                           •
                        ffections equall or su
                           •
                        passe the pagans con
                        
                           •
                        lict,
for wée are his knights and his absolute champions,
they without, but shadowes of foolish ceremonies. This
said, he loc
                           ••
                         her in his armes, and with kisses and those
delights that 
                           •
                        xceede kisses, wooed till they both were conquered.
Drohes on the other side was not behind with his
triumph, making Adain blush and sweare shee was by
loues power conquered. Alas, alas, a
                           •
                         this while they little
imagined the trai
                           •
                        our Marant to be in her chamber, who
like a dumbe mischiefe lay and noted all that passed between
them. Now hauing done dalliance the Ladies went to the
windowes to behold the iustes, and the two Knights behinde
them, crying ayme to others vertues, till such time
that a Herault at armes ranne crying vp and downe the
field that Belmarine Baham had vanquished all commers,
and to haue to equall in the deedes of knighthood. When
Singlay had heard the king at armes make this proclamation,
she smiling said to Bertran, Looke what a gallant
prince I haue refused for your loue, drawing vpon me the
wrath of my father for neglecting his offer, whose equall
for chiual
                           •
                        ie liues not betwixt this and Brandis. Bertran
to this speech made no reply, but the aide of Adain, who
for Drohes loue would hazard any thing▪ he withdrew him
selfe, priuately gote armour, and an excellent horse, on the
which being mounted, hee trotted to the place where the
iusts were solem
                           •
                        ized: whose first approch Singlay seuerely
noted, and called to Bertran, but Adain told her he was
gone to his solitary chamber a little troubled in heart, intending
for some houres to giue repose to his vnquiet: at that
Singlay turned her sweete speech to Drohes aud said, See
faire Knight what a comely champion is newly entred the
Lists, beleeue me, this person promiseth wonders, but his
bad furnitu
                           •
                        e saieth hee shoulde be pnre in vertue▪ beleeue

me, I maruell whence he came. Madam (said Adain) that
best knew the aduenture, the foulest Muscle hath the richest
pearle, and a Diamond set in yron, is more precious
than a perle in golde with the curio
                           •
                        sest workemanship, the
pouerty of his Armes may couer a vertuous spirit, and hée
may prooue more redoubted than the best in the assemblie,
therefore doe not blame, but attend his fortune. Neither do
I, (saide Singlay) yet giue me leaue to smile at the attempt,
for his had furnished estate must néedes cause laughter.
                     3 As they were thus talking Baham of Belmarine set

                           •
                        oorth himselfe to the iusts, but would not runne against
Bertran, because the bandes of his furniture was an assurance
(as he thought) of no defence, and his death nor price
of honour: yet notwithstanding Bertran thrust himselfe
forward: which Boham séeing said to his companion, there
is not remedy but I must incounter yond silly halfe armed
creature, wherefore I will onely ouerthrowe him from his
horse, and that shall be his penance. Which saide, he put
spurres to his beast, and Bertran on the other side mette
him with such an incounter, that lighting vppon Bahams
breast with his launce, he ouertheew horse and man to the
ground backward; at which the Ladies laughed excéedingly,
and Singlay séeing the blow, laughed much more than
any other, and calling Drohes said, Tell me swéete knight
how shall I take this to sée a poore halfe armed villaine ouerthrow
my loue, hée that hath protested these Armes in
mine honour? Madam (said Drohes) hée is a villaine that
villaino
                           •
                        ly effectteth any thing, but this poore vassall hath
done it wi
                           •
                        h such vertue, that of force he must be a Gentleman:
and surely hée that with such poore accomplements
brings to passe such wonders, what would he doe were hée
royally adorned in compleat perfection? Tis true, tis true

(said Adain who drawing Drohes aside, reported to him,
that it was a Bertran and the occasion of the aduenture: at
which Drohes changed colour and was somewhat grieued,
so that comming to Singlay he humbly desired her that hee
might be armed▪ that if any mi
                           •
                        chaunce should befall them,
that he might be able to defend her, she i
                           •
                        stantly consented,
and he was armed, vowing if any crosse chaunce befel Bertran,
he would be his partaker. Bertran by this time had
ouerthrowne three Kings, and Baham that was remounted,
whome Bertran twice had ouerthrowne, swore by Mahomet
the third time ot trie his successe against the poore armed
creature: which doing, Bertran ouerthrew him with
such vehemencie, that with the fall hee brake one of his
legges asunder, leauing him on the ground dead to al mens
imaginations, so that the Heraults with one voyce cryed
the poore armed knight is the most valiantest knight in the
world.
                     When Singlay heard this honourable exclamation, shée
desired Adain to call Bertran to behold the poore Knight:
she replied that he was at his rest, and it would offend him
to be disturbed. Nowe whilest euery one was busied about
Baham, Bertran departed out of the listes vnperceyued
of any one▪ but onely Adain, who went vnto him and
helped to vnarme him, and brought him to Singlay, who
fearefull of his health, asked him how he fared. Madame
saide he better than before. I am glad (said she) but I am
sory you were not here, where you might haue s
                           •
                        ene a man
all in rusty broken halfe-arming armour, that ha
                           •
                        h borne away
the prize, and wounded Prince Baham. How Madam
(said shee) wounded Prince Baham your Ladiships
loue? What, hée with whome not any may▪ compare?
O miracle! By my life (saide shée) it is most true, Baham
was thrice most villainously ouerthrowne. O Madam
(saide hee) the royall habite maketh not the rich man▪
                        
nor rich Armes a valiant Knight: and those that o
                           •
                        tenest
shew the light of countenaunce, seldome haue the sunne of
Spirite. This doe I speake to shew, that an vnlikelie man
vertuous, is worthier than an adorned dull spirited. After
manie other speeches vttered, they rose and went vnto the
prison, and the traiterous Marant, when he sawe his time
issued out of the chamber, and reported those things which
after returned to such mischiefe vpon himselfe, that is was
the ende of all his glorie.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VI.
                     1 How Marant accused his sister Singlay, 2 How Bertran
made the Pagans beleeue hee would renounce
christianitie, 3 How he vndertooke to combate against
Marant.
                     
                     
                        
                           MArant was no sooner come from his sisters
chamber, but he went to the pallace where
al the pagan Princes were, and after humble
reuerence doone to King Butor his father, he
tooke him aside, and discoursed al that had
passed betwixt his sister & Bertran, or Drohes,
and Adain, and the whole occurrents of that dayes action.
Marant saide the king, shall I assure my selfe this is
true thou reportest? With that he swore by an infinite

number of oathes▪ that it was most true; and in the midst
of his protestations Adain passed by that way, and heard
him, which bred not little sorrow in her soule, who comming
to Singlay, tolde her, that both they and their loues
were no lesse than dead, for all their actions were knowne
to the King her father, by her cruell brother damnable Marant.
Singlay at the first was vehemently pensiue, but in
the end, taking resolution to her, grew carelesse, and gaue
her incoragement, saying, I haue aduised my selfe of a
meane for our deliuery, I will persently goe to my bed,
and with tormenting agony comp
                           •
                        alne my selfe and say,
that my brother Marant would n
                           •
                        edes make wracke of
mine honour and defloure mée, which for that I would
not consent vnto▪ I will affirme he hath sore wounded, and
shamefully intreated me▪ and to make it the more credible,
I will all to be so
                           •
                        le my face with bloud, and you also shall
doe the like, affirming, that because you came to my succour,
therefore hee inflicted this extreame misery. Madame
(said Adain) better cannot bée inuented. Then Singlay
(taking a strong thre
                           •
                         bound her fingers and prickt them,
making abundance of blood issue foorth, with which shée
stained the excellencie of Nature▪ pu
                           ••
                        ing in practise all her
determination. And then shée sent Adain to theyr Loues
to aduertise them thereof; charging them, that if the pagann
did examine them, they should faine to denye their
Christian Religion. Adain did all her commaundement,
and the Knights consented: then shee returned to Singlay,
who lay in her bed all bloodie, faining those infinite gestures
of sorrow, that euen Sorrow hims
                           •
                        lfe was deceaued with
her languor. Adain seconded and kept the burden to her
distempera
                           •
                        ure, making so iust a concord, that no eye could
discerne their disssimulation. By this time King Butor
(incensed by Marants speaches) had called the Queene
Mother, and told her of all what hee had euer heard; desiring

her to goe vnto her Daughter and trie her, and returne
her answere. The Quéene (sighing at these speaches)
went to the yong Ladies chamber, whom shée found
almost franticke with sorrow, and brought almost to talke
idly with the tediousnes of wéeping: when she beheld her,
whe wondred, and desired (without fiction) to know the true
cause of her torment. Ha Madam (said shée) the cause
let me conceale, for 
                           •
                        will mad both you and my father: Alas,
alas, one of the neerest of my Kinne is the wounder of
my fortune. At this, the Quéene grew more destrous, and
commaunded her to report the truth without feare. Madam
(said Singlay) be not then offended, and I will speak
what to none (but your selfe
                           •
                         I du
                           •
                        st speake: and then shée
reported from poynt to poynt as before shee was determined,
How her Brother Marant had inforced her, and
slaine her honour, at such time as the Iustes were held by
Baham, and at his departure swore by all the Gods, that
if wee exclaimed▪ his sword should make vs for euer speaking.
To you Madame haue I opened the wound of my
shame, for Gods sake bee carefull: and good Ladie Mother
with all speede sende mee Calyph the Arch-flamine to
confesse me, for death (I know) is my portion, and I desire
to dye purified, though not vnstained: 
                           •
                        dd as she thus
spake, there flewe head
                           •
                        ong from her heart such profound
heart-wounding sighes, that the chamber ecchoed her lamentations.
The Queene (calling to minde the absence
of Marant at the Triumph) instantly gaue credite to her
speach, and swore he should dearly r
                           •
                        e his villanie: wherfore
going to the King, shee omitted nothing, but doubled
her reperts with most vehement perswasions of likelines.
The King seemed hardly to beleeue, that nature 
                           •
                        o it selfe
would be so monstrous, and therefore went with Mermont
to her chamber and beheld her; where she consorted so manie
teares with so manie sighings, as was able to pierce a

wall of A
                           •
                        amant: yet the King charged her of counterfaiting
falshood, and that her deceipt was but to smother the
villanies she practised with the Christians. At these words
shee powred a floud of teares from her eyes, and bade his
Maiestie think as he pleased: but Mahomet (in whom she
affied) knew her innocence. At this the kings departed, and
sent for Marant, whome they accused of this high treason
against kind and nature. But he with vehement oaths denied
it▪ offering to combat against an hoast of men that
durst accuse him; auerring beside his former accusation to
be true, for his eyes had beheld their villanie: and that also
hee desired to maintaine by sword or combat in the presence
of all his Princes and Barons This resolution was
commended, yet was he commi
                           ••
                        ed to prison▪ till Singlay
was examined: who beeing sent for once more before the
King▪ was charged of her former guile: and demaunded
why she entertained the Christians into her priuate chamber?
To which she replied, Deare father, it was your Maiesties
pleasure that they should be in my guard to see if I
could perswade them to renounce their opinions, and become
obedient sustainers of our Lawe: to which end I often
sent for them, and argued in priuate, and haue now fully
effected your Highnesse wil, and brought them vtterly to
denie Christianitie.
                     2 Butor (whom these speeches made more then well
pleased) expelled wrath from his countenance, and said;
Faire Daughter, if thou hast done thus, thou hast wonne
my loue for euer. Then foorthwith he sent 
                           ••
                        nne Knights
to fetch Bertran and Drohes before him, which they did:
and as they went, at euerie protestation they made, they
call Mahomet their God to witnes, and the pagans hearing
them, shouted for ioy of their conuersion. When they
came into the Pallace before King Butor, they fell on their

knees, and Bertran first said; Mahomet our great god defend
your Maiestie: Know then sacred King, that I am
come a reporter of a great myracle, which our God Mahomet
wondrously hat
                           •
                         reuealed, and thus it is: This
night in a vision appeared our h
                           •
                        ly prophet Mahomet vnto
me and in this manner spake: Bertran, I do greatly
reioyce in the conuersion, be strong in thy faith, and continue
my exalter: for reward whereof, when thou risest,
goe thy way vnto Butor, and say that I commaund him
to giue thee in marri
                           •
                        ge his faire daughter Singlay, whom
the traiterous Mara
                              •
                           t (during the time of the Iustes)
most 
                           〈◊〉
                         would haue ranished: and beholde, that
thou defend her against his traiterous practises with those
same a
                           ••
                        es, with which in the Tourney I brake the leg
of Baham, and ouerthrew him three seuerall times to the
earth, because (by his pride) he aspired to enioy Singlay.
                        
                           •
                        ell him also, that before I departed, I ouerthrew all
whosoeuer set their puissance against me, whilest that the
whole malti
                           •
                        ude cried: Honour to him in the broken armour.
This being said, inuisibly he departed: and what
he gaue me in charge▪ I haue deliuered to your Maiestie.
When Butor had 
                           〈◊〉
                         him he said vnto Mermont: By
Mahomet Bertran hath said most true, for it could be no other
but Mahomet that this day so wonderfully preuailed;
let all things be as hee will, for it is our great gods pleasure,
who (I know) is incensed against Baham and Marant.
                     
                     3 Then calling Bertran, hee asked him if hee would
combat for his daughters innocencie? Most willingly said
he, and chiefly when my God commaundeth, who will be
a rocke of defence in my iust quarrell. This said, the king
went to his daughter, and embracing her, he had her reuiue
her spirits, for she should haue Iustic
                           •
                        , and if 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
brother were faulty, he should die like a traitor: for he preferred
Right before Nature. Then was Marant brought
forth, who vtterly denied the crime wherewith hee was
accused, de
                           •••
                        ing no other proofe but his sword and Iustice.
The place of battell immediately was appointed, and they
commaunded to be armed: wherefore Bertran besought
the king, that he might haue his armes and sword deliuered
him, which was done to Bertrans excéeding good contentment,
who in his priuate soule made a solempne prayer to
the true God of life to aide him, and not to be offended at
his disguising, séeing that with Infidels faith is least to be
regarded. Now when hee was at all points prepared▪
                        Drohes said; Courage Prince Bertran, for two such as
Marant this day shall not preuaile against thee: he is perfectly
knowne a traitor, and his treason against Meruine
is yet a testimony: let that be thy hearts quarrell, and that
shall giue thée honour with victorie. Tis true, tis ture, said
Bertran, and I haue writ it on the table of my memorie.
Then mounted he on his horse, and Drohes deliuered him
his launce: then be trotted to the Listes, where he found
Marant armed at all points, and expecting his comming.
At whose approach Butor descended, and asked if their causes
were iust, or no? And they both answered they were.
Then the trumpets sounded, and they charged each other;
Marant brake his launce, but Bertrans blow came with
such f
                           •
                        rie, that he strake him from his horse to the ground
backeward: then, hauing finished his caréere, he turned
with his sword in his hand against Marant, who as yet
was not risen, and said: What Marant, wilt thou indure
any more of this battell? O no, said Marant, who then
was newly risen: yet I pray thée heare what I shall say.
Speake quickly then said Bertran, and I shall attend thée.
Prince Bertran, said Marant, I pray thée euen for mine
honors sake, faine thou hast seene our God Mahomet, and

that he commaundeth a truce betwéene vs, and thou shalt
haue both my life and power at thy commaundement: then
will I make thy peace with the King my father, thou sh
                           •
                        lt
espouse my sister, and I will liue and die for euer thy v
                           •
                        ssaile.
As I liue, and by Mahomet, quoth Bertran, most
willingly I will, if thou wilt so farre preuaile with thy father,
that he will deliuer Prince Meruine from his monstrous
infortune. Alas answered Marant, it is vtterly impossible,
for the prison wherein he liues is such yea and so
strange, as there is not any so subtill or fortunate, that
can approch it, vnlesse they speake with his keeper, who is
no man but an ayrie diuell, with whom onely my father
hath conference touching his imprisonment. When Bertran
heard him say thus, he whisperd to himselfe: By heauen
these pagans are all diuelles, therefore I will not take
one of them to mercy: whereupon lifting vp his sword,
and thinking to dispai
                           •
                        h the traitor, he staied his hand and
descen
                           •
                        ed from his horse, lest Marant should slay him vnder
him and Marant in the meane space, got the 
                           ••
                        uncheon
of a lan
                           ••
                        , think
                           ••
                        g therewith to thrust him thorow: but
he failed by 
                           〈◊〉
                         of Bertrans returne, who with his
sword gaue him such a blowe, that hee felled him to the
ground, and then leaping vpon him, he disarmed his head
from his shoulders▪ so that his soule forsooke her vn
                           •
                        allowed
mansion: and in that same moment, both it and his
body were miraculously borne thence into hell to the 
                           •
                        earefull
terror of all the beholders, who concluded him to be
execrable and damned▪ This finished, Butor came and
embraced Bertran, gaue him Singlay to wife, doing him
all the honor possible: Mermont did as much, and all the
other Pagan princes, making a festiuall for his conuersion
in religion. Great banquets were made, and Bertran
was set at the Table next to the king, who vaunted, that
now there was not a kingdome in christendome which hee

would not conquer. Then kissing his daughter, he blessed
the time of her generation saying: Now she should be the
Empresse of the world, for her husband with twenty thousand
gallants he would giue him, should presently goe conquer
France. She was prowd to heare those speaches, yet
neither in shew nor in words would expresse it; but protested,
that if it had not bin Mahomets commaundement,
she neuer would haue married. Then was Caliph the Flamine
called for, who incontinently married them, according
to the old prophane customes of Mahomet.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VII.
                     1 How Bertran and Drohes (vnder the pretence of Paganisme)
brought fortie thousand Pagans before
Montment; 2 How the most part of them were
there confounded and put to the sword.
                     
                        THus (vnder the veile of infidelitie)
Bertran and Drohes abused the
Pagans, who verely imagined,
that they had renounced Christ
Iesus: but it fell out farre otherwise,
as you shall vnderstand.
When Bertran had espoused Singlay,
doubt not of the Royall solempnities,
which continued for
the space of eight dayes: at the end whereof, Butor deliuered
to him fortie thousand resolued men at armes, and
desired him (with all expedition) to goe aide the mightie

king Gorbant, who had for thrée yeares laied siege against
Montment, but could not preuaile. To this he willingly
condiscended, swearing withall, that he and Drohes also
would exalt Mahomet, where yet neuer any God was
adored: but my Lord, quoth he, I humbly beseech you
before I goe, let me sée the prisoner Meruine, and on my
life I will also conuert him againe to our true religion. My
sonne quoth Butor, desire it not, for it is altogether impossible,
because, it I doe graunt, it is my death; in that
I 
                           •
                        aue promised so much to the diuell Mutafier, who daily
administreth vnto him, and effecteth what is fit for his being.
Then said Bertran, I will no more desire it, so mustering
vp his men, he departed from Minor, Singlay,
Adain, Drohes and Mermont going with him, hoping of
that which was without hope, I meane to regaine his cittie.
So continuall was their march, that now they are
come to Brandis, where they rested themselues that night,
in which Drohes asked Bertran, what course they should
take to destroy those dogges, those vnbelieuing infidelels:
Instantly said Bertran, I know not, but we will priuatly
giue my father notice, and hee shall come to our succour.
When Adain heard them who was néece to king Gorbāt,
she said: Princes write your Letters and vpon my soule
I will safely deliuer them, and in this maner: Know that
king Gorbant is mine vnckle, and I euer haue bin right
deare in his sighs: to whom I will declare that I am sent
in priuat to vnderstand the state of the christians in Montment,
and how that you are comming by sea to succor him.
I know he will beléeue me, and (without contradiction)
let me passe carelesse of any thing. Then more, I will
perswade him to march forth to meete and receiue you:
which done, I will passe into Montment, deliuer your letters
to your father, and make my returne (with all speede)
backe againe. They all highly commended the stratagem

and dispatched her away onely with one Attendant, who
was a Pagan. All whatsoeuer she promised she performed,
and abused Gorbant with false ioy, went vnto Gautier,
deliuered the letters▪ and was royally receiued Then did
Gautier goe with his thrée sonnes to counsaile, and thus
concluded; That they would send to Gorbant, and faigne
to deliuer vp the towne, on condition that they might haue
leaue quietly to passe into Fraunce: making him belieue
their pouerty was so great, they could no longer indure
warres furie: which when he vnderstandes, he will fall to
his regardlesse humor. Then shall Bertran and Drohes
cause great Feasts and Banquets to be made: during
whose Cupp
                           ••
                         and Triumphs we will with all our powers
issue forth; and if fortune fauour vs, make an end of our
bad fortunes. This agreed vpon, they deliuered it to Adain,
who taking her leaue departed. In the meane sapce,
Gautier dispatcht other letters to Gorbant, who had then
(with all the royall triumph could bee inuented) receiued
Bertran, Drohes, and the other Pagans. At which feast,
Guyda tooke her sonne Barant aside, and saide; Deare
sonnes wilt thou not accuse me, and I will tell thée a secret:
which saue to thy selfe, shall neuer be knowne to any
creature liuing? By Mahomet Mother (said the youth)
I will not. Then know, said she, that this famous prince
Bertran, whose sunne-light staineth all the gallants about
him, he euen he, and not Gorbaut, is thy father; he begot
thée of me at Damascus, long ere I sawe king Gorbant:
and for leauing me in that estate, I tooke displeasure, and
wedded as thou séest. Madame (said Barant) he is a villaine,
and hath done most damnably: but if he belieue not
in Mahomet our God, ere long time I will be his murderer,
because he shall not scandall me with the name of a
bastard. Turning these speaches Adain came and saluted
King Gorbant: after her Gautiers Ambassadour, who

presented his Lords letters. Which when Gorbant had
read, he cried, Pagans reioyce, for before two dayes be
compassed, we will be commaunders of the citie: Gautier
offers to deliuer it, so he may safely returne into France,
but it is not our pleasure, for neither he, nor any of his adhe
                           •
                        ents
shall escape vnpunished. Thus did king Gorbant
boast, who little knew the news that Adain brought, who
priuately deliuered a letter vnto Bertran from his father:
which when he had read, he shewd it to Drohes, then they
two agreed to arme themselues vnder their dublets, which
they did, and then went into king Gorbants tent, desiring,
that for the happines of the news there might be a festiual
proclaimed, and solempne banquets and Iubilies made
through all the campe, with proclamation, that for that
day no man, on paine of death, should put on an armour, or
weare a sword, but consecrate all his deeds with mirth to
Mahomet. Gorbant though this motion conuenient, and
forthwith sent his edicts and proclamations abroad, which
were fulfilled.
                     2 Gautier the holy Dane all this while was within
Montment preparing his hoast in a readinesse, onely staying
the returne of an espiall, whom hee had sent to bring
him word when the Pagans were set at dinner: Long it
was not but he came and 
                           •
                        ad him in the name of God issue
forth, for the Pagans were all set and triumphing, carelesse
of all manner of daunger whatsoeuer. This being saide,
Gautier left the citie, hauing in his army but onely tenne
thousand souldiers, which was all his remainder, and
made so great haste, that they entred the Pagan campe, to
the dismay of their aduersaries. Gautier with his sword
naked entred into Gorbants tent, and came close to the
table where Bertran sate, who when he beheld his fathers
armes, ouerthrew the table, and catching a battle axe in

his hand which was there, he strucke king Gorbant such
a blow betwixt the necke and the shoulders, that he diuided
his head from his body. At which fight all the pagans
were amazed, but Griffoner of Damascus cried, Bertran
this day, by treason, will be our destruction: and then taking
Barant and his sister, he fled away with twenty attendants,
whom we will leaue to their flight, and returne
to the battell, which begunne in Gorbants tent, and so
generally through all the campe, in which scarce a Pagan
or Sarazen suruiued: mighty was the resolution of Bertran,
and glorious to behold his valure, whom none durst
incounter, and from whom none escaped. Mermont, who
before time had lost his hand, séeing this vnmoueable miserie,
cried, Woe and alas we are all betraied, ha louely
Singlay, thou and this Adain are mistresses of our sorrow.
Now by the heauenly virgin, quoth Singlay, thou hast but
thine owne deseruing, for by treason thou betrayedst vertue,
and, than thy selfe there is not a greater traitour: remember
it is now twelue yeares since thou diddest mocke
Christianitie, to which I am conuerted, and most falsly
betrayedst the most exquisite Meruine vnto a tormenting
hell that hath no ending, record that mischiefe, and confesse
what thou deseruest. As she was thus speaking, Bertran
rushed in vpon Mermont, and saide: Uillaine, now shall
thy life render me account for the losse of the worldes pa
                           •
                        agon,
excellent Meruine, and then with his ax he claue him
to the shoulders. Griffoy this space accompanied with many
Pagans, fled to the sea for safety, whilest the Christians
ranging in their tents put all to the sword that remained.
In briefe, in this battell was slaine aboue an hundred
thousand Pagans, & but thrée and twenty christians,
and they of no other estéeme than priuate souldiers: the christians
also took v. hundred prisoners, so that of all the heathen
army scaped but foure thousand, which fled away with

                        Guida that sorrowed most ex
                           •
                        remely for the death of Gorbant
her lord and husband, and had no contentment but
the escape of her yong sonne, who sware in his infancie by
Mahomet, that the time should come he would be reuenged
of Bertran, both for this, and his mothers antient abuses,
which indéed came to passe, for he liued to be both the
death of his father, and all his famous vnckles. But let
that passe til fitter opportunity of discourse: now it fell out,
that after this discom
                           ••
                        ture, the Christians did returne to
the Pagans pauillions, where they found infinitie riches,
which were so equally diuided, that the poorest souldier
got the title of a rich Merchant. After this they went into
the city, and made great feasts and triumphs then in royall
maner was Singlay, Adain, and all the other prisoners
baptized, and Gautier tooke an oath to pursue his enemies,
euen to the walles of Damascus, but he failed, as you shall
sée in the next chapter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     1 How an Ambassadour came to Gautier, who brought
him word, that the Emperour Charlemaine had destroyed
all his country of Denmarke: 2 How Drohes
went to deliuer Meruine: and how Gautier arriued
at Maiance.
                     
                        IN the first part of this history yée may remember,
how discontentedly Charlemaine departed
from Meruine and Gautier, for the
hate of Huon of Burdeaux, whom Gautier
then amongst his sons maintained, and how
he vowed in despight of Gautier, to make all Maiance and

Denmarke l
                           •
                        ment that euer they knew him. Which indéed
he did, so mighty was the malice then raigning in him.
Wherefore the noble men of that country dispatche
                           •
                         an
ambassadour vnto Gautier, to giue h
                           •
                        m to vnderstand of
their troubles, who arriuing at Montment, and comming
into the pallace where he found his king, he 
                           •
                        ell vpon his
knées, and a
                           •
                        ter 
                           •
                        uch holy reuerence as belongd to his estate
said: My sacred and emperiall soueraigne, know that the
nobilitie of Maiance by me salute thy Highnesse, and giue
thee to vnderstand, that the great Charles of France, in
despight hath ruined thy countrey, and banished from thy
court all by royall coun
                           •
                        rymen: wherefore by me they intreate
your Maiestie, with spéede to returne and stanch the
wounds yet freshly bléeding else hereafter it will be too late,
and thou vtterly dispossessed of a kingdome. When Gautier
had heard this message, he rowzed himselfe, and with
a frowning gesture rep
                           •
                        ied, As I breathe, I will not sleep
out this iniurie, but come with such an hoste as shal make
Charles dearely repent it: and then he caused proclamation
to be made through all the citie, that euery souldier on
paine of death should in the morning be ready to be imbarked
for Maiance, which was performed; then he called Iacob,
giuing vnto him the gouernement of the city and sad
Mathaburn, a leauing a sufficient garrison▪ and taking an
oath for his trust and 
                           •
                        ealtie.
                     2 To be briefe, euery one in the morning was ready to
depart, but only Drohes, who refused, and said to Gautier,
that he had vowd neuer to manage other action, or embrace
one quiet thought till he had found the meane for Meruins
deliuerie. Which when his loue Adain heard, she said, she
also in that would be his companion. But he gainestoode
her, saying the paine would be too mighty. But she would
not be refused, though he iudged truely, for she was slaine

by Griffoy. as you shall heare in the story. Gautier séeing
their resolues, gaue them leaue, & so departing from them
imbarked himselfe, to whom the winde was so prosperous
that he arriued in safety neare to Maiance, where he found
Dion of Nantuell his neare kinsman, who though he had
laine long sicke, most ioyfully receiued both him and his
sonnes, declaring what euill Charles had done since his
comming: all which Bertran vowed, or to mend or to reuenge.
Then sommoned they all their friends and kinred
to their ayde, amounting to the number of twentie thousand,
all of the line of Oger, which with those that Gautier
had brought, made the army thirty thousand and better,
then duke Dardain aduised them to send ambassadors
to Charlemaine, to request restitution for the wrongs before
passed, which if he refused, thē to pursue them with reuenge
euen vnto the Loure in Paris. To this aduise they
accorded: yet Bertran would not leaue, but marched day
and night til he came within the sight of the French army,
executing as he went all whom he found traiterous or false
to their country, intending to raise the siege which Charlemaine
held before the castle of Nantuell: but a traitour of
Maiance vnderstanding it, went before, and aduertised the
Emperour: which as soone as he vnderstoode, he called the
duke of Dampmartin Naymes, and the rest of his nobilitie
to councill, in which consultation, duke Naymes perswaded
all peaceable conditions, laying before their eyes
the profites of their concord, and the ruine of christendome
by their fatall warrefare, withall, telling the empe
                           •
                        or, that
the most of his owne barons were descended from Gautiers
pedigrée, and in nature would aid him before he should
miscarry. Charles grew inraged at his words, and swore
by the God of paradise to put all those to a shameful death
that offered to stirre their feete before two moneths were
expired, or aided him not to lay waste that fatall countrey.

Thus spake Charlemaine, but the good Duke Naymes
left not his perswasions, till there was a truce taken for ij.
yeares: during which time sprung a new warrefare that
wounded all christendome, by Barant surnamed the Cruell
(whom Bertran begot of Guyda) now 5. yeares old, and by
the pagans, that crossed the seas, came into Christendome:
of which Barant made a piteous slaughter house, in that
none was able to indure his force, as you shall heare hereafter.
In the mean space we wil to our former occurrents
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IX.
                     1 Of the great battell which was betweene the Emperour
and Gautier, in which Charlemaine was taken
prisoner: 2 How Loys the sonne of Charles came
with a great power against Maiance to reuenge his
father.
                     
                        THe two yeares expired, for which the truce
was afore taken, betwixt the good emperour
Charles and Gautier; by the meanes of
trai
                           •
                        erous conspira
                           •
                        ors, which were about
the Emperour new séeds of discontentment
were sowne, and he commaunded all his barons to attend
him to Maiance, of which Gautier was aduertised, who desired
all his friends, to be héedefull of their euills. Now departed
the emperor from Paris, vowing neuer to returne
into France, if he brought not Gautier and his sons to their
funerall, and soone arriued within two leagues of Maiance.

Which when Gautier by his espialles vnderstoode
he mustred his friends, and marched to méete his enemies,
whose power was diuided into tenne bata
                           •
                        llions: and when
hee was commen within sight of them, after spéeches of
incouragement, brauely they charged ech other, and came
to handy blowes, Crueltie & Terror comming from hell to
learne more misery than had bin seene in former ages: great
was the resolution of Charles that day, who slew tenne in
a breathing moment, none escaping whom his sword blessed▪
                        Gautier on the other side was not behind for true magnanimitie,
neither Bertran or any of his brethren, who like
mad man made hauocke of all with whom they incountered,
anone Bertran met with the emperour, and with a batle
a
                           •
                        e which he bare he stroke him such a blow on his helmet
that he feld him from his horse, and that with such heauy
vertue, that for all the gold of the earth he was not able
to rise to regaine libertie, but force perforce was taken prisoner:
which the Duke of Britaine séeing, he cried, Courage
great king, and thou shalt soone be redéemed, with that
hée and all the floures of France assailed Bertran, who so
brauely defended himselfe, that in that conflict hée flew the
Duke of Britaine. Many times was the Emperour remounted
and vnmounted, so infinitie couragious were the
foure brethren. Gautier their father in an other part of the
field made many horses maisterlesse, and many maisters
senslesse, so fortunate was his sword, and so lucky his resolution:
this battell continued exceeding long, christians
against christians, selfe law against selfe law, and colours
against colours. The King of England, who came in
the ayde of Denmarke that day did wonderous deedes of
Knighthoode. But king Charlemaine franticke of see
his losse, ranged heere and there till hée mette with Thyerrie,
the sonne of Gautier, whome with Ioyous his good
sword he s
                           •
                        ue at the fi
                           •
                        st incounter. Bertran lion-like affrighted

the amazed flockes of the French men before him,
onelie to finde Charles, and no other; whome so soone as
euer hée encountered, hée felled from his horse with a blowe,
and there presently had slaine him, if his father who was
alwayes exceeding wise had not withheld him, saying, it
was a sin most capitall, to slay the brauest champion in the
world, or touch the blood of the holy annoynted. Wherefore
taking him prisoner, with a strong gard they conueied
him to Maiance. The Frenchmen no sooner saw their king
surprized, but they be
                           •
                        ooke themselues to flight. At which
Gautier reioyced, and disdained to pursue them, but foorthwith
went to Maiance, where he made processions and triumphs
for his victorie, and the taking of the famous Emperour
Charlemaine; to whom (being before him) he
saide, Sacred and high estéemed king of France, immortall
are the wrongs which I haue indur
                           •
                        d by you, and
iustly hath the King of Kings inflicted this deserued shame
on your dishonour, both for these iniust actions, and for exiling
(without cause) the iewels of thy kingdome from their
na
                           •
                        iue coutries: Know therefore, thou shalt neuer escape
from this thraldome till thou hast made me a sufficient restitution,
and wep
                           •
                         thy wrongs from thy soules bitternesse.
By my Crowne, sayd Charles, I will neuer doe it, and
if thou dost not deliuer mée, thou act vniust, because thou
art sworne my liege man and subiect. As thus they were
arguing an esquier entred into the hall, his eies blubbred
with wéeping, who turning himselfe to Gautier, tolde
him of the death of Thierrie, which Bertran no soner heard
but heauing vp his battell axe, he thought, and had 
                           ••
                        aine
King Charles, bu
                           •
                         his father catching him in his armes,
withheld him, saying; fie sonne, fie, why séekest thou to kill
the good Emperour, or to s
                           •
                        aine thine honour by killing in
colde blood? Thy brothers death was the chance of war,
and his graue is honourable, where thus to kill the Emperour

were ignominious and slaughterous. Yet this I doe
protest, I will imprison him during his life, if better perswasion
counsell me not to the contrary. This being said,
king Charles was inclosed in a strong tower, and with him
foure and twentie other prisoners. Which done, Gautier
caused Thierry to be solemnely interred and all the rest that
were slaine with him in the battaile; the whilest Duke Naymes
and those that escaped by flight, repaired home to their
owne countries.
                     2 The Duke Naymes as soone as he entred into Paris,
reported to Loys (the Sonne of Charlemaine) the imprisonment
of his Father; who (from the torment of his
angrie spirite) protested to dye, or reuenge his Fathers
dishonorable indignitie. To which ende, he dispatcht his
Commaunds through all the Citties of France, and mustered
an Army to the number of an hundred and fifty thousand
resolued Souldiers, with which he departed from Paris
and came to Déepe, where he tooke shipping and made
for Denmarke. Where we will leaue him, and speake a
little of Barant (surnamed the Cruell) who by this time
was growen so mightie, that not any Horse had abilitie to
sustaine him; and yet the tyrannie of his mind did exceed
the monstrousnes of his bodie, for he caused his owne Mother
to be beheaded, because (in a discontenter humor) shée
cald him Bastard: at which inhumane slaughter, many repined,
but he slew them eaeri
                           •
                         one that did but giue a shew
of displeasance; so that through his terror, all the Pagans
became obedient to his will. With a great Armie of men
he went before Montment, and won it both by assault and
diuelish art: for the same night that he slew his mother, the
damned Fiend Mutafier appeared vnto him, and made a co
                        
                           •
                        enant
with him, that he should neuer (for any thing whatsoeuer)
renounce the law of Mahomet; to which hee willingly

agréed: for ioy whereof, Muta
                              •
                           ier triumphed and
said he should be the destruction of all Christendome, promising
that he should neuer die by the hand of any man hauing
been nursed by the milke of woman. This promise
made Barant proud: for he imagined that there could not
be any infant brought vp without the milke of a woman;
wherefore hee held and reputed himselfe euer inuincible.
When Barant the Cruell had taken Montment, hee put
Iacob to death, and all those that trusted in the true God
of all things, whom Mathaburna again denied, as ye shal
heare hereafter.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. X.
                     1 How Barant, surnamed the Cruell, departed from
Montment with three hundred thousand souldiers,
and passed the Sea towards Maiance: 2 how Charls
and Gautier made a peace, and ioy
                           •
                        ed against the
Pagans.
                     
                        WHen Barant had brought all Montment to
his subiectio
                           •
                        , he went to the Pallace, where
he found the most beautifull Mathaburna,
and demaunded of her, whether she would adore
Mahomet or no. My good Lord (saide
she) I neuer refused him, for he hath alwayes béene deare
in my heart, and his temple haue I reserued in my bosome.

When Barant beheld with what a comely grace her speaches
were deliuered, and noted the excelling beautie, that
reflecting from one eye to another, he became mightily enamored
& in loue with her fauor; so that not able to smother
his desires, bluntly (like a will-wooing moouer) hee
said; Madame, your excellencies make mee wonder, that
neuer before beleeued there was such a thing as admiration:
in briefe, I loue you▪ and if you will let mee espouse
you, I will make you Queene of France, and giue you
the World for a Dowrie. My Lord (said shee) I humbly
thanke you, but no Espousalls shall bee so welcome to
mee, as the Conquest af France, and the death of Charles
who hath been the ruine of so manie of my Kindred; and
on whom incessantly I pray for some strange vengeance to
fall, so incessan
                           •
                         is the hate I beare him. Faire Madame
(said Barant) you are exceeding wise: and here I promise
you before Mahomet, whom I cal to witnes of my Uow,
within this short space, I will either giue him into your
owne hands to take vengeance of him, or dye in attempting
your pleasure. I beseech you my Lord doo so, sayd
Mathaburna: whose heart was cleane of a cantrarie opinion,
wishing rather to him and his confederates worse
torments than Hell fier, before that Charles (in thought)
should bee discontented. Thus shee whispered to her selfe,
and then speaking alowde, saide; Yet haue I one other
sute to your Lordshippe, which is, if you can fi
                           •
                        de out a
Knight whose name is Meruine, bring him to mee, that
I may reuenge my selfe of a notable wrong hee hath done
mée: and then will I not onely bée your Loue, but your
vassall, and you shall wholly dispose of mee. Thys Request
he swore vpon his life to performe. As these spéeches
were vttered; there came into their presence a Sarazen
foorth of Denmarke, who for feare had receaued Baptisme,
that falling on his knees, reported to Barant all

the great battaile, and the successe which passed betwixt
Charles and Gautier, and of the Emperours imprisonment:
telling him, that if his Highnesse were in Fraunce,
there was no let, but that at his pleasure he might conquer
the whole Nation, sith ciuill Dissention had broken the sinewes
of their Concord. At these words, Barant was so
much ouerioyed, that regardlesse of any manner of thing,
he would néedes kisse Mathaburna: but she repulsed him,
saying; No man vnder heauen should touch her, vntill she
were espoused, according to Mahomets lawe. This disdaine
did very much inrage him, so that through his passion,
he had strucken her, if a Lord of his counsaile had not
withholden him, whom he right highly estéemed: which
Lord chid him for his rashnesse, in offring to kill her whom
his heart so much loued, and one of so wise and diuine be
                        
                           •
                        iour.
Amend my Lord quoth he your fault, and for very
shame aske pardon. At these words Barant went vnto
her, and demanded if she would forgiue him. Yea my lord
quoth she, when you bring Charles and Meruine to be my
prisoners. Thankes gentle Lady replied he, and foorthwith
he caused a trumpet to be sounded, and sommoning
his army, departed towards Maiance, where by the aide
of diuels and furies) he arriued at the Port tenne leagues
from the city: where he beganne to sacke, burne and destroy
all the Countrey as hee went, shewing himselfe a
monstrous diuelish tyrant, and no man. The poore Countreymen
that sawe their houses burning, and their wiues
and children dying, ranne to Gautier, and told him of the
hideous ruine which the Pagans made in the Countrey,
laying it waste like a forsaken wildernesse, their number
being greater than any eie could account. These amazing
words raised the blood from Gautiers heart into his eyes,
and thence distilled in droppes of salt water, so that tormented
with sodaine feare, he called for his Lords and went to

counsaile: during which consult, arriued before the Citie,
Prince Loys of Fraunce, and his French army, who did
pitch their pauillions close to the walle
                           •
                        , being at that time
ignorant of the pagans commings.
                     2 It was thought most conuenient by Gautiers counsaile,
that the Emperour Charles should be deliuered, that
with his aide he might helpe to beate backe the Pagans:
which was performed. And Gantier with honny-dipped
words intreated the Emperors fauor, saying; he thought
the heauens were displeased with their disagreements, for
that within those dayes) there were arriued in his kingdome
aboue three hundred thousand Pagans, who had already
conquered Mequa, Ierusalem. Babylon▪ and all
those Countries before 
                           〈◊〉
                        , by Meruine 
                        
                           •
                        o famously conquered:
and that now his fortune was in the ballance of
Mischance or Honor. When Charles had heard his words
and marked his humblenes, then pitty expelling all rancor
from his 
                           •
                        reast▪ he embraced 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                         and his sonnes, and
tooke a 
                           〈◊〉
                         oath of perpetuall amity: for my wh
                           •••
                        of,
all the ti
                           •
                        y rung with clamours▪ and euery one triumphed
aboue measure. 
                           •
                        his done, Charles walking on the citie
walles, sawe from the battlements▪ the tents of the braue
French men: which knowing, he saide vnto Gautier; I
beléeue that Loys my sonne is in yonder army: 
                           〈◊〉
                         if 
                           〈◊〉
                        
not deceiued, I sée the shining of his colours. It is most
true saide Gautier, and I am very glad of his comming,
for his aide is a welcome hope to our doubtfull aduenture
against these damned Pagans, whose Generall is none
other but a mortall diuell, as far from pitty as pietie, and
both to him vtterly vnacquainted. Then Charles calling
for his horse, accompanied with the Counte of Dampmartin,
and the Counte of Anioy, he rode foorth to his sonne
                           •
                        
tents, where after royall entertainement, he declared the

peace that was concluded, the reasons, and the generall
good that should thereby be gotten. Then he, his son, duke
Naymes, and the rest, returned into the city, whom Gautier
and his sonnes met in most solempne order, and conducted
through the stréets, euery one doing honor to Charlemaine:
and so brought him to the pallace, where with
vnspeakeable ioy they reposed. After them the whole army
marched, and were receiued and lodged in the Citie.
Then the Kings and Princes went to counsaile touching
their weighty warres affaires: in which it was concluded,
that the towne should be victualled and manned for many
yeares, so the tediousnesse of siege should not preuaile against
them. Also it was agreede, that Prince Loys and
Bertran with twenty thousand should lie in an ambush,
that when the Pagans had pitched their Tents before the
towne, they in the dead of the night should assaile them;
and either ouerthrow or disseuer the army. All they conceiued

                           •
                        it, they put in practise: and the ambush was laid in
a great wood, by which of force the Pagans must passe, who
abo
                           ••
                         high noone, came marching in such inuincible troups
that the wayes hardly could containe them▪ In the last
ranke of all marched a king whose name was Gamart of
Mo
                           •
                        tiurne, and king of Iuerne the great: with him marched
a gentleman of his country, who was almost all naked,
and the king himselfe had his head and feet bare. These
carried in their hands boughs which they vsed in battel, and
no other weapons: their strength is their swiftnes, for they
runne faster than hares when grey hounds pursue them.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XI.
                     How Bertran, his Brethren, Loys and the other Christians
is
                           •
                        ued vpon the Pagans: 2 the deaths of all the
famous Christians except Loys; 3 of the Battaile
betwixt Barant the cruel, and of Bertran of Denmark.
                     
                     
                        AFter this naked nation was marched by,
(which were the rereward of the battaile)
the Christians mounted on horseback, Prince
Bertran being the first; who (holding his batleaxe
in his hand) charged the Iuernoys, and in
a breath space put them all to the sword, except those which
(to the amazement of the Christians) ranne not, but flew
to Barant, and cryed; Turne thee Prince, turne thee,
for the Christians are amongst vs. At this, Barant turning,
commaunded to sound Alarum, and with an hoast of
Elephants (whose very weight made the earth tremble) answered
the charge of his enemies. Now were the Christians
and the Pagans mingled together, and beganne a
Battaile, huge, fearefull, and wondrous vncertaine. Famous
Prince Bertran (like a Tyger in a flocke) made
hauocke of the Pagans, and (at the first incounter) slew a
Kinsman of Bahams, whose legge hee brake of Minor.
Three other Pagans at one instant charged prince Loys
and vnhorsed him; who being nimble, rose againe, and miraculously
defended himselfe with his sword: yet had hée

béen taken Prisoner, but that the Countie Dampmartin
rusht in to his Rescue, ouerthrowing three pagans at one
blow. Bertran beholding this tumult, brake the Raukes
that stood before him, and came to Loys; yet the Pagans
were so abundantly infinite, that they kild his horse vnder
him: at which though he greeued, yet was he not abashed,
but comming to Loys, bad him bee of good courage,
for he would not leaue him till he saw him newly remounted.
At these words (with his axe) hee slew a pagan, and
taking his horse (in despight of his Enemies) mounted
Loys. Then increased the fiercenesse of the Battaile,
where the pagans dyed so fast, that the ground was couered
with their bodies: at which, Barant (named the Cruell)
cha
                           •
                        ed most wonderfully, and protested to burie himselfe
there, if he buried not this dishonour in the glorie of the
Christians.
                     With this hee deuided his Armie, and inclosed his Enemies
round about on euerie side: whose hearts (lift vp
to heauen) cried to their Diuine helper for succour; being
but a Fish pond to the great Ocean of their Aduersaries.
Guyon and Florion (missing Bertran) raunged about,
and found him on foote with the Count Dampmartin and
prince Loys: to whom they said, that all their liues were
forfeite, and there was no way to saue their honours but
death, beeing now inclosed on euery side. Which when
Loys heard, he said; Ha Charles, this day shalt thou bee
Sonlesse and comfortlesse. 
                           •
                        ut Bertran (into whom Fear
was afraid to enter) incouraged him, and said; Why prince
thou art well mounted, feare not then, for this day we will
be Conquerors: with that he slew another Pagan King
who prest néere him, and vppon his horse mounted the
Count of Dampmartin, saying he would furnish himselfe
presently, which hée did by the death of another Pagan.
Then he desired his Brothers, not to forsake, but followe

him, for that day he would be such a lustie Wooer, that Conquest
should not choose but wedde with him. They swore
to doo his desire, and then the battaile was more dreadfull
than euer it was: for by this time the Christians had slaine
thirtie thousand of the best approued Sarazens, at which
sight Barant grew mad, and raylde both against his Me
                           •
                        ,
Mahomet, and Iupiter.
                     
                     2 This done, hée flew like a Tempest amongst the
Christians, and ouerthrewe all with whom he encountred:
an hundred he brought dead to the ground without respite▪
from whose sight the Christians fled as from the diuell, calling
on God, and blessing themselues with prayer and crosses
Piteous was the sight to behold, for they could flye
no way but into danger▪ 
                        
                           •
                        o strongly they were inclosed▪ in
somuch, that of twentie thousand which they were in the
beginning, now there remained but ten thousand, and they
vnable to endure Battaile, so vnresistable was the prowesse
of Barant. Which bloodie confusion when Bertran
sawe, his man
                           •
                        y heart relented, and honorable teares issued
from his neuer before so stained Beauer. Loys was much
more heartely sory, and millions of times wisht himselfe
within the Walls of Paris: wherefore he said to Bertran;
Ha Prince, this is our doomes-day, and here must all our

                           •
                        ames take their buriall: O, knew my royall Father our
misfortune, I know we should in a trice be rescued. Why
Prince (replyed Bertran) will you goe to him, and sée if
you can procure it? Willingly (said Loys) if it were possible
to passe. To passe, said Bertran? why plucke vp thy
spirits and doe but onely follow me, and I will make the
way easie enough for thée: which indéede he did, putting
all the Pagans to death that were obstacles or lets in his
way. When hee was got through the hoste, and put Lois
into the wood he said, Faire prince, commend my souls loue

to the emperour Charles, my father, and the faire vnfortunate
Singlay my wife, and tell them, this day I haue bound
my selfe, either to sée the vtter ruine of paganisme, or to
die in defending our most sincere and holy religion. Faire
prince (aunswered Loys) I will doe thy message, but I
had much rather thou wouldest goe with me, because this
day the field is no field but a 
                           •
                        laughterhouse▪ Not to be deified
(said Bertran) will I forsake my brothers, and so taking
leaue, Loys departed towards the citie, and he againe
to the battell, raging vppe and downe till hée found his
brethren, who were most mightily oppressed, till by his pr
                           •
                        
                        wesse
he redéemed them: which no sooner was doone, but
Barant the Cruell, with Entrant the good sword of prince
Meruine in his hand, which the deuill Mutafier had deliuered
him, and with which (in that moment) he had slaine
tenne noble christians, came and opposed himselfe against
Bertran, who with his battel axe gaue him such a blowe
on the helmet, and with such pow
                           •
                        r, that slipping downe,

                           •
                        ut the horse necke in sunder, bringing Barant ashamed to
the earth, who before neuer had felt a blowe of such puissaunce,
so that calling to Bertran he said, I beséech thée
christian, tell me what thou art, whose vertue I wonder at.
My name (said Bertran) was neuer hid for feare of any
Pagan, know then, men call me Bertran of Denmarke:
when Barant heard this, he knew he was his father, where
fore he commanded all his souldiers to retire from him, because
hée would with him trie fortune in single combate.
Which when his men had doone, Barant said, Prince Bertran,
you remember your imprisonment at Damascus,
your loue to Guyda my mother, whom traiterously you
forsooke and left with childe of me who am your sonne: and
you can not forget your vowes: now shall all they, nor your
valor auaile to deliuer you from death, vnlesse you doe fall
downe and adore our great God Mahomet. When Bertran
                        
had heard him, and beeing inraged with so vile a motion,
he saide: Thou art not my Sonne, neyther will
I euer acknowledge the begetting of so prophane a Deuill:
and with that lifting vp his axe, h
                           •
                        e strooke him a
maruellous great blowe, which beganne the fearefull combat
betwixt the father and the sonne, in which was shewed the
wonders of resolution; whome in that fight wee will leaue,
and speake a little of the other christians who were all slaine
saue thrée and twenty, which yet suruiued, though mightily
wounded. Guyon amongst the rest was deadly wounded
by Barant, yet indured as if he had béene immortall, till
the bloud falling into his eies depriued him of his sight, yet
notwithstanding, he would not leaue fighting, but strake
here and there, killing all that came neare him: in the end,
he assailed his brother Florion with such a mercilesse blow
that he feld him downe to the earth, who in falling cried, Ah
brother Guyon, thou hast slaine me whilest I regarded not
thy fury: woe and alas cried Guyon, what haue I done?
swéete brother forgiue mée, for the bloud of my woundes
hath closed vp mine eyes, and I did not nor could not behold
thée, my selfe am likewise wounded to the death, and
mine houres are shortning. This he saide, yet would not
leaue fighting whilst he had breath to breathe a minute, but
sate firmely on his horse till there was left aliue but tenne
Christians: then came a pagan and ranne his launce thorow
Florions body, who said, Now is my death certaine,
yet will I not die vnreuenged, and with that strooke the
Sarazin that he claue him to the girdle, saying, Thus dieth
the sonne of Gautier, himselfe by himselfe reuenged:
then fell 
                           •
                        e downe▪ there being at that houre but sixe breathing
christians, who
                           •
                        e names were these▪ 
                        Guyon that had
his 
                           〈◊〉
                         wound vpon him, and his sight forsaken; Florion
that likewise was at his last breathing; the Count
Dampmartin; the 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Dardaine; the Duke of Aniow;

and Bertran that then with his sonne Barant was
combating, the former fiue indured long, but in the end,
they were all dispatched, so that of twenty thousands there
was left but only one, and that was infortunate Bertran.
                     
                     3 Admirable was his and Barants combate, all the ar
                        
                           ••
                        y

                           〈◊〉
                         their resolutions, and vowing amongst them
selues neuer to part them till tho
                           •
                        e of them had left his life:
very variable was Fortune betwixt them, the sonne now
triumphing at the 
                           •
                        athers decaying, and the father immediately
smiling at the sons misfortune▪ so long lasted this
battell, and so much vnnaturall was the conflict, that the
day ashamed, forsooke the heauens; then ranne the pagans
and fetcht torches, and made such fire works, that the night
was as bright as the sun-shine, halfe of which they spent in
dreadfull and doubtfull wars: the sonne offring the father
mercy, if he would adore Mahomet, the father proffering
to the sonne forgiuenes, if he would renounce blasphemous
Mahomet: but both of them being of contrary resolutions,
they 
                           〈◊〉
                         afresh to their fearfull and fatall combate: and Barant
vow
                           •
                        d, if he conquered his father, that he would make
himselfe monarch of all the whe
                           ••
                         world. As he was thus
protesting. Bertran gaue him a blowe on the head, which
brought both his kn
                           •
                        es to the ground: but starting vp sodainely
againe, he sent it backe with such a violent requitall,
as mightily vexed and inraged Bertran, that thinking
at one stroke to finish the conflict, he gatherd al his strength
together, and st
                           •
                        oke him so, that he br
                           •
                        k
                           •
                         his axe in péeces,
so that left without defence, he closed with Barant, whom
by his strength he ouerthrew: but the Pagans ranne in
and pulled Bertran so, that Barant go
                           •
                         vpon him, an
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        aue
him diuers mortall blowe▪ Then Barant pulling on his
helmet he saide, Father, now be wise, for this is the la
                           ••
                        
moment, in which your life is forfeited▪ if you will not

adore Mahomet, and renounce that God which euer thou
hast estéemed. Traitor said Bertran, and thou bastard son of
a defiled curtezan, thinkest thou death can make me deny
my Sauiour? thou art deceiued, thou art deceiued. When
Barant saw his constancie, he drew forth his dagger and
stabbed his father foure times, who cried, thou onely great
God of Is
                           •
                        ael and Sauiour of the world, forgiue mine errors,
and receiue my soule into thy bosome, with that Barant
strucke him through the heart, and so he departed this
life. Then stood vp Barant and saide to his army, Behold
Princes, now ought you highly to esteeme me that haue
slaine my mother and my father, to the end I might make
mighty your religion, therefore take vp this dead body, and
beare it with me, to kill the heart of old Gautier with consuming
sorrow.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XII.
                     1 How Loys came to Maiance and reported the wofull
estate of the Christians, and the sorrow Gautier made
for his sonnes. 2 Singlayes sorrow, and the message
Barant sent to Charles, together with the answer.
3 How Barant slew one of the messengers.
                     
                        THe yong prince Loys, who in the battell had
receiued many great wounds, was now returned
to Maiance, and with a very heauy
countenance (the first report of misfortune)
came vnto the Kings pallace, where he did

finde the Emperour Charles his father, who looking on his
sad lookes, asked what was become of the christian a
                           •
                        my?
for (said he) thy lookes are heauy and vncomfortable. Tis
true my lord (said he) and that would hold me longer, but
falling to the ground, he swowned: at which Charles cried
out with amazement, whereby Gautier and his nobles
came foorth, who recouered Loys, and laid him on a bed, who
calling his father and the rest about him, declared al what
had passed in the battell during the time he tarried, and how
the whole army of twenty thousand were slaine by the pagans,
O peace yong prince (said Gautier) kill mée not with
thy wordes, flatter my death a little, and say not that all
my sonnes are 
                           〈◊〉
                        . My Lord (said Loys) doubt not but
they are al slain
                           •
                        , or before I left them, we were all inclosed
round about, so as it was impossible for any to escape, onely
my selfe had fortune, which fortune, I begd from Bertrans
sword, who with very much danger to himselfe hewed my
way before me.
                     2 Gautier hearing this, tore his garments, rent his
haire, and 
                           •
                        ringing his hands, made such piteous and lamentable
lamentation, that the aire resounded with his outcries,
and all that sawe him, became part
                           •
                        ers of his heauinesse.
Yet a great degrée aboue the dgrée of his perfit
                           •
                        
woe ascended the immortall afflictions of the most excellent
Singlay, Bertrans vnhappy wife, whose teares are impossible
to be described, and to whose woe none can finde an equall
epytheton. O heauens (said shee) O time, O hard
hearted prouidence, wherein haue I offended, that to my
life is adiudged an endlesse torment? Speake, speake you adamantine
destinies, why haue you robbed the world of her
renowne, and me of my glorie? O that I had time enough
to raile on you, or that by railing the time of your powers
might be expired. Ah miserable wretch that I am, left all

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         and desolate, who now shall sustaine mine anguish,
or pitie my mournings? Alas, none but Death: come then
gentle Death, I meane not the slow footed death which attend
the footesteps of nature, but the grim Death, sodayne
death, the page to vntoward mischiefe, come thou and bée
my comfort, thou which hast 
                           •
                        houghts wings, come quickly,
and be not 
                           •
                        ardy, or thus in despight will I pull thee
into my bosome; and with that taking a knife which hung
at her girdle, she had stabbed her selfe to the heart, but that
a squier of Bertrans standing by did holde her, chiding her
desper
                           ••
                        e thoughts, and perswading a more temperate
resolution: shée séeing her will broken, swowned, and reswowned,
so that by the helpe of the Ladies, she was conueyed
into her chamber, where she reposed. Generally ran
this sorrowe ouer all Maiance, and euery one wept the
losse of the princes. During these dayes of mourning, the
porters that guar
                           •
                        ed the gates 
                           〈◊〉
                         the cittie grew amazed,
for on a sodaine they sawe a numberlesse hoste of Pagans
begirt the towne round about, and pitch their pauillions in
the face of the Citie: the newes whereof they foorthwith
carried to the sad king, which hardly was deliuered, but
word was brought there were two Turkes royally mounted,
who craued accesse to deliuer a message from their
mightie Lord Barant the Cruel: they had entrance granted,
and were brought to the pallace before Charlemaine,
Gautier, Naymes, and the twelue Péeres of France, where
after some proude reuerence one of the Turkes thus spake,
To thée King Charles of Fraunce my Lord and Maister
prince Barant the Cruell sendeth this message, If thou
like a votarie bare footed, thy handes bound, and acorde about
thy necke, accompanied with Gautier in like manner,
come and fall downe before him▪ submitting your selues to
his mercie, and renounce the God whom you worship, that
then your peace shall continue; otherwise, he voweth neuer

to depart from this country till hee haue made it more
waste than Gruntland, or the frozen mountaines in Scythia.
Pagan (answered Charles when hee had heard the
message) if thy Lord doe that, I shall be sorie, but tell
him from me, that to morrowe I will giue him battell,
and feare not, but before night to make him runne headlong
into the Sea for his safetie. This is all, and this deliuer.
                     3 At this the pagans departed, and came to their Lord
Barant who seeing them, asked if Charles would accomplish
his pleasure; No aunswered one of them, but voweth
to morrow to giue you battel, and in the greatest scorn
                           •
                        
that may be esteemeth your Highnesse threatning; as for
the lawe of Mahomet hee saide it was damned, and hee
esteemed it 
                           •
                        aser than the basest earth he trodon. Uillains
(said Barant) heardst thou him reuile our religion, and
diddest not kill him? By Mahomet thou shalt pay for thy
cowardise, and at that worde hee strake him dead to the
ground with his punyarde. The other Ambassadour seeing
this, ranne amongest the Pagans and hidde himselfe,
swearing if hee escaped now, neuer againe to goe on any
messages of Barants. Now by this time began the day to
put on the nights apparell, and they went to their restes
till the next morning, at what time they arose and armed
themselues to receiue battell. Charlemaine on the other
side was as mightily troubled, who by the sound of trumpet
gathered his army together, and marching out of the
towne, hee diuided his hoste into fiue battallions, euerie
one containing at least twentie thousand Knightes and vpwardes.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIII.
                     1 How the Christians gaue battell to the Pagans, in
which turmoile the good King Gautier was slaine, and
his hoste ouerthrowne, 2 Charlemaine is forced to
retire, and issues out the second time, 3 The taking
of Loys, and Duke Naymes prisoners.
                     
                        WHen Charlemaine was commen vnto the
place of battel, aduised by the duke of Naimes,
hée sent tenne thousand of his souldiers backe
to defend the cittie, for feare of some secret
stratagem, and then sounding all his trumpets,
and making a fearefull noyse, they gaue a braue charge
on their enemies, crying. Saint Denis, and our right this
day: and in that first onset they 
                           •
                        iue of the pagans almost
an hundred thousand; but they so infinitely abounded, that
the christians beganne to stand amazed at their numbers.
But Gautier, who looked for nothing but for reuenge for
his sonnes deaths, stayed not at any thing, but méeting
with a king whose name was Bruant strooke him dead to
the earth▪ after him, an other, and another, and then out
drawing his faire bright Sworde (his launce beeing broken)
hee 
                           •
                        utte off King Danemons head, and then rushing
depserately into the prease, hée put to death all that
encountred him. This while was the good king Charles
amongst the pagans, where he killed king Feragu, and diuers

others of famous estimation, but in the end he was
inclosed round on euery side, where he defended himselfe
miraculously: yet notwithstanding, if it had not béene for
the Duke Naymes and diuers other gallants of France,
their king perforce had béene either slaine or taken, who
séeing their succors, 
                           •
                        reuiued new spirites, and fought like
a god of Conquest Barant the Cruell was not this while
idle, but slew the Christians by two and two together, so
that the most resolued in the army durst not abide him, but
beganne to conuert retrait to plaine flying. Which Gautier
with griefe beholding, demaunded a reason for theyr
faintnesse: to whom a French man made answere, there
was a diuell in the Pagan hoste, whose furie was not possible
to be indured. Gautier desiring to sée him, the French
man with pure feare brought him to behold him, to whom
Gautier cried, Traitor, stay, and giue my sword account
for thy murders, and so saying, he strucke him vpon the
headpiece so strongly, that the blow glauncing hurt Barant
in the thigh; at which the tyrant (being highly inraged)
turned and saide: Uillaine, thou hast hurt me, but
thy life shalbe my plaister, and at that word lifting aloft his
sword, 
                           •
                        e cut off one of Gautiers hands and the sword that
was grasped in it▪ which when the good king sawe, spur
                        
                           •
                        ing
his horse, he ouerthrew both Barant and his hor
                           ••
                         to
the earth; in which meane space, a Pagan comming behinde
him, gaue the Christian king such a blow on the helmet,
that he claue him to the chaps, and he fell downe dead
without motion. Then beganne the christians to flie here
and there about the field for safe
                           •
                        y, at which confusion,
Charlemaine sighed and after many holy prayers 
                           〈◊〉
                        
thrust himselfe amongest his enemies, more 
                           〈◊〉
                        
than before: of his army was not left aliue but fiue thousand,
and the most of those flying, 
                           •
                        nd not fighting 
                           •
                         the
which duke Naymes perceiuing, he perswaded the Emperour

to let a retrait be sounded: which as he was intending
to haue done, one brought to him word that Gautier was
slaine, so that both grieued and inraged, he flew vpon the
king of 
                           •
                        artaria, who but then had slaine a Christian, and
with the first stroke claue him to the collar.
                     2 The dying battell at this séemed to recouer, but yet
could it not continue, so weake were the ouer-maistered
christians: wherefore the sunne hauing gotten the middle
point of the heauens, Charles made a retraite be sounded,
and returned into the citie: which Barant beholding, he
present
                           •
                        y caused engines to be made with which he cast into
the city Bertran at all points so armed as he was when
he liued▪ the sight of whom, renued afresh b
                           •
                        th, the griefe
of Charles, and the rest of the Citie. This done, with the
same engine, he did cast huge stones and rockes into the
towne, killing diuers of the Burgers as they walked in
the stréetes: whereupon the rest went to the Emperour,
and tolde him, they had rather issue forth, and die fighting,
than liue in this danger of continuall fearing, and so
they then 
                           •
                        hewed what huge stones by engins were hourely
throwne vpon them. Friends quoth Charles, all your
willes shall be satisfied. And with that▪ he issued with all
the power of the city the second time: and first assailing
the engina
                           ••
                         they t
                           •
                        re them in pieces to the earth, and put
all those to the sword that vsed them; and then making
towards the army, they ouerthrew their Tents, and cast
down
                           •
                         their pauilions, putting a vrry great number of pagans
to death in a moment. Now entred Charles into the
Tent of the king of Danubia, whom he slew, and passed on
wi
                           •
                        h exceeding great triumph, vntill the Pagans making
an hideous crie, raysed vp all the Campe: who flocking
about the Christians, begaune an intollerable battell. In
this stirre was king Charles ouerthrowne, and had béene

taken but for duke Naymes once againe, who in despight
of the Pagans, remounted his Soueraigne, and tolde him
there was no other way for safety but 
                           •
                        light: vnto which
Charles did accord, and thereupon retraited towardes the
City.
                     3 But before he could regaine the gates, his Sonne
Loys, Naymes, and diuerse other Christians were taken
prisoners: which when he vnderstood, he would haue tur
                        
                           •
                        ed
againe to their rescue, but his Nobles would not suffer
him; because they prised his life as a holie relique: and for
that cause force perforce they brought him to the pallace, the
most discontented King then liuing, whilest the Pagans
themselues carried Loys and the rest to Barant the Cruell:
who taking a stormy view of them, first asked duke Naymes
what he was. My Lord quoth he, my name is Tristram,
a Burgesse of this City, this is my Sonne, these
other are my kinsmen, all at thy mercy. Yet if raunsome
may deliuer vs, I will giue to you an hundred tunne of
wine, and an hundred Quarters of wheate, all which I
haue ready in my house in Maiance, of which king Charles
hath no notice; for and if he had, he would seaze it, and
leaue me nothing. Barant was glad of this offer, because
his victualles were spent, and he had reinforced two hundred
thousand Pagans, so that he accepted the ransome:
yet did the Duke desire hostage for the performance of their
deliuerie, which he had: and then went he to the Citie to
Charles, whose sorrow smiled to behold him, and tolde
him what was done, which the Emperour highly commended,
and foorthwith caused theransome to be deliuered▪
which when Barant had receiued, he sent Loys and
also the rest home to the Citie, whom Charles with very
great ioy of heart receiued, and sent ba
                           •
                        ke the Pagan hostages.
                     
                        
But it happened (presently after) that there fell such a
wondrous Famine in the cittie, that they were inforced to
eate theyr horses, and other Beasts of the vilest loathsomnesse:
and in the end, (by extreame scarcitie) they grewe
into such lamentable néede and miserable pouertie, that
they had surely deliuered vp the Towne to Barant, had
not God (of his infinite mercie) myraculously sent princely
Meruine to bee their Aydour. Of whome I would
speake, but that first I must wryte of Drohes; who (as
you haue heard) departed from Montment, accompanied
onely with his Loue Adain, and swore neuer to lend rest
to his labours, till hée had found meanes for Meruines deliuerie,
whom in all the world he estéemed most déere: of
which he gaue sufficient testimonie, as you shall heare in
the Historie.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XIIII.
                     1 How Drohes and Adain trauailed so long in vnfrequented
places, till they found out the true meanes
for Meruines deliuerie: 2 How Drohes combated
with a Griffon for his Loue Adain.
                     
                     
                        
                           DRohes and Adaine(after they were departed
from Montment) clad themselues like Pilgrimes,
and in that humble manner on foot
beganne their wearie iourney, to finde out
means for the euer estéemed Meruines deliuerie.

So long they trauelled, till they came into a vast vninhabited
Wood, where repaired a certaine Hermit (as
was before declared) to Drohes; with whom he desired to
speake. So long they wandred in the Wood, till at last
they came to a delicate Fountaine, where they 
                           •
                        ate downe
to repose, and (with such simple viands as they carried about
them) they broke their fasts: in the middest whereof
came vnto them three Uillaines, who continually vsed to
rob all those which passed by that way. The first of whom
said to Drohes, Is this thy Wife thou carriest vp & downe
this Countrey? She is, said Drohes. And whither intend
you to goe with her, quoth the other? Sir (said Drohes)
to Saint Katherines, where our Iourney shall haue
his ending By heauen (replyed the first againe) I know
thou artfull of gold, which thy deuotion hath got from charitable
giuers; there is no other remedie but we must bee
thy partners: and, with that, offering to st
                           •
                        ike, Drohes,
rose lightly vp, and with his palmers staffe gaue him such
a blow, that he sprinkled his braines about the Field. The
other two (séeing their companion slai
                           •
                        e) assailed Drohes,
who wonderfully defended himselfe. In the ende, Adaine
with her Palmers cudgel, strake one of them behinde, so
that shée felled him to the earth: and Drohes slewe the other.
Then turning himselfe to Adaine, he louingly imbraced
her and praised her feminine resolution▪ of which
at that instant euen as he was speaking▪ he perceiued him
whom Adaine had strucke to reuiue againe: wherefore taking
him, he sayd; Uillaine, thy death is certaine, vnlesse
thou tellest me truely what countrey this is, and whether
thou hast anie more consorts of this damned qualitie? He
(whom feare of death did terrifie) thus answered; Good
Sir, the verie truth is, we are full fi
                           ••
                        ie in all, who are
gouerned vnder our captaine Raoult, sometimes of Ro
                              •
                           
                           q
                              •
                           ilon:
who (banished from France) brought vs into these

parts, where we liue onely by rapine and the spoile of passengers.
Then tell me said Drohes, which is my readiest
way to finde out the Heremite that continueth in this
wildernesse. Sir answered the villaine, you must keepe
along this way till you come to a great rocke, then turning
vpon your right hand towards it, you shall find out the
Hermitage. This said, Drohes tolde him theft was not
pardonable, and with that beat out his braines with a cudgell,
and ther went and found out the hermitage, and knocked
at the doore, till the ancient Hermite comming forth,
demaunded what he would: Right reuerend and graue

                           ••
                        r quoth Drohes, we are Christian Pilgrims. When
the Hermite heard they were Christians, he louingly embraced
them, and bade them welcome, because that he neuer
had séene Christian in that place before, asking them,
whither their iourney bore them. God sir answered Drohes,
our steppes are vncertaine, for I trauell to finde out
some meanes for the deliuery of the onely excellent creature
of the world, incomparable Meruine, who traiterously is
imprisoned at Minor, vnder the guard of a diuell: and for
that cause am I come to thée (diuine man) to learne means
for his restitution, because Experience hath made thee to
be wise in all things, especially in matters of verie great
secret. It is true, quoth the Hermite, yet in this I can
say nothing at all, but I will, and if thou be so pleased,
send thee vnto a place where (as I doe verily imagine)
thou shalt vnderstand any thing: and thus it is, Thou
must goe into Iuda, and inquire for the Hermite of that
Countrey, and to him tell thy desire, and he will gladly
resolue thee; for he is a great Clarke, a great Prophet, a
                           •
                        d
a man of great excellencie. Drohes gaue him many 
                           •
                        hanks,
and then (taking his leaue) went towards Iuda: whither
by his trauell he soone arriued, and came into the Forest
where the Hermit liued; wherein as he wandered, he was

set vpon by two cruell and rauenous Beares, but in the
end he 
                           ••
                        ew them, so great was his courage and resolution.
And then they trauelled forward vntill they had found
the Her
                           •
                        ite; who (being set in the portall of his Hermitage)
Drohes reuerently saluted. The Hermite requited
his salutation, demaunding whither they trauelled: To
you quoth Drohes, who are the wonder of this age for diuine
wisedome: and this (reuerend sir) is the verie cause
of our wandering; The onely accomplished man of all the
world, and he whose presen
                           •
                        e was my life, rare Meruin
my companion, hath most treacherously béene imprisoned
in Minor now about fiue yeares, and onely garded by a
flend of hell, whom no mortall strength can vanquish: now
my desire is to know some meanes for his deliuerie, without
whose redemption my life shall consume in sorrow.
Pilgrime (said the Hermite) I vnderstand all that thou
séekest; wherefore, for thy loues sake, which I find to be so
perfect, I will doe mine indeuoure: stay here then till my
returne, and thou shalt haue thy séeking. Then went the
Hermite into his study, and beganne to coniure, till a spirit
appeared vnto him, and demaunded his will. Tell me
quoth the Hermite, where is Prince Meruine prisoner?
and by what meanes may he be deliuered? He which will
haue him restored answered the spirite, must goe into the
Ile of Dordon, where dwelleth an Hermite named Robaster,
tis hée that must deliuer him: for it was predestinate
to Meruine in his Birth, that he should bée imprisoned,
till he were deliuered by a man whose mother died before
he was borne, and that is Robaster. More of this I
cannot, nor I will not report vnto thée: and then the spirit
departed with such a tempest, that all the corners of the spacious
Earth trembled.
                     Then came the hermit to Drohes, and tolde him what
he had vnderstood by Magicke, giuing him withall this

caneate, that when he came into that Ile, he should be well
and sufficiently armed, for that there was ther
                           •
                        in a Griffon,
an inuincible monster, whose hugenesse was incomparable,
and who had power to flye swifter than an Eagle,
who suffred not anie to come into that Ile, but he destroyed
them.
                     Graue Father (sayd Drohes) I most humbly thanke
you, and will from hencefoorth (for this vnspeakeable and
incomparable good turne) bée both your Knight and your
Beadesman. Then taking his leaue, hée and Adain departed
towards the Ile of Dordon, and at length came to
a great Riuer that descended into Orbe, which passeth vnto
Minor▪ King Butors chiefe Citie, where the Princely
Meruin lay so trecherously imprisoned. Ouer this Streame
(for their passage money) hée and Adain were conuayed,
and thence came to a little Uillage, where (during the
time of their small repose) hee caused a new Palmers staff
                           •
                        
to bee made for him of great Barres of yron, with pykes
halfe a foo
                           •
                        e in length: and then (beeing readie to depart)
he said to Adain; Thou art too exceeding vehement thus
to pursue my footsteps, I beseech thee (at my intreatie)
stay heere till my returne. But she by no meanes would
consent, saying; in all things she would be partner of his
fortune: then they departed together, and came into the Ile
of Dorbon.
                     2 Into which they had scarcely entered ere they discouered
a Griffon, who no sooner had set his eies vpon them,
but h
                           •
                        e came towards them: and first thinking to take
Drohes, Drohes with his staffe gaue him such a mightie
blowe as might haue felled a Lion, but hee esteemed it
not: then Drohes (with one of the pikes) stroke him thorough
the foote, that hee cryed extreamely; yet notwithstanding,

againe he came against him, thinking to flie away
with him; but standing in awe of his staffe, would not, but
mounting aloft, fell vpon Drohes like a mountaine, and
with his gripes wounded him so that he fell to the earth,
and lay in a swound, till Adain cried; O arise my Lord,
for the monster returneth. At these words Drohes awaked,
and holding the point of his staffe ouer his head, the
Griffon durst not assaile him. Wherefore Drohes thinking
in houering to kil him, he strucke so vehemently, that
missing, his staffe entred more than two foot into the very
ground as by no means he could get it out againe. Which
the Griff
                           •••
                         séeing, descended to haue borne him away: but
Drohes held the staffe so fast in his hand that he could not.
Adain beholding her Lord in that danger, strucke the Griffon
on the wing such a blow, that leauing Drohes, he returned
to Adain, seazing vpon her, bore her through
the ayre: but as the storie saieth, ere hee descended to the
ground she was dead, so grieuously did his talla
                           •
                        s gripe
her to the heart.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XV.
                     1 How Drohes spake to Robaster touching the deliuerie
of Meruine: 2 Of Malabeon of Luton Robasters
father that gaue counsell in the action.
                     
                        THe monstrous Griffon when hee sawe in his

                           ••
                        ght Adain dead, hee presently deuoured
her, for whose losse Drohes sorrowed extreamely,
and mingled with his moanes
many sw
                           •
                        wnings, and many bitter lamentations.

During which, Robaster comming by, and hearing
him make great moane, now for Adaine, then for
Meruine; he tooke compassion of his woes, and went and
saluted him, saying: good sir, I haue heard your outries,
in which you exclaime for the losse of a wife, and a perfect
friend; be comforted man, for destiny is vnremoueable.
When Drohes heard Robaster hee lifted vp his head,
and with humble reuerence he demanded of him his name.
My name quoth he is Robaster, who hath bin the death
of many Pagans, yea and of many Christians also, for
which, now doth my soule indure a mortall penaunce.
Drohes hearing this, amongest his woes re
                           •
                        oyced and
saide. Ha Robaster, thou art the Starre which hast led
me hither, and in thée is the power of all my ioy and happinesse.
Then Robaster taking him vp, for he was verie
sore wounded, he presently led him to his hermitage, where
Malabeon his father was, and cured him: but Malabeon
went inuisibly, for such was his power, and onely he
was seene to his sonne, and to none other. When time of
repast came, they sate downe to meate, and Drohes smelling
a delicate perfume, demaunded what it was, and Robaster
tolde him, that they were certaine rare waters the
which he kept in his chamber, which if he pleased, he would
shew him; thence he brought him into his chamber, which
resembled an earthly paradise, so rare was the exquisitenesse
thereof, all being done by the art of Malabeon, the
which Drohes in admiring, praised beyond all measure,
and Robaster, that tooke no small delight in Drohes, tolde
him he should command any thing he sawe, or wherein his
helpe might doe him seruice, he vowed he should finde it
most willing and ready. O quoth he, will you not heereafter
goe from your promise? Not for the world quoth he,
Then will I take you at your word quoth Drohes, know
then that for these fiue yeares space, the onely glorie of the

worlde, the myracle and mirour of Knighthoode, hath
beene by corrupt and false treason, detained and kept prisoner
in Minor, from which place it is vtterly impossible
that euer he should be deliuered, except by the handiwork
of almightie God, and your good helpe, because a diuell
of hell is his gardian, neare vnto whom no man dareth to
approach, so cruell is his wrathfull indignation. Wherefore
I humbly pray you, that in regard the life of Uertue
liueth in your power, be dei
                           ••
                        ed in the hearts of men, for
attributing vnto her a most happy restitution. How I
pray you doe you call the Knight, quoth Robaster? Oh
answered Drohes, it is renowmed Meruine the sonne of
Oger of Denmarke, and the right beautifull▪ and vertuous
Ladie Morgua, I haue heard quoth Robaster, of one
sonne of Ogers, who was slaine by Charles the sonne of
Charlemaine, who was called by the name of Baldwine,
but of Meruine I neuer heard before, nor of any of his actions.
                     2 Then spake Malabeon his father, and saide, Sonne,
it is very true, that Oger begot the valiant Prince Meruine
of the Fairie Lady Morgua in the Fairie land, which
I know right well that was present at his baptizing, as
the Fairie can well witnesse with me, who stole him from
his mother, and for griefe thereof, knowing herselfe to be
damned, suffered a diuell to beget on her a monster with
thrée heads, that hereafter shall bring all Christendome to
a most wofull heauinesse, vntill by that famous and worthily
renowmed Prince Meruine he be brought vnto some
shamefull end, whom it behooueth thée to deliuer, because
now the date of his destiny is expired, and if he be not the
sooner redéemed, all Christendome will be vtterly ruinated
by Barant surnamed the Cruell, against whom no creature
is able to indure battell, except Meruine, in whose

hands the tyrants life is contained: Father quoth Robaster,
by what manner of meanes may I worke his deliueraunce?
Uery easily answered Malabeon, for I will
first goe alone to Minor, and waiting the comming out of
Mutafier (who shall not see me) steale priuately away the
keys of the prison, and then returning for thée, by the helpe
of the highest Sonne deliuer him. Good father said Robaster,
help vs in this holy déed. I will dispatch it and returne
quoth Malabeon, before the day goe downe. Drohes hearing
this, ouercome with ioy, embraced Robaster in his
armes, and asked if he euer sawe his father. Yes said he,
but besides my selfe, not any creature. In sundry other
discourses they continued vntill Malabeon returned from
Minor with the keyes, and bade them arise, for now was
the time to goe and deliuer Meruine, for beholde, here are
Mutafiers keys. When the two barons heard this, they
leapt for ioy, and Drohes maruelled that he was so soone
returned. Stand not amazed (said Malabeon) but let vs be
gone, for if Mutafier shall chaunce to returne, and finde
his keyes taken away, it may be he will do the prince some
iniurie. Alas said Drohes, how shall wee be able in a
moment to goe more than an hundred leagues? Care not
(said Malabeon) onely arme your selues and doe but follow
me, which they did, and then casting pilgrims weedes ouer
them, went so that no man could possibly perceiue their
armors, and at the last came to the riuer Orbe, ouer which
(by the helpe of Malabeon) they passed vpon a little
planke of wood, and then came vnto the view of Minor,
where Malabeon commaunded them, that as soone as they
should come before Butor, that they should fayne themselues
to be come 
                           〈◊〉
                         countries, and that they should
say, that Barant the Cruel had by his prowesse taken both
Charles and the twelue peeres, assuring them that hee
woulde stand by them, and giue aduise in euery action.
                     
                        
Then afterwards in the very dead of the night, at what
time euerie creature shall be at their rest, we will goe to
the prison and set renowmed Meruine at libertie before it
be midnight. This being said, they went forward euen to
the city gates, where they remained vntill the next morning
that the Sunne was risen, deuising within themselues
with what speaches to entertaine king Butor: and
when they perceiued the day began to appeare, they knocked
at the gates, and desired entrance: but they answered,
that without the kings Maiesties knowledge, he durst
not suffer any man to enter. Then said Robaster, goe to
the king and tell him, we haue brought him newes which
will make his Highnesse ioyfull, and at thy returne wee
will giue to thée three pieces of siluer: Thou speakest well
quoth the Porter, and went his way and tolde the King,
who very well remembring the entrance of Bertran and
Drohes, was euer after circumspect of euerie mans entrance:
wherefore causing about thirtie of his best approued
Knights to arme themselues, with them he went to
the gates, and receiued in the two Pilgrims, and presently
remembred Robaster, for that he had afore time
slaine a monstrous Serpent which had greatly wasted his
countrey, for the which king Butor had promised many a
time and often to giue him what gift he would desire within
compasse of any reason.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     1 How Robaster deceiued king Butor. 2 How Meruin
was deliuered out of prison, and went to the pallace
where he slew Butor, his Queene, and diuer
                           •
                         other
pagans. 3 Of the great battell he maintained.
                     
                        MOst honorable was the entertainment that
Butor gaue to Robaster, imagining that
he was come for the gift which in time past
he had promised, but it was not so, and he
feasted him and Drohes (who by reason of
his disguise, he knew not) sumptuously: but Robaster he
would not eate any thing, but passed the time in telling of
strange newes, and in thend assured him that prince Barant
the cruel had taken the emperour Charles and his xij.
péers prisoners. At which tidings Butor much ioyd, & kissing
Robaster for his spéeches, and putting his hand vnder
his feet, did him vassaile-like reuerence, whereat Drohes
smiled to himselfe. Thus was Butor deceiued by Robaster
and by Drohes.
                     
                     2 Now when the euening drew on the blackest curtins
of the night, and euery one betooke themselues to their rest;
the King gaue cammaundement, that Robaster and his
companion should bee delicately lodged, which was very
iustly performed: but assoone as old Malabeon knew that
dead sléepe had arrested the thoughts of euery one, he came
to the two christians saying; nowel arise if you will deliuer

                        Meruine, for I haue the keyes of the prison. At that word
they arose and departed, the Moone shining out the pleasantest
beames of her countenaunce, and came to the doore
of the dungeon, where staying Malabeon opend the doores,
and then said, faire sonne, stay thou here till we returne, and
guard this passage. I wil (said Robaster) and sweare, that if
there come but 100 they shall not escape me. Them entred
in Drohes and Malabeon, who heard the musike which the
Fairies made thrice a day, to reui
                           •
                        e the spirites of Meruin
(as was before written:) at which Drohes wondered, vntil
Malabeon tolde him what it was▪ and the occasion thereof:
the musike ceasing, they went to Meruine that lay in most
intolerable martiredome, who as soone as hee saw Drohes,
he maruelld; but Drohes ouer-ioyed with his sight, came to
embrace him, but could not speake, so full was his heart with
ouer-pressing ioy: but hauing gotten a little libertie for his
tongue, saide, Thou woonder of men, behold Drohes thy
true prisoner, who is come to finde meanes to deliuer thée
from imprisonment. When Meruin heard him, he imbraced
him, and doubled kindenes vpon kindnes. Then Malabeon,
by vertue of an herb he had brake off his fetters. And
Meruine séeing himselfe deliuered; asked Drohes what he
was that vn
                           •
                        éene ta
                           •
                        ked vnto him; and Drohes at large discoursed
altouching Robaster and Malabeon his father, who
were indéed the tru actors of his deliuerie, for without them
his bondage was eternall. These spéeches Malabeon broke,
and tolde them they m
                           •
                        st depart, for why, the houre approched,
in which Mutafier was accustomed to come vnto the
prison. By my Sauiour (said Meruine) I would he were
here, for of all the Deuills in hell, I desire to combate
with him. This béeing saide, hée arose out of the dungeon
and came foorth, whome as soone as Robaster sawe,
hée called to minde Prince Oger, and saide, Beléeue me
                           •
                        
princely Meruine, I was hardly perswaded that Oger had

a sonne; but now I assure my selfe by thy countenaunce,
for one hand is not so like an other, as you to his excellence.
After this Malabeon brought Meruine into the chamber
where his armour was, which he presently put on, but his
sword was not there, which somewhat grieued him, but in
steede of it Malabeon gaue him a mace of yr
                           •
                        n, and then
they departed to the kings pallace, where they found euery
one asleepe, so that they vnforbidden went to the Kings
bed chamber, where breaking op
                           •
                        n the doores with theyr

                           •
                        é
                           •
                        te the King awaked and offering to rise, Meruine rushed
vnto him and saide; Damned traitour, and thou staine of
kingdomes, behold here Meruine the sonne of Oger, whos
                           •
                        
very soule thou hast tormented, is nowe come to take account
of thy treason, and in so saying, he strooke him with
his mace such a mercilesse blowe, that in his bedde hee slue
him: and Robaster at the same instant killed his Quéene
also. Which doone, they passed from chamber to chamber,
and put to death all the pagans they found of what estate
soeuer, During all this fearefull night, not any creature escaped,
but onely one base pesant, who running into the
Cittie, gaue a generall allarum, crying, Treason to
the kings sacred person. At which clamours all the towne
rose vp in armes and came to the pallace, where they found
the Christians, who flying amongst them beganne a dreadfull
battell: and Malabeon by his excellent Arte, made such
a light, that the pallace was as bright as day to to the Christians,
but hell-like blacke to the Pagans, who by that
meanes being slaine by their enemies, 
                           ••
                        ue also themselues
by their ignoraunce. Drohes set forward with desire of ceuenge,
was gote into the thickest of the Pagans, but th
                           •••
                        
numbers were so infinite, that all his prowesse was much
too little to haue saued his life, had it not béene for Malabeon,
who cried to Robaster and Meruine to succour Drohes
or he was but dead▪ at that thay turned about, and

preasing into the throng, there was not a pagan that durst
abide or indure them: so that all thrée ioyning themselues
together, they made ha
                           •
                        ocke of their enemies, onely one
thing greatly bred their trouble, which was the casting of
scalding water out of the windowes vpon them, but yet
notwithstanding, they slew so many that the stréetes were
paued with their bodies. Then came Malabeon and said,
Princes, now is the time to be gone, therefore sheath your
swords and retire: why quoth Meruin, or for what cause?
Because saide Malabeon, Mutafier euen now is in comming,
and when he shall perceiue this slaughter, he inraged
will set all the city on fire with vnquenchable flames,
so that we, nor any pagan shall escape the mischiefe. Thus
forward the Christians departed, fighting all the way till
they were without Minor, and without the streight passage,
then retired the Pagans, but were no sooner reentred
but Mutafier came, who when he missed Meruine he became
madly inraged, and with the frenzi
                           •
                         of his anger set
all the City on fire, so that not a Pagan escaped from burning,
but onelie one, who then was without the Citty,
and immediately bare those sadde tidings vnto Barant the
Cruell, who little or nothing esteemed the discourse. Meruine
and his companions being within 
                           •
                        ight, maruelled
at the hugenesse of the fire, till Malabeon calling his son,
hade him conduct the princes, and aid them in euery thing,
for of force he must passe into the Fairie land, to heare a
cause betwixt two of his aliance, that then were at di
                           ••••
                        
                        tion,
and so he departed, and Meruine and the rest marched
on their way.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     1 How Meruine, Robaster, and Drohes ariued in a wood
amongest robbers. 2 Of the dangers they were in,
3 How Malabeon aided them. 4 How they slew the
theeues.
                     
                        THe thrée Christians, after the departure of
Malabeon trauelled all the day without
finding any house or place of harbor, in the
end, they came into a thicke wood, where
they trauelled a long time, till in the end sitting
downe vnder a chesnut trée, they saide to themselues,
that vnlesse some aduenture called them forth, they would
rest there all that night: but their repose was very short
before x. outlaws that liued by robbing came out and espied
them, so that one said to the rest, behold yond itj. weary
ones, on my life they are full of gold, wherefore let vs take
them and carry them to our Castle, where our master
Barre will be prowd of them. This saide, they aduaunced
themselues, and saluted the Princes, who stedfastly beheld
till one of the theeues said, Gentlemen you are wel found:
and gallants said Robaster, who rose withall, you are as
well met, what is your pleasures? Our pleasures are, said
one outlaw, that if you haue store of gold, you diuide it amongst
vs. We haue qd Robaster enough for our selues,
and for xx. such as we be, onely we lacke lodging, which if
you will be so kinde as help vs with, then commaund our
purses. Gentlemen said the thiefe, if you will follow me
to a castle hard by, you shall haue that and what besides ye

will desire. Thy words are swéet qd Robaster, ride then
before and we will follow thée. Come said the thiefe, who
thought to take them prisoners. And then they passed along
with the ten Outlawes and the thrée Christians: and
as they rode, Drohes perswaded them to be aduised, for
the Uillaines were not guilty of one good thought towards
them. Tis true qd Robaster, but it is no matter, for we
thrée being together, were we in hell, in despite of all the
diuels in hell, we would giue our selues fréedome: they do
thinke to haue gold, and for mine owne part (since I was
borne) I neuer bore one crosse about me. In sadnesse said
Meruine, then I am thy companion, for iust so well am I
stored: but it skilleth not, for their imagination will giue
vs entertainment. By my soule quoth Drohes smiling,
as bare is the payment our host shall get at my hand. Thus
making sport at their wants, they followed the théeues to
the castle Malfeaus, where alighting they ascended vp into
the hall, where hanged all the shieldes of those haplesse
Knights, whom in the house were murdered. Belieue me
qd Meruine, this a right beautifull place, what is hee that
is lord thereof? His name (said one of the Outlawes) is
Barre a prince of great possessions. Then came an other,

                           •
                        aying; Gentlemen, it is the custome of this house, all lodgers
here deliuer vp to me their weapons till their departure.
Friend qd Meruine, not ours by any means, for we
loue them so deare, that we lie with them, eate with them,
walke with them, and nothing but death can part vs and
them. It séemeth then saide the thiefe, you suspect some
mischiefe. Mischiefe (said Robaster looking about) let me
sée him that is so hardy as not to tremble if we frowne vpon
him. Why (qd a villaine againe, thinke you we are not
enow to master you thrée? Yes, yes. Then were the castle
gates lockt vp, for all the villains were entred in, and Barre
their captaine vsed the princes very kindly, setting them by

his side at the table, where was store of all meats, yet Robaster
would neither eate nor drinke any thing: wherefore
Barre askt him if he did it for penance. Yea sir qd one of the
thieues, it is for the good men he hath slain, and for the robberies
he hath done in his life time. Robaster, hearing him,
snatcht vp a knife, and threw it at him, but missing the villaine,
it strucke halfe a foot into a table: which Barre seeing
was much grieued, and desired Robaster to be patient, and
amends should be made him. Then came the vassaile, and
knéeling, asked him forgiuenes: which (after some ceremonies)
was granted on condition he should loose one eie, for
calling him murderer. Barre that then durst not deny a
                           •
                        y
thing, agréed, so he lost an eie, but vowd ere midnight to be
reuenged. Supperended, and the time of rest come, Barre
broght them into a faire chamber, with one bed in it, saying
to Robaster: You shall lodge here, and these other in another
chamber not far off. How, qd Robaster shall we be diuided?
by heauen we are all one, and will not be seperated.
Sir qd Barre, I haue no chamber with thrée beds. Fetch
iij▪ q
                           •
                         
                        Robaster. I willl said Barre, who durst not denie
any thing: so two beds more were brought in.
                     2 As soone as he was gone, Meruine locked the doores,
and then beganne they to disarme themselues: which the
thieues perceiued through a 
                           •
                        hinke that was in the wall of
the chamber. When they were laide, they fell soundly asléepe,
insomuch that they snoared. Then retired all the
thieues like vnto thieues indeede, being wonderously agast
and fearefull, offering sometimes to turne backe againe,
imagining that the princes sléep was but fained and
counterfet. At the last percei
                           •
                        ing they slept indeede, they
much the more boldely set forward, hauing all resolued amongst
themselues, and each to other sworne the death of

the Christians. But the damned Captaine of this wicked
crue bade them first seaze the Princes weapons for their
more securenes: which accordingly they did, and then they
went fiue to each beddes side with their naked swordes in
their hands, beeing readie to giue the dismall stroakes of
their vnhappinesse: had not God deliuered them strangely:
and thus it was as the Historie reporteth.
                     3 Malabeon beeing in the Fayrie Land, by the will of
God remembred his Sonne, and instantly hee had knowledge
both of his and his companions daungers: wherefore
(in a trice) charming himselfe into the Chamber, he put vnder
each of their beddes an hearbe, which had this vertue,
that it made them beleeue both the Chamber and the bedde
were on fier: then making a fearefull noyse the Knights
arose. Which sodainnes so frighted the theeues, that they
ran backe, leauing the armour and weapoes of the Princes
they had before stolne: who (by the seeming 
                           ••
                        er-l
                           •
                        ght) discouering
their danger and armes, armed themselues and
tooke their weapons into their hand. Then said Malabeon,
quickly slay these theeues, for if God had not defended you,
this night, all three had beene murdred.
                     4 When they heard the voyce of Malabeon, they did
as he bade them: for in that hower they began a 
                           ••
                        ecce combat
bec
                           •
                        use the villaines were stout and valiant: but in the
end Meruine slew 25. and Robaster and Drohes the rest:
so that not any e
                           •
                        caped but onely one, who running vnder a
bed, imagined to hide himselfe from death: but Robaster
perceiuing it, pursued him; and when he saw his fortune
disclosed, he fell vpon his knees and craued mercie, promising
to amend his life, and to shew them the goodliest horse
of the world, which he would giue for his ransome. Meruine
gaue eare to those words, and said; Friend shew me

tha
                           •
                         beast which is so si
                           •
                        gular. Then they foure lighted a
torch and went towards the stable, which was locked with
thrée lockas, all which he opened and went in: whom he shewed
them the horse, that had before him twenty barres of
yron, and behind him as many. The horse no sooner sawe
the knights, but he neighed. How quoth Meruine, shall
we come to this horse? Sir said he, see you these holes that
locke these barres, there was neuer yet man that had power
to vndoe them. Meruine hearing this, laid his handes
vpon the lock
                           •
                        s, and they all fl
                           •
                        w open: there was also a
written scrowle, which Meruine tooke vp and read, containing
this matter.
                     
                        
                           
                              MEruine, I salute thée with this gift: Know thou,
that I am a witnesse of thy birth, and held thée at
the Font in the land of Fairia: wherefore this noble horse
(which is the brother to Baucant) I giue vnto thée, whose
name is Passant. Neither do thou change it, for he is the
exquisitest in euery point that ere was bred vnder heauen.
He is old, but yet as good as if he were yong, because his
last daies seruice shalbe as good as his first. Also I beseech
thée, that the first sonne which thou shalt haue, after thy
marriage, may beare my name: which doing, thou shalt
locke my loue vnto thée, and be blessed from heauen.
                           Written by thy Godfather: King Orient.
                           
                        
                     
                     Thus was the Letter written, and Meruine reioyced,
who going to the horse the horse was proud: then Meruin
espied his furniture, which he put on: and as hee was in
trimming him, the thiefe came behinde him to shew light
to Meruine, but he could not so quickely passe by, as Passant
                        
with his héeles strake him dead to the ground. At
which Meruine was displeased, till Malabeon said; prince,
be not offended for this, for hee was a théefe and a murderer,
which Passa
                              •
                           t knowing, strake him; for his vnderstanding
is mightie, and he was bred in Fairia: misdoubt
not then, for hee will serue thee princely: and héere must
Robaster tako leaue of thée, for he may goe no farther with
thée. Then Meruine imbraced Robaster, and gaue him in
                        
                           ••
                        nite
thankes for his deliuerance. Thus parted Malabeon
and Robaster, who with all spéed came backe to their
Hermitage; where we will leaue them, and returne againe
to Meruine and Drohes.
                     
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     1 How Meruine and Drohes went to Brandis, and conuerted
the Countrey: 2 how they came before Montment,
where (in the Battaile) Drohes was taken, and
brought into the Citie: 3 how Mathaburna (before
the Pagans) menaced him.
                     
                        AFter Malabeon and Robaster were departed,
Meruine and Drohes 
                        
                           ••
                        ayed in the Castle till it
was bright day: at what time Meruine mounted
vpon Passant, and Drohes vpon another horse;

                           •
                        ourneying till they came to Brandis, to the house of Minea,
who when she beheld Meruine, O how her ioy exceeded
in exceedingnes▪ she ran and imbraced him and kist
him, and lastly, tolde him of her▪ and her husbandes conuersion
to the true Faith. All which pleased him wondrously;
and hee desired her to bee most constant in her
opinion, and to perswade all shee loued to the like resolution;
for whoso did not bel
                           ••
                        ue so, should dye the death. In

briefe, that Ladie so laboured, that Croysant came with
400 Christians to Brandis, and presented them to Meruin,
who gladly gaue them all kinde acceptation. Then went
Meruin to the Castle to the Count, whom they found set in
the great Hall at a Table by his Countesse: to whom (after
Meruine had caused a trumpet to be sounded) he said; My
Lord of Brandis, wée are come to know thy disposition,
whether thou wilt adore the true God of heauen and earth,
the Sauiour of the world Christ Iesus. A Saracen that
stood by▪ hearing these words, drew foorth his knife & thought
to stab Meruine: but Drohes preuented him, and with his
sword gaue him such a blow that he claue his head euen to
his te
                           •
                        th. At this began an alarum in the hall, & on thother
part, Meruines 400 Christians gaue alarum to the Citie,
and put all to death that beléeued not in Christ Iesus, and
bee conuerted. When the Countie Brandis (whose name
was Fourquer) saw both his owne danger and his Citties
desolation, he came and kneeled downe before Meruin, promising
faithfully to conuert, and be baptised. Then Meruin
raysed vp the Countie, sounded a retrayte, and made euery
one sheath hie sword, and then went into the cittie, and put
all to death that would not be conuerted; in the end, they
all most humbly receiued Baptisme. Tis vaine to spe
                           •
                        ke
more of Brandis or her countrey, they were all conue
                           ••
                        ed,
and baptized: and in the Countrey all round about they
builded Temples, Monasteries, and religious Houses, in
which God continually was serued.
                     2 Then Meruine mustered of that Country ten thousand,
and marched towards Montment, and the Counte
Fourques went with him, for he had sworne neuer to fayle
him in anie conflict. In foure dayes space they came to
Luternia, and thence marched towards Montment, where
Mathaburna remained; whose labouring thoughts continually

were with Meruine: who now had marched till hée
came within sight of Montment. But an Espiall (hauing
beheld theyr Armie) went vnto the Towne, and gaue notice
especially to the fierce Pagan Bruant, whome Barant
had left his Substitute; whose hugenes no horse was able
to support, and his strength equalling that greatnes▪ To him
he told, how Prince Meruine was returned with a great
Band of christians, and were hard at the cittie walls. Mathaburna
hearing her Lords name resounded, her hart daunced;
yet shée durst not for her life discouer her ioyfullnes, but
fained her selfe sad, (as she was indéed, because she durst not
bée merrie when she was best pleased) and sayd; Brurant,
let vs bée carefull lest these damned Christians enter the
cittie, for this vilde Meruine is mercilesse: therefore I beseech
you, let the keyes of the cittie be euerie night brought
vp into my chamber. Brurant agréed theretoo. Then said
Mathaburna, I will Brurant, that you issue out vpon the
wretches, that they may not vaunt that they lodged before
our cittie, and were not bidden one Skirmish. To that motion
he was willing, wherefore (arming 20000) he sallied
out of the gates; whom Meruine and his Armie couragiously
encountred, himselfe throwing ten dead to the ground
before anie other Christian approached. When the Pagans
beheld his furie▪ they were amazed, and said one to another;
If all the Christians bée like to this, it is in vaine wée striue
against them. During the Battaile, Mathaburna stoode
on the top of Turgon to behold her Lord, whom she knew
by his blows and death that followed them, and also by an
olde Fauor of hers which he did weare in his Helmet. The
Battaile continued verie strongly, in which Meruine shewed
wondrons Chiualrie; Drohes, Croysant and Fouchier not
being short of anie Knightly resolution: but on the other
side, Brurant (who was on foote) made mightie slaughter
of the Christians; at which Drohes was inraged, and with a

strong launce charged vpon the Turke, but did him no
hurt, at which Drohes wondered; but the Turke sent
him backe such a token with his sword, tha
                           •
                         he cut away
one quarter of his shield, and the head of his horse also, insomuch
that Drohes was faine to descend to the earth to
begin a foote combate: but the Turke (who was of strange

                           •
                        or
                           •
                        e) tooke him vp in his armes, and in despite of all men
bore him into Montment, deliuering him into she custodie
of the Pagans, and then returned againe where he sawe
Meruine make a mightie slaughter of his souldiers that now
were flying to seeke safetie: whom as hée incountred hée
said, Cowards, whither will you? tourne, or ere night
you shall all repent you. Sir (said one of them) death is
worst, and that wee are sure of, if we turne to yond puissant
mightie one. Which (sayd Brurant)? shew mee
that Gallant. I will doo that (said one of his Souldiers)
so you will let mée come behinde you. And then he shewed
him where Meruine was, to whom hee went; and offering
to strike him with his axe, the horse Passant (seeing the
blow) retyred, and instantly turned againe, whereby Meruine
gaue the Turke such a mightie blowe, that if his
sword had not broken he had there fi
                           •
                        ished the Battaile:
then he tooke the pomell and hilts, which he cast at him so
vehemently, that hee brought him on his knees; and then
taking his yron mace from him, with it gaue h
                           ••
                         such a
blow, that he felled him to the earth.
                     Then came an infinite number of pagans about him, who
raised him vp, and as soone as he was come to himselfe, hee
cried, Let vs flie souldiers, let vs flie, for it is impossible to
indure these strange blowes. Then ranne the Pagans amaine
towardes the towne, and the Christians pursued
them, of whom in the entraunce they 
                           ••
                        ue abundance, notwithstanding
yet the Sarazens got into the towne & closed
vp their gates, at which Meruine was displeased, but

would haue béene much more grieued, had he knowne that
Drohes had bin taken prisoner. The christians went vnto
their pauilion
                           •
                         hauing lost but seuen hundred, and the pagans
eight thousand.
                     3 Brurant brought to Mathaburna the Knight Drohes,
with this spéech, saying, Madam, behold here is one of
the christians that hath beene our scourge this day: pleaseth
your Ladiship to keepe him, and present him to prince Barant
my Lord and Master, your royall loue: that will I not
(said Mathaburna) but before to morrow in the morning
dispatch him of his life, I knowe his name to be Drohes;
and pleased it Mahomet, that as I haue him, I had that
disloyall Meruine, who against my soule made me be baptized,
I would present him to my royall loue Barant, that
hee might take of him a neuer to be eq
                           •
                        alled vengeance.
When the gentle Drohes heard her, he answered; What
Madam, are these speeches your owne, or vnkindely borrowed?
I tell you, Meruine for the world would not thus
vnkindly forget you, but loues you as his owne saluation.
Peace (said Mathaburna) speake not to me, for thou shalt
know that in despight of what thou hast spoken of Meruin
thou shalt be hanged. Then calling a pagan to hir she commaunded
him to imprison Drohes, and to bring the keys to
her presently: which immediatly was done: and Drohes alone,
beganne to exclaime against women, and to curse their
sexe, for the inconstancie of Mathaburna.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIX.
                     1 How the cittie of Montment was taken by the
meanes of Mathaburna, 2 The deliuery of Drohes out
of prison, and other accidents.
                     
                        SMall was 
                           •
                        he hope of life retained in Drohes
after hee was imprisoned, and the keyes carried
to the Lady, that swore in the morning he
should bee carried to the gallows. Madam
(said Brurant) do your owne wil for my Lord
Barant at his departure commaunded me to obey you in all
things. Tis true, replied she, therefore see my commandem
                           •
                        nts
be effected, and to her selfe swore all the good possible
for the christians. Meruine by this time hauing missed
Drohes, made inquirie for him, but no man could tell anie
newes, wherefore he caused diligent search to be made, till
a squire came and reported that Brurant had borne him prisoner
into the cittie. At which wordes Meruine tore his
haires, lamented, and swowned till Croysant came and
perswaded him to be appeased: for Mathaburna beeing in
the citie there could no mischance befal him, for he knew that
she was Lady and mistresse of the towne, and the proudest
Sarazin durst not disobey her. This gaue some respite to
his mones. Yet he went and threw himselfe vpon his bed,
and would not be fully comforted. In the end hee fell on
his knees, and made a vow to the God of heauen, that if it
would please him to restore his deare friend Drohes, hee

would neuer sleepe on bed, exchange apparrell, drinke wine,
nor eate flesh, neither espouse wife, till he had passed the
seas, and slaine, that inauspitio
                           •
                        s stone of religion false
Barant, the ruine of christendome. This spake Meruine
so effectually, that his desire was graunted (as you shall
heare.) The beautifull Mathaburna whose busie thoughts
were vertues agents, when all the Pagans were laid at
rest, she tooke the keyes and went to Drohes whom she no
sooner sawe but shee imbraced, and with Ioyes teares demaunded
how Meruine did. When Drohes had heard her
he stoode amazed and said, ah inconstant Lady, thou hast
slaine me with thy chaunge and art vnworthy to speake of
him from whom thou art chaunged. Suffice it I knowe
thine intent, and my death is wellcome. Mistake mee
not faire Knight, (said shee) for by my past thoughts I
protest he is the God of my desiers, what I did, was to deceiue
the Pagans, who are waking Dragons that neuer
sleepe about mee; therefore I pray thee tell mee how hee
fareth, and bee not offended at mee. Drohes then resolued
of her trueth replied: Most gratious Madam, hee is troubled
in nothing, but onely for thy want, whom aboue all
thinges hee desireth, onely I doe knowe mine absence is
no pleasure to him, and I doe know that hee will put his
fortune in daunger for my deliuerie: therefore I pray you,
good Ladie, let vs aduise how eas
                           •
                        iest he may be maister of
the Citie, lest in daring too too boldely we repent his hazard.
                     2 All is doone already, said she, therefore come foorth
and follow me, then shee conducted him where hee was
armed, and then bade him come away with three hundred
of his best Knights, and I will here attend his comming.
Drohes effected all her wish, and in briefe, brought the
Prince where the Lady attended; and whoso had 
                           〈◊〉
                        
their meeting, would haue maruelled, and sworne, that

than Loue there could not be a greater godhead. He liuing
in her, and she in his bosome, either embracing the other
with such entirenesse of spirite, that as they had but one
heart, euen so they séemed to haue but one body, vntill
Drohes calling Honour from Loues combate, told them
they might heereafter consume ages in their happinesse.
But now it was fitter to thinke vpon the death of the pagans.
Tis true, tis true, said Meruine, and then with all
spéed they entred, and Meruin desired Mathaburna to guide
him to Brurants chamber, that I may confes him with this
yron mace before he passe to his graue. Then she led him to
the doore, and said, euen here he sleepeth, if you can open it.
That shall soone be done (said Meruine) and then with his
heauy mace he gaue such a blowe, that the d
                           ••
                        re brake into
many peeces into the chamber. When Brurant heard the
sound, he said, what deuill makes this noyse? You are deceiued,
said Meruine, it is a charitable chaplaine, that is
come to set you the right way to your graue, if you refuse
to be baptized, I had rather, said Brurant, loose my head:
Thine owne mouth shall be thy iudge, said Meruine, and
then heauing vppe his mace, hee slue him as he lay, which
séene to Mathaburna, with a smile she asked Meruine how
many he had confessed in that manner, as he passed through
the countrey. A world madame sayd he, and then hee passed
from chamber to chamber, and left not a breathing soule
which refused to be baptized. To be briefe, there was not a
pagan left, which came not créeping on his knees▪ and begged
that he might be baptized. This done, Meruine caused
a most royall and triumphant chariot of gold to be made,
in which he caused Mathaburna to ride and march with him
through all 
                           •
                        he country of Surry. And when those of the
thowne of M
                           •
                        qua vnde
                           •
                        stood of his comming, they met him
with the keys of their g
                           •
                        tes three leag
                           •
                        es from the towne.
There after they had rested foure daies, he marched to Ierusalem.

In briefe, after he had conuerted that mother of
cities, he went to performe his vowes, and visite the holie
sepulchre, which also Mathaburna did. Thence went they
to Babilon, which he conquered by assault, and caused all
to be baptized. To be short in my discourse, in lesse space
than a yeare and an halfe, he brought to the knowledge of
Christian religion more than an hundred mighty cities, all
which cities he held vnder his gouernement, and from euery
one of them took the expertest souldiers to furnish vp his
hoast, so that now departing from Babylon, he returned to
Montment, and then he imbarked himselfe for France: in
which iourney we will leaue him, and returne to speake of
the emperour Charles, and of Barant the Cruell, who continued
his siege against Maiance.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XX.
                     1 How Barant challenged combat of Charles himselfe
alone against three or fiue; 2 How he ouercame all
the fiue.
                     
                        YOu may remember how Barant the Cruell
kept king Charles in Maiance, who was
both besieged with dreadfull war and with
worse famine, wanting both men to 
                           •
                        ight,
and fortune to supply, being as then in the
towne thirty persons, and when Barant
perceiued that the French emperor durst no more giue him
battell, he armed himselfe, and full of pride, hee went and

chalenged Charlemaine to send forth thrée or fiue of the renowmedst
knights he had, to combat with him alone: and
if they could vanquish him, then his vnrest should haue ending;
otherwise they should be thralls to his mercy. Charlemaine
at this offer stoode astonished yet pondering well,
he promised in seuen dayes to giue him an answer: in the
meane space he consulted with his barons, but neuer came
to any conclusion: the last day, as they were in consultation
they might heare Barant crying at the port, Where is this
Charles of France? where are his champions? What, shall
I be combated with, yea▪ or no? As he spake these wordes
king Charles came vpon the walles, and told him that hée
should, for fiue knights within were ready for the battell,
onely he desired hostage for performance of the articles: to
that Barant accorded and sent into the city two noble Pagans,
whom the king caused to be imprisoned: then issued
out of the city armed, himselfe, duke Naymes, the Prince
Loys, young Dion of Nantuell, and Andri of Holland,
they all marched on foot, for the famine had not left them a
horse to ride on, and being come into the listes, Barant
entred mounted and armed excéeding royally, who seeing
them on foot, demanded why they were not on horsebacke▪
answer was made by Charlemaine, That they had not an
horse loft aliue within the Citie. By Mahomet (saide Barant)
I will not loose so much honour as to combat with
men halfe armed, and therefore instantly sent for the best
horses of his campe, and mounted them, and gaue them
launces into their ha
                           •
                        ds, and then sounding trumpets,
they began the battell.
                     2 Most terrible was the first incounter, where the christians
running all together broke their sta
                           •
                        es with such furie,
that they ouerthrew both Barant and his horse together,
but he quickely recouered himselfe againe, who inraged

for the death of his horse, went against the christians
with Entrant naked in his hand and at the first blow stroke
Andri of Holland dead to the ground, which seene to
Charles and the rest, all at once brauely assaulted him, but
with Entrant the defended himselfe like a man of immortall
resolution: intollerable was he fight on euery side, and
many prayers Charles made vnto heauen, but the eares of
the Almightie were stopped against him▪ because of the ciuill
dissention he causlesse beganne in Danmarke. By this
time Barant strooke prince Loys with huge force on the
helme; but the sword turning in his hand, lost his pewer
of doing euill, onely glauncing by his shield it fell vpon his
horse, and cut his head from his body, so that Loys was
forced to fall, and that so vnfortunately, that the horse falling
vpon him he was not able to rise againe for the worlds
riches: wich was worse than death to Charles, when he
beheld it, whose fortune was like his sonnes mischiefe, for
at the next blowe he cutte off the head of his horse, but the
emperour in a trice recouered his féete againe, but withall
was sore wounded in one of his thighes, and that so mortally
that hee was forced to withdraw from the prease; which
to duke Naymes was worse than poyson, who followed
their footesteppes in miserie, being stricken from his horse,
and intollerably wounded: to Dion the like euill chaunced,
whose horse flaine, himselfe was taken prisoner; and with
him thother three, whose wounds left no force to rule their
weapons. To be briefe, they were all imprisoned in Barants
tents, who triumphed at his owne glorie, which he
thought worthy a godhead: but within foure dayes after
newes was brought to him of Meruines army, which was
then within tenne leagues of his camoe.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     1 How Meruine incountred Baham the son of Belmarine
with ten thousand pagans that were forraging,
who were all conquerd except thre
                           •
                        , 2 How Baham
renounced 
                           
                              •
                           ahomet, 3 How the three that escaped
reported the action vnto Barant, who slew one
of them for bringing such euill newes.
                     
                        
                           MEruine (saith the historie) trauelled with so
earnest desire, not taking rest, that he came
within ten leagues of the hoast of Barant
the Cruell, at what time an espiall came to
him, and gaue him intelligence of an army
of Pagans to the number of ten thousand that marched not
farre off towards Barants campe, bearing thither aboundant
store of all manner of prouision, which he no sooner did
heare but he told Drohes that it behooued them to be partners
of their banquet; whereupon he marched to a wood,
by which of necessity they must passe, and when they were
come within a cariere thereof, Meruine gaue them a braue
charge, the sodainnesse whereof amazed Baham: but being
inforced by extreamitie, he incouraged his followers,
and requited the onset. The battell was hot for alitle space,
but the intolerable blowes of Meruine too too much for any
man to beare, put the poore Pagans to their wittes ends,
who séeking to flie mischiefe, found themselues so inclosed
with mischiefe, that they were inforced to intertaine him
as their best vnwelcommed companion: yet amongest all,
thrée escaped, who with the wings of feare were carried beyond

feare; yet feare being stil in their bosomes, the rest were
put to the sword, onely Baham su
                           ••
                        iued, to whom Prince
Meruine offered many fauours, if hee would renounce his
false god▪ which he vtterly refused: then Meruine with his
sword stroke him and felled him to the ground, and 
                           ••
                        ue his
horse vnder him: Then flocked the Christians about him,
and had slaine him, if Meruin had not beene his redeemer.
                     2 When Meruine had saued Baham from the mul
                           •
                        itude
of swordes, hee offered him againe mercy, if hee would renounce
Mahomet; Baham seeing his foo
                           •
                        e in the doore of
death, and all hope fled from his knowledge, kneeled downe
to Meruin and saide, wonder of knighthood, I yeeld to thee,
and giue my sword which is mine honour to thy disposing,
vowing henceforth to renounce Mahomet, and al false gods;
in witnesse whereof my desire is to be baptized, Meruine reioyced
at these words, and tooke him to fauor.
                     3 By this time the three that escaped from the christians
swords had so hasted, that they were now come to the Pagan
hoste, where they found Barant the Cruel threatening
Charles with death, if he would not renounce his God, and
fall downe before Mahomet: to the which, the good emperor
gaue but a little or a carelesse attention. When they were
approched, they fel on their knées, one of them saying▪ Neuer
to be conquered prince and god of nations, know, wee bring
thée heauie and vnspleasant news, for Baham of belmarin
and his 10000 Followers whome thou hadst sent foorth to
forage about the Country, were incountred with a heroicall
Christian, accompanied with an army of redoubted Chiualiers;
by whom he and his Armie are all 
                           •
                        laine and discomfited:
therefore aduise your Highnesse what to doo, for not
anie man is able to withstand that Christian; who is vndoubtedly
a diuell sent from the depth of hell, and no earthly

creature. When Barant heard this speech he rouzd himselfe
and (full of more than lunaticke ang
                           •
                        r) with his fist he strake
the messenger dead to the ground, for being the authour of
such bad reportings: from whence rose this Prouerbe, He
is euill come that euill brings. The other two seeing their
Companion dead, fledde from his presence, and concealed
themselues. Gribouart his Counsailour had chid him, for
his rashnesse, and with sweete words layde a 
                           •
                        léepe his anger,
then were they sent for againe, and Barant askt if it
were true their fellow had sworne: and they swore by holy
Mahomet it was. Then grew Barants wrath so great,
that he could not speake of a long time: in the end, when
his words had libertie, (after manie outragious cursings)
hee commaunded the messengers to bee imprisoned, vowing,
if the news fell out contrarie, to make their deaths a liuing
example. Then hee caused an hundred thousand to
arme themselues▪ and marched foorth, to trie if it were
iust or no King Belmarine did conduct them, vowing to
reuenge (with the death of manie thousand Christians) his
Sonnes misfortune. After their departure, Charlemaine
and his fellowe Prisoners fell to argue of this occurrent,
wondring what Christians they should bee▪ that should vndertake
this wonderfull enterprise▪ As I liue (said Naymes)
I cannot gesse who it should bee onely this last night I
dreamt▪ that the famous Duke Oger was risen againe, and
come to deliuer vs. Then (said Charlemaine) thus doo I
prophecie; God hath deliuered Meruine the Sonne of that
mightie one, and it is onely hee that must be our ransome.
Thus talkt they as they were in prison of Meruine, who
marched on so fast, that now he was come within the sight
of an hundred thousand, that passed on in a most tumultuous
disorder.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     1 How Barants hundred thousand were ouerthrowne
by Meruine. 2 How Barant then came with all his
hoast, exeept three hundred, and marched against
the Christians.
                     
                        WHen Meruine had taken a perfect view of the
Pagan army comming towards him, he diuided
his hoast into thrée battalions, and rode
from ranke to ranke, giuing such incouragement,
that like the méeting of long absent
Friends, so was warre welcome into their bosomes. This
while the Pagans like mad men came running, one here,
one there, and another in another place, in such disorder, that
ioyning with the Christians, they were slaine like gnats,
or new borne infants. The crie of them was so horrible,
that it was heard to the campe where Barant lay, who instantly
caused euery man to be in a readinesse, but sware,
not to leaue his tents till hee had newes of the Conquest:
but there remained very few to bring tidings, death was so
bitter amongst them. Of all the Pagans, king Butifart
was most worthy in armes, and made the greatest slaughter
of the Christians, till Drohes incountring him, at the
first blowe strake off his left arm
                           •
                        , and at the next, claue
his helmet and head downe euen to his téeth. And then
beganhe a second out-crie, which was heard euen vnto the
Citie of Maiance▪ the noyse whereof added vigour to the
Christian hearts; so that they spared not any, but put all to
the sword that durst abide an incountring, an hundred only

escaping, the rest slaine or taken prisoners. After this Conquest,
Meruine called all his army together, and after prailes
giuen to God, he commanded them to sit downe and
refresh themselues with victualls: for he vnderstood by one
of his prisoners, that at midnight Barant was minded to
giue them new battell. When they had refreshed them
selues, Meruine retired himselfe and his army vnto a fortified
place, to which there was but a streight and narrow
way for passage: where hauing pitched his tents, he tooke
Drohes aside, and saide: The reason why I haue retired
my selfe is, for that we are neare our enemies, and mine
army consisteth of many nations, and by much more than
I dare wholy trust, therefore, sith there is but this streight
entrance to annoy vs▪ you and I this night will watch and
gard it, and 20000 to second vs, whilest the rest shall take
their repose quietly. To this Drohes condescended, putting
euery thing in execution with great care. During the
which time, the fugitiue Pagans that were runne from
the batt
                           ••
                        l, made such speed, that they came into Barants
campe, crying, O prince Barant, prince Barant, thou art
much too slowe in thy reuenge, for thine army is ruined,
dead and conquered, the Christians vndoubtedly haue gotten
the god of warre from Heauen, and no mortall man is
able to indure his prowesse: for if he once strike, whomsoeuer
he toucheth, he is but a dead man. What is he quoth
Barant, thou so extollest to be thus famously renowmed?
I know not answered the Pagan, but I haue heard them
all call his name Meruine. Charles standing by and hearing
this, could not containe his ioy within his owne bosome,
but told the Duke Naymes; Now is thy vis
                           ••
                        n effected,
and the renowmed Prince Meruine will giue vnto
vs free liberty. Barant on the other part seemed to reioyce
more than the Christians, saying; Now shall my fame at
                        
                           •
                        aine
an euerlasting Crowne, for to morrow next before

the middest of the day, I will not leaue of all his number
one breathing Christian.
                     2 Then commaunding a trumpet to be sounded, he presently
sommooned al his host together, and all his elephants,
which were infinite in number, and with them departed
towards Meruine, leauing but onely 300. to guard his
Tents and the Emperour, with the other prisoners. Barant
himselfe marched the last man, and sware by Mahomet,
that whosoeuer turned his backe for feare of a Christian,
he himselfe would slay him. Briefly to speake, Barant
at last came where Meruin had fortified himselfe with
charriots and other carriages, himselfe and Drohes guarding
the entraunce with 20000 souldiers, all on foote; yet
with solempnity protesting, that whosoeuer would enter,
should for his daring presumption forfeit his life for raunsome.
By this time Barants army came and assaulted the
charriots, and turned them ouer and ouer to make themselues
a passage, at last came to the entrance, where Meruine
and Drohes were: who made such a slaughter of the
infidels as was hideous to behold. In briefe▪ before the sun
arose, there were 40000 pagans slaine, and not one christian.
The sunne being risen, Meruine saluted it with great
ioy, causing all his trumpets to sound, remoued thrée charriots,
and made way for his army to issue out, incouraging
them so, that he thought himselfe vnworthy to liue, that
aduentured not to die for the honour of so heroicall a Commander.
Mathaburna all this while was garded by Croisant,
and two thousand Christians, the rest all in a rout
assailed the Pagans, wounding or killing all with whom
they incountred. Now beganne the battell to be extreame
and fearefull, Meruine shewing himselfe still vnuanquishable
Meruine: 24. he slew ere his lance broke, and so many
more with his sword, all in a moment; he slew also the

king Orband, and diuers other kings. Amongst the Christians
there was a yong Gentleman of Ierusalem, that
with one blow claue a pagan from the head to the téeth;
which Meruine seeing laughed at, swearing to make him
a knight, and did so. In briefe, so coragious were the Christians,
that now the pagans stood amazed, and durst not
come neare either Meruine or Drohes, so dreadfull they
were. All this while Mathaburna wore out her time in
praying for the happy estate of her Lord Meruine; whose
valor so far extended, that there was not a Pagan of account
left to assaile them, but now began to take flight: the
which Barant beholding, he railed on Mahomet, till a certaine
king came to him, and said, O my lord, why are you
now leaden footed, or so 
                           •
                        low to enter into the battell? Looke,
looke, how your people are conquered, and onely two are
lords of this great triumph. Barant would not heare an
end of his speach, but like a hungrie wolfe put sput
                           •
                        es to
his horse, and charging his launce, ranne in amongest the
Christians with such violence, that he threw him dead to
the ground at the first incounter: but when his lance was
broken, hee drew his sword, and with it did miracles vpon
miracles, killing all that eue
                           •
                         he touched▪ which when the
Christians saw, they beganne to flee from one side of the

                           ••
                        eld vnto an other: but still he pursued them, making
hauocke of them. At the length (for their safeties) they entred
amongst the chariots, but he followed them crying:
Where is the traitor that hath béene the ruine of mine armie?
let him come and trie his fortune with me. And as
he was thus in speaking, he behold Mathaburna, whom
kindely he saluted, and saide: Ladie, well met, assure thy
selfe, this day Ile reuenge my selfe and thee of that monstrous
villaine, that hath brought thee hither, and detaines
my loue his prisoner. Thus spake Barant that imagined
the Lady had loued him. Shée the poore soule, being in

more than a fearefull amazement to behold her horror so
neare her. At this, Croisant and his company charged Barant,
but in lesse than an houre he slew halfe of them. Of
which Meruine being aduertised, with al speed came to the
rescue, saying to Barant; Traitour, thou hast forfeited thy
life with too much hardines, and they daring is not pardonable.
Barant (with stedfast eies 
                           ••
                        xt on him) demanded first
his name. My name qd he is Meruine. Meruine said Barant,
O execrable traitor: tis thou that hast 
                           •
                        laine my men,
robbed me of my Loue, and it is thou whom I look for, and
of thée Ile be reuenged: yet if thy valure equall the fame
that flies of thée, accord, that thou and I, in single combat,
maintaine ech against other our fortunes: these articles agreed
vnto, That if I be vanquished, all paynim countries
shall do thée homage, and Charles with many other prisoners
shalbe restored: but if I vanquish thée, that then thou
shalt fall downe and adore Mahomet. Pagan qd Meruin,
I s
                           •
                        e thine infinite pride, yet am I willing to performe thy
will: but this withall added, that thou send for Charles
and the other Christian prisoners to behold the combat, and
Ile oppose to them Mathaburna, whom thou so much desirest.
It shalbe done qd Barant, and then sounded a generall
retrait, ech armie returning to their tents. Yet vnderstand,
that of the 200000 pagans which were at the beginning
of the battell, there was now but 7000; and the christians
that were 100000, now were but 24000, all the
rest or the most of them slaine by the sword of Barant.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     1 Of the single combat betwixt Meruine and Barant,
and of the death of Barant. 2 The deliuery of Charls
and the other Christians, and the ouerthrow of the
Pagans.
                     
                        NOw were the Christians retired, and the pagans
also, to whom Barant reported his conclusion
with Meruine, and therefore disarmed
himselfe, commaunding new armes to
be prouided for him: Meruine on the other
part did the same. When Barant was newly armed again
to his liking, he mounted vpon his horse, took a launce into
his hand, and marched vnto the lists, and with him Charls
and thother prisone
                           •
                        s, as Meruine had desired, who by this
time (mounted on Passant) with a lance in his hand, bringing
Mathaburna on a palfrey trapt in gold, came also into
the lists. There found he Barant, to whom he saide, See
Barant, this is the beauty of my life, for her sake this day
shall thy fortune or mine be buried. Thou art a foole quoth
Barant, for were there ten such as thy 
                           •
                        elfe, they could not
be my conquerors. Barant said Meruine, let thy sword be
thine Orator; for in despite of thée, I giue thée a shameful
de
                           ••
                        ance. This said, they retired either from other, and
charging their lances, met with a fearefull incounter; Barant
breaking his staffe, and doing no further mischiefe:
but Meruine assailed him so couragiously, that piercing his
shield through, he ouerthrew Barant to the ground, greatly
astonished with the stroke; yet notwithstanding in a veryie

moment he raised himselfe againe, and vowed by Mahomet,
that if he could but fasten hand on Mer
                              •
                           ine, hee
would make him for euer charging staffe againe. When
Meruine had perfourmed his course, and was returned, he

                           ••
                        ied: Barant, either pay me for the lodging thou hast taken
possession of, or by the holy virgin Ile haue thy head
for a gage. When Barant saw he made a ieast of him, he
                           •
                        
drew Entrant, giuing Meruine such a blow on his shield,
that clea
                           •
                        ing it in the middest, he pierced his currats, and
wounded him in the body, but yet to little or no purpose,
Meruine at the first drawing knew the sword, and said: I
pray thée Barant, tell me how thou gotst that sword. By
Mahomet quoth he, the master of my fortune, and he who
will giue me conquest ouer thée, I meane the powerfull
spirite Mutafier, that hath calculated my starres, and assured
me that no man shalbe able to ouercome me, but he
who neuer tasted womans milke, twas euen he that gaue
it to mee: and assured me at that time moreouer, that the
knight that owed it, should neuer be deliuered from a hellish
prison, where he was in durance. Barant, Barant, qd
Meruine, seest thou this Mace that hangeth by my saddle,
assure thee in despite of thy master Mutafier, it shall strike
thy life from thy body, except thou wilt renounce Mahomet,
and then thy peace and my loue shall ioyne together.
Barant madded with his words, tooke the yron ends of his
launce, and swore to Meruine, if he would not descend, he
would kill his horse vnder him. Then Meruine alighted,
and sware that his dissention should cost him deare 
                           •
                        re they
parted, Passant bowing his knees to the earth, that his
lord might alight the more easily. Now stood they one against
the other like two angry lions, continuing a dismall
and vnconstant battell, no man being able to iudge which
way Uictory was affected: in the end they closed together,
and ouerthrew ech other, tumbling and striuing til the day

was shut vp by the euening, and the darke night appeared,
at what time Barant requested Meruine to deferre the ending
of the combat til the next morning, to which the prince
agréed, because that by the meanes of Mutafier that then
dwelt in the pagans body, he was much ouertoiled. When
ech army was returned to their tents, in the dead of night
Barant askt the reason of Mutafier, why he could not that
day vanquish Meruine. O Barant saide the diuell, be not
offended, for he is the most valiant, wise, resolute and fortunate
champion of the world: and know, if it had not bin
for me, this day he had many times slaine thée, therefore
I charge thee, that to morrow thou hold with him neither
faith nor loyaltie, but by any treason whatsoeuer, seeke his
destruction, otherwise is he neuer to be vanquished, and
with all the power I am able, assure thy selfe of mine assistance.
At these wordes the diuell entred againe into the
pagan: and the night hauing her discharge, the cleare day
appeared, when according to his former order he came into
the field, and armed with Mutafiers promises, called out
Meruine, who sumptuously appointed, entred the listes,
then they charged their lances, and incountred each other,
piercing their shields, and breaking their staues vpon their
curaces, and that with such f
                           •
                        ri
                           •
                        , that they were both ouerthrowne
to the ground. Passant féeling himselfe deliuered
of his master, went first to Barants horse and strangled
him, and then to Barants selfe, whom also he had strangled,
if Mutafier in a fearefull shape had not shewed him
selfe vnto him, and made the horse fearfully flie away. By
this time Meruine had stricken Barant to the ground, but
in a trice he arose and made requitall of his sorrow, giuing
Meruine such a blowe with Entrant the good sword, that
passing through the helmet, it gaue him a sore wound, and
made both his knees to kisse the earth: but when he recouered
himselfe, he ranne and closed with Barant, and by

maine power ouerthrew him, and in the fal laid hold on Entrant,
which he recouered from the pagan, then rising, the
pagan took from him his 
                           •
                        ace, and then began a new battell,
till at last Meruine gathering all his forces together,
and turning Entrant aloft, stroke Barant such a blow, as
in despite of all resistance he claue his head.
                     2 Then fell Barant downe dead, in whom the Diuell
challenged possession: and then the Christians assailed the
Pagans, whom in an instant they ouerthrew, 4000. being
willing to receiue baptisme: no sooner were the pagans
vanquished, but Meruine gaue all that they possessed amongest
his souldiers, whilest in the meane space Charles
went to Meruine, and doing him all the honour he could
deuise, said: Thou colume of our religion, and wonder of
knighthood, to thée will I surrender the crowne of France,
for, but thée, no man is worthy to receiue it. Emperour
quoth Meruine, farre be my thoughts from that imagination,
thy crowne is thy birth right, and Ile be thy seruant.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIIII.
                     1 How Meruine maried Mathaburna, 2 of the great
solempnity at Maiance for ioy thereof.
                     
                        AFter these speaches betwéene the Emperour
and Meruine, they raised their tents and did
march towards the citie of Maiance, all the
Cleargy and Commons thereof comming in
processions to meet them, in which ceremonious
sort they entred into the city, being richly adorned clean

throughout, and all the Ladies and gentlewomen standing
in windowes to beholde the bea
                           •
                        teous Meruine, who on
the one side, and the king on the other, marched with Mathaburna
betwéene them. No sooner was Meruine discouered,
but euery creature both yoong and olde cried out in
the pra
                           ••
                        e of Meruine their redéemer, and that so boldely,
that Meruine stoode almost astonished at their clamors,
that he passed on till he came to the Market place, where he
found many young Gentlemen and maides, who to diuers
well consorted instruments carrolled many excellent songs
in the praise of Meruine; thence they marched to the Pallace,
where lighting from their horses they ascended vp into the
hall, where was gathered together all the excellencie of

                           〈◊〉
                        , playing so melodiously, that Meruine was
rauished with the hearing: of their banquetting, dauncing,
and other reuelles, I will not speake, but passe them ouer
to imagination. After the first nights repose Charles dispatched
his Heraults into Fraunce, to carry the newes of
these occurents, charging euery one both noble and vnnoble,
all Ladies married and vnmarried: also, all those
whosoeuer had any skill in musicke, that they faile not, vppon
paine of disobedience, but to appeare at Maiance on the
great feast of Pentecost, where his Highnesse would keepe
an open and royall court. All his will was doone, and euery
one was present at the day, which was wonderfully
solemnized, Charles wearing his emperiall crowne on his
head, so also did Meruin, who by his conquest was king of
Ierusalem, of Mequa, of 
                           •
                        abylon, of Lilfort, of Damascus,
of Mon
                           •
                        ment, and diuers other realmes: but Mathaburna
that day ware no crown, because as yet she 
                           〈◊〉
                         not his wife,
only she ware a rich chaplet on her head, all inchased with
pretious stones. When dinner that day was finished▪
                        Charles gaue charge to all his Barons, that the next day
after, they should be in all their royalties, and to shew their

excellencies, as well in feasting as in running at the tilte
because it should be the wedding day of the famous prince'
Meruine. Then (notwithstanding that Mathaburna
had many Ladies with her) he sent al the Ladies of France,
to offer her their seruice, which they did. After this first day
was passed with solempne disports, the morrow after all the
Citie beganne their ioyes, and in the morning, Drohes,
Croysant, Baham, Belmarine, and all the gallants of
France went and gaue king Meruine good morrow, who
rising, Drohes and Croysant made him ready, adorning
him with most rich abillements, imbordered with orientall
pearles, and inchased with most pretious stones, as Diamonds,
Rubies, Carbuncles, Turkies, Emerauds, Saphyres,
and many other. When he was ready, he set the
crowne of Ierusalem on his head, and imediately he went
into the Emperours chamber, where he remained vntill such
time as Mathaburna was fully adorned after the French
maner, whom for her beauties sake euery one called a second
Hellen. Then came the king crowned, the Dukes, Marqueses,
Earls, and Barons, with crownets on their heads
according to the manner▪ and brought in the king Meruine,
who no sooner sawe his mistresse, but his heart capered for
ioy. Then after certaine ceremonies they descended downe
into the hall, whereall the princes of his army wayted for
him, then they went, and being mounted on golden chariots
rid to the great cathedrall church attended on most royally
in this manner. First went fiftie gentlemen most richly
attired, fiue and fiue in a ranke; then an hundred who carried
a hundred banners in which were the armes of the Nations
which he had conquered, and the last and the greatest
was that of Ierusalem: after these marched Fourchier erle
of Brandis, who bare Meruines golden spurres, clad in a
vesture of gold: then Baham in like ornaments with Meruines
shield; sutable to them the King of Nubiaes sonne

with Meruines helmet, and lastly, in most rich imbosted armor
of gold went Drohes bearing naked Meruins famous
sword Entrant; then came Meruine himselfe, Charles riding
on his right hand▪ and Loys on his left, after them the
twelue péeres, the dukes, marques
                           •
                        es, earles, barons, and
knights: and in this manner came hée into the Temple,
Mathaburna following them in as great state amongst the
Ladies. When they were both entered within the Temple,
the Archbishop of Maiance married them▪ and then
sang hymnes and infinite praises, all the troope offering vp
rich gifts for sacrifices.
                     2 After euery seuerall ceremonie perfourmed, they returned
as they came most orderly to the pallace, where they
banquetted, triumphed, and reuelled most gallantly,
which ended, the Knightes went and armed themselues,
and the Ladies were carried to beholde the Iustes, in the
which Meruine would needes be an actor, so also woulde
Charles, and Naymes▪ Meruine at the first incounter
ouerthrew fiue and twenty, no man hauing power to sustaine
him: then came Charles and humbly besought him
to withdrawe himselfe, else would their sport bee little,
because his prowesse, would put all men past running. I
am well pleased said Meruine, and then h
                           •
                        e departed, and
came and sate with the Ladie Mathaburna beholding the
iustes, which continued vntill euening, whose black browes
compelled them to giue ouer. Then the tables being adorned
they went to their s
                           •
                        ppers, after supper to dauncing,
masking, and all manner of reuelling, which beeing grown
a little olde there came bishops, who foorthwith with the
Emperour and with the good duke Naymes conueyed the
bridegroome to the Brides chamber, where after manie
blessings and ceremonies they lodged him, who that night

(by the will of God) begot on her a sonne, whose name afterward
was called Orient. As soone as it was day light,
Drohes entred into the chamber, who appareled Meruine,
and the Ladies of France that adorned Mathaburna: then
were solempne Masses sung, and other deuises. The feast
and triumphs continuing eight dayes, at the expiration
whereof Charles returned into Fraunce, taking leaue of
Meruine, and so likewise did all the gallants of Fraunce,
leauing no more in Maiance but Meruine, his Queene,
and his old souldiers, amongst whom he diuided all his nations,
except Lilfort, where himselfe determined to raigne:
to Drohes he gaue Montment, and the countrey adioy
                           •
                        
                        ing,
deliuering him an hundred thousand to gard him to his
kingdome, to Baham he gaue Damascus; to Croisant M
                           •
                        
                        qua,
and to euery other Prince that had serued him, other
lands and segniories. This done, he remaind in Denmark
till his Quéene was deliuered of a beautifull son, whom he
named Orient, according to the Letter which hee found
when hee got Passant. And after that his sonne Oriient
was once a yeare olde and vpwards, hee had a maruellous
great and earnest desire to go into Iewrie, to plant true religion
in that country, which hee did, yet it was a tedious
time before: wherefore for a while we will leaue him, and
speake of Gratiana the Fairie, who fell desperate for her
euill déeds towards Meruine.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     1 How Mutafier deceiued the Fairie Gratiana, and begot
of her a monster named Orke, that had three
heads. 2 And of other accidents.
                     
                        AS the storie saith, in that part, that by succéeding
times, the Christians liuing without
warres (the remembrauncer of sinnes) they
beganne to commit diuers outragious and
damnable offences, against the maiestie of
God, at the which Mutafier triumphed, making their
fall a staire to his glorie: wherefore he went to the woods,
where that desperate fairie Gratiana remained, and comming
to a poore cottage, where she liued, he took vpon him
the likenese of a woman, and knocking at the dore, which
the Fairie opened, desired
                           •
                        lodging for that night, with hir,
to which Gratiana gaue consent: so he stayed there beating
his thoughts howe hee might worke some notable
mischiefe. Anone as they were set to repast, Gratiana asked
whither she was trauelling all alone vnaccompanied.
Faire sister (saide the Deuil Mutafier) knowe that I and
my company haue liued in a wildernesse in great pouertie,
hauing nothing but bread and water, till they all are dead,
but I only reserued, for whom I sorrowed, and thought
to haue led my life in continuall solitarinesse, till two learned
Clarkes told me, that such a kinde of life was damnable.
After that they demaunded of me, whether I were a
maide or wife, or had in my life time accompanied with any
man, and I told them neuer, for which cause they blamd
me excéedingly, approuing by the sacred Scriptures, that

the woman that liues without the knowledge of man, shall
not sée the fa
                           •
                        e of God. Many other things they tolde me,
vntill one of them for charitie sake accompanied me, and
tooke my sinnes vpon him. Alas q
                           •
                         
                        Gratiana, what shal
I do? my sinnes are infinite▪ Ile take them vpon me saide
Mutafier. In briefe, so earnestly he tempted her, and begot
of her a most vgly and deformed thrée headed monster▪
thence he conueyed her into a vast and strange wildernes,
where neuer mortall footstep was before discouered, and
there she was deliuered of her aborti
                           •
                        e fruit, which wa
                           •
                        
called Orke, because, in that desolate habitation was not
to be séene any thing, by iij. headed monsters called Orke.
                     
                     2 This new borne monster had more then the strength
of sixe men, two of his heads looked forward, and the third
behind him, euery head had a beard, his eies were like melions,
and in his mouthes teeth thrée fingers long, and in a
monasterie at Ciuill in Spaine at this houre is his picture,
which king Loys caused to be drawne and erected there in
honour of Prince Meruine, his sword Entrant being kept
there for a diuine relique. This diuel-begot monster within
twenty daies became so fierce and vncontrolable, that he
ouercame all those of the forest, wherefore Mutafier his father
gaue him armes almost impregnable, and commanded
him to goe into Fraunce, where if he found Meruine, he
charged him to beare him such deadly hatred, that he should
not rest till he had brought him to a shamefull end: and also
that he should spare no Christian till he had laid the country
vtterly desolate: yet before thou goest saith he, goe vnto
king Turniquant of Orima, and intreate his aide to goe
with thée, which his damned sonne did accordingly. But
when hee was once come within Orima, all the Pagans
came and hid themselues for feare of his presence. From
thence he marched towards the pallace, where they locked

vp the gates, and told the king of the Orkes arriuall, who
laughed at their cowardi
                           •
                        e, vntill he heard the Orke crie 
                           •
                        o
them to open the gates, or he would destroy the city. The
King as then was set at a table with his daughter Beat
                              •
                           ce
who in priuate was brought to be a Christian by her nurse,
hauing instructed her in all the points of christian religion.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     1 How the king Turniquant of Oriam assembled a
great number of his people, and went in ayde of the
Orke, 2 how he destroyed all Normandie and Bri
                           •
                        
                        taine:
3 and of other occurrents.
                     
                        WHen King Turniquant heard the clamors of
the Orke, he arose from the table and went to
the gates; where (seeing the hugenesse of the
Monster) a trembling feare came ouer his bodie;
yet (with fained spéeches) hée intreated
him to doo him no hurt, and he would perfourme whatsoeuer
he commaunded him. I aske nothing said the Orke,
but that thou wilt be my subiect, and I will conduct thée into
France; where I will vtterly destroy the Countrey, if
they will not returne and beléeue in Mahomet. When
as Turniquant heard these words, hée exchaunged feare
into reioycings, and made the gates to bee set open, and
(with great honour) brought the Monster into his Pallace,
where the fairie Beatrice was; whom the Orke (at
the first sight) demanded of her father, and in recompence
hée would giue him the Crowne of Fraunce. All the

which Turniquant was proude of, but the poore Ladie
went and lame
                           •
                        ted exceedingly. Now with all speede that
could be, the King mustered vp his men, to the number of
two hundred thousand; with which the Orke and hee passed
(carrying the faire Beatrice with them) to Ierusalem,
which he so quickly conquered. Thence he went vnto Babylon,
and did the like; and to all the other Christian Countryes,
euen to Montment, where they gaue a strong assault,
gainst which Drohes was not able to indure; so the
Towne was taken: yet by the prouidence of heauen, Drohes
escaped, who flying into a Wildernesse, consumed his
life in great pouertie. Thus the Orke subuerted what
Meruine had planted; not leauing a Church or Monasterie,
which was not vtterly raced.
                     3 Thence (conducted by the diuells ayde) hee came
to Saint Michaels Mount in France, and thence marched
through Base Normandie and Base Brittaine; thence
to High Normandie, making all places both waste and desolate.
The newes whereof wounded King Charles,
chiefly when he heard the description of the Monster: yet
he assembled his Men at Armes to goe against him; but
not with such expedition, but that the false Orke and the
Pagans were first come to Montmarre, where it was pittifull
to beholde with what cryes the poore people ran into
Paris, one carrying his bed, another his coffer, some their
wiues, and some their children.
                     3 By this time Charles brought downe his Armie,
and set vpon the Orke and Turniquant, betweene whom
was a long and dreadfull Battaile. Charles slew a number
of Pagans with his owne hand, crying euer, Saint
Dennis and good Fortune, this day shall the Pagans perish;
the good Duke Naymes did as much, and vpon his

Enemies shewed wonderfull feates of Knighthood, ouerthrowing
here one, and there another; so that it was excellent
to behold the fall of the Pagans. But this triumph indured
but a moment, for the strong King Turniquant and
the false Orke (in lesse than an hower) ouerthrew euery
soule of them: because the Parisians (vppon sight of the thrée
headed Monster) fled away, and durst not one of them indure
in Battaile; so that the Emperour was compelled to
sound a Retrayt, and was the first that entered into the Citie
of Paris, so hideous was the beholding of the diuels Infant,
and all the Christians followed: whom the Orke in
pursute slew fiue vpon fiue, and twentie vppon twentie, to
the piteous amazement of all men▪ In this Chase, the Orke
had entered the Citie, but for especiall regard: but finding
himselfe deceiued, hée cryed at the Ga
                           •
                        es; False traitor
Charles come foorth, and bring twentie with thée against me
alone▪ or if they be not 
                           •
                        now, bring thirtie, and my selfe will
giue them Battaile. Thus triumphed he in his owne pride:
but before any long time expyre, a single man shall bring
his thrée heads to a Funerall: which can be none other but
the famous King Meruine, as you shall heare.
                     
                        Charles all this while was mightely perplexed, and not
causelesse; for of all that he had brought, there was no more
left aliue but thirtie thousand; neither durst Charles the space
of a yeare looke abroad, for feare of the Orke: yet at length
he found meanes to send to the King of England, who came
to his ayde with fortie thousand well approoued and valiant
Englishmen; yet so dreadfull was the Monster, that they
stood in doubt to passe, but remained thr
                           •
                        e dayes and nights
at Saint Dennis, nere Paris, of which the Orke had no
tidings, holding all that time a Counsayle, how the King
of France should be aduertised of their comming, that ioyntly
they might assayle the Orke on euerie 
                           ••
                        de.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     
                        
                           •
                         How king Charles had intelligence of the King of
Englands comming: 3 of their assault on both sides:
2 how Meruine came, who had conquerd againe all
that the Orke had wonne: 4 how Mathaburna gaue
charge, that no man should speake of the warres before
Paris: 5 how an Angell appeared to Meruine.
                     
                     
                        WHen the King of England had held a long
consult, one of his trayne came vnto him, and

                           •
                        ade him write his Letters, and (in despite of
all the Monsters in the World) he would
attempt to carrie them to Paris: which resolution
the King commended, and foorthwith dispatcht him;
who came to Paris about midnight, and threwe his Letters
ouer the walls: which the next morning béeing found,
were presented to the King; who reading them, vnderstood
the couragious English Kings resolue; wherefore he commaunded
his Hoast to arme themselues, who were then
thrée score thousand.
                     2 Then standing in readines, they attended to heare
when the Onset should bée giuen, which as soone as hée
heard, he cryed; Montioy, Saint Denis, and then 
                           •
                        allied
foorth, and made the Battaile fearefull to the Pagans, effecting
wonders. To bée briefe, both the English and
French shewed themselues absolute for courage: but the
Orke made such hauocke of both Nations, that in lesse
than an houre all the Christians fled for their 
                           ••••
                        tios; the

                        Orke (with an axe which Mutafier that night had giuen
him) killing so manie, that few escaped, but onely those in
the vantguard of the Flight. The King of England fled
to Saint Dennis, whom the Orke pursued to the walls of
the Towne then turning backe to his Tents he found the
faire Beatrice wéeping, whome he saluted, and perswaded
to be ioyfull, for that in sixe months space he would crowne
her Quéene of France: but those wordes were worse than
poyson, for than him she estéemed hell no viler, Also all this
while lamented Charles in Paris his crosse fortunes, because
the Monster nowe had béene in France full two yeares, and
layd waste the most fruitfull places in all the Countrey.
                     3 In this pensiuenes wée will leaue him while, to
speake of the renowmed Meruine; who after hee had conuerted
all Iewry, went to Babylon, Ierusalem, and the other
Countreyes, and brought them all backe to Christianitie.
Thence hee went to Montment to visite Drohes,
whom hee 
                           •
                        ound n
                           •
                        t; and therefore sorrowed most exceedingly,
vowing an endlesse reuenge if hee were dead: and
thereupon gaue an assault to the Towne, which presentlie
yeelded, because the greatest part were Christians. So
that Meruine made on Sampson (borne in that Cittie)
their Gouernour, leauing him all his Armie, and returned
alone into his naturall Kingdome of Danske, where
hee found his fayre Queene Mathaburna, and the young
Prince Orient their Sonne: who (with all the Nobles
Burgesss and Commons) most royally and louingly welcomed
him.
                     4 As soone as Mathaburna had brought her royall
Lord to rest, which (after his wearie trauayle) of all other
intertainment was to him best welcome, shee sent priuate
Commaundement to euerie Noble man and Magistrate

that was likely to haue accesse to the King, that as they
tendered the safetie of his priuate Person, and respected the
publique benefite of the Common-wealth, that they in no
case should acquaynt the noble Meruine with the miserable
estate of the Emperour Charles and the other Christians
in France: for (sayd shee) I need not tell you the resolutions
of my Princely Lord your Royall King, should he but
heare the least inckling thereof; to France hée would, to
wofull wretched France: and if to France, whither goeth
my loues Lord and your liues Protector? Euen to the
receptacle of horror, euen to the graue of death: where he
shal combat with Monsters, not men; and not with mortal
Monsters neyther, but that infernall thrée headed Dog of
hell, the vgly Orke, against whose force, men can haue no
force to make resistance. O doe not then, I beseech yee, doo
not make me a Widdow and your selues Fatherlesse, by
acquainting the King with the Estate of France. These
words she deliuered with such aboundance of teares, that
the Nobles and Magistrates greatly commended her zealous
care, and presently commanded, on payne of death,
that no man should shew a heauie countenance, or once
whisper of the Estate of France. Great Feasts and Triumphs
were therefore made throughout, and manie other
pastimes that continued a great part of the night, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the
King was layd in his bed.
                     5 When the hower of midnight was come, there appeared
to him (in his sleepe) an Angell from Heauen, who
like Sunne-shine stood before him, and sayd; Meruine,
the God which created all things, by mee commaundeth
thee, that to morrow thou depart and goe to king Charles
and ayde him against the Christians, who haue besiedged
him, and brought him almost to vtter confusion, by the
meanes of a monstrous thrée headed Orke, against whom

thou must take battell, and the Lord will be thy defender,
wherefore sée thou depart without any notice to the queene
thy wife, lest she should follow thee, which were offensiue
to the heauens. This sayd, the Angell departed, and immediately
Meruine arose, and hauing armed himselfe and
gathered his Souldiors together; told his Queene hee
would passe into Surrey, and make a speedie returne:
wherefore he desired her with her little Sonne Orient to
passe to Lilfort, where they should not faile but méete him.
She gladly agréed, because she feared no place but P
                           ••
                        is.
Thus he departed with threescore thousand, and made such
haste, that he came to Roan; which he found so sackt and
destroyed, that his heart for pittie bled within him. There
he left his Armie, and himselfe alone marched towardes
Paris, finding euery thing as he went destroyed & ruinated▪
When he was come within the sight of the Pagans tents,
hee turned himselfe towardes them, and marched into the
campe with his head vnarmed, and his helmet hanging by
his saddle. Then calling a Pagan vnto him, he desired to
be brought to the sight of king Turniquant. The Pagan
consented, and brought him to his Tent, but the King
was not there, onely he found the faire Beatrice, who at
the first sight knew him to be a Christian: and therefore
demanded what he sought. Madame said he, my busines
is to speake with him that beareth thrée heads on his shoulders.
Friend qd she, if you will but stay here alittle, I wil
go tell the king my father. Doe so good Madame (said he)
but I beséech your Ladieship, stay not long.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     1 How Meruine vndertooke combat against the Orke,
2 of the fight, and the Orkes death, which brought
rest to the Christians.
                     
                        
                           BEatrice instantly went to her father, and tolde
him what she knew touching his request, and
how he would speake with the thrée headed
monster: which the King hearing, he went
and took the Orke with him, who looking terribly
vpon Meruine, whom no lookes could affright, Meruine
stou
                           •
                        ly began saying, Thou that hast dared to destroy
this receptacle of Christianitie, I chalenge thee, if thou darest,
to single combate body to body, with these conditions,
that if thou vanquish me, all this Countrey shall be at thy
disposing: if I shall conquer thee, then thine army shall
returne home againe if they can escape our vengeaunce.
How saiest thou? When Turniquant heard this resolute
Challenge, he demaunded of him his name. Men call me
answered he, Meruine. Which word was no sooner vttered,
but taking the Orke and his daughter aside, he told
many wonders of Meruine, how he had slaine Barant surnamed
the Cruell, with the rest of his famous conquests:
and therefore was now flatly determined by treason to put
him to death. To which his Daughter made answer, that
treason were vile euen in a King, and therefore rather,

since the Orke had vaunted himselfe against twentie, that
now he should trie himselfe against this one single knight,
whom there was no doubt but be would vanquish with
shame, or quickely dispatch of his desperate life. At this
speach the proude Orke reioyced, and swore none but him selfe
should be in that combate: so they went to Meruine
and accorded, drawing certaine articles touching the combate,
which dispatched, Meruine went and told Charles,
to whom he was the welcommest man aliue.
                     2 When the day of battell was come, Meruin, Charls,
Naymes, Loys, and all their army came foorth, and went
to the Pagans tents, where after their othes taken on both
sides, the two champions were brought into the listes armed
at all points, and after the sound of Trumpets they
assailed each other, and Meruine brake his staffe vpon the
Orke, but his armour was so good that he could not hurt
him, only made him recoile tenne foote backeward: at the
which the Orke was angry, who with his battle ax would
haue stricken the prince, but with fine nimblenesse in turning
he auoided it, so that the axe fell into the earth aboue
three foot, then the prince with Entrant strake him a mightie
blow on the head, but could pierce no skin, which seene,
he sheathed his sword, and took his great mace, which hung
by, and with that gaue him such a blow vpon one of his helmets,
that he réeled, and with much adoe held himselfe from
falling: when the Orke felt these intollerable woundings,
he flew vpon Meruine like a tempest, and thinking to hit
him with his diuellish axe, the good horse Passant turned
so nimbly about, that he failed in his purpose, for why there
was no stéele would haue borne out the blow. When the
Orke saw his effectlesse furie▪ he grew mad, often assailing,
and as often failing▪ Then prince Meruine aduancing
himselfe, gaue the Orke such a blowe on the necke, that he

made one of his helmets flie into the middest of the field, so
that one of his heades was disarmed; then drawing his
sword, hée seconded his blowe vppon the Orkes disarmed
head, that he cut away one of his eares, whereat the Orke
raised a most fearefull crie, which put the pagans into a fearfull
affright. Beatrice séeing this, said to her father, My
Lord, this day the Orke will be vanquished, therefore hée
aduised by me, a
                           •
                        d let vs flie to our shippe, to escape worse
danger, the Orke is neither of our country nor kindred, let
vs leaue him to his fortune. Daughter (said Turniquant)
you are too blame, for it he doe ouercome, what shall befall
vs? therefore let vs attend some more of his fortune. Meruine
this while lion-like assailed the Orke, and gaue him
such a monstrous wound on his thigh, that he was no longer
able to sustaine himselfe from falling, yet still held his
axe in such sorte in his hand, that Passant durst not assaile
him. Then beganne the Orke to crie so fearefully that the
Pagans hearing him, trussed vp their tents, and betooke
themselues to flying: which the emperour Charles séeing,
shewed the duke Naym
                              •
                           s saying, sée how they flie and dare
not stay the end of the battel: were it not that I am sworne
to the contrary, they should not escape so easily. Tis true,
(said Naymes) therefore let them go, for the deuill is their
conduct. As they were thus talking, the pagans gote to
their shippes, and with all the haste they could, sailed into
their owne countries: all this while Meruine assailed the
Orke, but by reason of his lying on the ground, hee could
no whit hurt him, wherefore hee alighted downe and commaunded
Passant, if neede compelled him, to come and succour
him; which the Fairie horse well vnderstoode. This
said, Meruine went towards the Orke, and he seeing him
come, bethought himselfe of his best defence; and Meruine
imagining to strike him, the false diuellish Orke thrust his
axe before him with such violence, that hitting Meruine
                        
one blowe vppon the knee, he made him perforce fall to the
ground, which the monster seeing, hee crawled vpon him,
and gaue him many intollerable blowes, whilest Meruine
on the other side drawing foorth a puniard, thought to stab
the monster, but lighting vppon his curaces, the dagger
without hurt brake in two peeces. Then Meruine implored
some diuine helpe in his succour, for the Orke preased
him most extreamely, yet his strength gaue him some remedy.
Whereas the historie reportes, if there had beene
an hundred besides himselfe, the Orke had force to haue
strangled them all. But the strength of Meruine equalled
him euery way: Charles seeing this turmoile, wept exceedingly,
and said to Naymes, What shall we doe, sith the
damned Orke holdes king Meruine in subiection? As they
were thus in talking, Passant seeing his Lord in daunger,
he went to this Orke, and tooke hold of his disarmed head,
in such sort, that in despight of his will, hee made him let
King Meruine goe, who instantly rising tooke his sworde
which lay on the ground: Passant with his teeth tooke hold
of his eare, and Meruine gaue him two such blowes, that
he let his battle axe fall; then doubling his blowe, he cut off
his other two heades: at whose death Mutafier came in
such a tempest, that all Paris trembled. Then seeing his
sonne dead he would haue taken vengeance, but of the horse
he could not, because he was a Fairie; and of the ma
                           •
                        ster
he durst not, because he had heard diuine prayers before the
combate, otherwise he had done some notable mischiefe: but
preuented, he could do nothing, but tooke his sonne and all
his accompliments into hell with him: yet know for a suretie,
that at his departure, he made such a wonderfull storme,
that for the space of a quarter of an houre, the darkest midnight
had a fairer countenance.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     1 How Meruine tooke leaue of Charles and departed.
2 How he went to Ierusalem, and thence was conueyed
into Fairia.
                     
                        THus did the false Orke that monstrous sonne
of the diuell come to his end, beeing slaine in
the thir
                           ••
                        eth moneth of his age, being so inuincible,
that he brought all Fraunce almost desolate,
and so likewise had doone al christendom,
if God had not raised Meruine to be his destroyer. And the
storie saith, that if Meruine hadde béene brought vp with
womans milke, hee could neuer haue conquered the monster.
Now by this time came Charles and the other christians,
who with great honour and solemnitie woulde haue
brought him to the cittie; but he refused, telling the emperour
he must first pay his vowes to the sepulchre of his Sa
                        
                           •
                        iour,
intreating Charles for his sake, to ayde his sonne
Orient when any extremitie should assaile him. Which
when Charles heard he sorrowed excéedingly.
                     2 Thus parted Meruine, whome Charles would no
longer holde, and came to Roan, where his army attended
him, whome hée sent to Lilfort, and bade them charge
Mathaburna his Queene 
                           •
                        o looke carefully to his sonne
Orient, for that hee would goe to Ierusalem. Thus 
                           ••
                        
                        parted
they, and he stayed still in Roan til the wound in his

knee was cured; then he betooke himselfe to the sea: which
hauing ouerpassed, he rode till he came to a forrest, where
the night so sodainly ouertooke him, that he knew not where
to lodge. Now it fell out, that Mutafier to reueng
                           •
                         his
sonnes death, made in this wood an Abbacie▪ and himselfe
like a Nunne. When Meruine espied the house, hee spurred
his horse towards it, but by no meanes coulde hee make
him goe, but euermore hée did recoile backe: then came
Mutafier in the habite of a Nunne, and saluted him: then
Meruine desired her to take his horse and bring him to the
house, than which the Deuill desired nothing more. So
soone as Meruine was within the hall▪ hée found a table
spread, and store of cakes, but Meruine woulde neither
eate nor drinke; but Mutafier at last inchanted him that he
forgate God, and fell to both eating and drinking. Which
when Mutafier perceiued, hée vowed at midnight to carry
him to hell: then he demaunded of Meruine if h
                           •
                        e would go
to his rest, to which he consenting, brought him into a most
sumptuous chamber, where when he was laide to repose,
before the night was halfe spent, hee imagined, that the
chamber, the Abbey, the bed, and all about him was on fier,
wherefore incontinently hee arose and armed himselfe,
and came into the court, where hee found Mutafier in the
likenesse of Passant (who then was gone into Fairia) vpon
whome as soone as he was mounted, the Deuill flew away
like thunder or tempest, & bare him by woods, riuers,
and mountaines, euen to hell, where hee found his trauell
doubled; for by the commaundement of God the diuel was
compelled to beare him backe againe, wherefore he carried
him into India, where were many serpents and cruell
beasts, and therefore discharging himselfe of his b
                           •
                        rthen,
he tolde Meruine how he was his mortall Enemie the spirite
Mutafier, that had the keeping of him at Minor, and
there so manie yeares formented him, with hideous noyse

telling him that he intended to haue borne him quicke into
Hell, and that now hee would be reuenged for the fatall
death of his deare beloued sonne Orke. Which Meruine
hearing, he drew his sword, and defended himselfe therewith
in such sort, that if the malicious flend Mutafier had
béene mortall, he had slaine him an hundred times; which
séene, Meruine with the signe of the Crosse blessed himselfe
at which the diuell like a tempest flew away, and left Meruine,
who falling on his knées, asked pardon of his Creator,
then he beheld his horse Passant, to whom he went,
but in that the diuell had deceiued him, hee was strict in
trusting: wherefore vsing some blessings and coniuration:
Passant fell vpon his knées, and then hee mounted vpon
him, and neuer staied till he came to Ierusalem, where he
adored the holy sepulchre, and visited all the shrines of the
Saints, remaining there the space of two moneths, at the
end whereof he went into Spaine, to an Abbey that was
founded by duke Lyon, where he was confessed and absolued,
and then Gratiana sent the king Orient and diuerse
renowned Fairies, who imbraced Meruine and brought
him into the Fairie land, where he liued out his time with
the beautifull Gratiana.
                     
                  
                  ¶Thus endeth the historie of the famous and euer
renowned Meruin, which was first composed in rithme,
and after translated into French prose, from
whence it is thus reduced.
¶
                  Finis.
                  
               
            
         
      
   