
      
         
            
            
            THE
BLACKE
BOOKE.
            
               LONDON:
Printed by T. C. for Ieffrey
Chorlton.
1604.
         
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE
to the Reader. OR
The true Character of this
Booke.
            
               TO all thoſe that are truly
Vertuous, and can
touch Pitch and yet neuer
defile themſelues:
reade the miſchieuous
liues & pernicious practiſes
of Villaines, and yet be neuer the
worſe at the end of the Booke, but rather
confirmde the more in their honeſt
Eſtates, and the vprightnes of their
Vertues: To ſuch I dedicate my ſelfe,
the wholeſome intent of my labours,

the modeſtie of my Phraſes, that euen
bluſh when they diſcouer Vices, and
vnmaske the worlds ſhadowed villanies:
And I account him as a Traytor
to Vertue, who diuing into the deep
                  •
               
of this cunning Age, and finding there
ſuch Monſters of Nature, ſuch ſpeckled
lumps of poyſon, as Pandars, Harlots,
and Ruffians do figure, if hee riſe
vp ſilent again, and neither diſcouer or
publiſh them to the ciuil Ranck of ſober
and continent Liuers, who thereby
may ſhunne thoſe two deuouring
Gulfes: to wit, of Deceit and Luxury,
which ſwallow vp more Mortals, thē
               Scy
                     ••
                  a and Charibdi
                     •
                  , thoſe two Cormorants
& Woolners of the Sea, one tearing,
the other deuouring: Wherefore
I freely perſwade my ſelfe, no vertuous
ſpirit, or Iudiciall Worthy, but wil approue
my politick Morrall, wherevnder
the ſhadow of the Diuels Legacies,
or his bequeathing to Villaines, I

ſtrip their villanies naked, and bare the
inſectious Bulkes of Craft, Cooſnage,
and Pandariſme, the three Bloodhoundes
of a Common-wealth: And
thus farre I preſume, that none will or
can except at this which I call the Black
Booke (becauſe it doubly Damnes the
Diuel) but ſome tainted Harlot, Noſeleſſe
Bawde, obſceane Ruffian, & ſuch
of the ſame blacke Nature, and filthy
Condition, that poyſon the towardly
Spring of Gentilitie, and corrupt with
the mud of miſchiefs the pure & cleare
ſtreames of a Kingdome: And to ſpurgall
ſuch, who reades me ſhall know I
dare, for I feare neither the Rats-bane
of a Harlot, nor the Ponyard of a Villaine.
            
               T. M.
            
         
         
            
            
            A Morall.
            Lucifer aſcending, as Prologue to his
owne Play.
            NOw is Hell landed here vpon the Earth,
            When Lucifer in limbes of burning gold
            Aſcends this duſtie Theater of the world,
            To ioyne his powers: and were it numbeed well.
            There are more Diuells on Earth then are in Hell.
            Hence ſprings my damned ioy, my torturde ſpleene
            Melts into mirthfull Humour at this Fate,
            That heauen is hung ſo high, drawne vp ſo farre,
            And made ſo faſt, naylde vp with many a Starre.
            And Hell the very ſhop-borrd of the Earth,
            Where when I cut out ſoules, I throw the ſhreds
            And the white linings of a new-ſoyld Spirit,
            Pawnde to luxurious and adulterous merit.
            Yea, that's the ſinne, and now it takes her turne,
            For which the world ſhall llke a Strumpet burne:
            And for an Inſtance to fire falſe imbraces,
            I make the world burne now in ſecret places,
            I haunt inuiſible corners as a Spie,
            And in adulterous Circles there riſe I▪
            
            
               
There am I coniur'd vp through hote deſire,
            And where Hell riſes there muſt needs be fire:
            And now that I haue vaulted vp ſo hye
            Aboue the Stage-rayles of this earthen Globe,
            I muſt turne Actor, and ioyne Companies
            To ſhare my Comick ſleek-eyde villanies.
            For I muſt weaue a thouſand Ills in one,
            To pleaſe my blacke and burnt affection:
            Why? euery Tearme-time I come vp, to ſowe
            Diſſention betwixt Plough-men, that ſhould ſowe
            The Fields vaſte wome, and make the harueſt growe:
            So comes it oft to paſſe deare yeares befall,
            When Plough-men leaue the Field to till the Hall:
            Thus Famine and bleake death do greet the Land,
            When the Plough's held betweene a Lawyers hand.
            I fat with ioy to ſee how the poore Swaines
            Do boxe their Country-thyes, carrying their Packets
            Of writings, yet can neither reade nor write,
            They're like to Candles if they had no light:
            For they're darke within, in ſence and iudgement,
            As is the Hole at Newgate, and their thoughts
            Are like the men that lye there without ſpirit,
            This ſtrikes my black ſoule into rauiſhing Muſicke.
            
               
To ſee Swaynes plod and ſhake their ignorant skuls:
            For they are nought but skul, their braine but Burre,
            Wanting wits marrowe and the ſap of Iudgement;
            And how they grate with their hard nayly ſoales
            The ſtones in Fleet-ſtreete, and ſtrike fire in Powles:
            
            Nay, with heir theauie Trot, and yron-ſtalke,
            They haue worne off the braſſe in the mid-walke.
            But let theſe paſſe for Bubbles and ſo die,
            For I riſe now to breath my Legacie:
            And make my laſt Will, which I know ſhall ſtand,
            As long as Bawde, or Villaine ſtrides the Land.
            For which Ile turne my ſhape quite out of Verſe,
            Mou'd with the Supplication of poore Pierce,
            
            That writ ſo rarely villanous from hence,
            
               
                  •
               or ſpending money to my Excellence:
            Gaue me my Titles freely, for which giuing,
            I riſe now to take order for his Liuing.
            The blacke Knight of the Poſte ſhortly reternes
            From Hell, where many a Tabacc'mſt burnes:
            With newes to ſmoaky Gallants, Ryotous Heires,
            Strumpets that follow Theators and Faires,
            
               
                  ••
               ded-noſde Vſurers, baſe mettald Pandars
            To Copper Captaines, and Pickt-hatch Commanders.
            
               
To all 
                  •
               nſectious Catch-poles through the Town
                  •
               
            
            The very ſpeckled ve
                  •
               min of a crowne:
            To theſe and thoſe, and euery damned one,
            Ile bequeath Legacie
                  •
                to thri
                  •
               e vpon
                  •
               
            
            Amongſt the which, Ile giue for his red
                  •
               eſle,
            A ſtanding Penſion to Pierce-Pe
                     •••••
                  e,
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE BLACKE
Booke.
            
               NO ſooner was Peirce-Pennileſſe
breathed forth, but I the 
                  
                     ••
                  ght-b
                     ••
                  
                  ning
Seriant Lu
                     •••
                  ter, quencht my
firie ſhape, and whipt into a Conſtables
night gowne, the cunningſt habite
that could be, to ſearch Tipſi
                  •
               
Tauerns, rooſting Innes, and fr
                  •
               thy
Ale houſes, when calling together
my worſhipfull Bench of Bill-men, I procéeded toward
Pickt-hatch, intending to beginne their firſt, which (as I
may fitiy name it) is the very ſhirts of all Brothel-houſes;
the watchmen poore Night-crowes followed, and thought
ſtill they had had the Conſtable by the hand, when they
had the diueil by the Gowne-ſ
                  ••
               eue
                  •
                at laſt I looking vp to
the caſements of euery ſuſpected manſion, and ſpying a
light twinekling, betweene hope and diſperation, geſſed it
to be 
                  •
               ome ſleepie ſn
                  •
               ff
                  •
               , euer and anon winking and nodding
in the ſocket of a Candleſticke, as if the flame has
bene a departing from the grea
                  ••
               e body of Simon Snuffe
the Stinckard: whereupon I the blacke Conſtable commanded
my white Guard, not onely to aſſiſt my Office
with their browne Billes, but to raiſe vp the houſe extemporie:
with that the dreadful watch men hauing authority.

ſtanding by them, thundred at the doore, whilſt the Candle
lightned in the Chamber, and ſo betweene thundring and
lightning, the Bawde rizze, firſt putting the Snuffe to
an vntimely death, a cruell and a lamentable murther,
and then with her fat-ſag-chinne hanging downe like
a 
                  •
               owes Vdder, lay r
                  •
               eking out at the windowe, demaunding
the reaſon why they did ſummon a Parly:
I told her in plaine tearmes, that I had a warrant
to ſearch, fr
                  •
               m the Sheriffe of Limbo; How?
from the Sheriffe of L
                     •
                  me-ſtreete replyed Miſtreſſe
W
                     •
                  mble-ch
                     •
                  nn
                     •
                  , (for ſo ſhe vnderſtood the word Limbo,
as if Limbo had bene Latten for L
                     •
                  me-ſtreete)
why then all the doores of my houſe ſhall flye open and
receiue you Maiſter Conſtable: with that, as being
the watch word, two or three vaulted out of their beddes
at once, one ſwearing ſtockes and ſtoones, he could
not finde his ſtockins, other that they could not hit vppon
their falſe bodies, when to ſpeake 
                  •
               roath and ſhame
my ſelfe, they were then as cloſe to their fleſh as they
could, and neuer put them off ſince they were twelue
yeare old: At laſt they ſhuffted vp, and were ſhut out
at the back-part, as I came in at the North part,
vp the ſtayes I went to examine the Feather-beddes,
and car
                  •
               ie the ſheetes before the Iuſtice, for there was
none elſe then to carrie, onely the flowre was ſtrewde
with Buske-pointes, ſilke Garters, and ſhooe-ſtrings,

                  ••
               attred here and there for haſt to make away from me,
and the farther ſuch runne, the nearer they come to
me: then another doore opening rere-ward, there came
puffing out of the next roome a villainous Leiftenant
without 
                  〈◊〉
                Band, as if hée had béene new cut downe,
like one of Wapping, with his cruell Garters about his

Necke, which filthy reſembled two of Dericks Neckelaces:
hee had a head of hayre like one of my Diuells
in Docter Fauſtus, when the olde Theater crackt and
frighted the Audience; His Browe was made of courſe
Branne, as if all the Flower had béene boulted out to
make honeſter men, ſo ruggedly moulded with ch
                  •
               ps
and creuiſes, that I wonder how it helde together, had
it not béene paſted with villany; His eye-browes 
                  •
               etled
out like the round caſement of an Aldermans diningroome,
which made his eyes looke as if they had bene
both damned in his head: for if ſo bee two ſoules had
bene ſo farre ſuncke into Hell-pittes, they would neuer
haue walkt abroade againe: His Noſthrills were
couſen Germans to Currall, though of a ſofter condition,
aud of a more relenting humour; His C
                  •
               weblacke
Muchatoes, were almoſt halfe an Ell from the
end to the other, as though they would whiſper him in
the eare about a cheate or a murther: and his whoſe
face in generall, was more deteſtable on
                  •
               ly then the
viſage of my grim Porter Cerbe
                     •
                  us, which ſhewed that
all his body beſides was made of filthy Duſt, and Sea-cole
aſhes: A downe countenance he had, as 
                  〈◊〉
                would
haue lookte thirty mile into Hell, and ſée
                  ••
                
               Siſyph
                     •
                  s
rowling, and Ixi
                     •
                  n ſpinning and réeling: thus in a payre
of hoary Slippers, his ſtockins dengling about his wriſts,
and his read Buttons like Foxes out of their holes, he began
like the true Campion of a vaulting-houſe, firſt to

                  •
               ray me with the Bug-beares of his rough-caſt beard,
and then to ſound baſe in mine eares, like the Beare-garden
Dr
                  •
               m, and this was the humour he put on, and
the very apparell of his Phraſes! Why? maiſter Conſtable,
dare you 
                  〈…〉
                our owne manſion? ha!

What is not our houſe our Cole-harbour, our Caſtle of
come-downe, and lye-downe? muſt my honeſt wedded
Punck here, my glorie-fatte Awdry be taken napping,
and raiſd vp by the thunder of Bil-men? are we diſanold
of our firſt ſleepe? and cheated of our dreames and fantaſ
                  •
               es?
Is there not Law too for ſtealing away a mans ſlumbers,
as well as for ſhéetes off from hedges? Come you to
ſearch an honeſt Bawdie-houſe, this ſeuen and twentie
yeares in 
                  〈◊〉
                and ſhame? goe too then, you ſhall ſearch;
nay, my very Bootes too: are you well now? the leaſt hole
in my houſe too, are you pleaſde now? can we not take ou
                  •
               
eaſe in our Inne, but we moſt come out ſo quickly? Nawd,
goe to bed, ſwéet Nawd, thou wilt c
                  ••
               le thy greaſe 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
and make thy fat cake. This ſayde (by the vertue and vice
of my Office) I commanded my Bil-men downe ſtaires,
when in a twinckling, diſcouering my ſelfe a little, as much
as might ſerue to relliſh me, and ſhew what ſtuffe I was
made off, I came and kiſt the Bawde, hogde her excellent
villanies and cuning rare conueyances, then turning
my ſelfe, I threw mine armes (like a ſcarffe or 
                  〈◊〉
               )
croſſe the Leiftenants melancholly Boſome, embraeſt
his reſolute phraſes, and his diſſolute humours,
highly comm
                  •
               nding the damnable Trade, and deteſtable
courſe of their 
                  〈◊〉
               , ſo excellent filthie, and ſo admirable

                  〈◊〉
               ! Whereupon this Lefitenant of Pickt-hatch,
fell into deeper league a
                  •
               d farther acquaintance with the
blackneſſe of my boſome, ſometimes calling me Maiſter
Lucifer the Head-borow, ſometimes Maiſter Deuillin,
the little blacke Conſtable. Then telling me, he heard
from Limbo the 11. of the laſt Moneth, and that he had
the letter to ſhow, where they were all very mery: marry
as he told me, there were ſome of his friends in P
                     •
                  legetō
                  ▪
               
               
troubled with the heart-burning: yea, and with the
ſoule burning too thought I: though thou litle dreamſt
of the torment: then complaining to me of their bad takings
all the laſt plaguy Sommer, that there was no
ſtirrings, and therefore vndone for want of doings,
whereupon after many ſuch inudctions to bring the
ſceane of his pouerty vppon the Stage, he deſired in
coole tearmes to borrow ſome forty pence of me; I ſtuft
with anger at that baſe and lazie petition; (knowing
that a right true villain, and an abſolute practized Pandar)
could not want ſiluer damnation, but liuing vpon
the Reuenewes of his wits, might purchaſe the
Diuell and all, halfe conquerd with rage thus I replyed
to his baſenes.
            Why? for ſhame a Bawde and poore? why then
let vſurers goe a begging, or like an old Gréeke ſtand
in Powles with a Porringer? let Brokers become
whole honeſt then, and remoue to heauen out of
Hounſditch? Lawyers turne féeleſſe, and take Ten

                  〈◊〉
                a poore Widowes teares for Tenne ſhillings: Merchants
neuer forſweare themſelues, whoſe great periurde

                  •
               aths a Land, turne to great windes and caſt away
their Ships at Sea: which falſe perfidious tempeſt
ſplits their ſhips abroad, and their ſoules at home,
making the one take ſalt water, and the other ſalt fire:
let Mercers then haue conſcionable Thumbes, when
they meaſure out that ſmooth glittering Diuell Sattin,
and that old Reuell
                  •
               r V
                  •
               luet in the daies of Mounſeir,
both which haue deuoured many an honeſt Field of
Wheate and Barly, that hath bene metamorphoſed
and changed into white money; puh, theſe are but litle

w
                  •
               nders, and may be 
                  •
               aſtly poſſible in the working; A
Vſurer to cry bread and meate is not a thing impoſſible,
for indéed your greateſt Vſurer is your greateſt
Begger, wanting as well that which he hath, as that
which he hath not: then who can be a greater Begger?
he will not haue his houſe ſmell like a Cookes ſhop,
and therefore takes an order no meate ſhall be dreſt in
it▪ and becauſe there was an Houſe vpon Fiſh-ſtréets
Hill burnt to the Ground 
                  •
               nce, hee can abide by no
meanes to haue a fire in his Chimny euer ſince: to the
confirming of which, I will inſert here a pretie conceit
of a nimble-wiltied Gentlewoman, that was worthy
to be Ladyfied for the Ieſt, who entring into a Vſurers
Houſe in London, to take vp mony vpon vnmercifull
Intereſt, for the ſpace of a Tweluemoneth, was conducted
through two or thrée hungry roomes into a faire
dining Roome, by a Lenten faced Fellow, the Vſurers
man, whoſe Noſe ſhowoe as if it had bene made of
hollow Paſt boord, and his Che
                  •
               ks like two thin Parcakes
clapt together: A pittifull kna
                  •
               e he was, and
lookte for all the world as if meal
                  •
                had bene at twentie
ſhillings a Buſhell: the Gentlewoman being placed
in this faire Roome to awaite the Vſurers leyſure, who
was caſſing vp Ditches Golde in his Counting-houſe,
and being almoſt frozen with ſtanding for it
was before Kandle-ma
                     •
                  
                Froſt bitten Tearme) euer
and anon turning about to the Chimney where ſhee
ſawe a paire of Corpulent Giganticall Andiorns that
ſtood like two Burgomaſters at both corners, a Harth
briſkly dreſt vp, and a great cluſter of Charcoale pilde
vp together like blacke Pudoings, which l
                  •
               ye for a
                  •
               
               
dead fire, and in the dyning Roome ſoo: the Gentlewoman
wondring it was ſo long a kindling, at laſt
ſhee caught the nuſcrable conce
                  •
               t of it, and calling her
man to her, bad him ſeeke ou
                  •
                for a piece of Chalke, or
ſome peeling of a white Wall, whileſt in the meane

                  〈◊〉
                ſhee conceited the D
                  •
               uice, when taking vp the
ſixe former Coales one after another, ſhee chalkt 
                  •
               pon
each of them a Satyricall Letter, which ſixe were
theſe.
            
               T. D. C. R. V. S.
            
            Explaind
                  •
                thus:
            
               Theſe Dead Coales, Reſemble
Vſurers Soules.
            
            Then placing them in the ſame order againe turning
the chalkt ſides inward to try concluſions, which
as it happened, made vp the Ieſt the better, by that
time the Vſurer had done amongſt his golden heapes,
and entertaining the Gentlewoman with a Cough a
quarter of an houre long, at laſt after a rotten Hawke
and a Hem, he began ſpit and ſpeake to her: To
conclude, ſhe was furniſhed of the money for a twelue-moneth,
but vpon large ſecuritie and moſt Tragicall
Vſury; when keeping her day the Twelue-moneth after,
comming to repa
                  •
               e both the mony and the breede
of it.
            (For Intereſt may well be calde the Vſurers Baſtard)
ſhee found the Hearth dreſt vp in the ſame

order with a dead fire of charcole againe, and yet the
Thames was halfe frozen at that time with the bitternes
of the ſeaſon: when turning the formoſ
                  •
                ranke of
coales, determining againe as it ſeemd to drawe ſome
prety knauery vppon them too, ſhee ſpy
                  •
               d all thoſe
ſix
                  •
                Letters which ſhee chalkt vppon them the twelue-month
before, and neuer a one ſtirde or diſplaced: the
ſtrange ſight of which, made her breake into theſe
words. Is it poſſible quoth ſhe a Vſurer ſhould burne
ſo litle here, and ſo much in Hell? or is it the colde propertie
of theſe Coales to be aboue a tweluemonth a
kindling? ſo much to ſhowe the frozen Charity of a
Vſurers Chimney.
            And then a Broaker to be an honeſt ſoule, that is,
to take but ſixpence a month, and three pence for
the Bill making: a Diuell of a very good conſcience?
poſſible too, to haue a Lawyer bribeleſſe and without
Fee if his clyēteſſe or female clyent pleaſe his eie wel, a
Merchant to weare a ſut
                  •
                of periury but once a quarter,
or ſo: miſtake m
                  •
                not, I meane not foure times
an hower, that ſhift were too ſhort, 
                  •
               ee could not
put it on ſo ſoone I thinke: and laſtly, not impoſſible
for a mercer to haue a Thumbe in Folio, like one
of the biggeſt of the Guard, and ſo giue good and
very bountifull meaſure: but which is moſt impoſſible
to be a right Bawde and poore, it ſtrikes my ſpleene
into dulnes: and turnes all my blood into coole lead;
Wherefore was vice ordained but to bee rich, ſhining
and wealthy, ſeeing vertue her opponent is
poor
                  •
               , ragged, and needy? thoſe that are poore

are timorous honeſt, and fooliſh harmeleſſe, as your
carroling Sheepheards, whiſtling Plough-men, and
ſuch of the ſame innocent Rancke, that neuer reiuſh
the blacke Iuice of villan
                  ••
               , neuer taſte the red foode
of murther, or the damnable ſuckets of Lururie:
whereas a Pandar is the very o
                  •
               le of Villani
                  •
               , and
the ſirroppe of Rogues
                  •
                of excellent Rogues I meane,
ſuch as haue purchaſde fiue hundreds a yeare b
                  •
                the
Talent of their Villanie: how many ſuch Gallants
doe I knowe, that liue onely vppon the reuenewe
of their wittes: ſome whoſe Braynes are aboue an
hundred mile about, and thoſe are your Geometricall
Theeues, which may fitly be called ſo, becauſe they
meaſure the High-wayes with falſe Gallops, and
therefore are Heires of more Acres then fiue and
fittie elder Brothers: ſometimes they are Clarkes of
Newe-market Heathe▪
                ſometimes the Sheriffes of
Salisburie Plaine; and another time they commit
Brothelrye, when they make many a man ſtand at
Hockley in the Hole. Theſe are your great head
Land lords indeed, which call the word Robbing, the
gathering in of their Rents, and name all Paſſengers
their Tenants of Will.
            Another ſet of delicate Knaues there are, that
diue into Deedes and Writings of Landes, leſt to
young Gall-Finches, poyſoning the true ſence and
intent of them, with the mercileſſe Antimonie of the
Common Lawe, and ſo by ſome craftie Clawe or
two, ſhoue the true fooliſh Owners quite beſide the
Saddle of their Patrimonies, and then they hang
onely by the Stirrops: that is, by the colde Almes and

frozen chriſtie of the Gentlemen-defeaters; (whom
they take after mee their great Grandfather) will rather
ſtampe them downe in the déepe mire of pouertie,
then bolſter vp their heads with a poore wiſpe of charitie:
ſuch as theſe corrupt the true meanings of lest
Willes and Teſtaments: and turne Legacies the
wrong way, wreſting them quite awrie like Grauntum
Stéeple.
            The third Rancke (quainter then the former) preſents
vs with the Race of luſtie Vaulting Gallants,
that in ſtead of a French Horſe practiſe vppon their
Miſtreſſes all the nimble Trickes of Vaulting, and
are worthy to be made Dukes for doing the Somerſet
ſo liuely.
            This Neaſt of Gallants, for the naturall partes
that are in them, are maintainde by their Drawne-worke
Dames, and their imbrodered Miſtreſſes, and
can diſpend their two thouſand a yeare out of other
mens Coffers: kéepe at euery héele a man, beſide a
French Lackey, (a great Boy with a beard) and an
Engliſh Page, which filles vp the place of an Ingle:
they haue their Citie-horſe (which I may well tearme
their Stone-horſe) or their Horſe vppon the Stones:
For indeed, the Citie being the luſty Danie and Miſtreſſe
of the Land, layes all her foundation vpon good
Stone-worke, and ſome body payes well for it, where
euer it lights, and might with leſſe coſt keepe London
Bridge in reparations euery fall, then Miſtreſſe Briget
his wife; for Women and Bridges alwayes lacke
mendings and what the aduantage of one Tide performes,

                  〈◊〉
                another tyde preſently & w
                  •
               ſhes away.
            
               
Thoſe are your Gentlemen Gallants, that ſeeth
vppermoſt, and neuer lin gallopping, till they runns
ouer into the fire, ſo gloriouſly accounted, that they rauiſh
the eyes of all Wantons, and take them priſoners
in their ſhops with a briſke ſute of Appar
                  •
               ll: they
ſtrangle and choake more Veluet in a deepe 
                  ••
               ther
                  •
               d
Hoſe, then would ſerue to line through my Lord what
call ye-hims Coach.
            What neede I inferre more of their prodigall glistrings,
and their 
                  •
               pangled damnations? when theſe
are Arguments ſufficient to ſhew the wealth of ſinne,
and howe rich the Sonnes and Heires of Tartarie
are: And are theſe ſo glorious ſo floriſhing, ſo brimfull
of golden Lucifers or light Angelles, and thou
a Pandar and poore? A Bawde and emptie, appareld
in villainous Pack-thread, in a wicked Sute
of courſe Hoppe-bagges, the wings and ſkirts faced
with the ruines of Diſh-cloutes? Fie, I ſhame to
ſee thée dreſt vp ſo abhominable ſcuruie. Complaynſt
thou of bad doings, when there are Harlols of all
Trades, and Knaues of all Languages? Knoweſt
thou not, that ſinne may bée committed, either in
French, Dutch, Iitalian, or Spaniſh, and all after
the Engliſh faſhion: But thou excuſe the negligance
of thy practize by the laſt Sommers Peſtilence: Alas,
poore Skark Gull, that put off is idle: for Seriant
Carbuncle, one of the Plagues chiefe Officers,
dares not venture within thrée yardes of an Harlot,
becauſe Mounſeir Dry-bone the French-man, is a
Ledger before him. At which ſpéech, the Slaue burst
into a melancholy Laugh, which ſhewde for all the

world like a ſadde Tragedie with a Clowne int: and
thus began to reply.
            I knowe not whether it be a Croſſe or a Curſe, (noble
Philippe of Phlegeton) or whether both, that I
am forced to pinck foure Elles of Bagge to make mee
a Summer ſuite, but I proteſt, what with this long
Vacation, and the 
                  •
               idging of Gallants to Norfolke,
and vp and downe Countries, Pierce was neuer ſo
Pennileſſe, as poore Lieutenant Frig-beard.
            
            With thoſe werds he put mée in minde of him for
whom I chiefly changed my ſelfe into an officious
Conſtable, poore Pierce-Pennileſſe: when preſently
I demanded of this Leiuetenant the place of his
abode, and when hee la
                  •
               t heard of him (though I knew
well enough both where to heare of him, and finde
him) to which hée made anſwere. Who? Pierce, honeſt
Pennileſſe? hée that writ the Mad-cappes Supplication?
why, my very next Neighbour, lying within
thrée leane houſes of mée, at olde Miſtreſſe Siluer-pinnes,
the onely doore-kéeper in Europe. Why?
we meete one another euery Terme time, and ſhake
hands when the Exchequer opens, but when we open
our hands, the Diuell of Penny we can ſée.
            With that II chéerde vp the drooping Salue, with
the Aqua-vitae of villanie, and put him in excellent
comfort of my damnable Legacie: ſaying, I would
stuffe him with ſo many wealthy inſtructions, that
hée ſhould excell euen Pandarus himſelfe, and goe
nine mile beyonde him in Pandariſme, and from
thence forward he ſhould neuer know a true Raſcall
goe vnder his red Veluet flops; and a gallant Bawde

indéed belowe her looſe bodied-Sattin?
            This ſaide, the ſlaue hugd himſelfe and buſt the
Bawde for ioy, when preſently I lett them in the 
                  〈◊〉
               
of their wicked Smack, and deſcended to my Bil men
that waited in the pernitious Alley for me their Maiſter
Conſtable: and marching forward to the third
Garden-houſe, there we knockt vp the Ghoſt of miſtreſſe
Siluer-pin. who ſuddainly riſſe out of two white
ſhéetes, and acted out of her tyring-houſe windowe,
but hauing vnderſtood who we were, and the Authoritie
of our office, ſhée preſently eneu in her Ghoſts
apparell, vnfolded the Doores, and gaue me my frée enterance,
when in policie I chargde the reſt to ſtay
and watch the houſe belowe, whilſt I ſtumbled vp
two payre of ſtayres in the darke, but at laſt caught
in mine eyes the ſullen blaze of a melancholy lampe,
that burnt very tragically vppon the rarrow Deſke
o
                  •
                a halfe Bedſtead, which deſcryed all the pittifull
Ruines throughout the whole chamber, the bare priuities
of the ſtone-walls were hid with two pieces of
painted Cloth; but ſo ragged and tottreb, that one
might haue ſéene all neuertheleſſe, hanging for all
the world like the two men in Chaynes betwéene
Mile-end & Hackney; The Teſterne or the ſhadow,
ouer the bed▪ was made of foure Elles of Cobwebs,
and a number of ſmall Spinners Ropes hung downe
for Curtaines; the Spindle-ſhanke Spyders which
ſhowd like great Leachers with little legges, went ſtalking
ouer his head, as if they had bene conning of
Tamburlayne. To conclude, there was many ſuch
ſights to be ſéene and all vnder a Pennie, beſide

the lamentable proſpect of his hoſe and doublet, which
being of old Kendall Greene, ſitly reſembled a Pitcht
Fielde, vppon which trambled many a luſty Corporal:
in this vnfortunate Tyring-houſe lay poore Pierce
vppon a Pillow ſtuft with Horſemeate, the Shéetes
smudged ſo durtily, as if they had bene ſtolne by night
out of Saint Pulchers Church-yard when the Sexton
had leſt a Graue open, and ſo laide the dead bodies
wool-ward: the Couerlet was made of pieces a blacke
Cloth clapt together, ſuch as was ſcatterd off the railes
in Kings-Streete, at the Queenes Funerall: vpon this
miſerable Beds-head, lay the old Copy of his Supplication
in ſoule written hand which my blacke Knight
of the Poſt conueyed to Hell: which no ſooner I entertaynd
in my hand, but with the ratling and blabbing of
the papers, poore Pierce began to ſtretch and grate his
Noſe againſt the hard Pillowe, when after a Rowze
or two, he muttred theſe reeling words betwéene
drunke and ſober, that is, betwéene ſléeping and
waking.
            I ſhould laugh yſaith, if for all this I ſhould proue a
Vſurer before I die, and haue neuer a Penny now to
ſet vp withall, I would build a Nunnery in Pickt-hatch
here, and turne the walke in Powles into a
Bowling Alley; I would haue the Thames leaded
ouer, that they might play at Cony-holes, with the
Arches vnder London- Bride. Well, and with that
he wakte, the diuell is a mad Knae ſtill.
            How now Pierce, (quoth I) doeſt thou call mée
Knaue to my face? Whereat the poore ſlaue ſtarted vp
with his haire a tip-toe, to whom by eaſie degrées, I

gently diſcouered my ſelfe, who trembling like the
treble of a Lute, vnder the heauie finger of a Farmers
daughter, craued pardon of my damnable Excellence,
and gaue me my Titles as freely, as if he had knowne
where all my Lordſhips lay, & how many Actes there
were in Tartarie: but at the length hauing recouered
to be bold againe, he vnfolded all his boſome to mee,
told me that the Knight of Periurie had lately brought
him a ſinged Letter, ſent from a damned Friend of
his: Which was thus directed, As followeth.
            
               
                  
                  From Stix to Woods cloſe,
OR
The VValke of Pickt-hatch.
                  AFter I ſawe poore Pennileſſe grow ſo well acquainted
with me, and ſo familiar with the villany
of my humour, I vnlockt my determinations,
and laide open my intents in particulars, the
cauſe of my vpriſing being moued both with his penetrable
petition and his inſufferable pouerty, and therefore
changed my ſhape into a litle wapper-eid Conſtable,
to winke and blinke at ſmall faults, and through
the policy of ſearching, to finde him out the better
in his cleanly Tabernacle, and therefore gaue him
encouragement now to be frolike, for the time was
at hand like a Pickpurſe, that Pierce ſhould be cald
no more Pennilelie, like the Maiors bench at Oxford,
but rather Pierce-Penny-fis. becauſe his palme
ſhall bee pawnde with Pence. This ſayd, I bad him
be reſolude, and get vp to Breake-faſt, whilſt I went

                        •
                     ogather my Noyſe of Villaines together, and made
his lodging my Conuocation houſe: with that in a reſulting
humour, he calde his Hoſe and Dublet to him,
(which could almoſt goe alone, borne like a Herſe vpon
the Legges of Vermin) whilſt I thumpt downe
ſtaires with my Cowe-heele, imbraced Miſtreſſe
Siluerpinre and betooke me to my Bill-men: when

in a twinckling before them all, I leapt out of Maiſter
Conſtables Night-gowne, into an Vſurers 
                        •
                     uſtie

                        •
                     urde Jacket, whereat the Watch-men ſtaggered,
and all their Billes fell downe in a ſownde: when I
walkte cloſe by them laughing and coughing like a
rotten-lunpde Vſurer, to ſee what Italian faces they
all made, when they miſt their Conſtable, and ſawe
the blacke Gowne of his Office lye full in a puddle.
                  Whell, away I ſcudded in the muſtie moth-eaten
habit, and being vpon Exchange time, I crowded my
ſelfe amongſt Merchants, poyſoned all the Burſe
in a minute, and turnd their Faiths and Troths, into
Curds and whay
                        •
                     , making them ſweare thoſe thi
                        •
                     gs
now, which they for-ſwore when the Quarters ſtruck
againe: for I was preſent at the clapping vp of euery
Bargaine, which did nere h
                        •
                     ld, no longer then they
helde handes together: there I heard newes out of
all Countries, in all Languages; how many Villainies
were in Spaine: how many Luxurs in Italie:
how many Perſurds in France: and how many
Reele-pots in Germanie.
                  
                  At laſt I met at halfe turne, one whom I had ſpent
hoarie eyes ſo long for, an 
                        〈◊〉
                      money-maiſter, that
had beene off and on ſowe ſixe and fitlie yeares
dambde in his Counting-houſe, for his onely recreation
was but to hop about the Burle before twelue,
to heare what newes from the Bancke, and howe
many Merchants were banqrout the laſt change of
the Moone. This ramiſh Penny-father I rounded
in the left Eare, winded in thy intent, the place and

houre: Which no ſooner hee suckt in, but ſmilde
vppon me in French, and replyed:

                        O Mounſeir Deiable.
                        Ile be chiefe Gueſt at your Table,
                     
                  
                  With that we ſhooke handes: and as we parted,
I bade him bring Maiſter Cog-bill the Scriuenet
along with him, and ſo I vaniſht out of that dreſſing.
And paſſing through Burchen-lane, amidſt a Campe
Royall of Hoſe and Doublets, (Maiſter Snips backſide
being turnde where his face ſtood) I tooke excellent
occaſion to ſlip into a Captaines Sute, a valiant
Buſſe, Doublet, ſtuft with Points like a Legge of
Mutton with Pa
                        •
                     ſlye, and a payre of Veluet ſlops,
ſcored thicke with Lgce, which ranne ound about the
Hoſe like Ring-wormes, able to make a man ſcratch
where it itcht not. And thus accoultred, taking vp
my weapons a truſt in the ſame order, at he next Cutlers
I came too, I marcht to Maiſter Bezles Ordinary,
where I found a whole dozen of my damned crue
ſweating as much at Dice, as many pooze Laborers
doe with the caſting of Ditches: when preſently I
ſet in a Stake amongſt them: round it went; but
the craftie Dice hauing péept vppon me once, knew
who I was well enough, and would neuer haue their
little blacke eyes of a me all the while after; at laſt
came my turne about, the Dice quaking in my Firſt
before I threw them; but when I yerkt them forth,
away, they ranne like Iriſh Lackeys, as farre as

their bones would ſuffer them.
                  I ſweeping vp all the Stakes that lay vppon
the Table: whereat ſome-ſtampt, others ſwore,
the reſt curſt, and all in generall fretled to the
Gaull, that a new Commer (as they tearmed
me) ſhould gather in ſo many Fi
                        •
                     teenes at th
                        •
                      firſt
vomit.
                  Well, thus it paſt on, the Dice running as
falſe as the Drabbes in White-Fryers, ano when
any one thought himſelfe ſureſt, in came I with
a lurching caſt, and made them all ſweare round
againe: But ſuch Gunne powder Oathes they
were, that I wonder haw the Seeling held together
without ſpitting Morter vppon them. Zownes,
Captaine ſwore one to mée, I thinke the Diuell be
thy good Lorde and Maiſter: True, (thought I) and
thou his Gentleman-Vſher. In concluſion, it fatted
mee better then twentie eightéene-pence Gr
                        •
                     inaries,
to here them rage, curſe and ſweare, like ſo many
Emperours of Darkeneſſe. And all theſe twelue, were
of twelue ſeuerall Crmpanies.
                  There was your Gallant extraordinary Thiefe,
that keepes his Colledge of Good-Fellowes, and will
not feare to robbe a Lord in his Coach for all his tenne
Trencher-bearers on horſe-back, your deepe conceited
Cut purſe, who by the dexteritie of his knife will draw
out the money, and make a flame coloure-purſe ſhew
like the bottomleſſe pit, but with neuer a ſoule int:
Your cheating Bowler that will bancke falſe of purpoſe,
and looſe a game of twelue-pence to purchaſe his

Partner twelue ſhillings in Bettes, and ſo ſhare it
after the Play. Your Cheu
                        •
                     rell-g
                        •
                     tted Catch-pele,
who like a Horſe-litch ſuckes Gentlemen, and in
all your twelue Tribes of Villanie, who no ſooner
vnderſtood the quaint forme of ſuch an vncuſtomed
Legacie, but they all pawnds their vitious Golles
to meete there, at the houre prefixt: and to confirme
their reſolution the more, each ſlipt downe his Stockin,
baring his right Knée, and ſo began to drinke
a Health, halfe as deepe as Mother Hubburds Celler:
She that was calde in for ſelling her working
Bottle-Ale to Booke-binders, and ſpurting the Froth
vpon Courtiers Noſes. To conclude, I was their
onely Captaine, (for ſo they pleaſde to title mée)
and ſo they all rizze, Poculis manibuſque, applauding
my newes: then the houre being more then once and
once reiterated, we were all at our hands againe, and
ſo departed.
                  I could tell nowe, that I was in many a ſecond
Houſe in the Cittie and Suburbs afterward, where
my entertainment was not barren, nor my welcome
Cheape or Ordinarie. And then howe I walkte in
Powles to ſee faſhions; to diue into villainous meetings,
pernitions Plots, blacke Humours, and a
Million of miſchiefes, which are bred in that Cathedrall
Wombe, and borne within leſſe then forty
wéekes after. But ſome moy obiect and ſay; What
doth the Diuell walke in Powles theu? Why not,
Sir, aſwell as a Seriant, or a Ruffian, or a Murtheter:
may not the Diuell I pray you walke in Powles
                     
as well as the Horſe goe a toppe of Powles, for
I am ſure I was not farre from his Kéeper. Puh,
I doubt where there is no doubt, for there is no
true Criticke indeede, that will carpe at the Diuell.
                  Now the Houre poſted on-ward to accompliſh the
effects of my deſire, to gorge euery Vice full of poyſon,
that the ſoule might burſt at the laſt, and vomit
out her ſelfe vppon blew cakes of Brimſtone. When
returning home (for the purpoſe, in my Capiaynes apparell
of Buffe and Veluet) I ſtrucke mine Hoſteſſe
into admiration at my proper appearance, for my Poh,
foote was helpt out with Bumbaſt. A propertie whielt
many worldings vſe, whoſe Toes are dead and rottenand
therefore ſo ſtuffe out their Shooes, like the corners
of Wooll-Packes.
                  Well, into my Tyring-houſe I went, where
I had ſcarce ſhifted my ſelfe into the Apparell of my
laſt Will and Teſtament, (which was the Habite of
a couetous Barne-cracking Farmer) but all my
Striptlings of Perdition, my Nephewes of Damnation:
my Kindred and alliance of Villany and Sharking,
were ready before the houre, to receiue my Bottomleſſe
Bleſſing. When entring into a Countrey
Night-Gowne, with a Cappe of ſickneſſe about my
browes. I was led in betweene Pierce-Pennileſſe, and
his Hoſteſſe, like a feeble Farmer, ready to depart
England, and ſayle to the Kingdome of Tartarie:
who ſetting mee downe in a wicked Chaire, all my
pernitious Kinſ-folkes round about mée, and the

Scriuener betwéene my logges (for his loues alwayes
to fit in the Diuells Cot-houſe) thus with
a wha
                        •
                      countenance, ſhort ſtooppes, and earthen
dampiſh-voyce, the true Counterfets of a dying
C
                           •
                        llian, I procéeded to the blacke Order of my
Legacies.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                              The laſt Will and
Teſtament of Lawrence Lucifer,
the old Batchiler
of Limbo. ALIAS,
Dicke Deuill-Barne, the griping Farmer
of Kent.
                              
                                 IN the Name of Bezle-bub, Amen.
                              I Lawrence Lucifer, alias,
Dicke Deuil-Barne, sicke in
ſoule but not in body, béeing in
perfect health to wicked memorie:
Doe conſtitute and Ordaine
this my laſt Will and Teſtament
irreuocable, as long as the world ſhall be trampled
on by Villanie.
                              
                                 Inprimis, I Lawrence Lucifer, bequeath my
ſoule to Hell, and my bodie to the Earth, amongſt
you all, diuide mée and ſhare me equally, b
                                    •
                                 t with
as much wrangling as you can, I pray: and it will be
the better if you goe to Law for me.
                              
                                 
As touching my worldly wicked Goods, I giue
and bequeath them in moſt villanous order following.
                              Firſt, I conſtitute and Ordaine, Leiuetenant
Prig-beard, Arch-Ponder of England, my ſole
Heirs, of all ſuch Lands, Cloſes and Gappes, as he
within the Boundes of my gift: beſide, I haue
certaine Houſes, Te
                                    ••
                                 ments, and with drawing
Roomes in Shoreditch, T
                                       •••
                                    hold-streete, WhiteFryers,
and Weſtminſter: which I fréely giue and
bequeath to the aforeſayde Leiuetenant, and the baſe
Heires truely begotte of his villanous body: with
this Prouiſo, that hée ſell none of the Land when
hée lacks money; nor make away any of the Houſes
to impaire and weaken the Stocke, no not ſo
much as to alter the propertie of any of them, which
is to make them honeſt againſt their willes, but to
traine and muſter his wittes vpon the Mile-ende of
his Mazard, rather to fortifie the Territories of
Tunbold-ſtreet, and curich the Countie of Pickt-Hatch,
with all his vitious Endeuours: golden Enticements,
and damnable Practiſes. And Leiutenant,
thou muſt diue (as thou vſeſt to doe) into Lauded
Nouices, who haue onely wit to be licoriſh and
no more, that ſo their Tenants trotting vp to London
with with their Quartridges, they may pay them
the rent, but thou and thy Colledge ſhall receiue the
money.
                              Let no yong rigle-eyde Damoſell (if her years haue
ſtrucke twelue once) be left vnaſſaulted, but it muſt be
thy Office to lay hard ſeige to her honeſtie: and to try

if the walles of her Mayden-head may be ſcaled wiſh
a ladder of Angells: for one 
                                    •
                                 ere of ſuch Wenches
will bring in more al yeares ende, then an hundred
Acres of the beſt harrowed Land betwéene Detford
and Douer: and take this for a Note by the way, you
muſt neu
                                    •
                                 r walke without your Dewce, or Dew
                                    •
                                 e-Ace
of Drabbes, after your Boote-héeles: for when
you are abroad you know not what vſe you may haue
for them. And laſtly (if you be well feed by ſome riosons
Galiant) you muſt practize, (as indéed you doe)
to winde out a wanton Veluet-cap and Bodkin from
the tangles of her Shoppe, teaching her (you knew
how) to caſt a Cuckolds Miſt before the eyes of her
Huſband, which is, telling him, ſhée muſt ſee her Coozeu,
new come to Towne: or that ſhee goes to a womans
Labour: when thou knoweſt well ynough, ſhée
goes to none but her owne: and being ſet out of the
Shoppe, (with her man afore her, to quench the iealouzie
of her Huſband) ſhee by thy inſtructions ſhall
turne the honeſt ſimple fellow off, at the next turning,
and giue him leaue to ſée the merry Diuel of Edmunton,
or a Woman kild with kindneſſe: when his Miſtreſſe
is going her ſelfe to the ſame murther. Thouſand
of ſuch inuentions, practizes and deuices, I ſtuffe
thy Trade withall: beſide the luxurious méetings at
Tauernes, ten pound ſuppers, and flitéene pound reckonings,
made vp afterwards with riotous Egs and
Muſcadine. All theſe female vomites, and adulterous
Surfets, I giue and bequeath to thée, which I hope
thou wilt put in practize with all expedition, after

my decease: and to that ende, I ordaine thée wholy
and ſolely, my onely abſolute, excellent, villanous
Heire.
                              
                                 Item, I giue and bequeath to you Gregory
Gauntlet, high Thiefe on Horſe-backe; all ſuch
ſummes of Money, that are nothing due to you,
and to receiue them in, whether the Parties bée
willing to pay you or no. You néede not make
many wordes with them, but onely theſe two:
Stand, and deliuer; and therefore a true thiefe cannot

                                    •
                                 huſe but be wiſe, becauſe hée is a man of ſo very
fewe words.
                              I néede not inſtruct you, I thinke Gregorie,
about the politicke ſearching of craftie Carryers
Packes, or ripping vp the bowells of wide Bootes,
and Cloake-bagges, I doe not doubt but you
haue already exerciſed them all. But one thing I
eſpecially charge you of: the neglect of which makes
many of your Religion ſender their wine-pipes at
Tyburne, at leaſt thrée Monthes before their day:
that if you chaunce to robbe a vertuous Towneſman
on Horſe-backe, with his wife vppon a Pillion
behind him, you preſently ſpeake them faire to
walke a Turne or two at one ſide, where binding
them both together like Man and Wife, arme in
arme very louingly: Bee ſure you tie them hard
ynough, for feare they breake the bondes of Matrimonie,
which if it ſhould fall out ſo, the matter
would lie ſore vppon your Neckes the next Seſſions
after, becauſe your negligent tying, was the

cauſe of that breach betwéene them.
                              Now, as for your Welch Hue and Crie (the
onely Nette to catch Theeues in) I knowe you
auoyde well ynough, becauſe you can ſhift both
your Beardes and your Townes well, but for
your better diſguiſing, hence forward I will fit you
with a Beard-maker of mine owne: One that
makes all the falſe haires for my Diuells, and all
the Periwigges that are worne by olde Courtiers,
who take it for a pride in their balde dayes to weare
yallowe Curles on their Foreheads, when one may
almoſt ſee the Sunne goe to bed through the chinkes
of their faces.
                              Moreouer Gregorie, becauſe I know thée
toward ynough, and thy armes full of feates, I
make the Kéeper of Come-Parke; Seriant of
Salisburie-Plaine; Warden of the Standing-places;
and laſtly, Conſtable of all Heaths, Holes,
High-wayes, and Conny-groues: hoping that thou
wilt execute theſe Places and Offices as truely,
as Dericke will execute his place and Office at
Tyburne.
                              
                              I giue and bequeath to thée Dicke
Dogge-man, G
                                    •
                                 aund-Catchpole, (ouer and aboue
thy bare-bone Fees, that will ſcarſe hang wicked
fleſh on thy backe) all ſuch 
                                    •
                                 urches, Gripes and
Squéezes, as may bee wrung out by the fiſt of extortion.
                              And becauſe I take pillie on thée, wayfing ſo
vsest as thou ere to doe, 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  thou canſt land on
                                    •
                                 
                                 
Fare at the Counter, watching ſometimes ten houres
together in an Ale-houſe, euer and anon péeping forth
and ſampling thy Noſe with the red Lattis: let him
whoſoeuer that falls into thy Clutches at night, pay
well for thy ſtanding all day: And couzen Richard
when thou haſt caught him in the Mouſtray of thy libertie
with the chéeſe of thy office, the wire of thy hard
fiſt being clapt downe vpon his Shoulders, and the
backe of his eſtate almoſt broken to pieces; then call
thy cluſter of fellow-vermins together, and ſit in triumph
with thy priſoner at the vpper end of a Ta
                                    •
                                 ene
table, where vnder the colour of ſhowing him fauour
(as you tearme it) in waiting for Bayle, thou and thy
Counter-liche, may ſwallow downe ſixe Gallons of
Charnico, and then begin to chafe that he makes you
ſtay ſo long-before Peter Bayle comes: And here it will
not be amiſſe if you call in more wine-ſuckers, and
damne as many Gallons againe; for you know your
priſoners ranſome will pay for all: this is if the partie
be fluſh now, and would not haue his credit copparde
with a ſcut
                                    •
                                 ey Counter.
                              Another kinde of reſt you haue which is called
Shoopenny, that is, when you will be paide for
euery ſtride you take: and if the Channell be dangerous
and ruffe, you will not ſtep ouer vnder a Noble:
a very excellent Lurch to get vp the price of your legs,
betweene Powles-chaine and Ludgate.
                              
                              But that which likes me beyond meaſure, is the
villanous nature of that arreſt which I may fitly
tearme by the name of Cog-oulſhder, when you clap

a both ſides like old Rowſe in Cornewell, and receiue
double Fée both from the Creditor and the Debter,
ſwearing by the poſt of your office to ſhoulder-clap the
party, the firſt time he lights vpon the Limetwigs
of your liberty, when for a litle Vſurers Oyle, you
allowe him day by day frée paſſage to walke by the
wicked precinct of your Noſes, and yet you will pimple your
ſoules with oathes, till you make them as
well fauoured as your faces, and ſweare he neuer
came within the verge of your eyelids: nay more, if
the Creditor were preſent to ſée him arreſted on the
one ſide, and the party you wot on, ouer the way at
the other ſide, you haue ſuch quaint ſhifts, prety hindrances,
and moſt Lawyer-like delayes ere you will
ſet forward, that in the meane time he may make
himſelfe away in ſome by Alley, or ruſh into the Bowells
of ſome Tauerne, or drinking ſchoole; or if neither,
you will find talke with ſome Sharke-ſhift by the
way, and giue him the markes of the partie, who
will preſently ſtart before you, giue the D
                                    •
                                 bter Intelligence,
and ſo a rotten Fig for the Catchpole. A moſt
wittie, ſmooth, and damnable conueyance: many ſuch
running deuices breede in the Reynes of your offices:
beſide I leaue to ſpeake of your vnmercifull dragging
a Gentleman through Fleet-ſtreete, to the vtter confuſion
of his white Feather, and the lamentable ſpattring
of his Pearle colour 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  Stockins, eſpecially
when ſome ſixe of your balcke Dogges of Newgate
are vppon him at once. Therefore ſweete couſen
Richard for you are the néereſt kinſman I haue I

giue and bequeath to you no more then you haue already,
for you are ſo well gorged and ſtuft with that, that
one ſpoonefull of villanie more, would ouer-lay your
ſtomacke quite, and I feare me make you kicke vp all
the reſt.
                              
                                 Item, I giue and bequeath to you Benedick Bottomleſſe,
moſt déepe Cut-purſe, all the benefite of Pageant-dayes,
great Market-dayes, Ballat-places,
but eſpecially the Sir Penny Roomes in Play-houſes,
to Cut, Diue, or Nim, with as much ſpeede, Arte, and
dexter
                                    •
                                 tie, as may be handled by hon
                                    •
                                 ſt Rogues of thy
qualitie. Nay, you ſhall not ſticke Benedick, to giue
a ſhaue of your Office at Powles Croſſe in the Sermon
time: but thou holdſt it a thing thou mayſt doe by
law, to cut a Purſe in Weſtminſter Hall. True, Beuedicke,
if thou be ſure the Lawe bée on that fide thou
cutſt it on.
                              
                                 Item, I giue and bequeath to you, old Bias, Alias,
Humfrey Hollow-banke, true cheating Bowler,
and Lurcher, the one halfe of all falſe Bettes, Cunning
Hookes, ſubtill Tyes, and Croſſe-layes, that are ven
                                 
                                    •
                                 ured
vpon the landing of your Bowle, and the ſafe
arriuing al the Hauen of the Miſtreſſe, if it chaunce to
paſſe all the daungerous Rocks and Rubs of the Alley,
and be not choackt in the ſand, like a Merchants Ship,
before it comes halfe way home, which is none of your
fault (youle ſay and ſweare) although in your owne
turnde-conſcience you know, that you threwe it abou
                                    •
                                 
three yards ſhort out of hand, vpon very ſet purpoſe.
                              Moreouer, Humfrey, I giue you the lurching of all

yong Nouices, Citizens ſonnes, and Countrey Gentlemen,
that are hookt in by the winning of one
Twelue-penny Game at firſt, loſt vppon policy, to bee
cheated of Twelue pounds worth-a Bets afterward.
And olde Bias, becauſe thou art now and then ſmelt
out for a Cooſner, I would haue thee ſometimes goe
diſguiſde (in honeſt apparell) and ſo drawing in amongſt
Bunglers and kellers, vnder the plaine Freeze of ſimplicitie,
thou mayſt finely couch the wrought-veluet of
Knauery.
                              
                                 Item, I giue and bequeath to your Cooſen German
here, Francis Finger-falſe, Deputie of Di
                                    •
                                 inghouſes,
all cunning Lifts, Shifts, and Couches, that
euer were, are, and ſhall be inuented, from this houre
of a Leauen-clocke vpon blacke Munday, vntill it ſmite
Twelue a clocke at Doomes-day: and this I knowe
Francis, if you doe endoure to excell, as I know you
doe, and will truely practize falſely, you may liue more
gallanter farre vppon three Dice, then many of your
fooliſh Heires about London, vppon thrice thrée
hundred Apr
                                    •
                                 s.
                              But 
                                    •
                                 urning my Legacie to you-ward, Barnaby
Burning-glaſſe, ſtrech Tabacco-taker of England, in
Ordinaryes, vppon Stages both common and priuate,
and laſtly, in the Lodging of your Drabbe and Miſtreſſe:
I am not a little proud, I can tell you Barnaby,
that you daunce after my Pipe ſo long: and for all
Coun
                                    •
                                 erblaſts and Tabacco-Naſhes (which ſome
call Raylers) you are not blowne away, nor your
fierie thriſt quencht with the ſmall Penny-Ale of their

contradictions, but ſtill ſuck that dug of Damn
                                    ••
                                 ion,
with a long nipple, ſtill burning that rare Phaenix of
Phlegiton Tabacco, that from her aſhes burnt and
knockt out, may ari
                                    •
                                 e another pipefull: Therefore I
giue and bequeath vnto thée, a breath of all religions,
ſaue the true one, and taſting of all countries, ſaue his
owne: a brayne well footed, where the Muſes hang vp
in the ſmoake like red Herrings: and looke how the
narrow all
                                    •
                                 y of thy pipe ſhowes in the inſide, ſo ſhall
all the pipes through ſay body. Beſides, I giue and bequeath
to thy kings, as ſmooth as Iet, and iuſt of the
ſame colour, that when thou art cloſed in thy graue,
the wormes may be conſumed with them, and take
them for blacke Puddings.
                              Laſtly, not leaſt, I giue and bequeath to thée Pierce-penneleſſe,
exceeding poore Scholler, that hath made
cleane ſhooes in both Vniuerſities, and bene a pittifull
Batler all thy life time, full oftē heard with this lamentable
cry at the Buttry-hatch Ho Lancelot, a Cewe of
bread, and a Cewe of béere, neuer paſſing beyond the
confines of a farthing, nor once monching commons,
but onely vpon Gaudy dayes: To thee moſt miſerable
Pierce, or pierced through and through with miſerie,
I bequeath the tythe of all Vaulting Houſes, the
tenth 
                                    •
                                 eneere of each heigh paſſe come a loft: beſide the
playing in & out of all wenches at thy pleaſure, which I
know as thou maiſt vſe it, wil be ſuch a fluent penſion,
that thou ſhalt neuer haue néed to write Supplication
againe.
                              Now for the eſpeciall tr
                                    •
                                 ſt and confidence I haue in

both you, Mihell Mony God Vſurer, and Leonard
Lauender Braker, or pawne-lender, I make you two
my full Executors to the true diſpoſing of all theſe my
helliſh intents, wealthy villanies, and moſt pernicions
damnable Legacies.
                              And now kinſmen and friends, winde about me,
my breath begins to coole, and all my powers to 
                                    〈◊〉
                                  ſe.
And I can ſay no more to you Nephewes then I haue
ſaide, only this, I leaue you all like Rats-bane so poyſon
the realme. And I pray, be all of you as arrant villain
                                    •
                                 s
as you can be, and ſo farewel, be all hangde, and
come downe to me as ſoone as you can.
                              This ſaide, he departed to his mo
                                    •
                                 lton kingdome,
the winde riſſe, the botto
                                    •
                                 e of the Chayre flew
out, the Scriuener fell flat vpon his noſe,
and here is the end of a harmeleſſe
Morrall.
                              
                              FINIS.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Now Syr, what is your cenſure now? you haue
read me I am ſure: am I blacke ynough thinke you,
dreſt vp in a laſting ſuite of Incke? Do I deſerue my
Darke and pitchy Tytle? Sticke I cloſe ynough to
a villaines Ribs? Is not Lucifer liberall to his Nephewes,
in this his laſt Will and Teſtament? Meethinkes
I heare you ſay-nothing: and therefore I
knowe you are pleaſde and agree to all: for Qui tacit
conſentire videtur: And I allow you wiſe, and truly
Iudicious, becauſe you keepe your Cenſure to
your ſelfe.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   