
      
         
            
            
            THE WISDOME of Solomon Paraphraſed. Written by Thomas Middleton.
            A Joue ſurgit opus.
            
            Printed at London by Valentine Sems, dwelling on Adling hil at the ſigne of the white Swanne. 1597.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the right Honourable and my very good Lord, Robert Deuoreux, Erle of Eſſex and Ewe, Vicount of Hereford, Lorde Ferrers of Chartley, Boutcher, and Louayne, Maiſter of her Maiesties Horſe and Ordonance, Knight of the honourable order of the Gartor, and one of her Maieſties moſt hon
                  •
               rable priuie Counſell.
            
               THe Summers Harueſt, (right Honourable) is long ſince reapt, & now it is ſowing time againe: behold, I haue ſcattred a few ſeedes vpon the yong ground of vnskilfulneſſe, if it beare fruit, my labour is well beſtowed, but if it be barren, I ſhall haue leſſe ioy to ſet more. The husbandman obſerues the courſes of the Moone, I, the forces of your fauor: he deſireth ſun-ſhine, I, cheerefull

countenance: which once obtayned, my harueſt of ioy will ſoone bee ripened. My ſeedes, as yet, lodge in the boſome of the earth, like Infantes vpon the lappe of a Fauourite, wanting the budding ſpring-time of their growth, not knowing the Eſt of their glorie, the weſt of their quietneſſe, the South of their ſummer, the North of their winter: but if the beames of your aſpectes lighten the ſmall moytie of a ſmaller implanting, I ſhall haue an euery-day-harueſt, a fruition of content, a braunch of felicitie.
            
               Your Honours addicted in all obſeruance, 
                Thomas Midleton.
            
         
         
            
            To the Gentlemen Readers.
            
               GEntlemen, I giue you the ſurueyaunce of my new-bought grounde, and will only ſtand vnto your verdicts, I feare me, that the acres of my fielde paſſe the anchers of my ſeed, if wanting ſeed, then I hope it wil not be to much ſeeded: this is my bare excuſe: but truſt me, had my wit been ſufficient to maintaine the freedome of my will, then both ſhould haue been anſwerable to your wiſhes, yet neuertheleſſe thinke of it as a willing, though not a fulfilling moity. But what meane I? while I thus argue, Momus and Zoylus, thoſe two Rauens deuoure my ſeede, becauſe J lacke a Scarrecrowe:

indeede ſo J may haue lesse than I haue, when ſuch fowle-gutted Rauens ſwallowe vp my portion: if you gape for ſtuffing, hie you to dead carrion carkasses, and make them your Ordinaries; J beſeeche you Gentlemen, let mee haue your ayde, and as you haue ſeene the first practiſe of my husbandry in ſowing, ſo let me haue your helping hands vnto my reaping.
            
               
                  Yours deuoted in friendſhip. Thomas Middleton
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Wiſedome of Solomon paraphraſed.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     WIſedome Elixer of the pureſt life,
                  Hath taught hir leſſon to iudicial views,
                  To thoſe that iudge a cauſe & end a ſtrife,
                  Which ſits in Iudgements ſeat & Iuſtice vſe:
                  A leſſon worthy of diuineſt eare,
                  Quinteſſence of a true diuineſt ſcare.
               
               
                  Vnwilling that exordium ſhould retaine,
                  Her life-infuſing ſpeech, doth thus begin,
                  You (quoth ſhee) that giue remedy or paine:
                  Loue Iuſtice, for iniuſtice is a ſin.
                  Giue vnto God his due, his reuerent ſtile;
                  And rather vſe ſimplicity then guile.
               
               
                  For him, that guides the radiant eie of day,
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Sitting in his ſtar-chamber of the Skie,
                  The Horizons and hemeſpheres obay,
                  And windes the fillers of vacultie:
                  Much leſſe ſhuld man tempt God, when all obay,
                  But rather be a guide, and leade the way.
               
               
                  For temting argues but a ſins attempt,
                  Temptation is to ſin aſſociate;
                  So doing, thou from God art cleane exempt,
                  Whoſe loue is neuer placde, in his loues hate,
                  He will be found, not of a tempting minde,
                  But found of thoſe which he doth faithfull finde.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Temptation rather ſeperates from God,
                  Conuerting goodnes from the thing it was,
                  Heaping the indignation of his rod,
                  To bruſe our bodies like a brittle glaſſe:
                  For wicked thoughts haue ſtill a wicked end,
                  In making God our foe, which was our frend.
               
               
                  They muſter vpreuenge, encamp our hate,
                  Vndoing what before they meant to do,
                  Stirring vp anger, and vnluckie fate,
                  Making the earth their friend, the heauen their foe:
                  But when heauens guide makes manifeſt his power,
                  The earth, their frinds, doth them like foes deuoure.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 O fooliſh men to warre againſt your bliſſe,
                  O hatefull harts where wiſedome neuer raignd,
                  O wicked thoughts which euer thought amiſſe,
                  What haue you reapt? what pleaſure haue you gaind?
                  A fruite in ſhew, a pleaſure to decay,
                  This haue you got by keeping follies way.
               
               
                  For wiſedomes harueſt is with follie nipt,
                  And with the winter of your vices froſt,
                  Her fruite all ſcattered her implanting ript,
                  Her name decayed, her fruition loſt:
                  Nor can ſhe proſper in a plot of vice,
                  Gaining no ſummers warmth, but winters ice.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Thou barren earth, where vertues neuer bud,
                  Thou fruitles wombe, where neuer fruits abide,
                  And thou drie-withered ſap which bears no good,
                  But the diſhonor of thy prowd hearts pride:
                  A ſeate of al deceit, deceit, deceaude,
                  Thy bliſſe, a woe, thy woe of bliſſe bereaude.
               
               
                  This place of night hath left no place for day,
                  Here neuer ſhines the ſunne of diſcipline,
                  But miſchiefe clad in ſable nights array,
                  Thoughts apparition, euill Angel
                        •
                     s ſigne,
                  Theſe raigne enhouſed with their mother Night,
                  To cloude the day of cleareſt wiſedomes light.
               
               
                  Oh you that practiſe to be chiefe in ſinne,
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Loues hate, hates friend, friends foe, foes follower,
                  What doe you gaine? what merit do you winne,
                  To be blaſpheming vices practiſer?
                  Your gaine is wiſedomes euerlaſting hate,
                  Your merit, griefe, your griefe, your liues debate.
               
               
                  Thou canſt not hide thy thoght, god made thy thoght,
                  Let this thy caucat be for thinking ill,
                  Thou knowſt that Chriſt thy liuing freedome boght,
                  To liue on earth according to his will:
                  God being thy creator, Chriſt thy bliſſe,
                  Why doſt thou erre? why doſt thou do amiſſe?
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Hee is both Iudge and witneſſe of thy deeds,
                  Hee knowes the volume which thy hart containes,
                  Chriſt skips thy faults, only thy virtue reades,
                  Redeeming thee from all thy vices paines:
                  O happy crowne of mortall mans content,
                  Sent for our ioye, our ioye in being ſent.
               
               
                  Then ſham'ſt thou not to erre, to ſin, to ſtray,
                  To come to compoſition with thy vice,
                  With new-purg'd feete to treade the ouldeſt way,
                  Lending new ſence vnto thy ould deuice?
                  Thy ſhame might flowe in thy ſin-flowing face,
                  Rather then ebbe to make an ebbe of grace.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 For hee which rules the Orbe of heauen and earth,
                  And the ineqall courſe of euery ſtarre,
                  Did knowe mans thoughts and ſecreats at his birth,
                  Whither enclinde to peace or diſcords iarre:
                  He knowes what man will be ere he be man,
                  And all his deeds in his lifes liuing ſpan.
               
               
                  Then tis vnpoſsible that earth can hide,
                  Vnrighteous actions from a righteous God,
                  For he can ſee their feete in ſin that ſlide,
                  And thoſe that lodge in righteouſneſſe abode:
                  Hee will extend his mercy on the good,
                  His wrath on thoſe in whom no vertues bud.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Many there bee, that after treſpaſſe done,
                  Will ſeeke a couert for to hide their ſhame,
                  And range about the earth, thinking to ſhunne,
                  Gods heauie wrath, and meritorious blame:
                  They thinking to flye ſin, run into ſin,
                  And thinke to end, when they do new begin.
               
               
                  God made the earth, the earth denies their ſute,
                  Nor can they harbor in the centres womb,
                  God knowes their thoughts, although their tongs be mute,
                  And heares the ſounds from forth their bodies tomb:
                  Sounds? ah no ſounds, but man himſelfe hee heares,
                  Too true a voice of mans moſt falſeſt feares.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Oh ſee deſtruction houering ore thy head,
                  Mantling her ſelfe in wickednes array,
                  Hoping to make thy body as her bed,
                  Thy vice her nutriment, thy ſoule her pray:
                  Thou haſt forſaken him that was thy guide,
                  And ſee what followes to aſſwage thy pride.
               
               
                  Thy roaring vices noyſe, hath cloyd his eares,
                  Like foaming waues they haue orewhelmde thy ioy,
                  Thy murmurings which thy whole body beares
                  Hath bred thy waile, thy waile, thy lifes annoy,
                  Vnhappy thoughts to make a ſoules decay,
                  Vnhappie ſoule in ſuffering thoughts to ſway.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Then ſith the height of mans felicitie,
                  Is plung'd within the pudle of miſdeedes:
                  And wades amongſt diſcredits infamie,
                  Blaſting the merit of his vertues ſeedes,
                  Beware of murmuring, the chiefeſt ill,
                  From whence all ſin, all vice, all paines diſtill.
               
               
                  O heauie doome proceeding from a tong,
                  Heauie light tong; tong to thy owne decay,
                  In vertue weake, in wickedneſſe too ſtrong,
                  To miſchiefe prone, from goodneſſe gone aſtray;
                  Hammer to forge miſdeedes, to temper lies,
                  Selling thy life to death, thy ſoule to cries.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Muſt death needs pay the ranſome of thy ſin,
                  With the dead carcaſſe of deſcending ſpirit?
                  Wilt thou of force be ſnared in his gin,
                  And place thy errour in deſtructions merit:
                  Life ſeeke not for thy death, death comes vnſought,
                  Buying the life which not long ſince was bought.
               
               
                  Death and deſtruction neuer needs a call,
                  They are attendants on liues pilgrimage,
                  And life to them is as their playing ball.
                  Grounded vppon deſtructions anchorage,
                  Seeke not for that which vnſought will betide,
                  Nere wants deſtruction a prouoking guide.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Will you needs act your owne deſtruction?
                  Will you needs harbour your owne ouerthrowe?
                  Or will you cauſe your owne euerſion?
                  Beginning with diſpaire, ending with woe:
                  Then die your hartes in tyrannies arraie,
                  To make acquittance of deſtructions pay.
               
               
                  What do you meditate but on your death?
                  What doe you practiſe but your liuing fall?
                  Who of you all haue any vertues breath,
                  But ready armed at a miſchiefes call?
                  God is not pleaſed at your vices ſauour,
                  But you beſt pleaſed when you loſe his fauour.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 He made not death to be your conqueror,
                  But you to conquer ouer death and hell.
                  Nor you to bee deſtructions ſeruitor,
                  Enhouſed there where Maieſtie ſhould dwell:
                  God made man to obay at his beheaſt,
                  And man to be obayde of euery beaſt,
               
               
                  He made not death to be our labours hire,
                  But we our ſelues made death through our deſart,
                  Here neuer was the kingdome of hell fire,
                  Before the brand was kindled in mans hart:
                  Now man defieth God, all creatures, man,
                  Vice flouriſheth, and vertue lieth wan.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 O fruitefull tree, whoſe roote is alwaies greene,
                  Whoſe bloſſomes euer bud, whoſe fruites encreaſe,
                  Whoſe toppe celeſtiall vertues ſeat hath been,
                  Defended by the ſoueraintie of peace:
                  This tree is righteouſnes, ô happy tree,
                  Immortalized by thine owne decree.
               
               
                  O hatefull plant whoſe roote is alwaies drie,
                  Whoſe bloſſomes neuer bud, whoſe fruites decreaſe:
                  On whom ſits the infernall deitie,
                  To take poſſeſsion of ſo foule a leaſe;
                  This plant is vice, O too vnhappy plant,
                  Euer to die, and neuer fill deaths want.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Accurſed in thy growth, dead in thy roote,
                  Cancred with ſin, ſhaken with euery winde,
                  Whoſe top dooth nothing differ from the foote,
                  Miſchiefe the ſappe, and wickedneſſe the rhinde:
                  So the vngodly like this withered tree,
                  Is ſlacke in doing good, in ill too free.
               
               
                  Like this their wicked growth, too faſt, too ſlowe,
                  Too faſt in ſlouth, too ſlow in vertues haſt,
                  They thinke their vice a friend, when tis a foe,
                  In good, in wickednes, too ſlow, too faſt:
                  And as this tree decayes, ſo do they all,
                  Each one copartner of the others fall.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter II.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     INdeede they doe preſage what wil betide,
                  With the miſgiuing verdict of miſdeeds,
                  They knowe a fall will follow after pride,
                  And in ſo foule a hart growes manie weeds:
                  Our life is ſhort, quoth they, no tis too long,
                  Lengthned with euill thoughts, and euill tong.
               
               
                  A life muſt needs be ſhort to them that dies,
                  For life once dead in ſin, doth weakely liue:
                  Theſe die in ſin, and maske in deaths diſguiſe,
                  And neuer thinke, that death new life can giue;
                  They ſay, life dead, can neuer liue againe,
                  O thoughts, ô wordes, ô deeds, fond, fooliſh, vaine.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Vilde life, to harbor where ſuch death abodes,
                  Abodes worſe then are thoughts, thoughts worſe then words,
                  Wordes halfe as ill as deeds, deeds ſorrowes odes,
                  Odes ill inchaunters of too ill records;
                  Thoghts, words, and deeds conoyined in one ſong,
                  May cauſe an Eccho from deſtructions tong.
               
               
                  Quoth they, tis chaunce whether we liue or die,
                  Borne, or abortiue, be, or neuer bee,
                  Wee worſhip fortune, ſhee's our deitie,
                  If ſhe denies, no vitall breath haue wee.
                  Here are wee placed in this orbe of death,
                  This breath once gone, we neuer looke for breath.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Betweene both life and death, both hope and feare,
                  Betweene our ioy and griefe, bliſſe and diſpaire,
                  We here poſſeſſe the fruite of what is here,
                  Borne euer for to die, and die deaths heire:
                  Our heritage is death annexde to life,
                  Our portion death, our death an endleſſe ſtrife,
               
               
                  What is our life but our liues tragedy,
                  Extinguiſhde in a momentary time?
                  And life to murder life, is cruelty
                  Vnripely withering in a flowrie prime;
                  And vrne of aſhes pleaſing but the ſhowes,
                  Once dry, the toiling ſpirit wandring goes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Like as the traces of appearing clouds,
                  Giues way when Tytan reſalutes the ſea,
                  With new-changd flames guilding the Oceans flouds,
                  Kiſsing the cabinet where I hetis lay:
                  So fares our life, when death doth giue the wound,
                  Our life is led by death, a captiue bound.
               
               
                  When Sol beſtrides his golden mountaines toppe,
                  Lightning heauens tapors with his liuing fire,
                  All gloomye powers haue their diurnall ſtoppe,
                  And neuer gaines the darknes they deſire;
                  So periſheth our name when wee are dead,
                  Our ſelues nere cald to mind, our deeds nere read.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 What is the time wee haue? what be our daies?
                  No time, but ſhadowe of what time ſhould be,
                  Daies in the place of houres which neuer ſtaies,
                  Beguiling ſight of that which ſight ſhould ſee;
                  As ſoone as the begin they haue their fine,
                  Nere waxe, ſtill waine, nere ſtay, but ſtill decline,
               
               
                  Life may be cald the ſhadowe of effect,
                  Becauſe the cloude of death doth ſhadow it,
                  Nor can our life approaching death reiect,
                  They both in one for our election ſit;
                  Death followes life in euery degree,
                  But life to followe death you neuer ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Come we, whoſe olde decrepit age doth hault,
                  Like limping winter, in our winter, ſin,
                  Faultie wee know we are, tuſh, whats a fault?
                  A ſhadowed viſion of deſtructions gin;
                  Our life begun with vice, ſo let it ende,
                  It is a ſeruile labour to amend.
               
               
                  Wee ioyde in ſin, and let our ioyes renewe,
                  We ioyed in vice, and let our ioyes remaine,
                  To preſent pleaſures future hopes enſue,
                  And ioy once loſt, let vs fetch backe againe;
                  Although our age can lend no youthfull pace,
                  Yet let our mindes follow our youthfull race.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 What though olde age lies heauie on our backe,
                  Anotomie of an age crooked clime,
                  Let minde performe that which our bodies lacke,
                  And change olde age into a youthfull time;
                  Two heauie things are more then one can beare,
                  Blacke may the garments be, the body cleare.
               
               
                  Decaying thinges be needfull of repaire,
                  Trees eaten out with years muſt needs decline,
                  Nature in time with foule doth cloude her faire,
                  Begitting youthfull daies with ages twine;
                  We liue, and while we liue, come let vs ioy,
                  To thinke of after life, tis but a toy.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Wee know God made vs in a liuing forme,
                  But weele vnmake, and make our ſelues againe;
                  Vnmake that which is made, like winters ſtorme▪
                  
                  Make vnmade things to aggrauate our paine,
                  God was our maker, and he made vs good,
                  But our deſcent ſprings from another blood.
               
               
                  He made vs for to liue, 
                        •
                     ee meane to die,
                  He made the heauen our ſeate, we make the earth,
                  Each faſhion makes a contrarietie,
                  God trueſt God, man falſeſt from his birth;
                  Quoth they, this earth ſhal be our chiefeſt heauen,
                  Our ſin the anchor, and our vice the hauen.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Let heauen in earth, and earth in heauen conſiſt,
                  This earth is heauen, this heauen is earthly heauen:
                  Repugnant earth, repugnant heauen reſiſt,
                  We ioy in earth, of other ioyes bereauen;
                  This is the Paradice of our delight;
                  Here let vs liue, and die in heauens ſpght.
               
               
                  Here let the monuments of wanton ſports
                  Be ſeated in a wantonnes diſguiſe;
                  Cloſde in the circuit of veneriall forts,
                  To feed the long ſtaru'd ſight of Amours eyes;
                  Bee this the Chronicle of our content,
                  How wee did ſport on earth, till ſport was ſpen
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 But in the glory of the brighteſt day,
                  Heauens ſmootheſt browe ſometime is furrowed,
                  And cloudes vſurp the clime in dim array,
                  Darkning the light which heauen had borrowed,
                  So in this earthly heauen wee dayly ſee,
                  That greife is placed where delight ſhould bee.
               
               
                  Here liues the righteous, bane vnto their liues,
                  O ſound from forth the hollow caue of woe,
                  Here liues age-crooked fathers, widowed wiues;
                  Poore, and yet rich in fortunes ouerthrowe;
                  Let them not liue, let vs increaſe their want,
                  Make barren their deſire, augment their ſcant▪
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Our lawe is correſpondent to our doome,
                  Our lawe to doome, is dooming lawes offence,
                  Each one agreeth in the others roome,
                  To puniſh that which ſtriues and wants defence;
                  This Cedar-like doth make the ſhrub to bend,
                  When ſhrubs doth waſt their force but to contend.
               
               
                  The weakeſt power is ſubiect to obay,
                  The muſhroms humbly kiſſe the cedars foote,
                  The cedar floriſhes when they decay,
                  Becauſe her ſtrength is grounded on a roote
                  Wee are the cedars, they the muſhromes bee,
                  Vnabled ſhrubs, vnto an abled tree.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Then ſith the weaker giues the ſtronger place,
                  The yong the elder, and the foote the top,
                  The low, the high, the hidden powers, the face,
                  All beaſtes, the Lion, euery ſpring, his ſtop;
                  Let thoſe which practiſe contrariety,
                  Be ioynd to vs with inequallity:
               
               
                  They ſay that we offend, we ſay they doe,
                  Their blame is laid on vs, our blame on them:
                  They ſtricke, and we retort the ſtrucken blowe,
                  So in each garment there's a differing hem;
                  Wee end with contraries as they begun,
                  Vnequall ſharing of what either wun.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 14 In this long conflict betweene tongue and tong,
                  Tongue new begining what one tonque did end,
                  Made this cold battell hot in eithers wrong,
                  And kept no pawſing limites to contend;
                  One tongue was eccho to the others ſound,
                  Which breathed accents between mouth & ground
               
               
                  Hee which hath vertues armes vppon his ſhield,
                  Drawes his deſcent from an eternall King:
                  Hee knowes diſcretion can make follie yeild,
                  Life conquere death, and vice a captiue bring:
                  The other tutred by his mother ſin,
                  Reſpects nor deedes, nor words, but hopes to win.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 The firſt, firſt eſſence of immortall life,
                  Reprooues the hart of thought, the eie of ſight,
                  The eare of hearing ill, the minde of ſtrife,
                  The mouth of ſpeach, the body of deſpight;
                  
                     
                        •…
                     art thinks, eies ſees, eares heares, mindes meditate,
                  Mouth vtters both the ſoule and bodies hate.
               
               
                  But Nature differing in each natures kinde,
                  Makes differing hartes, each hart, a differing thought,
                  Some hath ſhee made to ſee, ſome follie blinde,
                  Some famous, ſome obſcure▪ ſome good, ſome nought.
                  So theſe which differeth in each natures reaſon,
                  Had natures time, when t
                        •
                     me was out of ſeaſon.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16(Quoth they) he doth reprooue our hart of thinking,
                  Our eies of ſight, our eares of hearing ill,
                  Our minds, our hearts in meditation linking,
                  Our mouthes in ſpeaking of our bodies will;
                  Becauſe hart, ſight, and minde do diſagree.
                  Hee'ld make heart, ſight, and mind of their decree.
               
               
                  Hee ſaies, our hart is blinded with our eies,
                  Our eies are blinded with our blinded hart,
                  Our bodies on both parts defiled lies,
                  Our mouthes the trumpets of our vices ſmart;
                  Quoth hee, God is my Father, I his ſonne,
                  His waies I take, your wicked waies I ſhun.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 As meditated wrongs are deeper plaſte,
                  Within the deepe crue of a wronged minde,
                  So meditated wordes is neuer paſt,
                  Before their ſounds a ſetled harbour finde;
                  The wicked anſwering to the latter words,
                  Begins to ſpeake as much as ſpeach affords.
               
               
                  One tong muſt anſwer other tongues replie,
                  Beginning boaſts, requires an ending fall;
                  Wordes liuely ſpoke, do ſomtimes wordles dye,
                  If not, liue Ecchoes vnto ſpeeches call;
                  Let not the ſhadow ſmother vp the deed,
                  The outward leafe differs from in ward ſeed.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 The ſhape and ſhewe of ſubſtance and effect,
                  Doth ſhape the ſubſtance in the ſhadowes hue,
                  And ſhadowe put in ſubſtance, will neglect
                  The wonted ſhadowe of not being true:
                  Let ſubſtance followe ſubſtance, ſhowe a ſhowe,
                  And let not ſubſtance for the ſhadowe goe.
               
               
                  Hee that could giue ſuch admonition,
                  Such vaunting wordes, ſuch words confirming vaunts,
                  As if his tongue had mounted to ambition,
                  Or clim'd the turrets which vaine-glory haunts:
                  Now let his father, if he be his ſonne,
                  Vndoe the knot which his prowd boaſts haue ſpun.
               
               
                  Wee are his enimies, his chaine our hands,
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Our wordes his fetters, and our hart his caue,
                  Our ſterne embracements are his ſeruile bands,
                  Where is the helper nowe which he ſhould haue?
                  In priſon like himſelfe, not to be found,
                  Hee wanteth helpe himſelfe to be vnbound.
               
               
                  Then ſith thy father beares it patiently,
                  To ſuffer torments, griefe, rebuke, and blame,
                  Tis needfull thou ſhouldſt beare equallity,
                  To ſee if meekeneſſe harbour in thy name,
                  Help father, for thy ſonne in priſon lies,
                  Helpe, ſonne, or elſe thy helples father dies.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Thus is the righteous God and righteous man,
                  Drownde in obliuion with this vices raigne,
                  God wanteth power (ſay they) of what we can,
                  The other would performe that which is vaine;
                  Both faultie in one fault, and both alike,
                  Muſt haue the ſtroke which our lawes iudgements ſtrike
               
               
                  He calls himſelfe a ſonne, from heauens deſcent,
                  What can earths force aualie gainſt heauens defence?
                  His life by immortalitie is lent:
                  Then how can puniſhment his wrath incenſe?
                  Though death her ſelfe in his arraignment decke,
                  He hath his lifes preſeruer at a becke.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 As doth the Baſiliske with poyſoned ſight,
                  Blinde euery function of a mortall eye,
                  Diſarme the bodies powers of vitall might,
                  Rob heart of thought, make liuing life to die:
                  So doth the wicked with their vices looke,
                  Infect the ſpring of cleareſt vertues brooke.
               
               
                  This Baſiliske mortalities chiefe foe,
                  And to the hearts long-knitted arterie;
                  Doth ſometime periſh at her ſhadowes ſhowe,
                  Poyſning her ſelfe with her owne poyſoned eie:
                  Needs muſt the ſting fall out with ouer-harming,
                  Needs muſt the tong burne out in ouer-warming.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 So fares it with the practiſers of vice,
                  Laden with many venomous adders ſtings,
                  Sometimes are blinded with their owne deuice,
                  And tunes that ſong which their deſtruction ſings;
                  Their miſcheife blindeth their miſcheiuous eies,
                  Like Baſiliskes which in their ſhadow dies.
               
               
                  They goe and yet they cannot ſee their feete,
                  Like blinded pilgrimes in an vnknowen way,
                  Blind in perceiuing things which be moſt meete,
                  But neede nor ſight nor guide to goe aſtray;
                  Tel them of good, they cannot vnderſtand,
                  But tell them of a miſcheife, that's at hand.
               
               
                  The Baſiliske, was made to blind the ſight,
                  
                     
                        verse 23 24 The adder for to ſting, the worme to creepe,
                  The viper to deuoure, the dog to bite,
                  The nightingale to wake when others ſleepe;
                  Onely man differs from his makers will,
                  Vndoing what is good, and doing ill.
               
               
                  A god-like face he had, a heauenly hue,
                  Without corruption, image without ſpottes.
                  But now is metamorphoſed anewe,
                  Full of corruption, image full of blottes;
                  Blotted by him that is the plot of euill,
                  Vndone, corrupted, vanquiſht by the deuill.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter III.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 BVt euery cloude can not hide Phoebus face,
                  Nor ſhut the caſement of his liuing flame,
                  Nor is there euery ſoule which wanteth grace,
                  Nor euery hart ſeducde with miſchiefs name;
                  Life cannot liue without corruption,
                  World cannot be without deſtruction.
               
               
                  Nor is the body all corrupt, or world
                  Bent wholie vnto wickednes aſſault,
                  The adder is not alwaies ſeene vncurlde,
                  Nor euery ſoule found guiltie in one fault;
                  Some good, ſome bad, but thoſe whom vertues guard,
                  Heauen is their hauen, comfort their reward.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 3 Thrice happy habitation of delight,
                  Thrice happy ſtep of immortalitie,
                  Thrice happy ſoules to gaine ſuch heauenly ſight,
                  Springing from heauens perpetuitie;
                  Oh peacefull place, but oh thrice peacefull ſoules,
                  Whom neither threats, nor ſtrife, nor wars control▪
                  
               
               
                  They are not like the wicked, for they liue,
                  Nor they, like to the righteous, for they die;
                  Each of their liues a differing nature giue,
                  One thinkes that life endes with mortalitie,
                  And that the righteous neuer liue againe,
                  But die as ſubiects to a grieuous paine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 What labouring ſoule refuſeth for to ſweat,
                  Knowing his hire, his paiment, his reward?
                  To ſuffer winters colde, and ſummers heate,
                  Aſſured of his labours due regard?
                  The Bee with ſummers toile will lade her hiue,
                  In winters froſt to keepe herſelfe aliue.
               
               
                  And what diuineſt ſpirit would not toile,
                  And ſuffer many torments, many paines,
                  This worlds deſtruction, heauie laboures foile,
                  When heauen is their hire, heauens ioy their gaines?
                  Who would not ſuffer torments for to die,
                  When deaths reward is immortalitie?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Paine is the entrance to eternall ioy,
                  Death endeth life, and death beginneth life,
                  Beginneth happy, endeth in annoy,
                  Begins immortall peace, ends mortall ſtrife;
                  Then ſeeing death and paines bring ioy and heauen,
                  What need we feare deaths pain when life is giuen?
               
               
                  Say ſicknes or infairmities diſeaſe,
                  (As many harmes hang ouer mortall heades)
                  Should be his worlds reward, yet heauen hath eaſe,
                  A ſalue to cure, and quiet reſting beds;
                  God maketh in earths world, lament our pleaſure.
                  That in heauēs world, delight might be our treaſure
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Faire may the ſhadow bee; the ſubſtance foule,
                  After the 
                        ••…
                     all followeth the truſt,
                  The cleareſt skinne may haue the ſouleſt ſoule,
                  The pureſt golde will looner take the ruſte:
                  The brooke though nere ſo cleare may take ſome foile,
                  The hart thogh nere ſo ſtrong may take ſome foile.
               
               
                  Wouldſt thou be counted iuſt? make thy ſelfe iuſt,
                  Oh purifie thy mire be ſpotted heart,
                  For god doth trie thy actions ere he truſt,
                  Thy faith, thy deeds, thy wordes, and what thou art,
                  He will receiue no mud, for cleareſt ſprings,
                  Nor thy vnrighteous wordes for righteous things.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 As God is perfit God; and perfit good,
                  So hee accepteth none but perfit mindes,
                  They euer proſper, flouriſh, liue, and bud,
                  Like bleſſed plants, far from deſtructions winds:
                  Still bud, nere fade, ſtill flouriſh, nere decay,
                  Stil riſe, nere fall, ſtill ſpring, nere fade away.
               
               
                  Who would not couet to be ſuch a plant?
                  Who would not wiſh to ſtand in ſuch a ground?
                  Sith it doth neither fruit nor blesſing want,
                  Nor ought which in this plant might not be found;
                  They are the righteous which enioye this earth,
                  The figure of an euer-bearing birth.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 The ſmall is alwayes ſubiect to the great,
                  The yong to him which is of elder time,
                  The loweſt place vnto the higheſt ſeate,
                  And pale-facde Phoebe to bright Phoebus clime,
                  Vice is not gouerner of vertues place,
                  But bluſhes for to ſee ſee ſo bright a face.
               
               
                  Vertue is chiefe, and vertue will be chiefe,
                  Chiefe good, and chiefe Astraea, Iuſtice mate,
                  Both for to puniſh and to yeeld reliefe,
                  And haue dominion ouer euery ſtate:
                  To rghit the wrongs which wickednes hath done,
                  Deliuering Nations from life-laſting mone.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Oh you whoſe cauſes plungeth in deſpaire,
                  Sad facde petitioners with griefes requeſt:
                  What ſeeke you? heeres nor Iuſtice, nor her heire,
                  But woe and ſorrow with deaths dumbe arreſt:
                  Turne vp your woe blinde eyes vnto the skie,
                  There ſits the Iudge can yeeld you remedie.
               
               
                  Truſt in his power, he is the trueſt God,
                  True God, true Iudge, true Iuſtice, and true guide;
                  All trueth is placed in his trueths abode,
                  All vertues ſeated at his verouous ſide:
                  He will regarde your ſure, and eaſe your plaint,
                  And mollifie your miſeries conſtraint.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Then ſhall you ſee the Iudges of the earth,
                  Summoned with the trumpet of his ire,
                  To giue account and reckning from their birth,
                  Where worthy or vnworthy of their hire:
                  The godly ſhall receiue their labours triall,
                  The wicked ſhall receiue their ioyes deniall.
               
               
                  They which did ſleepe in ſinne, and not regarded
                  The poore mans fortune, proſtrate at their feete,
                  Euen as they dealt, ſo ſhall they be rewarded,
                  When they their toyled ſoules deſtruction meet,
                  From Iudges they petitioners ſhall be,
                  Yet want the ſight which they do ſue to ſee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 That labour which is grounded on delight,
                  That hope which reaſon doth enrich with hap,
                  That merite which is placde in wiſedomes might,
                  Secure from miſchiefes baite, or follies clap:
                  Wits labour, reaſons hope, and wiſedomess merit,
                  All three in one, make one thrice happy ſpirit.
               
               
                  Why ſet I happineſſe fore mortall eyes,
                  Which couets to be drencht in miſery?
                  Mantling their fooliſh mindes in follies guiſe,
                  Deſpiſing wiſedomes perpetuitie:
                  Sins labour, follies hope, and vices merit,
                  Theſe three in one, make a thrice curſed ſpirit.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Vaine hope muſt needs conſiſt in what is vaine;
                  All fooliſh laboures flowes from follies teares,
                  Vnprofitable workes proceed from paine,
                  And paine ill labours dueſt guerdon beares:
                  Their vanities in one, and one in three,
                  Make three paines one, and one vncertaintie,
               
               
                  A wicked King, makes a more wicked land,
                  Heads once infected, ſoone corrupts the feete,
                  If the tree falls, the branches cannot ſtand,
                  Nor children, bee their parents indiſcreet;
                  The man infects the wife, the wife the childe,
                  Like birdes, which in one neſt bee all defilde.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The field which neuer was ordainde to beare,
                  Is happier farre, then a ſtill tilled ground,
                  This ſleepes with quietnes in euery yeare,
                  The other curſt if any tares bee found,
                  The barren happier then ſhee that beares,
                  This brings foorth ioye, the other tares and teares.
               
               
                  The Eunuch neuer lay in vices bed,
                  The barren woman, neuer brought foorth ſin,
                  Theſe two in heauens happines are led,
                  Shee fruite in ſoule, hee fruite in faith doth win:
                  O rare and happy man, for euer bleſt,
                  O rare and happy woman, heauens gueſt.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 1 Who ſeekes to reape, before the corne be ripe?
                  Who lookes for harueſt among winters froſt?
                  Or who in greife, will followe pleaſures pipe?
                  What mariner can ſaile vppon the coaſt?
                  That which is done in time, is done in ſeaſon,
                  And things done out of time, is out of reaſon.
               
               
                  The glorious labour is in doing good,
                  In times obſeruance, and in natures will,
                  Whoſe fruite is alſo glorious for our foode,
                  If glory may conſiſt in labours skill:
                  Whoſe roote is wiſdome, which ſhal neuer wither,
                  But ſpring, and ſprout, and loue, and liue together.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 But euery ground doth not beare bleſſed plants,
                  Nor euery plant brings foorth expected frute,
                  What this ſame ground may haue, another wants,
                  Nor are all cauſes anſwered with one ſute:
                  That tree whoſe roote is ſound, whoſe grounding ſtrong,
                  May firmely ſtand when others lie along.
               
               
                  View natures beautie, marke her chaunging hue,
                  Shee is not alwaies foule, nor alwaies faire,
                  Chaſte and vnchaſte ſhe is, true and vntrue,
                  And ſome ſprings from her in a luſtfull aire,
                  And theſe adulterers be, whoſe ſeede ſhall periſh,
                  Neuer ſhall luſt and wickednes long floriſh.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Although the flint be hard, the water ſoft,
                  Yet is it molifide with lighteſt drops,
                  Hard is the water, when the wind's aloft,
                  Small things in time may vanquiſh greateſt ſtops:
                  The longer growes the tree, the greater moſſe,
                  The longer ſoile remaines, the more the droſſe.
               
               
                  The longer that the wicked liues on earth,
                  The greater is their paine, their ſin, their ſhame;
                  The greater vices raigne, and vertues dearth,
                  The greater goodnes lacke, and miſchiefes name;
                  When in their youth no honour they could get,
                  Olde age could neuer pay ſo yong a debt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 To place an honour in diſhonours place,
                  Were but to make diſparagement of both,
                  Both enimies they could not brooke the caſe,
                  For honor to ſubuert diſhonors growth:
                  Diſhonor will not chaunge for honours roome,
                  Shee hopes to ſtay after their bodies doome.
               
               
                  Or liue they long, or die they ſodainly,
                  They haue nor hope, nor comfort of rewarde,
                  Their hope of comfort is iniquitie,
                  The barre by which they from their ioyes are bard:
                  O olde newe end, made to begin newe griefe,
                  O new beginning, end of old reliefe.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter IIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     IF happines may harbour in content,
                  If life in loue, if loue in better life;
                  Then vnto many happines is lent,
                  And long departed ioy might then be rife:
                  Some happy if they liue, ſome if they dye,
                  Happy in life, happy in tragedy.
               
               
                  Content is happines, becauſe content,
                  Barenes and barrennes is vertues grace,
                  Bare, becauſe wealth to pouertie is bent,
                  Barren, in that it ſcornes ill fortunes place:
                  The barren earth is barren of her tares,
                  The barren woman barren of her cares.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 The ſoule of vertue is eternitie,
                  All-filling eſſence of diuineſt rage,
                  And vertues true eternall memory,
                  Is barrennes, her ſoules eternall gage:
                  O happy ſoule that is engaged there,
                  And pawnes his life that barren badge to weare.
               
               
                  See how the multitude with humble harts,
                  Lies proſtrate for to welcome her returne;
                  See how they mourne and waile when ſhe departs
                  See how they make their teares her trophees vrne:
                  Being preſent they deſire her, being gone,
                  Their hot deſire is turnde to hoter moane.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 As euery one hath not one natures mould,
                  So euery one hath not one natures minde;
                  Some think that droſſe which others take for golde,
                  Each difference commeth from a differing kinde:
                  Some do deſpiſe what others do imbrace,
                  Some praiſe the thing which others do diſgrace.
               
               
                  The barren doth embrace their barrenneſſe,
                  And holde it as a vertue worthy meede:
                  The other calles conception happineſſe,
                  And holde it as a vertue worthy deede:
                  The one is firmely grounded on a rocke,
                  The other billows game and tempeſts mocke.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Sometime the nettle groweth with the roſe,
                  The nettle hath a ſting, the roſe a thorne,
                  This ſtings the hand, the other prickes the noſe,
                  Harming that ſcent which her ſweete birth had borne;
                  Weeds among herbs, herbs among weeds are found
                  Tares in the mantle of a corny ground.
               
               
                  The nettles growth is faſt, the roſes ſlow,
                  The weeds outgrow the herbs, the tares the corne,
                  Theſe may be well compared to vices ſhow,
                  Which couets for to grow ere it be borne:
                  As greateſt danger doth purſue faſt going,
                  So greateſt danger doth enſue faſt growing.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 The talleſt Cedar hath the greateſt winde,
                  The higheſt tree is ſubiect vnto falles,
                  High ſoaring Eagles ſoone are ſtrucken blinde,
                  The tong muſt needes be hoarſe with many calles:
                  The wicked thinking for to touch the skie,
                  Are blaſted with the fier of heauens eie.
               
               
                  So like aſcending and deſcending aire,
                  Both duskie vapours from two humerous cloudes,
                  Lies withered the glory of their faire,
                  Vnpleaſant branches wrencht in follies floudes:
                  Vnprofitable fruites like to a weede,
                  Made onely to infect, and not to feede.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Made for to make a faſt, and not a feaſt,
                  Made rather for infection than for meate,
                  Not worthy to be eaten of a beaſt,
                  Thy taſte ſo ſower, thy poyſon is ſo great:
                  Thou mayſt be well compared to a tree,
                  Becauſe thy branches are as ill as thee▪
                  
               
               
                  Thou haſt begot thine owne confuſion,
                  The witneſſes of what thou doſt beginne,
                  Thy doomers in thy lifes concluſion,
                  Which will vnaskt and askt reueale thy ſinne:
                  Needs muſt the new hatched birds bewray the neſt,
                  When they are nurſed in a ſtep-dames breaſt.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 But righteouſnes is of another ſex,
                  Her roote is from an euerlaſting ſeede,
                  No weake-vnable grounding doth connex,
                  Her neuer-limited memorialles deed:
                  She hath no branches for a tempeſts pray,
                  No deedes, but ſcornes to yeeld vnto decay.
               
               
                  She hath no withered fruit, no ſhew of ſtore,
                  But perfect eſſence of a compleate power,
                  Say that ſhe dies to world, ſhe liues the more,
                  As who ſo righteous but doth waite deaths hower?
                  Who knowes not death to be the way to reſt?
                  And he that neuer dies is neuer bleſt,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Happy is he that liues, twice he that dies,
                  Thrice happy he which neither liu'd, nor died,
                  Which neuer ſaw the earth with mortall eies,
                  Which neuer knew what miſeries are tried:
                  Happy is life, twice happy is our death,
                  But three times thriſe he, which had neuer breath.
               
               
                  Some thinkes that pleaſure is atchieude by yeares,
                  Or by maintaining of a wretched life,
                  When, out alas, it heapeth teares on teares,
                  Griefe vpon griefe, ſtrife on beginning ſtrife:
                  Pleaſure is weake, if meaſured by length,
                  The oldeſt ages hath the weaker ſtrength.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Three turnings are containde in mortal courſe,
                  Old, meane, and yong; meane, and old brings age,
                  The youth hath ſtrength, the meane decaying force,
                  The old are weake, yet ſtrong in angers rage:
                  Three turnings in one age, ſtrong, weak, & weaker,
                  Yet age, nor youth, is youths or ages breaker.
               
               
                  Some ſayes that youth is quicke in iudging cauſes,
                  Some ſayes that age is witty, graue, and wiſe:
                  I holde of ages ſide with their applauſes,
                  Which iudges with their hearts, not with their eyes:
                  I ſay graue wiſedome lies in grayeſt heads,
                  And vndefiled liues in ages beds.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 God is both graue and old, yet yong and new,
                  Graue becauſe aged, aged becauſe yong;
                  Long youth may wel be called ages hew,
                  And hath no differing ſound vpon the tongue:
                  God old, becauſe eternities are old,
                  Yong, for eternities one motion hold.
               
               
                  Some in their birth, ſome dies when they are borne,
                  Some borne, and ſome abortiue, yet all die,
                  Some in their youth, ſome in old age forlorne,
                  Some, neyther yong nor old, but equally:
                  The righteous, when he liueth with the ſinner,
                  Doth hope for death, his better lifes beginner.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The ſwine delights to wallow in the mire,
                  The giddy drunkard in exceſſe of wine,
                  He may corrupt the pureſt reaſons gire,
                  And ſhee turne vertue into vices ſigne:
                  Miſchiefe is mire, and may infect that ſpring,
                  Which euery flowe and ebbe of vice doth bring.
               
               
                  Fiſhes are oft deceiued by the baite,
                  The baite-deceiuing fiſh doth fiſh deceiue;
                  So righteous are allurde by ſins deceit,
                  And oft inticed into ſinners weaue:
                  The righteous be as fiſhes to their gin,
                  Beguilde, deceiude, allured into ſin.
               
               
                  The fiſher hath a baite deceiuing fiſh,
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The fowler hath a net deceiuing fowles,
                  Both wiſheth to obtaine their ſnaring wiſh,
                  Obſeruing time like night-obſeruing owles:
                  The fiſher layes his baite, fowler his net,
                  He hopes for fiſh, the other birds to get.
               
               
                  This fiſher is the wicked, vice his baite,
                  This fowler is the ſinner, ſinne his net,
                  The ſimple-righteous-falles in their deceit,
                  And like a prey, a fiſh, a fowle beſet:
                  A baite, a net, obſcuring what is good,
                  Like fiſh and fowle tooke vp for vices food.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 14 But baites, nor nets, gins, nor beguiling ſnares,
                  Vice, nor the vicious ſinner, not the ſin
                  Can ſhut the righteous into priſons cares,
                  Or ſet deceiuing baites to mew them in:
                  They know their liues deliuerer, heauens God,
                  Can breake their baites and ſnares with iuſtice rod.
               
               
                  When vice abounds on earth, and earth in vice,
                  Then vertue keepes her chamber in the skie,
                  To ſhun the miſchiefe which her baites intice,
                  Her ſnares, her nets, her guiles, her companie:
                  Aſſoone as miſcheife raignes vpon the earth,
                  Heauen calls the righteous to a better birth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 The blinded eies can neuer ſee the way,
                  The blinded heart can neuer ſee to ſee,
                  The blinded ſoule doth alwayes go aſtray,
                  All three want ſight, in being blinde all three:
                  Blinde and yet ſee, they ſee and yet are blinde,
                  The face hath eies, but eyeleſſe is the minde.
               
               
                  They ſee with outward ſight Gods heauenly grace,
                  His grace, his loue, his mercy on his Saints,
                  With outward faced eie, and eied face,
                  Their outward body inwarde ſoule depaintes:
                  Of hearts chiefe eye they chiefely are bereſt,
                  And yet the ſhadowe of two eyes are left.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Some blinded be in face, and ſome in ſoule,
                  The faces eyes are not incurable,
                  The other wanteth healing to be whole,
                  Or ſeemes to ſome to be indurable:
                  Looke in a blinded eie, bright is the glaſſe,
                  Though brightnes baniſhed from what it was.
               
               
                  So (quoth the righteous) are theſe blinded hearts,
                  The outward glaſſe is cleare, the ſubſtance darke,
                  Both ſeeme as if one tooke the others parts,
                  Yet both in one haue not one brightnes ſparke:
                  The outwarde eye, is but deſtructions reader,
                  Wanting the inwarde eye to be the leader.
               
               
                  Our body may be calde a common-weale,
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Our head the chiefe, for reaſon harbours there,
                  From thence comes hearts and ſoules vnited zeale,
                  All elſe inferiours be, which ſtande in feare,
                  This common-weale rul'd by diſcretions eye,
                  Liues likewiſe if ſhee liue, dies if ſhee die.
               
               
                  Then how can weale, or wealth common, or proper,
                  Long ſtand, long flowe, long flouriſh, long remaine,
                  When wail is weales, & ſtelth is welths chiefe ſtopper▪
                  
                  When ſight is gone which neuer comes againe:
                  The wicked ſees the righteous looſe their breath,
                  But knowe not what rewarde they gaine by death.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 Though blinde in ſight, yet can they ſee to harme,
                  See to deſpiſe, ſee to deride and mocke,
                  But their reuenge lies in Gods mighty arme,
                  Scorning to chuſe them for his choſen flocke:
                  He is the ſhepheard, godly are his ſheepe,
                  They wake in ioy, theſe in deſtruction ſleepe.
               
               
                  The godly ſleepe in eies, but wake in hearts,
                  The wicked ſleepe in hearts, but wake in eies;
                  Theſe euer-wake eyes are no ſleepie partes,
                  Theſe euer ſleepe, for ſleepe is hearts diſguiſe:
                  Their waking eies do ſee their hearts lament,
                  While heart ſecurely ſleepes in eyes content.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 20 If they awake, ſleepes image doth moleſt them,
                  And beates into their waking memories,
                  If they doe ſleepe, ioy-waking doth deteſt them,
                  Yet beates into their ſleeping arteries:
                  Sleeping or waking they haue feare on feare,
                  Waking or ſleeping they are ne're the neare.
               
               
                  If waking they remember what they are,
                  What ſins they haue commmitted in their waking,
                  If ſleeping they forget tormentings fare,
                  How ready they haue beene in miſchiefes making:
                  When they awake, their wickednes betrayes them,
                  When they do ſleepe, deſtruction diſmayes them.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter V.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     AS theſe two ſlumbers haue two contraries,
                  One ſlumber in the face, one in the minde,
                  So their two caſements two varieties,
                  One vnto heauen, and one to hell combinde:
                  The face is flattery, and her manſion hell,
                  The minde is iuſt, this doth in heauen dwell.
               
               
                  The face heauing her heauie eie-lids vp,
                  From foorth the chamber of eternall night,
                  Sees vertue holde plenties repleniſht cup,
                  And boldly ſtands in Gods and heauens ſight:
                  Shee opening the windowes of her breſt,
                  Sees how the wicked reſt in their vnreſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 3 Quoth ſhee, thoſe whom the curtaine of decay,
                  Hath tragically ſummoned to paine,
                  Were once the cloudes, and clouders of my day,
                  Deprauers and depriuers of my gaine;
                  The wicked hearing this deſcending ſound,
                  Feare ſtrucke their lims to the pale-clothed ground.
               
               
                  Amazed at the freedome of her words,
                  Their tongue-tide accents droue them to diſpaire,
                  And made them change their mindes to woes records,
                  And ſay within themſelues, lo what wee are:
                  We haue had vertue in deriſions place,
                  And made a parable of her diſgrace.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 See where ſhe ſits enthronizde in the skie,
                  See, ſee, her labours crowne vpon her head,
                  See how the righteous liue which erſt did die,
                  From death to life with vertues loadſta
                        •
                     re led,
                  See thoſe whome we derided, they are bleſt,
                  They heauens, not hels, we hells, not heauens gueſt.
               
               
                  We thought the righteous had beene furies ſonne,
                  With inconſiderate ſpeech, vnſtayed way,
                  We thought that death had his diſhonour wonne,
                  And would haue made his life deſtructions pray:
                  But we were mad, they iuſt, we fooles, they wiſe,
                  We ſhame, they praiſe, we loſſe, they haue the priſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5 We thoght thē fools, when we our ſelues were fooles
                  We thoght them mad, when we our ſelues were mad,
                  The heate which ſprang from them, our follie cooles,
                  We find in vs, which we but thought they had:
                  We thought their end had beene diſhonors pledge,
                  They but ſurueyd the place, we made the hedge.
               
               
                  We ſee how they are bleſt, how we are curſt,
                  How they accepted are, and we refuſde,
                  And how our bands are tied, their bands are burſt,
                  Our faults are hourely blamde, their faults excuſde:
                  See how heauens gratulate their welcomd ſight,
                  Which comes to take poſſeſsion of their right.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 But oh, too late we ſee our wickedneſſe,
                  Too late we lie in a repentant tombe,
                  Too late we ſmoothe olde haires with happineſſe,
                  Too late we ſeeke to eaſe our bodies doome:
                  Now falſhoode hath aduauncde her forged banner,
                  Too late wee ſeeme to verefie truths manner.
               
               
                  The ſunne of righteouſnes which ſhould haue ſhinde,
                  And made our hearts the cabines of his Eaſt,
                  Is now made cloudy night through vices winde,
                  And lodgeth with his downefall in the weſt:
                  That ſummers day which ſhuld haue bin nights bar
                  Is now made winter in her icie carre▪
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Too much our feet haue gone, but neuer right▪
                  
                  Much labour we haue tooke, but none in good,
                  We wearied our ſelues with our delight,
                  Endangering our ſelues to pleaſe our moode:
                  Our feete did labour much, twas for our pleaſure,
                  We wearied our ſelues, twas for our leaſure.
               
               
                  In ſinnes perfection was our labour ſpent,
                  In wickednes preferment we did haſte,
                  To ſuffer perills wee were al content,
                  For the aduancement of our vices paſt:
                  Throgh many dangerous waies our feet haue gone,
                  But yet the way of God we haue not knowne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 9 Wee which haue made our harts a ſea of pride,
                  With huge riſſe billowes of a ſwelling minde,
                  With toſsing tumults of a flowing tide,
                  Leauing our laden bodyes plungde behinde;
                  What trafficke haue we got? our ſelues are drownd,
                  Our ſoules in hell, our bodies in the ground.
               
               
                  Where are our riches now? like vs conſumde,
                  Where is our pompe? decaide, wher's glory? dead;
                  Where is the wealth of which wee all preſumde▪
                  
                  where is our profit? gone, our ſelues? miſled:
                  All theſe are like to ſhadowes what they were,
                  There is nor wealth, nor pompe, nor glory here.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 The diall giues a caueat of the houre,
                  Thou canſt not ſee it go, yet it is gone,
                  Like this the diall of thy fortunes power,
                  Which fades by ſtealth till thou art left alone.
                  Thy eies may well perceiue thy goods are ſpent,
                  Yet can they not perceiue which way they went.
               
               
                  Lo, eu'ne as ſhips ſailing on Tethis lap,
                  Plowes vp the furrowes of hard grounded waues,
                  Enforced for to go by Eoles clap,
                  Making with ſharpeſt teeme the water graues:
                  The ſhip once paſt, the trace cannot be found,
                  Although ſhee digged in the waters ground.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Or as an Eagle with her ſoaring wings▪
                  
                  Scorning the duſty carpet of the earth,
                  Exempt from all her clogging geſſes, flings
                  Vp to the ayre, to ſhew her mounting birth:
                  And euery flight doth take a higher pitch,
                  To haue the golden ſunne her wings enrich.
               
               
                  Yet none can ſee the paſſage of her flight,
                  But onely heare her houering in the skie,
                  Beating the light winde with her being light,
                  Or parting through the ayre where ſhe might flie:
                  The eare may heare, the eye can neuer ſee,
                  What courſe ſhe takes, or where ſhe meanes to bee.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Or as an arrowe which is made to goe,
                  Through the tranſparent and coole-blowing ayre,
                  Feeding vpon the forces of the bowe,
                  Elſe forceleſſe lies in wanting her repaire:
                  Like as the branches when the tree is lopt,
                  Wanteth the forces which they forceleſſe cropt.
               
               
                  The arrow being fed with ſtrongeſt ſhot,
                  Doth part the loweſt elementall breath,
                  Yet neuer ſeparates the ſoft ayres knot,
                  Nor neuer woundes the ſtill-foote windes to death▪
                  
                  It doth ſeioyne and ioyne the ayre together,
                  Yet none there is can tell, or where, or whither.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 So are our liues, now they beginne, now end,
                  Now liue, now die, now borne, now fit for graue,
                  As ſoone as we haue breath, ſo ſoone we ſpend,
                  Not hauing that which our content would haue:
                  As ſhips, as birds, as arrowes, all as one,
                  Euen ſo the traces of our liues are gone.
               
               
                  A thing not ſeene to go, yet going ſeene,
                  And yet not ſhewing any ſigne to go;
                  Euen thus the ſhadowes of our liues haue beene,
                  Which ſhewes to fade, and yet no vertues ſhew:
                  How can a thing conſumde with vice be good?
                  Or how can falſhoode beare true vertues foode?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Vaine hope to thinke that wickednes hath bearing▪
                  
                  When ſhe is drowned in obliuions ſea,
                  Yet can ſhe not forget preſumptions wearing,
                  Nor yet the badge of vanities decay:
                  Her fruites are cares, her cares are vanities,
                  Two, both in one deſtructions liueries.
               
               
                  Vaine hope is like a vane turnde with each winde,
                  Tis like a ſmoake ſcattred with euery ſtorme,
                  Like duſt, ſometime before, ſometime behinde,
                  Like a thin ſome made in the vaineſt forme:
                  This hope is like to them which neuer ſtay,
                  But comes, and goes againe, all in one day.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 View Natures gifts, ſome gifts are rich▪ ſome poore,
                  Some barren grounds there are, ſom clothd with fruit,
                  Nor hath all nothing, nor hath all her ſtore,
                  Nor can all creatures ſpeake, nor are all mute:
                  All die by nature, being borne by nature,
                  So all change feature, being borne with feature.
               
               
                  This life is hers, this dead, dead is her power,
                  Her bounds begins, and ends in mortall ſtate,
                  Whom ſhe on earth accounteth as her flower,
                  May be in heauen condemnde of mortall hate:
                  But he whom vertue iudges for to liue,
                  The Lord his life and due reward will giue.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 The ſeruant of a king, may be a king,
                  And he that was a king, a ſeruile ſlaue;
                  Swans before death a funerall dirge do ſing,
                  And waues their wings agen ill fortunes waue.
                  He that is loweſt in this lowly earth,
                  May be the higheſt in celeſtiall birth.
               
               
                  The rich may be vniuſt, in being rich,
                  For riches do corrupt and not correct,
                  The poore may come to higheſt honours pitch,
                  And haue heauens crowne for mortall lifes reſpect:
                  Gods hands ſhall couer them from al their foes,
                  Gods arme defend them from misfortunes blowes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 18 19 20 His hand eterniti 
                        〈◊〉
                      his arme, his force,
                  His armour zelouſie, his breaſt-plate heauen,
                  His helmet iudgement, iuſtice, and remorce,
                  His ſhield is victories immortall ſteauen:
                  The world his challenge, and his wrath his ſword,
                  Miſchiefe his foe, his ayde his goſpels word.
               
               
                  His arme doth ouerthrowe his enimie,
                  His breaſt-plate, ſinne, his helmet death and hell,
                  His ſhield preparde againſt mortallitie,
                  His ſword gainſt them which in the world do dwell:
                  So ſhall vice, ſinne, and death, world and the deuill,
                  Be ſlaine by him which ſlayeth euery euill.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 All heauen ſhall be in armes againſt earths world,
                  The ſunne ſhall dart foorth fire commixt with bloud,
                  The blazing ſtarres from heauen ſhall be hurlde,
                  The pale-facde moone againſt the Ocean floud:
                  Then ſhall the thundring chambers of the skie,
                  Be lightned with the blaze of Titans eie.
               
               
                  The cloudes ſhall then be bent like bended bowes,
                  To ſhoote the thundring arrowes of the ayre,
                  Thicke haile and ſtones ſhall fall on heauens foes,
                  And Tethis ouerflowe in her deſpayre:
                  The moone ſhall ouer-fill her horny hood,
                  With Neptunes Oceans ouer-flowing flood.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 The winde ſhall be no longer kept in caues,
                  But burſt the iron cages of the clouds?
                  And Aeole ſhall reſigne his office ſtaues,
                  Suffering the windes to combate with the flouds:
                  So ſhall the earth with ſeas be paled in,
                  As erſt it hath beene ouerflowde with ſin.
               
               
                  Thus ſhall the earth weepe for her wicked ſonnes,
                  And curſe the concaue of her tyred wombe,
                  Into whoſe hollowe mouth the water runnes,
                  Making wet wildernes her drieſt tombe;
                  Thus, thus, iniquitie hath raignd ſo long,
                  That earth on earth is puniſht for her wrong.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter VI.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 2 AFter this conflict betweene God and man,
                  Remorce tooke harbour in Gods angry breaſt,
                  
                     Astraea to be pitifull began,
                  All heauenly powers to lie in mercies reſt:
                  Forthwith the voice of God did redeſcend,
                  And his Aſtraea warnde all to amend.
               
               
                  To you I ſpeake, (quoth ſhee) heare, learne, and marke,
                  You that be Kings, Iudges, and Potentates,
                  Giue ere, (I ſay,) wiſedome your ſtrongeſt arke,
                  Sends me as meſſenger, to end debates:
                  Giue care, (I ſay) you Iudges of the earth,
                  Wiſedome is borne, ſeeke out for wiſedomes birth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 3 This heauenly ambaſſage from wiſedomes tong,
                  Worthy the volume of all heauens skie,
                  I bring as meſſenger to right your wrong,
                  If ſo her ſacred name might neuer die:
                  I bring you happy tidings, ſhe is borne,
                  Like golden ſunne-beames from a ſiluer morne.
               
               
                  The Lord hath ſeated you in iudgements ſeat,
                  Let wiſedome place you in diſcretions places,
                  Two vertues, one, will make one vertue great,
                  And drawe more vertues with attractiue faces:
                  Be iuſt and wiſe, for God is iuſt and wiſe,
                  He thoughts, he words, he words, and actions tries.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 5 If you neglect your offices decrees,
                  Heape new lament on long-toſſt miſeries,
                  Doe and vndoe by reaſon of degrees,
                  And drowne your ſentences in briberies:
                  Fauour and puniſh, ſpare and keepe in awe,
                  Set and vnſet, plant and ſupplant the lawe.
               
               
                  Oh bee aſſur'd there is a Iudge aboue,
                  Which will not let iniuſtice flouriſh long,
                  If tempt him, you, your owne temptation moue,
                  Proceeding from the iudgement of hid tong:
                  Hard iudgement ſhal he haue which iudgeth hard,
                  And he that barreth others ſhall be bar'd.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 For God hath no reſpect of rich from poore,
                  For he hath made the poore, and made the rich,
                  Their bodies be alike, though their mindes ſoare,
                  Their difference nought, but in preſumptions pitch:
                  The carcaſſe of a King is kept from ſoule,
                  The Begger yet may haue the cleaner ſoule.
               
               
                  The higheſt men do beare the higheſt mindes,
                  The cedars skorne to bowe, the muſhromes bend,
                  The hieſt often ſuperſtition blindes,
                  But yet their fall is greateſt in the end:
                  The windes haue not ſuch power of the graſſe,
                  Becauſe it lowly ſtoopeth when as they paſſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 8 The olde ſhould teach the yong obſeruance way,
                  But now the yong doth teach the elder grace;
                  The ſhrubs doe teach the Cedars to obay,
                  Theſe yeelde to winds, but theſe the winds out-face:
                  Yet he that made the windes to ceaſe and blowe,
                  Can make the higheſt fall, the loweſt growe.
               
               
                  He made the great to ſtoop as well as ſmall,
                  The lions to obay as other beaſts,
                  He cares for all alike, yet cares for all,
                  And lookes that all ſhould anſwere his beheaſts:
                  But yet the greater hath the ſorer triall,
                  If once he findes them with his lawes deniall.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Be warnde you tyrants at the fall of pride,
                  You ſee how ſurges chaunge to quiet calme;
                  You ſee both flowe and ebbe in follies tide,
                  How fingers are infected by their palme:
                  This may your caueat be, you being kinges,
                  Infect your ſubiects, which are leſſer things.
               
               
                  Ill ſents of vice once crept into the head,
                  Doth pearce into the chamber of the braine,
                  Making the outward skin diſeaſes bed,
                  The inward powers as nouriſhers of paine:
                  So if that miſcheife raignes in wiſedomes place,
                  The inward thought lies figured in the face.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Wiſdome ſhould clothe her ſelfe in Kings attire,
                  Being the portrature of heauens Queene,
                  But tyrantes are no Kings, but miſchiefes mire,
                  Not ſage, but ſhewes of what they ſhould haue beene:
                  They ſeeke for vice, and how to go amis,
                  But doe not once regard what wiſdome is.
               
               
                  They which are Kings, by name are Kings by deed,
                  Both rulers of them ſelues and of their land,
                  They know that heau'n is vertues dueſt meed,
                  And holines is knit in holy band:
                  Theſe may be rightly called by their name,
                  whoſe words and works are blaz'd in wiſedomes flame.
               
               
                  To nurſe vp crueltie with milde aſpect,
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Were to begin, but neuer for to end,
                  Kindenes with tygers neuer takes effect,
                  Nor proffered frendſhip with a foe-like friend:
                  Tyrants and tygers haue all natural mothers,
                  Tyrants her ſonnes, tygers the tyrants brothers.
               
               
                  No words delight can moue delight in them,
                  But rather plow the traces of their ire,
                  Like ſwine that take the durt defore the gem,
                  And skorns that pearle which they ſhould moſt deſire:
                  But Kings whoſe names proceed frō kindnes ſound,
                  Do plant their harts & thoghts on wiſdōs ground.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 13 A grounding euer moiſt, and neuer dry,
                  An euer fruitfull earth, not fruitleſſe way,
                  In whoſe deare wombe the tender ſprings do lye,
                  which euer flowes, and neuer ebbes away;
                  The ſunne but ſhines by day, ſhe day and night,
                  Doth keepe one ſtayed eſſence of her light.
               
               
                  Her beams are conducts to her ſubſtance view,
                  Here eye is adamants attractiue force,
                  A ſhadowe hath ſhee none, but ſubſtance true,
                  Subſtance out liuing life of mortall corſe:
                  Her ſight is eaſie vnto them which loue her,
                  Her finding eaſie vnto them which proue her.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The far fet chaſtitie of female ſex,
                  Is nothing but allurement into luſt,
                  Which will forſweare and take, ſcorne and annex,
                  Denie and practiſe it, miſtruſt, and truſt:
                  Wiſedome is chaſt and of another kinde,
                  She loues, ſhe likes, and yet not luſtfull blinde.
               
               
                  She is true loue, the other loue a toy,
                  Her loue hath eyes, the other loue is blinde,
                  This doth proceed from God, this from a boy,
                  This conſtant is, the other vaine combinde:
                  If longing paſsions follow her deſire,
                  She offereth her ſelfe, as labours hire
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 She is not coyiſh ſhee, won by delay,
                  With ſighs and pasſions, which all louers vſe,
                  With hot affection, death, or lifes decay,
                  With louers toyes, which might their loues excuſe:
                  Wiſedome is poore, her dowrie is content,
                  Shee nothing hath becauſe ſhee nothing ſpent.
               
               
                  She is not woo'd to loue, nor won by wooing,
                  Nor got by labour, nor poſſeſt by paine,
                  The gaine of her conſiſts in honeſt doing,
                  Her gaine is great, in that ſhe hath no gaine:
                  He that betimes followes repentance way,
                  Sall meet with her his vertues worthy pay.
               
               
                  To think vpon her, is to think of bliſſe,
                  
                     
                        verse 16 The very thought of her is miſchiefes barre,
                  Depeller of miſdeeds which do amiſſe,
                  The blot of vanitie, misfortunes ſcarre:
                  Who wold not think; to reap ſuch gain by thought?
                  Who would not loue, when ſuch a life is bought?
               
               
                  If thought be vnderſtanding, what is ſhee?
                  The full perfection of a perfect power,
                  A heauenly branch from Gods immortall tree,
                  Which death, nor hell, nor miſchiefe can deuoure:
                  Her ſelfe is wiſedome, and her thought is ſo,
                  Thrice happie he which doth deſire to know.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Shee manlike woes, men womenlike refuſes,
                  She offers loue, they offered loue denie,
                  And hould her promiſes as loues abuſes,
                  Becauſe ſhe pleads with an indifferent eye:
                  They thinke that ſhe is light, vaine and vniuſt,
                  When ſhe doth plead for loue, and not for luſt.
               
               
                  Hard hearted men (quoth ſhee) can you not loue,
                  Behold my ſubſtance, cannot ſubſtance pleaſe,
                  Behold my feature; cannot feature moue?
                  Can ſubſtance, nor my feature, helpe or eaſe?
                  See heauens ioy, defigured in my face,
                  Can neither heauen, nor ioy, turne you to grace?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 Oh how deſire ſwayes her pleading tong,
                  Her tongue, her heart, her heart, her ſoules affection?
                  Faine would ſhe make mortalitie be ſtrong,
                  But mortall weaknes yeelds reiection:
                  Her care is care of them, they careleſſe are,
                  Her loue loues them: they neither loue nor care.
               
               
                  Faine would ſhee make them clients in her lawe,
                  Whoſe laws aſſurance is immortall honour,
                  But them, nor words, nor loue, nor care can awe,
                  But ſtill will fight vnder deſtructions bonner.
                  Though immortalitie be their reward,
                  Yet neither words, nor deeds will they regard.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Her tongue is hoarſe with pleading, yet doth plead,
                  Pleading for that which they ſhould all deſire,
                  Their appetite is heauie made of lead,
                  And lead can neuer melt without a fire:
                  Her words are milde and cannot raiſe a heat,
                  Whilſt they with hard repulſe her ſpeeches beat.
               
               
                  Requeſted they; for what they ſhould requeſt,
                  Intreated they; for what they ſhould intreat,
                  Requeſted to enioye their quiet reſt,
                  Intreated like a ſullen bird to eate:
                  Their eies behold ioyes maker which doth make it,
                  Yet muſt they be intreated for to take it.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 You whoſe delight is plac'd in honours game,
                  Whoſe game, in maieſties imperiall throne,
                  Maieſticke portratures of earthly fame,
                  Releeuers of the poore in ages mone:
                  If your content be ſeated on a crowne,
                  Loue wiſedome, and your ſtate ſhall neuer downe.
               
               
                  Her crownes are not as earthly diadems,
                  But diapaſans of eternall reſt,
                  Her eſſence comes not from terreſtriall ſtems,
                  But planted on the heauens immortall breſt:
                  If you delight in ſcepters and in raigning,
                  Delight in her your crownes immortall gaining.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Although the ſhadowes of her glorious view,
                  Hath beene as acceſſary to your eies,
                  Now will I ſhew you the true ſubſtance hiew,
                  And what ſhe is, which without knowledge lies:
                  From whence ſhe is deriude, whence her diſcent,
                  And whence the linage of her birth is lent.
               
               
                  Now will I ſhew the skie, and not the cloude,
                  The ſunne, and not the ſhade, day, not the night,
                  
                     Tethis her ſelfe, not Tethis in her floud,
                  Light, and not ſhadow of ſuppreſsing light:
                  Wiſedome her ſelfe true tipe of wiſedomes grace,
                  Shall be apparant before heart and face.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Had I ſtill fed you with the ſhade of life,
                  And hid the ſunne it ſelfe in enuies aire,
                  My ſelfe might well be called natures ſtrife,
                  Striuing to cloude that which all cloudes impaire:
                  But Enuy, haſte thee hence, I loathe thy eie,
                  Thy loue, thy life, thy ſelfe, thy company.
               
               
                  Here is the banner of diſcretions name,
                  Aduaunſt on wiſedomes euer-ſtanding tower,
                  Here is no place for enuie or her ſhame,
                  For Nemeſis, or blacke Mageraes power:
                  He that is enuious, is not wiſedomes frend,
                  She euer liues, he dies when enuies end.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 25 Happy, thrice happy land, where wiſedome raignes,
                  Happy, thrice happy king, whom wiſedome ſwayes,
                  Where neuer poore laments, or ſoules complaines,
                  Where follie neuer keepes diſcretions wayes:
                  That land, that king doth flouriſh, liue and ioy,
                  Farre from ill fortunes reach, or ſins annoy.
               
               
                  That land is happy, that king fortunate,
                  She in her dayes, he in his wiſedomes force,
                  For fortitude is wiſedomes ſociate:
                  And wiſedome trueſt fortitudes remorce:
                  Be therefore rulde by wiſedome, ſhe is chiefe,
                  That you may rule in ioy, and not in griefe.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter VII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     WHat am I? man, oh what is man? oh nought,
                  What am I? nought, yes, what? ſin & debate,
                  Three vices all in one, of one life bought,
                  Man am I not, what then? I am mans hate:
                  Yes man I am, man, becauſe mortall, dead,
                  Mortalitie my guide, by miſchiefe led.
               
               
                  Man, becauſe like to man, man, becauſe borne,
                  In birth no man, a child, child, becauſe weake,
                  Weake, becauſe weakned by ill fortunes ſcorne,
                  Scorn'd, becauſe mortall, mortall, in wrongs reake:
                  My father like my ſelfe did liue on earth,
                  I like my ſelfe, and him, folow his birth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 My mothers matrice was my bodies maker,
                  There had I this ſame ſhape of infamies,
                  Shape, ah no ſhape, but ſubſtance miſchiefes taker,
                  In ten months faſhion; months, ah miſeries,
                  The ſhame of ſhape, the very ſhape of ſhame,
                  Calamitie my ſelfe lament my name.
               
               
                  I was conceiude with ſeede, deceiude with ſin,
                  Deceiude, becauſe my ſeede was ſins deceit,
                  My ſeede deceit, becauſe it cloſde me in,
                  Hemd me about, for ſins and miſchiefes baite:
                  The ſeede of man did bring me into blood,
                  And now I bring my ſelfe, in what? no good.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 When I was borne, when I was, then I was,
                  Borne? when? yet borne I was, but now I beare,
                  Beare mine owne vices, which my ioyes ſurpaſſe,
                  Beare mine owne burden full of miſchiefes feare:
                  When I was borne, I did not beare lament,
                  But now vnborne, I beare what birth hath ſpent.
               
               
                  When I was borne, my breath was borne to mee,
                  The common aire which aires my bodies forme,
                  Then fell I on the earth with feeble knee,
                  Lamenting for my lifes ill fortunes ſtorme:
                  Making my ſelfe the index of my woe,
                  Commencing what I could, ere I could goe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 5 Fed was I with lament as well as meat,
                  My milke was ſweet, but teares did make it ſower,
                  Meat and lament, milke and my teares I eat,
                  As bitter herbs commixt with ſweeteſt flower:
                  Care was my ſwadling clothes as well as cloth,
                  For I was ſwadled, and clothed in both.
               
               
                  Why do I make my ſelfe more then I am?
                  Why ſay I, I am nouriſhed with cares,
                  When euery one is clothed with the ſame,
                  Sith as I fare my ſelfe, another fares?
                  No King had any other birth then I,
                  But waild his fortune with a watry eye.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Say what is mirth, an entrance vnto woe,
                  Say what is woe, an entrance vnto mirth,
                  That which begins with ioy doth not end ſo,
                  Theſe go by chaunge, becauſe a changing birth:
                  Our birth is as our death, both barren, bare,
                  Our entrance waile, our going out with care.
               
               
                  Naked we came, into the world as naked,
                  Wee had nor wealth nor riches to poſſeſſe,
                  Now differ we, which difference riches maked,
                  Yet in the end we naked neretheleſſe:
                  As our beginning is, ſo is our end,
                  Naked and poore, which needs no wealth to ſpend.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Thus weighing in the ballance of my minde,
                  My ſtate, all ſtates, my birth, all births alike,
                  My meditated paſsions could not finde,
                  One freed thought which ſorrow did not ſtrike:
                  But knowing euery ill is curde by praier,
                  My minde beſought the Lord my griefes allaier.
               
               
                  Wherefore I prayde, my praier tooke effect,
                  And my effect was good, my good was gaine,
                  My gaine was ſacred wiſedomes bright aſpect,
                  And her aſpect in my reſpect did raigne:
                  Wiſedome that heau'nly ſpirit of content,
                  Was vnto me from heau'n by praier ſent.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 A preſent far more worthy then a crowne,
                  Becauſe the crowne of an eternall reſt,
                  A preſent far more worthie then a throne,
                  Becauſe the throne of heau'n, which makes vs bleſt:
                  The crowne of bliſſe, the throne of God is ſhee,
                  Compared vnto heau'n, not earth to thee.
               
               
                  Her foot-ſtoole is thy face, her face thy ſhame,
                  Thy ſhame her liuing praiſe, her praiſe thy ſcorne,
                  Thy ſcorne her loue, her loue thy merits blame,
                  Thy blame her worth, her worth thy being borne:
                  Thy ſelfe art droſſe to her compariſon,
                  Thy valour weake vnto her gariſon.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 To liken gold vnto her radiant face,
                  Were likening day to night, and night to day,
                  The Kings high ſeat, to the low ſubiects place,
                  And heau'ns tranſlucent breaſt, to earthly way:
                  For what is golde? her ſcorne, her ſcorne? her ire,
                  Melting that droſſe, with nought but angers fire.
               
               
                  In her reſpect tis duſt, in her aſpects
                  Earth, in reſpect of her tis little grauell,
                  As duſt, as earth, as grauell ſhe reiects,
                  The hope, the gaine, the ſight, the price, the trauell:
                  Siluer, becauſe inferiour to the other
                  Is clay, which two ſhe in one looke doth ſmother.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Her ſight I called health, her ſelfe my beautie,
                  Health as my life, and beautie as my light,
                  Each in performance of the others dutie,
                  This curing griefe, this leading me aright:
                  Two ſoueraigne eies, belonging to two places,
                  This guides the ſoule, and this the body graces.
               
               
                  The heart ſicke ſoule, is cur'd by heart-ſtrong health,
                  The heart-ſtrong health, is the ſoules brighteſt eye,
                  The heart-ſick body heal'd by beauties wealth,
                  Two ſunnie windolets of eithers skie,
                  Whoſe beames cannot be clouded by reproach,
                  Nor yet diſmounted from ſo bright a coach.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 What dowrie could I wiſh more then I haue?
                  What wealth, what honour, more then I poſſeſſe?
                  My ſoules requeſt is mine, which I did craue,
                  For ſole redreſſe in ſoule, I haue redreſſe:
                  The bodyly expences which I ſpend,
                  Is lent by her, which my delight doth lend.
               
               
                  Then I may call her author of my good,
                  Sith good and goods are portions for my loue,
                  I loue her well, who would not loue his food,
                  His ioyes maintatiner, which all woes remoue?
                  I richeſt am, becauſe I doe poſſeſſe her,
                  I ſtrongeſt am, in that none can oppreſſe her.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 It made me glad to thinke that I was rich,
                  More gladder for to thinke that I was ſtrong,
                  For loweſt mindes do couet higheſt pitch,
                  As higheſt braues proceed from loweſt tongue:
                  Her firſt arriuall firſt did make me glad,
                  Yet ignorant at firſt, firſt made me ſad.
               
               
                  Ioyfull I was, becauſe I ſawe her power,
                  Wofull I was, becauſe I knew her not,
                  Glad that her face was in mine eies lockt bower,
                  Sad that my ſenſes neuer drew her plot
                  I knew not that ſhe was diſcretions mother,
                  Though I profeſt my ſelfe to be her brother.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Like a raſh wooer feeding on the lookes,
                  Diſgeſting beauty apparitions ſhow,
                  Viewing the painted out-ſide of the bookes,
                  And inward workes little regardes to know:
                  So I, feeding my fancies with her ſight,
                  Forgot to make inquirie of her might.
               
               
                  Externall powers I knew, riches I had,
                  Internall powers I ſcarcely had diſcerne,
                  Vntamedly I learned to be glad,
                  Faining I hated, veritie I learnd:
                  I was not enuious, learned to forſake her.
                  But I was louing, learned for to take her.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And had I not, my treaſure had bin loſt,
                  My loſſe, my perills hazard had proclaimde,
                  My perill had my lifes deſtruction toſt,
                  My lifes deſtruction at my ſoule had aimde:
                  Great perills hazarded from one poore loſſe,
                  As greateſt filth doth come with ſmalleſt droſſe.
               
               
                  This righteous treaſure whoſo rightly vſeth,
                  Shall be an heire in heau'ns eternitie,
                  All earthly fruites her heretage excuſeth,
                  All happineſſe in her felicitie:
                  The loue of God conſiſts in her embracing,
                  The gifts of knowledge in her wiſedomes placing.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 I ſpeake as I am prompted by my mind,
                  My ſoules chiefe agent, pleader of my cauſe,
                  I ſpeake theſe things, and what I ſpeake I finde,
                  By heau'ns iudgement, not mine owne applauſe:
                  God he is iudge, I next, becauſe I haue her,
                  God he doth know, I next, becauſe I craue her.
               
               
                  Should I direct, and God ſubuert my tongue,
                  I worthy were of an vnworthy name,
                  Vnworthy of my right, not of my wrong.
                  Vnworthy of my praiſe, not of my ſhame:
                  But ſeeing God directs my tongue from miſsing,
                  I rather looke for clapping than for hiſsing.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 He is the prompter of my tongue and me,
                  My tongue doth vtter what his tongue applies,
                  He ſets before my ſight what I ſhould ſee,
                  He breathes into my heart his verities:
                  He telles me what I thinke, or ſee, or heare,
                  His tongue a part, my tongue a part doth beare.
               
               
                  Our wordes he knowes, in telling of our hearts,
                  Our hearts he knowes in telling of our words,
                  All in his hands, words, wiſedome, workes, and arts,
                  And euery power which influence affords:
                  He knowes what we will ſpeake, what we will doe,
                  And how our mindes and actions will goe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 18 The wiſedome which I haue, is heauens gift,
                  The knowledge which I haue, is Gods reward,
                  Both preſents my fore-warned ſences lift,
                  And of my preſeruation had regard:
                  This teaches me to know, this to be wiſe,
                  Knowledge is wits, and wit is knowledge guiſe.
               
               
                  Now know I, how the world was firſt created,
                  How euery motion of the aire was framed,
                  How man was made, the diuells pride abated,
                  How times beginning, midſt, and end was named: now know I time, times chāge, times date, times ſho
                  And when the ſeaſons come, and when they goe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 20 I know the chaunging courſes of the yeares,
                  And the diuiſion of all differing climes,
                  The ſituation of the ſtars and ſpheres,
                  The flowing tides, and the flow-ebbing times:
                  I know that euery yeare hath his foure courſes,
                  I know that euery courſe hath ſeuerall forces.
               
               
                  I know that nature is in euery thing,
                  Beaſts furious, winds rough, men wicked are,
                  whoſe thoghts their ſcurge, whoſe deeds their iugmēts ſling,
                  Whoſe words and works their perill, and their care,
                  I know that euery plant hath difference,
                  I know that euery roote hath influence.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 True knowledge have I got in knowing truth,
                  True wiſedome purchaſed in wiſeſt wit,
                  A knowledge fitting age, wit fitting youth,
                  Which makes me yong, though olde with gaine of it;
                  True knowledge haue I, and true wiſedomes ſtore,
                  True hap, true hope, what wiſh, what wold I more?
               
               
                  Known things I needs muſt know, ſith not vnknown,
                  My care is knowledge, ſhe doth heare for me,
                  All ſecrets know I more becauſe not ſhowne,
                  My wiſedome ſecret is, and her I ſee;
                  Knowledge hath taught me how to heare knowne cauſes
                  Wiſedome hath taught me ſecrecies applauſes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 23 Knowledge and wiſedome knowne in wiſeſt things,
                  Is reaſons mate, diſcretions centinell,
                  More then a trine of ioyes, from vertues ſprings,
                  More then one vnion, yet in vnion dwell,
                  One for to guide the ſpring, ſommer the other,
                  One harueſts nurſe, the other winters mother.
               
               
                  Foure mounts, and foure high mounters, all foure one,
                  One holy vnion, one begotten life,
                  One manifolde affection, yet alone,
                  All one in peaces reſt, all none in ſtrife:
                  Sure, ſtable, without care, hauing all power,
                  Not hurtfull, doing good, (as one all foure.)
               
               
                  This peacefull army of foure knitted ſoules,
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Is marching vnto peaces endles warre,
                  Their weapons are diſcretions written roules,
                  Their quarrell, loue, and amitie their iarre:
                  Wiſedome director is, captaine, and guide,
                  All other take their places, ſide by ſide.
               
               
                  Wiſedome deuides the conflict of her peace,
                  Into foure ſquadrons, of foure mutuall loues,
                  Each bent to war, and neuer meanes to ceaſe,
                  Her wings of ſhot her diſputation moues:
                  Shee warres vnſeene, and pacifies vnſeene,
                  Shee is wars victory, yet peaces Queene.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Shee is the martiall trumpet of alarmes,
                  And yet the quiet reſt in peaces night,
                  Shee guideth martiall troupes, ſhe honours armes,
                  Yet ioyns ſhe fight with peace, and peace with fight:
                  Shee is the breath of Gods and heauens power,
                  Yet peaces nurſe, in being peaces flower.
               
               
                  A flowing in of that which ebbeth out,
                  An ebbing out of that which floweth in,
                  Preſumption ſhe doth hate, in being ſtout,
                  Humilitie though poore her fauours win:
                  Shee is the influence of heauens flow,
                  No filth doth follow her, where ere ſhee goe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Shee is that ſpring, which neuer hath an ebbe,
                  That ſiluer-coloured brooke, which hath no mud,
                  That loome, which weaues, and neuer cuts the webbe,
                  That tree which growes, and neuer leaues to bud:
                  Shee conſtant is, vnconſtancie her foe,
                  Shee doth not flow and ebbe, nor come and goe.
               
               
                  
                     Phoebus doth weepe, when watrie cloudes approach,
                  Shee keeps her brightnes euerlaſtingly,
                  
                     Phoebe, when Phoebus ſhines forſakes nights coach,
                  Hir day is night and day immortally:
                  The vndefiled mirrour of renowne,
                  The image of Gods power, her vertues crowne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 28 Diſcretion, knowledge, wit, and reaſons skill,
                  All foure are places in one only grace,
                  They wiſedome are, obedient to her will,
                  All foure are one, one in all foures place:
                  And wiſedome being one, ſhe can do all,
                  Sith one hath foure, all ſubiect to one call.
               
               
                  Her ſelfe remaining ſelfe, the world renewes,
                  Renewing ages with perpetuall youth,
                  Entring into the ſoules, which death purſues,
                  Making thē Gods friends, which were frends to truth.
                  If wiſedome doth not harbour in thy minde,
                  God loues thee not, and that thy ſoule ſhall finde.
               
               
                  For how canſt thou be lead without thy light,
                  
                     
                        verse 29 30 How can thy eyles ſoule direct her way,
                  If wanting her, which guides thy ſteps aright,
                  Thy ſteps from night into a path of day?
                  More beautifull then is the eye of heau'n,
                  Guilding her ſelfe with her ſelfe-changing ſteau'n.
               
               
                  The ſtars are twinckling handmaides to the moone,
                  Both moone and ſtars, handmaids to wiſdomes ſunne,
                  Theſe ſhine at middeſt night, this at mid-noone,
                  Each new begins their light, when each hath done:
                  Pale-mantled night, followes red mantled day,
                  Vice followes both, but to her owne decay.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter VIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     WHo is the Empreſſe of the worlds confine,
                  The Monarcheſle of the foure cornerd earth,
                  The Princeſſe of the ſeas, life without fine,
                  Commixer of delight with ſorowes mirth:
                  What ſoueraigne is ſhee which euer raignes,
                  Which Queene-like gouerns al, yet none cōſtrains?
               
               
                  Wiſedome, ó flie my ſpirit with that word,
                  Wiſedome, ó lodge my ſpirit in that name,
                  Fly ſoule vnto the manſion of her lord,
                  Although thy wings be findged in her flame:
                  Tell her my blacknes doth admire her beautie,
                  Ile marie her in loue, ſerue her in dutie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 If marry her; God is my father God,
                  Chriſt is my brother, Angells are my kin,
                  The earth my dowrie, heauen my aboade,
                  My rule the world, my life without my ſin:
                  Shee is the daughter of immortall Ioue,
                  My wife in heart, in thought, in ſoule, in loue.
               
               
                  Happy for euer hee that thought in hart,
                  Happy for euer he that heart in thought,
                  Happy the ſoule of both which beares both part,
                  Happy that loue which thoght har
                        •
                     , ſoule, hath ſought;
                  The name of loue is happieſt, for I loue her,
                  Soule, heart, and thoughts, loues agents are to proue her.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Ye parents that would haue your children rulde,
                  Here may they be inſtructed, rulde and taught:
                  Ye children that would haue your parents ſchoolde,
                  Feeding their wanton thirſt with follies draught;
                  See here the ſchoole of diſcipline erected,
                  See here how yong and old are both corrected.
               
               
                  Children, this is the Miſtris of your bliſſe,
                  Your ſchoolemiſtris reformer of your liues,
                  Parents, you that do ſpeake, thinke, do amiſſe,
                  Heres ſhe, which loues, and lifes direction giues:
                  She teacheth that which God knowes to be true,
                  She chuſeth that, which God would chuſe for you.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 What is our birth? poore, naked, needy, cold,
                  What is our life? poore as our birth hath beene:
                  What is our age? forlorne in being old:
                  What is our end? as our beginnings ſcene:
                  Our birth, our life, our age, our end is poore,
                  what birth, what life, what age, what end hath more
               
               
                  Made rich it is with vanities vaine ſhow,
                  If wanting wiſedome it is follies game,
                  Or like a bended, or vnbended bow,
                  Ill fortunes ſcoffe it is, good fortunes ſhame:
                  If wiſedome be the riches of thy minde,
                  Then can thy fortune ſee, not ſeeing blinde.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 6 Then if good fortune doth begin thy ſtate,
                  Ill fortune cannot end what ſhe begins,
                  Thy fate at firſt will ſtill remaine thy fate,
                  Thy conduct vnto ioyes, not vnto ſins:
                  If thou the bridegroome art, wiſedome the bride,
                  Ill fortune cannot ſwimme againſt thy tide.
               
               
                  Thou marrying her, doſt marry more than ſhe,
                  Thy portion is not faculties, but bliſſe,
                  Thou needſt not teaching, for ſhe teacheth thee,
                  Nor no reformer ſhe thy miſtris is,
                  The leſſon which ſhe giues thee for thy learning,
                  Is euery vertues loue, and ſins deſeruing.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Doſt thou deſire experience for to know?
                  Why how can ſhe be leſſe than what ſhe is?
                  The growth of knowlege doth from wiſdome grow▪
                  
                  The growth of wiſedome is in knowing this:
                  Wiſedome can tell all things, what things are paſt,
                  What done, what vndone, what are doing laſt.
               
               
                  Nay more, what things are come, what are to come,
                  Or words, or works, or ſhews, or actions,
                  In her braines table-booke ſhe hath the ſumme,
                  And knowes darke ſentences ſolutions:
                  She knowes what ſignes and wonders will enſue,
                  And when ſucceſſe of ſeaſons will be new.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Who would not be a bridegroome? who not wed?
                  Who would not haue a bride ſo wiſe, ſo faire?
                  Who would not lie in ſuch a peacefull bed?
                  Whoſe canopy is heau'n, whoſe ſhade the aire:
                  How can it be that any of the skies
                  Can there be miſsing, where heau'ns kingdom lies?
               
               
                  If care-ſicke, I am comforted with ioy,
                  If ſurfeting on ioy, ſhe bids me care,
                  Shee ſayes that ouermuch will ſoone annoy,
                  Too much of ioy, too much of ſorrowes fare:
                  She alwayes counſels me to keepe a meane,
                  And not with ioy too fat, with griefe too leane.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Faine would the ſhrub growe by the higheſt tree,
                  Faine would the muſhrome kiſſe the cedars barke:
                  Faine would the ſeely worme a ſporting be,
                  Faine would the ſparrow imitate the larke:
                  Though I a tender ſhrub, a muſhrome be,
                  Yet couet I the honour of a tree.
               
               
                  And may I not? may not the bloſſoms bud?
                  Doth not the little ſeed make eares of corne?
                  Doth not a ſprig (in time) beare greateſt wood?
                  Doth not yong eu'nings make an elder morne?
                  For wiſedomes ſake, I know, though be yong
                  I ſhall haue praiſes from my elders tongue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And as my growth doth riſe, ſo ſhall my wit,
                  And as my wit doth riſe, ſo ſhall my growth,
                  In wit I growe, both growths grow to be fit,
                  Both fitting in one growth, be fitteſt both:
                  Experience followes age, and nature youth,
                  Some aged be in wit, though yong in ruth.
               
               
                  The wiſedome which I haue, ſprings from aboue,
                  The wiſedome from aboue, is that I haue,
                  Her I adore, I reuerence, I loue,
                  Shee's my pure ſoule, lockt in my bodies graue:
                  The iudgement which I vſe, from her proceedes,
                  Which makes me maruelld at in all my deedes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Although mute ſilence tie my iudgements tongue,
                  Sad ſecretarie of dumbe action,
                  Yet ſhall they giue me place though I be yong,
                  And ſtay my leiſures ſatisfaction:
                  Euen as a iudge which keeps his iudgements mute,
                  When clients haue no anſwer of their ſute.
               
               
                  But if the cloſure of my mouth vnmeetes,
                  And diues within the freedome of my words,
                  They like petitioners tongues welcome greetes,
                  And with attentiue eare heares my accords:
                  But if my words into no limites goe,
                  Their ſpeech ſhall ebbe, mine in their ebbing flow.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And what of this vaine world, vaine hope vaine ſhow
                  Vaine glory ſeated in a ſhade of praiſe,
                  Mortalities deſcent, and follies flow,
                  The badge of vanity, the houre of daies,
                  What glory is it for to be a King,
                  When care is crowne, and crown is fortunes ſling?
               
               
                  Wiſedome is immortalities alline,
                  And immortalitie is wiſedomes gaine,
                  By her the heauens lineage is mine,
                  By her I immortalitie obtaine,
                  The earth is made immortall in my name,
                  The heau'ns are made immortall in my fame.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 14 Two ſpatious orbes of two as ſpatious climes,
                  Shall be the heritage which I poſſeſſe,
                  My rule in heau'n, directing earthly times,
                  My raigne in earth, commencing earths redreſſe,
                  One king made two, one crowne a double crowne,
                  One rule two rules, one fame a twice renowne.
               
               
                  What heauen is this, which euery thought containes,
                  Wiſedome my heau'n, my heau'n is wiſedoms heau'n,
                  What earth is this, wherein my bodie raines?
                  Wiſedome my earth, all rule from wiſedome giu'n:
                  Through her I rule, through her I do ſubdue,
                  Through hir I raigne, through hir my empire grew.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 A rule, not tyrannie, a raigne, not blood,
                  An empire, not a ſlaughter houſe of liues,
                  A crowne, not crueltie in furies moode,
                  A Scepter which reſtores, and not depriues:
                  All made to make a peace and not a warre,
                  By wiſedome concords Queene, and diſcords barre.
               
               
                  The coldeſt worde oft cooles the hotteſt threat,
                  The tyrants menaces, the calmes of peace,
                  Two coldes augmenteth one, two heates one heat,
                  And makes both too extreame, when both encreaſe:
                  My peacefull raigne ſhall conquer tyrants force,
                  Not armes, but wordes, not battaile, but remorce,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Yet mightie ſhall I be though warre in peace,
                  Strong though abilitie hath left his clime,
                  And good, becauſe my warres and battails ceaſe,
                  Or at the leaſt lie ſmothered in their prime:
                  The ſence once digged vp with feares amaze,
                  Doth rage vntam'd with follies ſenceles gaze.
               
               
                  If wiſedome doth not harbour in delight,
                  It breakes the outward paſſage of the minde,
                  Therfore I place my war in wiſedomes might,
                  Whoſe heauie labours eaſie harbours finde:
                  Her company is pleaſure, mirth, and ioy,
                  Not bitternes, not mourning, not annoy,
               
               
                  
                  When euery thought was ballanced by weight
                  
                     
                        verse 17 18 Within the concaue of my bodies ſcale,
                  My heart and ſoule did holde the ballance ſtreight,
                  To ſee what thoght was ioy, what thoght was waile:
                  But when I ſaw that griefe did weigh down pleſure,
                  I put in wiſedome to augment her treaſure.
               
               
                  Wiſedome the weight of immortallitie,
                  Wiſedome the ballance of all happineſſe,
                  Wiſedome the weigher of felicitie,
                  Wiſedome the Paragon of bleſſedneſſe:
                  When in her hands there lies ſuch plenties ſtore,
                  Needs muſt her heart haue twice aſmuch and more.
               
               
                  Her hart haue I conioyned with hir hand,
                  
                     
                        verse 19 20 Her hand hath ſhe conioyned with my hart,
                  Two ſoules, one ſoule, two hearts, one bodyes band,
                  And two hands made of foure, by amours art:
                  Was I not wiſe in chuſing earthly life?
                  Nay wiſe, thrice wiſe, in chuſing ſuch a wife?
               
               
                  Was I not good? good; then the ſooner bad,
                  Bad, becauſe earth is full of wickednes,
                  Becauſe my body is with vices clad,
                  Anotomy of my ſins heauines:
                  As doth vnſeemely clothes make the skin foule,
                  So the ſin-inked body blots the ſoule.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Thus lay my hart plung'd in deſtructions mire,
                  Thus lay my ſoule beſpotted with my ſin,
                  Thus lay my ſelfe conſum'd in my deſire,
                  Thus lay all parts enſnared in one gin:
                  At laſt my hart mounting aboue the mud,
                  Lay betweene hope and death, miſchiefe, and good.
               
               
                  Thus panting ignorant to liue or die,
                  To riſe or fall, to ſtand or elſe to ſinke,
                  I caſt a fainting looke vnto the skie,
                  And ſ
                        •
                     we the thought, which my poore hart did think
                  Wiſdome my thought at whoſe ſeene ſight I prai'd,
                  And with my hart, my minde, my ſoule, I ſaid.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter IX.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 2 3 
                     O God of Fathers, Lord of heau'n and earth,
                  Mercies true ſoueraigne, pitties portraiture,
                  King of all kings, a birth ſurpaſsing birth,
                  A life immortall, eſſence euer pure:
                  Which with a breath aſcending from thy thought,
                  Haſt made the heau'ns of earth, the earth of nought.
               
               
                  Thou which haſt made mortalitie for man,
                  Beginning life to make an end of woe,
                  Ending in him, what in himſelfe began,
                  His earths dominion, through thy wiſedomes flow:
                  Made for to rule according to deſart,
                  And execute reuenge with vpright heart.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Behold a crowne, but yet a crowne of care,
                  Behold a ſcepter, yet a ſorrowes guiſe,
                  More than the ballance of my head can beare,
                  More than my hands can hold wherein it lies:
                  My crowne doth want ſupportance for to beare,
                  My ſcepter wanteth empire for to weare.
               
               
                  A legleſſe body is my kingdomes mappe,
                  Limping in follie, halting in diſtreſſe,
                  Giue me thy wiſedome (Lord) my better happe,
                  Which may my follie cure, my griefe redreſſe:
                  O let me not fall in obliuions caue,
                  Let wiſedome be my baile, for her I craue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Behold thy ſeruant pleading for his hire,
                  As an apprentice to thy goſpels word,
                  Behold his poore eſtate, his hot-cold fire,
                  His weake-ſtrong limmes, his mery woes record:
                  Borne of a woman, woman-like in woe,
                  They weake, they feeble are, and I am ſo.
               
               
                  My time of life is as an houre of day,
                  Tis as a day of months, a month of yeeres,
                  It neuer comes againe, but fades away,
                  As one mornes ſunne about the hemiſpheres:
                  Little my memory, leſſer my time,
                  But leaſt of all my vnderſtandings prime.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Say that my memory ſhould neuer die,
                  Say that my time ſhould neuer looſe a glide,
                  Say that my ſelfe had earthly Maieſtie,
                  Seated in all the glory of my pride:
                  Yet if diſcretion did not rule my minde,
                  My raigne would be like fortunes, follie-blinde.
               
               
                  My memory, a pathway to my ſhame,
                  My time, the looking-glaſſe of my diſgrace,
                  My ſelfe, reſemblance of my ſcorned name,
                  My pride, the puffed ſhadow of my face:
                  Thus ſhould I be remembred, not regarded,
                  Thus ſhould my labours end, but not rewarded.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 What were it to be ſhadow of a king?
                  A vanitie: to weare a ſhadow'd crowne?
                  A vanitie: to loue an outward thing?
                  A vanitie: vaine ſhadowes of renowne:
                  This King is king of ſhades, becauſe a ſhade,
                  A king in ſhew, though not in action made.
               
               
                  His ſhape haue I, his cogniſance I weare,
                  A ſmoaky vapour hemd with vanitie,
                  Himſelfe I am, his kingdomes crowne I beare,
                  Vnleſſe that wiſedome change my liuerie:
                  A king I am, God hath inflamed me,
                  And leſſer than I am I can not be.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 When I commaund, the people do obay,
                  Submiſsiue ſubiects to my votiue wil,
                  A prince I am, and do what princes may,
                  Decre
                        •
                     , commaund, rule, iudge, performe, fulfill;
                  Yet I my ſelfe am ſubiect vnto God,
                  As are all others to my iudgements rod.
               
               
                  As doe my ſubiect honour my command,
                  So I at his commaund a ſubiect am,
                  I build a temple on mount Sions ſand,
                  Erect an altar in thy citties name:
                  Reſemblances theſe are, where thou dooſt dwell,
                  Made when thou framedſt heau'n, earth and hell.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Al theſe three caſements were containd in wit,
                  Twas wiſedome for to frame the heauens skie,
                  Twas wiſedome for to make the earth ſo fit,
                  And hell within the loweſt orbe to lie:
                  To make a heau'nly clime, an earthly courſe,
                  And hell, although the name of it be worſe.
               
               
                  Before the world was made wiſedome was borne,
                  Borne of heau'ns God, conceiued in his breaſt,
                  Which knew what works would be, what ages worn,
                  What labours life ſhould haue, what quiet reſt:
                  What ſhuld diſpleaſe and pleaſe, in vice, in good,
                  What ſhould be cleareſt ſpring, what fowleſt mud.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Oh make my ſinfull bodies world anew,
                  Erect new elements, new aires, new skies,
                  The time I haue is fraile, the courſe vntrue,
                  The globe vnconſtant, like ill fortunes eies:
                  Firſt make the world, which doth my ſoule contain,
                  And next my wiſdome, in whoſe power I raigne.
               
               
                  Illumine earth, with wiſedomes heau'nly ſight,
                  Make her embaſſador to grace the earth,
                  Oh let her reſt by day, and lodge by night,
                  Within the cloſure of my bodies hearth:
                  That in her ſacred ſelfe I may perceiue,
                  What things are good to take, what ill to leaue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The bodies heate will flow into the face,
                  The outward index of an outward deede,
                  The inward ſins do keepe an inward place,
                  Eies, face, mouth, tongue & euery function feede:
                  She is my face, if I do any ill,
                  I ſee my ſhame in her repugnant will.
               
               
                  She is my glaſſe, my tipe, my forme, my mappe,
                  The figure of my deede, ſhape of my thought,
                  My lifes character, fortune to my happe,
                  Which vnderſtandeth all that heart hath wrought:
                  What workes I take in hand, ſhe finiſheth,
                  And all my vitious thoughts diminiſheth.
               
               
                  My facts are written in her foreheads booke,
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The volume of my thoughts, lines of my words,
                  The ſins I haue ſhe murders with a looke,
                  And what one cheeke denies, th' other affords:
                  As white and red like battels, and retreates,
                  One doth defend the blowes, the other beates.
               
               
                  So is her furious moode commixt with ſmile,
                  Her rod is profit, her correction mirth:
                  She makes me keepe an acceptable ſtile,
                  And gouerne euery limit of the earth:
                  Through her the ſtate of monarchie is knowne,
                  Through her I rule, and guide my fathers throne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Mortalitie it ſelfe without repaire,
                  Is euer falling feebly on the ground,
                  Submiſsiue body, hart aboue the aire,
                  Which faine would knowe, when knowledge is not found:
                  Faine would it ſoare aboue the Eagles eie,
                  Though it be made of lead, and cannot flie.
               
               
                  The ſoule and body are the wings of man,
                  The ſoule ſhould mount, but that lies drownd in ſin,
                  With leaden ſpirit, but doth what it can,
                  Yet ſcarcely can it riſe when it is in:
                  Then how can man ſo weake, know God ſo ſtrong?
                  What hart from thought, what thought from heart hath ſprung?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 15 We thinke that euery iudgement is alike,
                  That euery purpoſe hath one finall end,
                  Our thoughts (alas) are feares, feares horrors ſtrike,
                  Horrors our lifes vncertaine courſe do ſpend:
                  Feare followes negligence, both death, and hel,
                  Vnconſtant are the paths wherein we dwell.
               
               
                  The hollow concaue of our bodies vaultes,
                  Once laden vp with ſins eternal graues,
                  Strait burſts into the ſoule the ſlime of faults,
                  And ouerfloweth like a ſea of waues:
                  The earth as neighbour to our priuy thought,
                  keeps faſt the manſion which our cares haue bought
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Say, can wee ſee our ſelues? are we ſo wiſe?
                  Or, can we iudge our owne with our owne hearts?
                  Alas we cannot; folly blindes our eies,
                  Miſchiefe our mindes, with her miſchieuous arts:
                  Folly raigns there, where wiſdom ſhuld beare ſway.
                  And follies miſchiefe barres diſcretions way.
               
               
                  O weake capacitie of ſtrongeſt wit,
                  O ſtrong capacitie of weaker ſence,
                  To guide, to meditate, vnapt, vnfit,
                  Blinde in perceiuing earths circumfluence:
                  If labour doth conſiſt in mortall skill,
                  Tis g
                        •
                     eater labour to know heauens will.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 The toyling ſpirit of a labouring man,
                  Is toſſt in caſualties of fortunes ſeas,
                  He thinkes it greater labour than he can,
                  To runne his mortall courſe without an eaſe:
                  Then who can gaine or finde celeſtiall things,
                  Vnleſſe their hopes a greater labour brings?
               
               
                  What volume of thy mind can then containe,
                  thoghts, words, & works, which god thinks, ſpeaks, & makes,
                  When heau'n it ſelfe cannot ſuch honour gaine,
                  Nor Angells know the counſell which God takes:
                  Yet if thy heart be wiſedomes manſion,
                  Thy ſoule ſhall gaine thy hearts made mention.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Who can in one dayes ſpace make two dayes toile?
                  Or who in two dayes ſpace will ſpend but one?
                  The one doth keepe his meane in ouerbroyle,
                  The other vnder meane, becauſe alone:
                  Say, what is man without his ſpirit ſwayes him?
                  Say, what's the ſpirit if the man decayes him?
               
               
                  An ill reformed breath, a life, a hell,
                  A going out worſe than a comming in,
                  For wiſedome is the bodies centinell,
                  Set to guard life which elſe would-fall in ſin:
                  Shee doth correct and loue, ſwayes, and preſerues,
                  Teaches, and fauours, rules, and yet obſerues.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter X.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     COrrection followes loue, loue followes hate,
                  For loue in hate, is hate in too much loue,
                  So chaſtiſment is preſeruations mate,
                  Inſtructing and preſeruing thoſe we prooue:
                  So wiſedome firſt corrects, then fauoureth,
                  But fortune fauours firſt, then wauereth.
               
               
                  Firſt, the firſt father of this earthly world,
                  Firſt man, firſt father cal'd for after time,
                  Vnfaſhioned and like a heape was hurl'd;
                  Form'd and reform'd, by wiſedome out of ſlime,
                  By nature ill reform'd, by wiſedome purer,
                  Shee mortall life, ſhe better lifes procurer.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 3 Alas what was he? but a clod of clay,
                  What euer was he? but an aſh
                        •
                     e caske,
                  By wiſedome clothed in his beſt array,
                  If better may bee beſt, to chooſe a taske:
                  One gaue him time to liue, ſhe power to raigne,
                  Making two powers one, one power twaine.
               
               
                  But ó maligne ill boading wickednes,
                  Like burſting gulfes orewhelming ve
                        •
                     tues ſeed,
                  Too furious wrath forſaking happines,
                  Looſing ten thouſand ioyes, with one dire deede:
                  
                     Cain could ſee, but follie ſtrucke him blinde,
                  To kill his brother in a raging minde.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Oh too vnhappy ſtroke to end two liues,
                  Vnhappy actor in deaths tragedy,
                  Murdring a brother, whoſe name murder giues,
                  Whoſe ſtaying action, ſlaughters butcherie:
                  A weeping part had earth in that ſame play,
                  For ſhe did weepe herſelfe to death that day.
               
               
                  Water diſtill'd from millions of her eyes,
                  Vpon the long dride carcaſſe of her time,
                  Her watrie conduites were the weeping skies,
                  Which made her wombe an ouerflowing clime:
                  Wiſedome preſeru'd it, which preſerues all good,
                  And taught it how to make an arke of wood.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Oh that one borde ſhould ſaue ſo many liues,
                  Vpon the worlds huge billow-toſsing ſea,
                  Twas not the borde, twas wiſedome which ſuruiues,
                  Wiſedome that arke, that boord, that fence, that bay:
                  The world was made a water-rowling waue,
                  But wiſedome better hopes aſſurance gaue.
               
               
                  And when pale malice did aduance her flagge,
                  Vpon the raging ſtandard of deſpight,
                  Fiends ſoueraigne, ſins miſtr
                        •
                     s, and hells hagge,
                  Dunne Plutoes Lady, empreſſe of the night:
                  Wiſedome from whom immortall ioy begun,
                  Preſeru'd the righteous, as her faultleſſe ſonne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The wicked periſhed, but they ſuruiu'd,
                  The wicked were enſnar'd, they were preſeru'd,
                  One kept in ioy, the one of ioy depriu'd,
                  One feeding, fed, the other feeding, ſteru'd,
                  The foode which wiſedome giues, is nouriſhment,
                  The foode which malice giues, is languiſhment.
               
               
                  One feeds; the other feeds, but choking feedes,
                  Two contraries in meat, two differing meats,
                  This brings forth hate, and this repentance ſeeds:
                  This war, this peace, this battails, this retreats:
                  And that example may be truely tride,
                  Theſe liu'd in Sodomes fire, the other dide.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 The land will beare me witnes they are dead,
                  Which for their ſakes beare nothing elſe but death,
                  The witnes of it ſelfe with vices fed,
                  A ſmoaky teſtimony of ſins breath:
                  This is my witnes, my certificate,
                  And this is my ſinne weeping ſociate.
               
               
                  My pen will ſcarce holde inke to write theſe woes,
                  Theſe woes, the blotted inkie lines of ſin,
                  My paper wrincles at my ſorrowes ſhowes,
                  And like that land will bring no harueſt in:
                  Had Lots vnfaithfull wife beene without fault,
                  My freſh-inkt pen had neuer calld her ſalt.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 But now my quill the tel-tale of all moanes,
                  Is ſauory bent to aggrauate ſalt teares,
                  And wets my paper with ſalt-water groanes,
                  Making me ſtick in agoniſing feares:
                  My paper now is growne to billowes might,
                  Sometimes I ſtay my pen, ſometimes I write.
               
               
                  O fooliſh pilate I, blind-harted guide,
                  Can I not ſee the clifts, but rent my barke,
                  Muſt I needs hoiſt vp ſailes gainſt winde and tide,
                  And leaue my ſoule behinde my wiſedomes arke,
                  Well may I be the glaſſe of my diſgrace,
                  And ſet my ſin in other ſinners place.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 10 But why deſpaire I? heere comes wiſedomes grace,
                  Whoſe hope doth lead me vnto better hap,
                  Whoſe preſence doth direct my fore-run race,
                  Becauſe I ſerue her as my beauties map:
                  L
                        •
                     ke Cain I ſhall be reſtored to heau'n,
                  From ſhipwracks perill to a quiet hau'n.
               
               
                  When that by Cains hand Abel was ſlaine,
                  His brother Abel, brother to his ire,
                  Then Cain fled, to fly deſtructions paine,
                  Gods heauie wrath, againſt his blouds deſire:
                  But being fetcht againe by wiſedomes power,
                  Had pardon for his deed, loue for his lower.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 By his repentance he remiſsion had,
                  And relaxation from the clogge of ſin,
                  His painefull labour, labours riches made,
                  His labouring paine, did pleſures profit win:
                  Twas wiſedome, wiſedome made him to repent,
                  And newly plac'd him in his olde content.
               
               
                  His body which was once deſtructions caue,
                  Blacke murders teritorie, miſchiefes houſe,
                  By her, theſe wicked fins were made his ſlaue,
                  And ſhe become his bride, his wife, his ſpouſe:
                  Enriching him which was too rich before,
                  Too rich in vice, in happynes too poore.
               
               
                  
                     Maegera which did rule within his breaſt,
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And kept foule Lernas fen within his minde,
                  Both now diſpleaſe him, which once pleaſde him beſt,
                  Now murdring murder with his being kinde:
                  Theſe which were once his frends are now his foes,
                  Whoſe practiſe he retorts with wiſedomes blowes.
               
               
                  Yee ſtill lie they in ambuſh for his ſoule,
                  But he more wiſer keepes a wiſer way,
                  They ſee him; and they barke, ſnarle, grin, and houle,
                  But wiſedome guides his ſteps he cannot ſtray:
                  By whom he cōquers, and throgh whom he knows
                  The feare of God is ſtronger then his foes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 14 When man was clad in vices liuery,
                  And ſolde as bondman vnto ſins commaund,
                  Shee ſhee, forſooke him not for infamie,
                  But free'd him from his harts impriſoned band:
                  And when he lay in dungeon of deſpight,
                  Shee interlinde his griefe with her delight.
               
               
                  Though ſeruile ſhee with him; ſhee was content,
                  The priſon was her lodge, as wel as his,
                  Till ſhe the ſcepter of the world had lent,
                  To glad his fortune, to augment his bliſſe,
                  To puniſh falſe accuſers of true deeds,
                  And raiſe in him immortall glories ſeeds.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Say, ſhall wee call her wiſedome by her name,
                  Or new inuent a nominating ſtile,
                  Reciting ancient worth to make new fame,
                  Or new-old hierarchie from honours file:
                  Say, ſhall file out fame for vertues ſtore,
                  And giue a name not thought, nor heard before▪
                  
               
               
                  Then ſhould wee make her two, where now but one,
                  Then ſhould we make her common to each tongue,
                  Wiſedome ſhall be her name, ſhe wiſe alone,
                  If alter olde for new, we do olde wrong,
                  Call her ſtill wiſedome, miſtris of our ſoules,
                  Our liues deliuerer from our foes controules.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 To make that better which is beſt of all,
                  Were to diſarme the title of the power,
                  And thinke to make a raiſe, and make a fall,
                  Turne beſt to worſt, a day vnto an houre,
                  To giue two ſundry names vnto one thing,
                  Makes it more commoner in Ecchoes ſling.
               
               
                  She guides mans ſoule, let her be calld a Queene,
                  Shee enters into man, call hir a ſprite,
                  Shee makes them godly, which haue neuer beene
                  Call her her ſelfe, the image of her might:
                  Thoſe which for vertue plead, ſhe prompts their tong,
                  Whoſe ſute no tyrant, nor no King can wrong.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Shee ſtands as barre betweene their mouth and them,
                  She prompts their thoghts, their thoghts prompts ſpeeches ſound
                  Their tongues reward is honours diadem,
                  Their labours hire with dueſt merit crown'd:
                  Shee is as iudge and witnes of each heart,
                  Condemning falſhood, taking vertues part.
               
               
                  A ſhadow in the day, ſtar in the night,
                  A ſhadow for to ſhade them from the ſunne,
                  A ſtar in darkenes for to giue them light,
                  A ſhade in day, a ſtar when day is done:
                  Keeping both courſes true, in being true,
                  A ſhade, a ſtarre, to ſhade and lighten you.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 And had ſhe not, the ſunnes hot burning fire,
                  Had ſcorcht the inward pallace of your powers,
                  Your hot affection coolde your hot deſire,
                  Two heats once met make coole diſtilling, ſhowers,
                  So likewiſe had not wiſedome beene your ſtar,
                  You had beene priſoner vnto Phoebes car.
               
               
                  Shee made the red-ſea ſubiect to your craues,
                  The ſurges, calmes, the billowes, ſmootheſt wayes,
                  Shee made rough winds ſleepe ſilent in their caues,
                  And Aeole watch, whom all the winds obayes:
                  Their foes purſuing them, with death and doome,
                  Did make the ſea their church, the waues their tome
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 20 21 They furrowed vp a graue to lie therin,
                  Burying themſelues with their owne handie deed,
                  Sin dig'd a pit it ſelfe to bury ſin,
                  Seed plowed vp the ground, to ſcatter ſeed:
                  The righteous, ſeeing this ſame ſodaine fall,
                  Did praiſe the Lord, and ceas'd vpon them all.
               
               
                  A glorious priſe, though from inglorious hands,
                  A worthy ſpoile, though from vnworthy hearts,
                  Toſſt with the Oceans rage vppon the ſands,
                  Victorious gaine, gained by wiſedomes arts:
                  Which makes the dumbe to ſpeak, the blind to ſee,
                  The deafe to heare, the babes haue grauitie.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XI.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 2 3 
                     WHat he could haue a hart, what hart a thought
                  what thoght a tong, what tong a ſhew of fear
                  Hauing his ſhip balanſte with ſuch a fraught
                  Which calms the euer-weeping oceans tears:
                  Which proſpers euery enterpriſe of warre,
                  And leades their fortune by good fortunes ſtarre.
               
               
                  A Pilate on the ſeas, guide on the land,
                  Through vncouth deſolate vntroden way,
                  Through wildernes of woe, which in woes ſtand,
                  Pitching their tents where deſolation lay:
                  In iuſt reuenge incountring with their foes,
                  Annexing wrath to wrath, and blowes to blowes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 But when the heate of ouermuch alarmes,
                  Had made their bodies ſubiect vnto thurſt,
                  And broyld their hearts, in wraths-allaying harmes,
                  With fiery ſurges which from body burſt:
                  That time had made the totall ſumme of life,
                  Had not affection ſtroue to end the ſtrife.
               
               
                  Wiſedome affectionating power of zeale,
                  Did coole the paſsion of tormenting heate,
                  With water from a rocke which did reueale,
                  Her deare deare loue, placde in affections ſeate:
                  She was their mother twice, ſhe nurſt them twice,
                  Mingling their heat with cold, their fire with ice:
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 From whence receiude they life, from a dead ſtone?
                  From whence receiude they ſpeach, from a mute rock?
                  As if all pleaſure did proceed from mone,
                  Or all diſcretion from a ſenſleſſe blocke:
                  For what was each but ſilent, dead, and mute?
                  As if a thorny thiſtle ſhould beare fruit.
               
               
                  Tis ſtrange how that ſhould cure, which erſt did kill,
                  Giue life, in whome deſtruction is enſhrinde,
                  Alas the ſtone is dead, and hath no skil,
                  Wiſedome gaue life and loue, twas wiſedomes minde:
                  Shee made the ſtore, which poyſoned her foes,
                  Giue life, giue cure, giue remedy to thoſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 7 Blood-quaffing Mars, which waſht himſelfe in gore,
                  Raignde in her foes thirſt-ſlaughter-drinking hearts,
                  Their heads the bloody ſtore-houſe of bloods ſtore,
                  Their minds made bloody ſtreames disburſt in parts:
                  What was it elſe but butchery and hate?
                  To przie yong infants bloud at murders rate:
               
               
                  But let them ſurffet on their bloody cup,
                  Carowſing to their owne deſtructions health,
                  We drinke the ſiluer-ſtreamed water vp,
                  Which vnexpected flow'd from wiſedomes wealth:
                  Declaring by the thirſt of our dry ſoules,
                  How all our foes did ſwimme in murders boules.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 What greater ill than famine? or what ill
                  Can be compared to the fire of thirſt?
                  One be as both, for both the body kill,
                  And firſt brings torments in tormenting firſt:
                  Famine is death it ſelfe, and thirſt no leſſe,
                  If bread and water doe not yeelde redreſſe.
               
               
                  Yet this affliction is but vertues triall,
                  Proceeding from the mercy of Gods ire,
                  To ſee if it can finde his truths deniall,
                  His iudgements breach, attempts contempts deſire:
                  But oh, the wicked ſleeping in miſdeede,
                  Had death on whom they fed, on whom they feede.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Adiudgde, condemnd, and puniſht in one breath,
                  Arraignde, tormented, torturde in one lawe,
                  Adiudgde like captiues with deſtructions wreathe,
                  Arraignde like theeues before the barre of awe:
                  Condemnd, tormented, torturde, puniſhed,
                  Like captiues bold, theeues vnaſtoniſhed.
               
               
                  Say God did ſuffer famine for to raigne,
                  And thirſt to rule amongſt the choiſeſt hart,
                  Yet father-like he eaſde them of their paine,
                  And proou'd them, how they could endure a ſmart:
                  But as a righteous King condemnd the others,
                  As wicked ſonnes vnto as wicked mothers.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 For where the diuel raignes, there ſure is hell,
                  Becauſe the tabernacle of his name,
                  His manſion-houſe, the place where he doth dwell,
                  The cole-blacke viſage of his nigrum fame:
                  So if the wicked liue vpon the earth,
                  Earth is their hell, from good to worſer birth.
               
               
                  If preſent, they are preſent to their teares,
                  If abſent, they are preſent to their woes,
                  Like as the ſnaile which ſhewes all that ſhe beares,
                  Making her backe the mountaine of her ſhoes:
                  Preſent to their death, not abſent to their care,
                  Their puniſhment alike where ere they are.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Why ſay they mournd, lamented, greeude, and wailde,
                  And fed lament with care, care with lament?
                  Say, how can ſorrow be with ſorrow bailde,
                  When teares conſumeth that which ſmiles hath lent?
                  This makes a double priſon, double chaine,
                  A double mourning, and a double paine.
               
               
                  Captiuitie hoping for freedomes hap,
                  At length doth pay the ranſome of her hope,
                  Yet frees her thought from any clogging clap,
                  Though backe be almoſt burſt with yrons cope:
                  So they indurde the more, becauſe they knew,
                  That neuer till the ſpring the flowers grew.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And that by patience commeth hearts delight,
                  Long-ſought for bliſſe, Long far fet happines,
                  Content they were to die for vertues right,
                  Sith ioy ſhould be the pledge of heauines:
                  When vnexpected things were brought to paſſe,
                  They were amazde and wondred where God was.
               
               
                  Hee whom they did denie now they extoll,
                  Hee Whom they do extoll, they did denie,
                  Hee whom they did deride, they doe enroll,
                  In regiſter of heau'nly maieſtie:
                  Their thirſt was euer thirſt, repentance ſtopt it,
                  Their life was euer dead, repentance propt it.
               
               
                  And had it not their thirſt had burnd their harts,
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Their harts had cri'd out for their tongues replie,
                  Their tongues had raiſed all their bodies parts,
                  Their bodyes once in armes had made all die:
                  Their fooliſh practiſes had made them wiſe,
                  Wiſe in their hearts, though fooliſh in their eyes.
               
               
                  But they (alas) were dead to worſhippe death,
                  Senceleſſe in worſhiping all ſhadowed ſhowes,
                  Breathleſſe waſting of ſo vaine a breath,
                  Dumbe in performance of their tongues ſuppoſe:
                  They in adoring death, in deaths beheſt,
                  Were puniſhed with life, and liuing beaſtes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 15 Thus for a ſhew of beaſts, they ſubſtance haue,
                  The thing it ſelfe againſt the ſhadowes will,
                  Which makes the ſhadowes, ſad woes in lifes graue,
                  As nought impoſsible in heauens skill;
                  God ſent ſad-ohes, for ſhadowes of lament,
                  Lions, and beares, in multitudes he ſent.
               
               
                  Newly created beaſts; which ſight ne'er ſawe,
                  Vnknowne, which neither eye nor eare did know,
                  To breathe out blaſts of fire againſt their law,
                  And caſt out ſmoake with a tempeſtuous blow:
                  Making their eyes the chambers of their feares,
                  Darting forth fire as lightning from the ſpheares.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Thus marching one by one, and ſide by ſide,
                  By the prophane ill-limnd, pale ſpectacles,
                  Making both fire and feare to be their guide,
                  Pulld downe their vaine-adoring chronicles:
                  Then ſtaring in their faces ſpit forth fire,
                  Which heats, and cools, their froſty-hot deſire.
               
               
                  Froſty in feare, vnfroſty in their ſhame,
                  Coole in lament, hot in their powers diſgraces,
                  Like luke-warme coales, halfe kindled with the flame,
                  Sate white and red muſtring within their faces:
                  The beaſts thē ſelues did not ſo much diſmay them,
                  As did their vgly eyes aſpects decay them.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Yet what are beaſts, but ſubiects vnto man,
                  By the decree of heau'n, degree of earth?
                  They haue more ſtrength then he, yet more he can,
                  Hee hauing reaſons ſtore, they reaſons dearth,
                  But theſe were made to breake ſubiections rod:
                  And ſhow the ſtubernneſſe of man to God.
               
               
                  Had they not beene ordain'd to ſuch intent,
                  Gods word was able to ſupplant their powers,
                  And root out them which were to miſchiefe bent,
                  With wrath & vengeance, minutes in deaths houres:
                  But God doth keepe a full-direct-true courſe,
                  And meaſures pitties loue, with mercies force.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 The wicked thinkes, God hath no might at all,
                  Becauſe he makes no ſhew of what he is,
                  When God is loth to giue their pride a fall,
                  Or cloud the day wherein they do amiſſe;
                  But ſhould his ſtrength be ſhowne his anger riſe,
                  Who could withſtand the ſunne-caues of his eyes.
               
               
                  Alas, what is the world againſt his ire?
                  As ſnowie mountaines gainſt the golden ſunne,
                  For'ſt for to melt, and thawe with froſty fire,
                  Fire hid in froſt, though froſt of colde begunne:
                  As dew-diſtilling drops fall from the morne,
                  So nw-deſtructions claps fall from his ſcorne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 But his reuenge lies ſmother'd in his ſmiles,
                  His wrath lies ſleeping in his mercies ioy,
                  Which very ſeldome riſe at miſchiefes coyles,
                  And will not wake for euery ſinners toy:
                  Boundleſſe his mercies are, like heauens grounds,
                  They haue no limittes they, nor heau'n no bounds.
               
               
                  The promontary top of his true loue,
                  Is like the end of neuer-ending ſtreames,
                  Like Nilus water-ſprings which inward moue,
                  And haue no outward ſhew of ſhadowes beames:
                  God ſees, and will not ſee, the ſinnes of men,
                  Becauſe they ſhould amend, amend? oh when?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 The mother loues the iſſues of her wombe,
                  As doth the father his begotten ſonne,
                  Shee makes her lap their quiet ſleeping tombe,
                  Hee ſeekes to care for life which new begun:
                  What care hath he (think then) that cares for all,
                  For aged, and for yong, for great and ſmall?
               
               
                  Is not that father carefull, filld with care,
                  Louing, long ſuffering, mercifull, and kinde;
                  Which made with loue all things that in loue are,
                  Vnmercifull to none, to none vnkinde,
                  Had man beene hatefull, man had neuer beene,
                  But periſht in the ſpring-time of his greene.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 23 But how can hate abide where loue remaines?
                  Or how can anger follow mercies path?
                  How can vnkindeneſſe hinder kindneſſe gaines?
                  Or how can murder bathe in pitties bath?
                  Loue, mercy, kindeneſſe, pitty, eithers mate,
                  Doth ſcorne vnkindeneſſe, anger, murder, hate.
               
               
                  Had it not beene thy will to make the earth,
                  It ſtill had beene a Chaos vnto time,
                  But twas thy will that man ſhould haue a birth,
                  And be preſerude by good, condemnd by crime:
                  Yet pitty raignes within thy mercies ſtore,
                  Thou ſpar'ſt & lou'ſt vs all, what would we more?
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 2
                     WHen all the elements of mortall life,
                  Were placed in the manſion of their skin,
                  Each hauing dayly motion to be rife,
                  Cloſde in that body which doth cloſe thē in,
                  God ſent his holy ſpirit vnto man,
                  Which did begun when firſt the world began.
               
               
                  So that the body which was king of al,
                  Is ſubiect vnto that which now is king,
                  Which chaſtneth thoſe whom miſchiefe doth exhale,
                  Vnto miſdeeds from whence deſtructions ſpring:
                  Yet mercifull it is though it be chiefe,
                  Conuerting vice to good, ſin to beliefe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Old time is often loſt in being balld,
                  Balld becauſe old, old becauſe liuing long,
                  It is reiected oft when it is calld,
                  And weares out age with age, ſtill being yong:
                  Twice children we, twice feeble, and once ſtrong,
                  But being old, we ſin, and do youth wrong.
               
               
                  The more we grow in age, the more in vice,
                  A houſe-roome long vnſwept wil gather duſt,
                  Our long vnthawed ſoules wil freeze to ice,
                  And weare the badge of long impriſoned ruſt:
                  So thoſe inhabitants in youth twice borne,
                  Were old in ſin, more olde in heauens ſcorne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 5 Committing workes as inckie ſpots of fame,
                  Commencing wordes like foaming vices waues,
                  Committing and commencing miſchiefes name,
                  With workes and words ſworne to be vices ſlaues:
                  As ſorcery, witchcraft, miſchieuous deeds,
                  And ſacrifice which wicked fancies feeds.
               
               
                  Well may I call that wicked which is more,
                  I rather would be lowe than be too hie,
                  Oh wondrous practiſers clothde all in gore,
                  To end that life, which their owne liues did buy:
                  More than ſwine-like eating mans bowelles vp,
                  Their banquets diſh, their blood their banquets cup.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 7 Butchers vnnaturall, worſe by their trade,
                  Whoſe houſe the bloody ſhambles of decay,
                  More than a ſlaughter-houſe which butchers made,
                  More than an Eſchip ſeely bodies pray:
                  Thorow whoſe hearts a bloody ſhambles runnes,
                  They do not butcher beaſts, but their owne ſonnes.
               
               
                  Chief murdrers of their ſoules, which their ſouls boght
                  Extinguiſhers of light which their liues gaue,
                  More than kniue-butchers they, butchers in thought,
                  Sextons to digge their owne begotten graue:
                  Making their habitations old in ſinne,
                  Which God doth reconcile and new beginne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 9 That murdring place was turnd into delight,
                  That bloody ſlaughter-houſe to peaces breaſt,
                  That lawleſſe pallace, to a place of right,
                  That ſlaughtring ſhambles to a liuing reſt:
                  Made meete for iuſtice, fit for happineſſe,
                  Vnmeete for ſin, vnfit for wickedneſſe.
               
               
                  Yet the inhabitants, though miſchiefes ſlaues,
                  Were not dead-drencht in their deſtructions flood,
                  God hop'd to raiſe repentance from ſins graues,
                  And hop'd that paines delay would make them good:
                  Not that he was vnable to ſubdue them,
                  But that their ſins repentance ſhould renue them.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Delay is tooke for vertue and for vice,
                  Delay is good, and yet delay is bad,
                  Tis vertue when it thawes repentance ice,
                  Tis vice to put off things we haue or had:
                  But here it followeth repentance way,
                  Therefore it is not ſins nor miſchiefes pray.
               
               
                  Delay in puniſhment is double paine,
                  And euery paine makes a twice double thought,
                  Doubling the way to our liues better gaine,
                  Doubling repentance which is ſingle bought:
                  For fruitles grafts when they are too much lopt,
                  More fruitleſſe are, for why their fruits are ſtopt.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 So fares it with the wicked plants of ſin,
                  The rootes of miſchiefe, toppes of villany,
                  They worſer are with too much puniſhing,
                  Becauſe by nature prone to iniury:
                  For tis but folly to ſupplant his thought,
                  Whoſe heart is wholy giuen to be nought.
               
               
                  Theſe ſeeded were in ſeede; oh curſed plant,
                  Seeded with other ſeede, Oh curſed roote,
                  Too much of good doth turne vnto goods want,
                  As too much ſeede doth turne to too much ſoote:
                  Bitter in taſte, preſuming of their height,
                  Like miſty vapours in blacke-coloured night.
               
               
                  But god whoſe powerful arms one ſtrength doth hold
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Scorning to ſtaine his force vpon their faces,
                  Will ſend his meſſengers both hote and colde,
                  To make them ſhadowes of their owne diſgraces:
                  His hot Ambaſſador is fire, his cold
                  Is winde, which two ſcorne for to be controld.
               
               
                  For who dares ſay vnto the King of kings,
                  What haſt thou done, which ought to be vndone?
                  Or who dares ſtand againſt thy iudgements ſtings?
                  Or dare accuſe thee for the nations mone?
                  Or who dare ſay, reuenge this ill for me?
                  Or ſtand againſt the Lord with villanie?
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 What he hath done he knowes, what he will doe,
                  He weigheth with the ballance of his eies,
                  What iudgement he pronounceth muſt be ſo,
                  And thoſe he oppreſſeth cannot riſe:
                  Reuenge lies in his hands, when he doth pleaſe,
                  He can reuenge, and loue, puniſh, and eaſe.
               
               
                  The carued ſpectacle which workemen make,
                  Is ſubiect vnto them, not they to it,
                  They which from God a liuely forme do take,
                  Should much more yeeld vnto their makers wit:
                  Sith there is none but he which hath his thought,
                  Caring for that which he hath made of nought.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The clay is ſubiect to the potters hands,
                  Which with a new deuice makes a new moule,
                  And what are we I pray but clayie bands,
                  With aſhie body, ioynde to cleaner ſoule?
                  Yet we once made, ſcorne to be made againe,
                  But liue in ſin like clayie lumps of paine.
               
               
                  Yet if hot anger ſmother coole delight,
                  Hee'le mould our bodies in deſtructions forme,
                  And make our ſelues as ſubiects to his might,
                  In the leaſt fewell of his angers ſtorme:
                  Nor king, nor tyrant, dare aske or demaund,
                  What puniſhment is this thou haſt in hand?
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 We all are captiues to thy regall throne,
                  Out priſon is the earth, our bands our ſins,
                  And our accuſer our owne bodies grone,
                  Preſt downe with vices weights, and miſchiefs gins:
                  Before the barre of heau'n we pleade for fauour,
                  To cleanſe our ſin-beſpotted bodies ſauour.
               
               
                  Thou righteous art, our pleading then is right,
                  Thou mercifull, we hope for mercies grace,
                  Thou ordreſt euery thing with looke-on ſight;
                  Behold vs priſoners in earths wandring race:
                  We know thy pitty is without a bound,
                  And ſpareſt them which in ſome faults be found.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Thy power is as thy ſelfe, without an end,
                  Beginning all to end, yet ending none,
                  Sonne vnto vertues ſonne, and wiſedomes frend,
                  Originall of bliſſe to vertue ſhowne:
                  Beginning good which neuer ends in vice,
                  Beginning flames which neuer ende in ice.
               
               
                  For righteouſnes is good in ſuch a name,
                  It righteous is, tis good in ſuch a deed,
                  A lamp it is, fed with diſcretions flame,
                  Begins in ſeede, but neuer ends in ſeed:
                  By this we know the Lord is iuſt and wiſe,
                  Which cauſeth him to ſpare vs when he tries.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Iuſt, becauſe iuſtice weighs what wiſedome thinkes,
                  Wiſe, becauſe wiſedome thinkes what iuſtice weighs,
                  One vertue maketh two, and two more linckes,
                  Wiſedome is iuſt, and iuſtice neuer ſtraies:
                  The help of one doth make the other better,
                  As is the want of one the others letter.
               
               
                  But wiſedome hath two properties in wit,
                  As iuſtice hath two contraries in force,
                  Heate added vnto heate augmenteth it,
                  As too much water burſts a water-courſe:
                  Gods wiſdome too much proou'd doth breed gods hate,
                  Gods iuſtice too much mou'de breeds Gods debate.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Although the aſhy priſon of fire-durſt,
                  Doth keepe the flaming heate impriſoned in,
                  Yet ſometime wil it burne, when flame it muſt,
                  And burſt the aſhie caue where it hath bin:
                  So if Gods mercy paſſe the bounds of mirth,
                  It is not mercy then, but mercies dearth.
               
               
                  Yet how can loue breed hate, without hates loue?
                  God doth not hate to loue, nor loue to hate,
                  His equitie doth euery action proue,
                  Smothring with loue that ſpitefull enuies fate:
                  For ſhould the teene of anger trace his brow,
                  The very puffes of rage would driue the plow.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 But God did end his toile when world begun,
                  Now like a louer ſtudies how to pleaſe,
                  And win their harts againe, whom miſchiefe won,
                  Lodg'd in the manſion of their ſins diſeaſe:
                  Hee made each mortall man two eares, two eyes,
                  To heare and ſee; yet he muſt make them wiſe.
               
               
                  If imitation ſhould direct mans life,
                  Tis life to imitate a liuing corſe,
                  The things example makes the thing more rife,
                  God louing is, why do wee want remorce?
                  Hee put repentance into ſinfull hearts,
                  And ſed their fruitleſſe ſoules, with fruitfull arts.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 20 21 If ſuch a boundleſſe Ocean of good deeds,
                  Should haue ſuch influence from mercies ſtreame,
                  Kiſsing both good, and ill, flowers, and weedes,
                  As doth the ſunnie flame of Tytans beame,
                  A greater Tethis then ſhould mercy bee,
                  In flowing vnto them which loueth thee.
               
               
                  The ſunne which ſhines in heau'n doth light the earth
                  The earth which ſhines in ſin doth ſpight the haau'n,
                  Sinne is earths ſunne, the ſunne of heau'n ſins dearth,
                  Both odde in light, being of height note eu'n:
                  Gods mercy then which ſpares both good and ill,
                  Doth care for both, though not alike in will.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Can vice be vertues mate, or vertues meate?
                  Her company is bad, her foode more worſe,
                  Shee ſhames to ſit vpon her betters ſeat,
                  As ſubiect beaſts wanting the Lions force,
                  Mercy is vertues badge, foe to diſdaine,
                  Vertue is vices ſtop, and mercies gaine.
               
               
                  Yet God is mercifull, to miſchiefe flowes,
                  More mercifull in ſins and ſinners want,
                  God chaſt'neth vs, and puniſheth our foes,
                  Like ſluggiſh drones, amongſt a laboring ant:
                  VVee hope for mercy at our bodies doome,
                  Wee hope for heau'n, the baile of earthly tombe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 23 What hope they for, what hope haue they of heau'n?
                  They hope for vice, and they haue hope of hell,
                  From whence their ſoules eternity is giu'n,
                  But ſuch eternity which paines can tell:
                  They liue; but better were it for to die,
                  Immortall in their paine and miſery.
               
               
                  Hath hell ſuch freedome to deuoure ſoules?
                  Are ſoules ſo bolde to ruſh in ſuch a place?
                  God giues hell power of vice, which hell controules:
                  Vice makes her followers bolde with armed face,
                  God tortures both, the miſtris and the man,
                  And ends in paine, that which in vice began.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 A bad beginning makes a worſer end,
                  Without repentance meet the middle way,
                  Making a mediocrity their friend,
                  Which elſe would be their foe, becauſe they ſtray:
                  But if repentance miſſe the middle line,
                  The ſunne of vertue endes in weſts decline.
               
               
                  So did it fare with theſe, which ſtrai'd too far,
                  Beyond the meaſure of the middayes eye,
                  In errors waies, lead without vertues ſtar,
                  Eſteeming beaſt-like powers for deitie:
                  Whoſe heart no thought of vnderſtanding ment,
                  Whoſe tongue no word of vnderſtanding ſent.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Like infant babes bearing their natures ſhell,
                  Vpon the tender heads of tendrer wit,
                  which tongue-tide are, hauing no tale to tell,
                  To driue away the childhood of their fit:
                  Vnfit to tune their tongue with wiſedomes ſtring,
                  Too fit to quench their thirſt in follies ſpring.
               
               
                  But they were trees to babes, babes ſprigs to them,
                  They not ſo good as theſe, in being nought,
                  In being nought, the more from vices ſtem,
                  Whoſe eſſence cannot come without a thought;
                  To puniſh them, is puniſhment in ſeaſon;
                  They children like, without or wit, or reaſon.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 26 To bee derided, is to be halfe dead,
                  Deriſion beares a part tweene life and death,
                  Shame followes her with miſery halfe fed,
                  Halfe-breathing life, to make halfe life and breath:
                  Yet here was mercy ſhowne, their deeds were more,
                  Then could bee wipte off by deriſions ſcore.
               
               
                  This mercy is the warning of miſdeedes,
                  A trumpet ſummoning to vertues walls,
                  To notifie their hearts which miſchiefe feeds,
                  Whom vice inſtructs, whom wickednes exhal's:
                  But if deriſion can not murder ſin,
                  Then ſhame ſhall end, and puniſhment begin.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 27 For many ſhameleſſe are, bolde, ſtout in ill,
                  Then how can ſhame take roote in ſhamleſſe plants,
                  When they their browes with ſhameleſſe furrows fill,
                  And plows ech place, which one plow-furrow wants:
                  Then being arm'd gainſt ſhame with ſhamleſſe face,
                  How can deriſion take a ſhameful place?
               
               
                  But puniſhment may ſmoth their wrinckled brow,
                  And ſet ſhame on the forehead of their rage,
                  Guiding the forefront of that ſhameleſſe row,
                  Making it ſmooth in ſhame, though not in age:
                  Then will they ſay, that God is iuſt and true,
                  But tis too late, damnation will enſue.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 THe branch muſt needs be weake, if roote be ſo,
                  The roote muſt needs be weake, it branches fall,
                  Nature is vaine, man cannot be her foe,
                  Becauſe from nature, and at natures call:
                  Nature is vaine, and wee proceede from nature,
                  Vaine therefore is our birth, and vaine our feature.
               
               
                  One body may haue two diſeaſes ſore,
                  Not being two, it may be ioynde to two,
                  Nature is one it ſelfe, yet two and more,
                  Vaine, ignorant of God, of good, of ſhow,
                  Which not regards the things which god hath don,
                  And what things are to doe, what new begun.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Why doe I blame the tree? when tis the leaues,
                  Why blame I nature? for her mortall men,
                  Why blame I men? tis ſhe, tis ſhe that weaues,
                  That weaues, that wafts vnto deſtructions pen:
                  Then being blamefull both, becauſe both vaine,
                  I leaue to both, their vanities due paine.
               
               
                  To prize the ſhadow at the ſubſtance rate,
                  Is a vaine ſubſtance of a ſhadowes hue,
                  To thinke the ſonne to be the fathers mate,
                  Earth to rule earth, becauſe of earthly view:
                  To thinke fire winde, ayre ſtars, water, and heau'n,
                  To be as Gods, from whom their ſelues are giu'n.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Fire as a God? oh irreligious ſound,
                  Winde as a God? oh vaine, oh vaineſt voice,
                  Aire as a God? when tis but duskie ground,
                  Star as a God? when tis but Phoebes choice:
                  Water a God? which firſt by God was made,
                  Heauen a God? which firſt by God was laide.
               
               
                  Say all hath beautie, excellence, array,
                  Yet beautifide they are, they were, they bee,
                  By Gods bright excellence of brighteſt day,
                  Which firſt implanted our firſt beuties tree:
                  If then the painted outſide of the ſhow,
                  Bee radiant, what is the inward row.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 If that the ſhadowe of the bodies skin,
                  Bee ſo illumin'd with the ſun-ſhin'd ſoule,
                  What is the thing it ſelfe which is within,
                  More wrencht, more cleanſde, more purifi'd from foul:
                  If elementall powers haue Gods thought,
                  Say what is God, which made them all of nought.
               
               
                  It is a wonder for to ſee the skie,
                  And operation of each ayrye power,
                  A meruaile, that the heau'n ſhould be ſo hie,
                  And let fall ſuch a low diſtilling ſhower:
                  Then needs muſt hee bee high, higher then all,
                  Which made both hie and lowe with one tongues call.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 The workeman mightier is then his hand-worke,
                  In making that which elſe would be vnmade,
                  The nere-thought thing, doth alwaies hidden lurke,
                  Without the maker in a making trade:
                  For had not God made man, man had not beene,
                  But nature had decayde, and nere beene ſeene.
               
               
                  The workman neuer ſhewing of his skill,
                  Doth liue vnknowne to man, though knowne to wit,
                  Had mortall birth beene neuer in Gods will,
                  God had beene God, but yet vnknowne in it:
                  Then hauing made the glory of earths beautie,
                  Tis reaſon earth ſhould reuerence him in dutie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The ſauadge people haue a ſupreame head,
                  A king, though ſauadge as his ſubiects are,
                  Yet they with his obſeruances are lead,
                  Obaying his beheaſts what ere they were:
                  The Turkes, the infidels, all haue a Lord,
                  Whom they obſerue in thought, in deed, in word.
               
               
                  And ſhall we; differing from their ſauage kinde,
                  Hauing a ſoule to liue and to beleeue,
                  Be rude in thought, in deed, in word, in minde,
                  Not ſeeking him which ſhould our woes releeue:
                  Oh no deere brethren, ſeeke our God, our fame,
                  Then if wee erre we ſhall haue leſſer blame.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 How can wee erre, wee ſeeke for ready way,
                  Oh that my tongue could fetch that word againe,
                  Whoſe very accent makes me go aſtray,
                  Breathing that erring wind into my braine▪
                  
                  My word is paſt and cannot be recalde,
                  It is like aged time, now waxen balde.
               
               
                  For they which goe aſtray in ſeeking God,
                  Doe miſſe the ioyefull narrow-footed path,
                  (Ioyfull, thrice ioyfull way to his abode,)
                  Nought ſeeing but their ſhadowes in a bath:
                  Narciſsus-like pining to ſee a ſhow,
                  Hindring the paſſage, which their feete ſhould goe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 9 Narciſsus fantaſie did die to kiſſe,
                  O ſugred kiſſe dide with a poiſoned lip,
                  The fantaſies of theſe do die to miſſe,
                  Oh toſſed fantaſies, in follies ſhip:
                  He dide to kiſſe the ſhadow of his face,
                  Theſe liue and die to lifes and deaths diſgrace.
               
               
                  A fault without amends, crime without eaſe,
                  A ſin without excuſe, death without aide,
                  To loue the world, and what the world did pleaſe,
                  To know the earth, wherein their ſinnes are laide:
                  They knew the world, but not the L. that framde it
                  They knew the earth, but not the L. that namde i
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Narciſsus drownde himſelfe, for his ſelfes ſhew,
                  Striuing to heale himſelfe, did himſelfe harme,
                  Theſe drownde them ſelues on earth, with their ſelues woe,
                  Hee in a water-brooke by furies charme;
                  They made dry earth wet with their follys weepīg,
                  Hee made wet earth dry, with his furies ſleeping.
               
               
                  Then leaue him to his ſleepe: returne to thoſe,
                  Which euer wake in miſeries conſtraints,
                  Whoſe eyes are hollow caues, and made ſleeps foes,
                  Two dungeons darke with ſin, blind with complaints:
                  They called images which man firſt found,
                  Immortall Gods: for which, their tongs are bound.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 12 Golde was a God with them, a golden God,
                  Like children in a pageant of gay toyes,
                  Adoring images for ſaints abode,
                  Oh vaine vaine ſpectacles of vainer ioyes:
                  Putting their hope in blocks, their truſt in ſtones,
                  Hoping to truſt, truſting to hope in mones.
               
               
                  As when a carpenter cuts downe a tree,
                  Meet for to make a veſſell for mans vſe,
                  He pareth all the barke moſt cunningly,
                  With the ſharp ſhauer of his kniues abuſe,
                  Ripping the ſeely wombe with no entreate,
                  Making her woundy chips to dreſſe his meat.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 14 Her bodies bones are often rough and hard,
                  Crooked with ages growth, growing with crookes,
                  And full of wether-chinkes, which ſeaſons marrde,
                  Knobbie and rugged, bending in like hookes:
                  Yet knowing age can neuer want a fault,
                  Encounters it with a ſharpe knifes aſſault.
               
               
                  And carues it well though it be ſelfe-like ill,
                  Obſeruing leaſure, keeping time and place,
                  According to the cunning of his skill,
                  Making the figure of a mortall face:
                  Or like ſome vgly beaſt in ruddy mould,
                  Hiding each crannie with a painters fould.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 16 It is a world to ſee, to marke, to view,
                  How age can botch vp age, with crooked thread,
                  How his olde hands, can make an olde tree new,
                  And dead-like hee, can make another dead:
                  Yet makes a ſubſtantiue, able to beare it,
                  And ſhe an adiectiue, nor ſee, nor heare it.
               
               
                  A wall it is it ſelfe, yet wall with wall,
                  Hath great ſupportance bearing either part,
                  The image like an adiectiue would fall,
                  Were it not cloſed with an yron hart:
                  The workman being olde himſelfe, doth know,
                  What great infirmities olde age can ſhow.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Therefore to ſtop the riuer of extreames,
                  Hee burſt into the flowing of his wit,
                  Toſsing his braines with more then thouſand theams,
                  To haue a wooden ſtratagem ſo fit:
                  Woodden, becauſe it doth belong to wood,
                  His purpoſe may be wiſe, his reaſon good.
               
               
                  His purpoſe wiſe? no, fooliſh, fond, and vaine,
                  His reaſon good? no, wicked, vild, and ill;
                  To be the authour of his owne liues paine,
                  To be the tragick actor of his will:
                  Praying to that which he before had fram'd,
                  For welcome faculties, (and not aſham'd.)
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 Calling to follie, for diſcretions ſence,
                  Calling to ſicknes, for ſick bodies health,
                  Calling to weakenes, for a ſtronger fence,
                  Calling to pouertie, for better wealth:
                  Praying to death, for life, for this hee praide,
                  Requiring helpe of that, which wanteth aide.
               
               
                  Deſiring that of it, which he not had,
                  And for his iourney, that which cannot goe,
                  And for his gaine, her furdrance, to make glad,
                  The worke which he doth take in hand to doe:
                  Theſe windie words do ruſh againſt the wall
                  Shee cannot ſpeake, twill ſooner make her f
                        •••
                     .
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XIIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     AS doth one little ſparke make a great flame,
                  Kindled from forth the boſome of the flint,
                  As doth one plague infect with it ſelfe name,
                  With watrie humours making bodies dint:
                  So, euen ſo, this idoll worſhipper,
                  Doth make another idoll practiſer.
               
               
                  The ſhipman cannot teeme dame Tethis waues,
                  Within a winde-taught-capring anchorage,
                  Before hee proſtrate lies, and ſuffrage craues,
                  And haue a block to be his fortunes gage:
                  More crooked then his ſterne, yet he implores her,
                  More rotten then his ſhip, yet he adores her.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 3 4 Who made this forme? he that was form'd and made,
                  Twas auarice, twas ſhee that found it out,
                  Shee made her crafts-man crafty in his trade,
                  Hee cunning was in bringing it about:
                  Oh had he made the painted ſhew to ſpeake,
                  It would haue calde him vaine, herſelfe to wreake.
               
               
                  It would haue made him bluſh aliue, though hee,
                  Did die her colour with a deadly bluſh,
                  Thy pouidence (ó father) doth decree,
                  A ſure ſure way, amongſt the waues to ruſh:
                  Thereby declaring that thy power is ſuch,
                  That thogh a man were weake, thou canſt do much.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 What is one ſingle barre to double death?
                  One death in death, the other death in feare,
                  This ſingle barre, a borde, a poore bords breath,
                  Yet ſtops the paſſage of each Neptunes teare:
                  To ſee how many liues one borde can haue,
                  To ſee how many liues one borde can ſaue.
               
               
                  How was this borde firſt made? by wiſedomes art,
                  Which is not vaine, but firme, not weake, but ſure,
                  Therfore do men commit their liuing hart,
                  To plancks which either life or death procure:
                  Cutting the ſtormes in two, parting the winde,
                  Plowing the ſea till they their harbour finde.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The ſea whoſe mountaine billowes, paſsing bounds
                  Ruſheth vpon the hollow-ſided barke,
                  With rough-ſent kiſſes from the water grounds,
                  Raiſing a foaming heat with rages ſparke,
                  Yet ſea, nor waues, can make the ſhipman feare,
                  Hee knowes that die he muſt, hee cares not where.
               
               
                  For had his timorous heart beene dide in white,
                  And ſent an eccho of reſembling woe,
                  Wiſedome had beene vnknowne in follies night,
                  The ſea had beene a deſolations ſhowe:
                  But one world hope lay houering on the ſea,
                  When one worlds hap did end with one decay.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 8 Yet Phoebus drowned in the oceans world,
                  
                     Phoebe diſgraſt with Tethis billow-roules,
                  And Phoebus firie-golden-wreath vncurl'd,
                  was ſeated at the length in brightnes ſoules:
                  Man toſſt in wetteſt wildernes of ſeas,
                  Had ſeed on ſeed, encreaſe vpon encreaſe.
               
               
                  Their manſion-houſe a tree vpon a waue,
                  O happy tree, vppon vnhappy ground,
                  But euery tree is not ordain'd to haue
                  Such bleſſednes, ſuch vertue, ſuch abound:
                  Some trees are carued images of nought,
                  Yet God-like reuerenc'd, ador'd, beſought.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Are the trees nought, alas, they ſenceleſſe are,
                  The hands which faſhion them, condemne their groth,
                  Cuts downe their branches, vailes their forehead bare,
                  Both made in ſin, though not ſins equall both:
                  Firſt God made man, and vice did make him new,
                  And man made vice from vice; and ſo it grew.
               
               
                  Now is her harueſt greater then her good,
                  Her wonted winter, turn'd to ſummers ayre,
                  Her ice to heat, her ſprig to cedars wood,
                  Her hate to loue, her lothſome filth to faire:
                  Man loues her well by miſchiefe new created,
                  God hates her ill, becauſe of vertue hated.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 O fooliſh man mounted vppon decay,
                  More vgly then Alaſtors pitchie backe,
                  Nights diſmall ſummoner, and end of day,
                  Carrying all duskie vapours hemde in blacke:
                  Behold thy downfall ready at thy hand,
                  Behold thy hopes wherein thy hazards ſtand.
               
               
                  Oh ſpurne away that blocke out of thy way,
                  With vertues appetite, and wiſedomes force,
                  That ſtumbling blocke of follie and decay,
                  That ſnare which doth enſnare thy treading corſe:
                  Beholde thy body falls, let vertue beare it,
                  Beholde thy ſoule doth fall, let wiſedome reare it.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Say art thou yong, or olde, tree, or a bud,
                  Thy face is ſo disfigured with ſin,
                  Yong I doe thinke thou art, in what? in good,
                  But olde I am aſſur'd by wrinckled skin:
                  Thy lips, thy tongue, thy heart, is yong in praying,
                  But lips, and tongue, and heart is olde in ſtraying.
               
               
                  Olde in adoring idolls, but too yong,
                  In the obſeruance of diuineſt lawe,
                  Yong in adoring God, though olde in tong,
                  Olde and too olde, yong, and too yong in awe:
                  Beginning that, which doth begin miſdeeds,
                  Inuenting vice, which all thy body feeds.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 13 But this corrupting and infecting foode,
                  This caterpiller of eternitie,
                  The foe to bliſſe, the canker vnto good,
                  The new accuſtom'd way of vanitie:
                  It hath not euer beene, nor ſhall it be,
                  But periſh in the branch of follies tree.
               
               
                  As her deſcent was vanities aline,
                  So her deſcending like to her deſcent,
                  Here ſhall ſhee haue an end, in hell no fine,
                  Vaine glory brought her, vainely to be ſpent:
                  You know all vanity drawes to an end,
                  Then needs muſt ſhee decay becauſe her frend.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Is there more follie then to weepe at ioy,
                  To make eyes watrie, when they ſhould be drie,
                  To greeue at that, which murders griefes annoy,
                  To keepe a ſhower where the ſunne ſhould lie?
                  But yet this folly-cloude doth oft appeare,
                  When face ſhould ſmile and watry eie bee cleere.
               
               
                  The father mournes to ſee his ſonne life-dead,
                  But ſeldome mournes to ſee his ſonne dead-liu'd,
                  Hee cares for earthly lodge, not heau'ns bed,
                  For death in life, not life in death ſuruiu'd:
                  Keeping the outward ſhadow of his face,
                  To worke the inward ſubſtance of diſgrace.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Keeping a ſhew to counterpoize the deed,
                  Keeping a ſhadow to be ſubſtance heire,
                  To raiſe the thing it ſelfe from ſhadowes ſeed,
                  And make an element of liueleſſe aire:
                  Adoring that which his owne hands did frame,
                  Whoſe hart inuention gaue, whoſe tong the name.
               
               
                  But could infection keepe one ſetled place,
                  The poyſon would not lodge in euery breſt,
                  Nor feede the hart, the minde, the ſoule, the face,
                  Lodging but in the carcaſſe of her reſt:
                  But this Idolatry once in mans vſe,
                  Was made a cuſtome then without excuſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Nay more: it was at tyrannies commaund,
                  And tyrants cannot ſpeake without a doome,
                  Whoſe iudgement doth proceed from heart and hand,
                  From heart in rage, from hand in bloudy tombe:
                  That if through abſence any did neglect it,
                  Preſence ſhould pay the ranſome which reiect it.
               
               
                  Then to auoide the doome of preſent hate,
                  Their abſence did performe their preſence want,
                  Making the image of a kingly ſtate,
                  As if they had new ſeed from ſins olde plant:
                  Flattring the abſence of olde miſchiefes mother,
                  With the like forme and preſence of another.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Making an abſence with a preſent ſight,
                  Or rather preſence with an abſent view,
                  Deceiuing vulgars with a day of night,
                  Which know not good from bad, nor falſe from true:
                  A crafts-man cunning in his crafty trade,
                  Beguiling them with that which he had made.
               
               
                  Like as a vane is turn'd with euery blaſt,
                  Vntill it point vnto the windie clime,
                  So ſtand the people at his worde agaſt,
                  Hee making olde, new forme in new-olde time,
                  Defies, and deifies all with one breath,
                  Making them liue and die, and all in death,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 They like to Tantalus are fed with ſhoes,
                  Shewes which exaſperat: and cannot cure,
                  They ſee the painted ſhadow of ſuppoſe,
                  They ſee her ſight, yet what doth ſight procure?
                  Like Tantalus they feed, and yet they ſtarue,
                  Their foode is caru'd to them, yet hard to carue.
               
               
                  The crafts-man feeds them with a ſtaruing meat,
                  Which doth not fill but empty hungers gape,
                  Hee makes the idoll comely, faire, and great,
                  With well limnd viſage, and beſt faſhioned ſhape:
                  Meaning to giue it to ſome noble view,
                  And faine his beautie with that flattring hue,
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Enamour'd with the ſight, the people grew,
                  To diuers apparitions of delight,
                  Some did admire the portraiture ſo new,
                  Hew'd from the ſtandard of an olde trees hight,
                  Some were allur'd through beutie of the face,
                  With outward eye to worke the ſoules diſgrace.
               
               
                  Adored like a God though made by man,
                  To make a God of man, a man of God,
                  Tis more then humaine life or could, or can,
                  Though multitudes applauſe in error trode,
                  I neuer knew ſince mortall lifes abod,
                  That man could make a man much leſſe a God.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Yes man can make his ſhame, without a maker,
                  Borrowing the eſſence from reſtored ſin,
                  Man can be vertues foe, and vices taker,
                  Welcome himſelfe without a welcome in:
                  Can he doe this? yea more, oh ſhamleſſe ill,
                  Shamefull in ſhame, ſhameleſſe in wiſedomes will.
               
               
                  The riuer of his vice can haue no bound,
                  But breakes into the ocean of deceit,
                  Deceiuing life with meaſures of dead ground,
                  With carued idols, diſputations baite:
                  Making captiuitie cloth'd all in mone,
                  Bee ſubiect to a God made of a ſtone.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Too ſtony hearts had they which made this lawe,
                  Oh had they beene as ſtony as the name,
                  They neuer had brought vulgars in ſuch awe,
                  To be deſtructions pray, and miſchiefes game:
                  Had they beene ſtone-dead both in looke & fauour
                  They neuer had made life of ſuch a ſauour.
               
               
                  Yet was not this a too ſufficient doome,
                  Sent from the roote of their ſin-oregrowne tong,
                  To cloud gods knowledge with hel miſchiefs gloome
                  To ouerthrowe truths right with falſhoods wrong:
                  But dayly practiſed a perfect way,
                  Still to begin and neuer end to ſtray.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 22 23 For either murders pawe did gripe their harts,
                  With whiſpring horrors drumming in each eare,
                  Or other villanies did play their parts,
                  Augmenting horror to newe ſtrucken feare:
                  Making their hands more then a ſhambles ſtall,
                  To ſlay their children ceremoniall.
               
               
                  No place was free from ſtaine of blood or vice,
                  Their life was markt for death, their ſoule for ſin,
                  Marriage, for fornications thawed ice,
                  Thought for deſpaire, body for eithers gin:
                  Slaughter did either end what life begunne,
                  Or luſt did end what both had left vndone.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 25 The one was ſure, although the other faile,
                  For vice hath more competitors then one,
                  A greater troupe doth euermore auaile,
                  And villanie is neuer found alone,
                  The bloud-hound folows that which ſlaughter kild
                  And theft doth folow what deceit hath ſpild.
               
               
                  Corruption mate to infidelitie,
                  For that which is vnfaithfull is corrupt,
                  Tumults are ſchoole fellowes to periury,
                  For both are full when either one hath ſupt:
                  Vnthankfullnes, defiling, and diſorders,
                  Are fornications and vncleannes borders.
               
               
                  See what a ſort of rebells are in armes,
                  
                     
                        verse 26 To root out vertue, to ſupplant her raigne,
                  Oppoſing of them ſelues againſt all harmes,
                  To the depoſing of her empires gaine:
                  O double knot of treble miſeries,
                  Oh treble knot, twice, thrice, in villanies.
               
               
                  O idoll-worſhipping, thou mother art,
                  Shee procreatreſſe of a he offence,
                  I know thee now, thou bearſt a womans part,
                  Thou nature haſt of her, ſhee of thee ſence:
                  Theſe are thy daughters, too too like the mother,
                  Black ſins I dim you all with inckie ſmother
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 My pen ſhall be officious in this ſcene,
                  To let your harts blood in a wicked veine,
                  To make your bodies cleare, your ſoules as cleane,
                  To cleanſe the ſinkes of ſin, with vertues reine:
                  Behold your cole-blacke blood my writing inke,
                  My papers poyſoned meate, my pens fowle drinke.
               
               
                  New chriſtned are you, with your owne new blood,
                  But madde before; ſauage, and deſperate,
                  Prophecying lies, not knowing what was good,
                  Liuing vngodly euermore in hate:
                  Thundring out oathes, pale Sergeants of deſpaire,
                  Swore, and forſwore, not knowing what you were.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Now looke vpon the ſpectacle of ſhame,
                  The well-limnd image of an ill-limnd thought,
                  Say, are you worthy now of praiſe or blame,
                  That ſuch ſelfe-ſcandall in your owne ſelues wrought?
                  You were heart-ſicke before I let you blood,
                  But now heart-well ſince I haue done you good.
               
               
                  Now wipe blinde folly from your ſeeing eies,
                  And driue deſtruction from your happy mind,
                  Your follie now is wit, not fooliſh-wiſe,
                  Deſtruction, happineſſe, not miſchiefe blinde:
                  You put your truſt in idoles, they deceiude you,
                  You put your truſt in God, and he receiude you.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Had not repentance grounded on your ſoules,
                  The climes of good or ill, vertue or vice,
                  Had it not flowde into the tongues enrowles,
                  Aſcribing miſchiefes hate, with good aduice:
                  Your tong had ſpild your ſoul, your ſoul your tong
                  Wronging each function with a double wrong.
               
               
                  Your firſt attempt was placed in a ſhow,
                  Imaginary ſhow without a deed,
                  The next attempt was periury, the foe
                  To iuſt demeanors, and to vertues ſeede:
                  Two ſins, two puniſhments, and one in two,
                  Makes two in one, and more than one can do.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Foure ſcourges from one paine, al comes from ſin,
                  Single, yet double, double, yet in foure,
                  It ſlayes the ſoule, it hems the body in,
                  It ſpills the minde, it doth the heart deuoure:
                  Gnawing vpon the thoughts, feeding on blood,
                  For why, ſhe liues in ſin, but dies in good.
               
               
                  She taught their ſoules to ſtray, their tongs to ſweare,
                  Their thought to thinke amiſſe, their life to die,
                  Their heart to erre, their miſchiefe to appeare,
                  Their head to ſin, their feete to treade awry:
                  This ſceane might well haue bin deſtructions tent,
                  To pay with paine, what ſin with ioy hath ſpent.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XV.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 But God will neuer die his hands with bloud,
                  His heart with hate, his throne with crueltie,
                  His face with furies map, his browe with cloud,
                  His raigne with rage, his crowne with tyrannie:
                  Gratious is he, long-ſuffering, and true,
                  Which ruleth all things with his mercies view.
               
               
                  Gratious, for where is grace but where he is?
                  The fountaine-head the euer-boundleſſe ſtreame,
                  Patient, for where is patience in amiſſe,
                  If not conducted by pure graces beame:
                  Truth is the moderator of them both,
                  For grace and patience are of trueſt groth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 For grace-beginning truth, doth end in grace,
                  As truth-beginning grace, doth end in truth,
                  Now patience takes the moderators place,
                  Yong-olde in ſuffering, olde-yong in ruth:
                  Patience is olde in being alwaies yong,
                  Not hauing right, nor euer offering wrong,
               
               
                  So this is moderator of Gods rage,
                  Pardoning thoſe deeds, which wee in ſin commit,
                  That if wee ſin, ſhee is our freedomes gage,
                  And wee ſtill thine, though to be thine vnfit:
                  In being thine (ô Lord) wee will not ſin,
                  That we thy patience, grace, and truth may win.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 O grant vs patience in whoſe grant we reſt,
                  To right our wrong, and not to wrong the right,
                  Giue vs thy grace (ô Lord) to make vs bleſt,
                  That grace might bleſſe, & bliſſe might grace our ſight:
                  Make our beginning and our ſequell truth,
                  To make vs yong in age, and graue in youth,
               
               
                  Wee know that our demaunds reſt in thy will,
                  Our will reſts in thy word, our worde in thee,
                  Thou in our oriſons, which doſt fullfill,
                  That wiſhed action, which wee wiſh to bee:
                  Tis perfect righteouſnes to know thee right▪
                  
                  Tis immortalitie to know thy might.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 5 In knowing thee, we know both good and ill,
                  Good, to know good and ill, ill to know none,
                  In knowing all, wee know thy ſacred will,
                  And what to do, and what to leaue vndone:
                  We are deceiu'd, not knowing to deceiue,
                  In knowing good and ill, wee take and leaue.
               
               
                  The glaſſe of vanitie, deceit, and ſhowes,
                  The painters labour, the beguiling face,
                  The diuers-coloured image of ſuppoſe,
                  Cannot deceiue the ſubſtance of thy grace:
                  Only a ſnare, to thoſe of common wit,
                  Which couets to be like, in hauing it.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The greedy lucre of a witleſſe braine,
                  This feeding auarice on ſenceleſſe minde,
                  Is rather hurt, then good, a loſſe, then gaine,
                  Which couets for to looſe and not to finde:
                  So they were coloured with ſuch a face,
                  They would not care to take the idols place.
               
               
                  Then be your thoughts coherent to your words,
                  Your words as correſpondent to your thought,
                  Tis reaſon you ſhould haue what loue affords:
                  And truſt in that which loue ſo dearely bought:
                  The maker muſt needs loue what he hath made,
                  And the deſirers free of either trade.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Man, thou waſt made, art thou a maker now?
                  Yes, tis thy trade, for thou a potter art,
                  Tempring ſofte earth, making the clay to bow,
                  But clayie thou, doſt beare too ſtout a hart:
                  The clay is humble to thy rigorous hands,
                  Thou clay, too tough againſt thy Gods commaūds.
               
               
                  If thou want'ſt ſlime, beholde thy ſlimie faults,
                  If thou want'ſt clay, beholde thy clayie breaſt,
                  Make them to be the deepeſt centres vaults,
                  And let all clayie mountaines ſleepe in reſt:
                  Thou bear'ſt an earthly mountaine on thy back,
                  Thy harts chiefe priſon-houſe thy ſouls chief wrack.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Art thou a mortall man, and mak'ſt a God,
                  A God of clay, thou but a man of clay,
                  O ſuds of miſchiefe, in deſtruction ſod,
                  O vaineſt labour in a vainer playe:
                  Man is the greateſt worke which God did take:
                  And yet a God with man is nought to make.
               
               
                  Hee that was made of earth, would make a heau'n,
                  If heauen may be made vpon the earth,
                  Sins heires, the ayres, ſins plants, the planets ſeau'n,
                  Their God a clod, his birth, true vertues dearth:
                  Remember whence you came wither you goe,
                  Of earth, in earth, from earth to earth in woe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 No, quoth the potter, as I haue beene clay,
                  So will I end with what I did begin,
                  I am of earth, and I doe what earth may,
                  I am of duſt, and therefore will I ſin:
                  My life is ſhort, what then? I'le make it longer,
                  My life is weake, what then? I'le make it ſtronger.
               
               
                  Long ſhall it liue in vice, though ſhort in length,
                  And fetch immortall ſteps, from mortall ſtops,
                  Strong ſhall it be in ſin, though weake in ſtrength,
                  Like mounting Eagles, on high mountaines tops:
                  My honour ſhall bee placed in deceit,
                  And counterfait new ſhewes of little weight.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 My pen doth almoſt bluſh at this replie,
                  And faine would call him wicked to his face,
                  But then his breath would anſwe
                        •…
                      with a lie,
                  And ſtaine my inck with an vntruths diſgrace:
                  Thy maiſter bids thee write, the pen ſayes no,
                  But when thy maiſter bids, it muſt be ſo.
               
               
                  Call his hart aſhes: oh too mild a name,
                  Call his hope vile, more viler then the earth,
                  Call his life weaker then a clayeie frame,
                  Call his beſpotted heart, an aſhye hearth:
                  Aſhes, earth, clay, conioyn'd to heart, hope, life,
                  Are features loue, in being natures ſtrife.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Thou mightſt haue choſe more ſtinging wordes then theſe
                  For this he knowes he is, and more, then leſſe,
                  In ſaying what he is, thou doſt appeaſe,
                  The foming anger which his thoughts ſuppreſſe:
                  Who knowes not, if the beſt be made of clay,
                  The worſt muſt needs be clad in foule array.
               
               
                  Thou in performing of thy maiſters will,
                  Doſt teach him to obay his lords commaunds,
                  But he repugnant is, and cannot skill
                  Of true adoring, with heart-heau'd vp hand:
                  Hee hath a ſoule, a life, a breath, a name,
                  Yet is he ignorant from whence they came.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 My ſoule, ſaith he, is but a mappe of ſhoes,
                  No ſubſtance, but a ſhadow for to pleaſe,
                  My life doth paſſe, euen as a paſtime goes,
                  A momentary time to liue at eaſe:
                  My breath a vapour, and my name of earth,
                  Each one decaying of the others birth.
               
               
                  Our conuerſation beſt, for there is gaines,
                  And gaine is beſt in conuerſations prime,
                  A mart of lucre in our conſcience raignes,
                  Our thoughts as buſie agents for the time:
                  So we get gaine enſnaring ſimple men,
                  It is no matter how, nor where, nor when.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 We care not how, for all miſdeedes are ours,
                  We care not where, if before God or man,
                  We care not when, but when our crafts haue powres,
                  In meaſuring deceit with miſchiefes fanne:
                  For wherefore haue we life, forme, and ordaining,
                  But that we ſhould deceiue, and ſtill be gaining?
               
               
                  I made of earth, haue made al earthen ſhops,
                  And what I ſell is al of earthy ſale,
                  My pots haue earthen feete, and earthen tops,
                  In like reſemblance of my bodies vale:
                  But knowing to offend the heauens more,
                  I made fraile images of earthy ſtore.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 O bold accuſer of his owne miſdeedes,
                  O heauy clod more than the earth can beare,
                  Was neuer creature clothde in ſauage weedes,
                  Which would not bluſh when they this miſchief hear:
                  Thou toldſt a tale which might haue bin vntolde.
                  Making the hearers bluſh, the readers olde.
               
               
                  Let them bluſh ſtill that heares, be olde that reades,
                  Then boldnes ſhal not raigne, nor youth in vice,
                  Thrice miſerable they which raſhly ſpeeds,
                  With expedition to this bold deuice:
                  More fooliſh than are fooles, whoſe miſery
                  Cannot be changde with new felicitie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Are not they fooles which liue without a ſence,
                  Haue not they miſery which neuer ioy?
                  Which takes an idoll for a Gods defence,
                  And with their ſelf-willd thoghts themſelues deſtroy?
                  What folly is more greater than is here?
                  Or what more miſerie can wel appeere?
               
               
                  Call you them gods which haue no ſeeing eyes?
                  No noſes for to ſmell, no eares to heare,
                  No life but that which in deaths ſhadow lies,
                  Which haue no hands to feele, no feete to beare:
                  If gods can neither heare, liue, feele, nor ſee,
                  A foole may make ſuch gods of euery tree.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 And what was he that made them but a foole?
                  Conceiuing follie in a fooliſh braine,
                  Taught and inſtructed in a wodden ſchoole,
                  Which made his head run of a wodden vaine:
                  Twas man which made them, he his making had,
                  Man full of wood, was wood, and ſo ran mad.
               
               
                  He borrowed his life, and would reſtore
                  His borrowed eſſence to another death,
                  He faine would be a maker, though before
                  Was made himſelfe, and God did lend him breath:
                  No man can make a god like to a man,
                  He ſayes he ſcornes that worke, he furder can.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 He is deceiude, and in his great deceit,
                  He doth deceiue the folly-guided harts,
                  Sin lies in ambuſh, he for ſin doth waite,
                  Here is deceit deceiude, in either parts:
                  His ſin deceiueth him, and he his ſin,
                  So craft with craft is mewed in either gin.
               
               
                  The craftſ-man mortall is, craft mortall is,
                  Each function nurſing vp the others want,
                  His hands are mortall, deadly what is his,
                  Onely his ſins buds in deſtructions plant:
                  Yet better he, than what he doth deuiſe,
                  For he himſelfe doth liue that euer dies.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Say, call you this a God? where is his head?
                  Yet headleſſe is he not, yet hath he none:
                  Where is his godhead? fled; his power? dead▪
                  
                  His raigne? decayed; and his eſſence? gone:
                  Now tell me, is this God the God of good?
                  Or elſe Siluanus monarch of the wood.
               
               
                  There haue I pierſt his barke, for he is ſo,
                  A wooden god, fainde as Siluanus was:
                  But leauing him, to others let vs go,
                  To ſenſleſſe beaſts their new adoring glaſſe:
                  Beaſts which did liue in life, yet died in reaſon,
                  Beaſts which did ſeaſons eate, yet knew no ſeaſon.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Can mortall bodies, and immortall ſoules
                  Keepe one knit vnion of a liuing loue?
                  Can ſea with land? can fiſh agree with foules?
                  Tygers with lambes, a ſerpent with a doue?
                  Oh no, they cannot; then ſay, why doe wee,
                  Adore a beaſt which is our enimy.
               
               
                  What greater foe than folly vnto wit?
                  What more deformitie than vgly face?
                  This diſagrees, for follie is vnfit,
                  The other contrary to beauties place:
                  Then how can ſenſleſſe heads, deformed ſhoes,
                  Agree with you when they are both your foes.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XVI.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     OH call that word againe, they are your friends
                  Your liues aſſociats, and your loues content,
                  That which begins in them, your follie ends,
                  Then how can vice with vice be diſcontent:
                  Beholde deformitie ſits on your heads,
                  Not hornes but ſcornes, not viſage but whole beds.
               
               
                  Beholde a heap of ſins your bodies pale,
                  A mountaine-ouerwhelming villany,
                  Then tell me, are you clad in beauties vale?
                  Or in deſtructions pale-dead liuerie:
                  Their life demonſtrates; now aliue now dead,
                  Tormented with the beaſts which they haue fed.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 3 You like to Pelicans haue fed your death,
                  With follies-vaine let bloud, from follies veyne,
                  And almoſt ſterude your ſelues, ſtopt vp your breath,
                  Had not Gods mercie helpt, and eaſde your paine,
                  Beholde a new-found meat, the Lord did ſend,
                  Which taught you to be new, and to amend.
               
               
                  A ſtrange diſgeſted nutriment, euen quailes,
                  Which taught them to be ſtrange vnto miſdeeds,
                  When you implore his aide, he neuer failes,
                  To fill their hunger, whom repentance feeds:
                  You ſee when life was halfe at deaths arreſt,
                  Hee new created life at hungers feaſt.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Say, is your God like this, whom you ador'd,
                  Or is this God like to your handie frame,
                  If ſo, his power could not then afford,
                  Such influence which floweth from his name:
                  Hee is not painted, made of wood and ſtone,
                  But he ſubſtantiall is, and rules alone.
               
               
                  He can oppreſſe, and helpe, helpe, and oppreſſe,
                  The ſinfull incolants of his made earth,
                  He can redreſſe, and paine, paine, and redreſſe,
                  The mountaine-miſeries of mortall birth:
                  Now tyrants you are next, this but a ſhow,
                  And merry index of your after woe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 5 6 Your hot-colde miſery is now at hand,
                  Hot becauſe furies heat, and mercies colde,
                  Cold becauſe limping, knit in froſty band,
                  And cold and hot in being ſhamefaſt-bolde:
                  They cruell were, take crueltie their part,
                  For miſery is but too meane a ſmart.
               
               
                  But when the Tygers iawes, the Serpents ſtings,
                  Did ſummon them vnto this lifes decay,
                  A pardon for their faults thy mercy brings,
                  Cooling thy wrath with pitties ſunnie day:
                  O tyrants tere your ſin-bemired weeds,
                  Beholde your pardon ſealde by mercies deeds.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 8 That ſting which pained could not eaſe the paine,
                  Thoſe iaws that wounded, could not cure the wounds
                  To turne to ſtings for helpe, it were but vaine,
                  To iawes for mercie, which wants mercies bounds:
                  The ſtings, ô Sauiour, were puld out by thee,
                  Their iawes claſpt vp, in midſt of crueltie.
               
               
                  O ſoueraigne ſalue, ſtop to a bloody ſtreame,
                  O heauenly care and cure, for duſt and earth,
                  Celeſtiall watch to wake terreſtriall dreame,
                  Dreaming in puniſhment, mourning in mirth,
                  Now knowes our enimies, that it is thee,
                  Which helpes and cures, our griefe and miſery.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Our puniſhment doth end, theirs new begins,
                  Our day appeares, their night is not oreblowne,
                  Wee pardon haue, they puniſhment for ſins,
                  Now we are raiſde, now they are ouerthrowne:
                  Wee with huge beaſts oppreſt, they with a flie,
                  Wee liue in God, and they againſt God die.
               
               
                  A flie, poore flie, to follow ſuch a flight,
                  Yet art thou fed, as thou waſt fed before,
                  With duſt and earth, feeding thy wonted bite,
                  With ſelfe-like food, from mortall earthly ſtore:
                  A miſchiefe-ſtinging food, and ſting with ſting,
                  Do ready paſſage to deſtruction bring.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Man beeing graſſe is hopt and graz'd vpon,
                  With ſucking graſſe-hoppers of weeping dew,
                  Man being earth is wormes vermilion,
                  Which eats the duſt, and yet of bloudy hue:
                  In being graſſe he is her grazing food,
                  In being duſt he doth the wormes ſome good.
               
               
                  Theſe ſmalleſt actors were of greateſt paine,
                  Of follies ouerthrow, of miſchiefes fall,
                  But yet the furious dragons coulde not gaine,
                  The life of thoſe whom verities exhale:
                  Theſe follie ouercame, they fooliſh were,
                  Theſe mercie cur'd, and cures, theſe godly are.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 When poyſoned iawes and veninated ſtings,
                  Were both as oppoſite againſt content,
                  (Becauſe content with that which fortune brings,)
                  They eaſed were, when thou thy mercies ſent:
                  The iawes of dragons had not hungers fill▪
                  
                  Nor ſtings of ſerpents a deſire to kill.
               
               
                  Appal'd they were, and ſtruck with timerous feares,
                  For where is feare, but where deſtruction raignes,
                  Agaſt they were, with wet eye-ſtanding teares,
                  Outward commencers of their inward paines:
                  They ſoone were hurt, but ſooner healde and cured,
                  Leſt black obliuion had their minds inured.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The lion wounded with a fatall blow,
                  Is as impatient as a king in rage,
                  Seeing himſelfe in his owne bloody ſhow,
                  Doth rent the harbour of his bodies cage:
                  Scorning the baſe-houſde earth, mounts to the skie,
                  To ſee if heauen can yeeld him remedy.
               
               
                  Oh ſinfull man, let him example be,
                  A patterne to thine eye, glaſſe to thy face,
                  That Gods diuineſt word is cure to thee,
                  Not earth, but heauen, not man, but heauenly grace:
                  Nor hearb, nor plaiſter, could help teeth or ſting,
                  But twas thy word which healeth euery thing.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 We fooles lay ſalues vpon our bodies skin,
                  But neuer drawe corruption from our minde,
                  We lay a plaiſter for to keepe in ſin,
                  We drawe foorth filth, but leaue the cauſe behinde:
                  With hearbs and plaiſters we do guard miſdeedes,
                  And pare away the tops, but leaue the ſeedes.
               
               
                  Away with ſalues, and take our Sauiours word,
                  In this word Sauiour lies immortall eaſe,
                  What can thy cures, plaiſters, and hearbs afford?
                  When God hath power to pleaſe and to diſpleaſe:
                  God hath the power of life, death, help, and paine,
                  He leadeth downe, and bringeth vp againe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 15 Truſt to thy downefall, not vnto thy raiſe,
                  So ſhalt thou liue in death, not die in life,
                  Thou doſt preſume, if giue thy ſelfe the praiſe,
                  For vertues time is ſcarce, but miſchiefes rife:
                  Thou mayſt offend, mans nature is ſo vaine,
                  Thou now in ioy, beware of after paine.
               
               
                  Firſt commeth fury, after fury thirſt,
                  After thirſt, blood, and after blood, a death,
                  Thou mayſt in fury kill, whome thou louedſt firſt,
                  And ſo in quaſſing blood, ſtop thine owne breath:
                  And murther done, can neuer be vndone,
                  Nor can that ſoule once liue, whoſe life is gone.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 What is the body but an earthen caſe,
                  That ſubiect is to death, becauſe earth dies?
                  But when the liuing ſoule doth want Gods grace,
                  It dies in ioy, and liues in miſeries:
                  This ſoule is led by God, as others were,
                  But not brought vp againe as others are.
               
               
                  This ſtirs no prouocation to amend,
                  For earth hath many partners in one fall,
                  Although the Lord doth many tokens ſend,
                  As warnings for to heare when he doth call:
                  The earth was burnt & drownd with fire & raine,
                  And one could neuer quench the others paine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Althogh both foes, God made them then both frends,
                  And onely foes to them which were their foes,
                  That hate begun in earth what in them ends,
                  Sins enimies they which made friends of thoſe:
                  Both bent both forces vnto ſingle earth,
                  From whoſe deſcent they had their double birth.
               
               
                  Tis ſtrange that water ſhould not quench a fire,
                  For they were heating-cold, and cooling hot,
                  Tis ſtrange that wailes could not allay deſire,
                  Wailes waters kinde, and fire deſires knot:
                  In ſuch a cauſe, though enimies before,
                  They would ioyne friendſhip to deſtroy the more.
               
               
                  The often weeping eies of drie lament,
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Doth powre forth burning water of deſpaire,
                  Which warms the caues frō whence the tears are ſent,
                  And like hot fumes, do foule their natures faire:
                  This contrary to icie-waters vale,
                  Doth ſcorch the cheekes, & makes them red & pale.
               
               
                  Here fire and water are conioynde in one,
                  Within a red-white glaſſe of hote and cold,
                  Their fire like this, double and yet alone,
                  Raging, and tame, and tame, and yet was bold:
                  Tame when the beaſts did kill, and felt no fire,
                  Raging vpon the cauſers of their ire.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Two things may well put on two ſeuerall natures,
                  Becauſe they differ in each natures kind,
                  They differing colours haue, and differing features,
                  If ſo, how comes it that they haue one minde?
                  God made them friends, let this the anſwer be,
                  They get no other argument of me.
               
               
                  What is impoſsible to Gods command?
                  Nay, what is poſsible to mans vaine eare?
                  Tis much he thinkes that fire ſhould burne a land,
                  When miſchiefe is the brand which fiers beare:
                  He thinkes it more, that water ſhould beare fire,
                  Then know it was Gods will, now leaue t'enquire.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Yet mightſt thou aske, becauſe importunate,
                  How God preſerude the good; why? becauſe good,
                  Ill fortune made not them infortunate,
                  They Angells were, and fed with Angells food:
                  Yet maiſt thou ſay (for trueth is alwayes had)
                  That raine falles on the good aſwell as bad.
               
               
                  And ſay it doth; farre be the letter P.
                  From R. becauſe of a more reuerent ſtile,
                  It cannot doe without ſuppreſsion be,
                  Theſe are two barres againſt deſtructions wile:
                  Paine without changing P cannot be raine,
                  Raine without changing R can not be paine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Both ſunne and raine are portions to the ground,
                  And ground is duſt, and what is duſt but nought?
                  And what is nought is naught, with Alphaes ſound,
                  Yet euery earth the ſunne and raine hath bought:
                  The ſunne doth ſhine on weeds, as well as flowers,
                  The raine on both diſtills her weeping ſhowers.
               
               
                  Yet far be death from breath, annoy from ioy,
                  Deſtruction from all happines allines,
                  God will not ſuffer famine to deſtroy,
                  The hungry appetite of vertues ſignes:
                  Theſe were in mid'ſt of fire, yet not harmed,
                  In mid'ſt of water, yet but coolde, and warmed.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And water-wet they were, not water-drowned,
                  And fire-hot they were, not fire-burned,
                  Their foes were both, whoſe hopes deſtruction crowned:
                  But yet with ſuch a crowne which ne'er returned,
                  Heere fire and water brought both ioy and paine,
                  To one diſprofit, to the other gaine.
               
               
                  The ſunne doth thaw what colde hath freezde before,
                  Vndoing what congealed ice had done,
                  Yet heete the haile and ſnow did freeze the more,
                  In hauing heat more piercing then the ſunne
                  A mournfull ſpectacle vnto their eyes,
                  That as they die ſo their fruition dyes.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23 24 Fury once kindled with the coles of rage,
                  Doth houer vnrecall'd, ſlaughters vntam'd;
                  This wrath on fire no pitty coulde aſſwage,
                  Becauſe they pittileſſe which ſhould be blam'd:
                  As one in rage, which cares not who he haue,
                  Forgetting who to kil and who to ſaue.
               
               
                  One deadly foe is fierce againſt the other,
                  As vice with vertue, vertue againſt vice,
                  Vice hartned by death his hartleſſe mother,
                  Vertue by God, the life of her deuice:
                  Tis hard to hurt or harme a villany,
                  Tis eaſy to do good to verity.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 25 26 Is graſſe mans meat, no it is cattells food,
                  But man doth eat the cattell which eats graſſe,
                  And feeds his carcaſſe, with their nurſt vp blood,
                  Lengthning the liues which in a moment paſſe:
                  Graſſe is good food if it be ioynde with grace,
                  Elſe ſweeter foode may take a ſowrer place,
               
               
                  Is there ſuch life in water and in bread?
                  In fiſh, in fleſh, in hearbs, in growing flowers,
                  Wee eat them not aliue, wee eat them dead,
                  What fruit then hath the word of liuing powers?
                  How can wee liue with that which is ſtill dead?
                  Thy grace it is, by which we all are fed.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27 28 This is a liuing food, a bleſſed meat,
                  Made to digeſt the burthen at our harts,
                  That leaden-weighted food, which we firſt eat,
                  To fill the functions of our bodies parts:
                  An indigeſted heape, without a meane,
                  Wanting thy grace, o Lord, to make it cleane.
               
               
                  That ice which ſulphure vapours could not thaw,
                  That haile which piercing fier could not bore,
                  The coole-hot ſunne did melt their froſty iaw,
                  Which neither heat nor fire, could pierce before:
                  Then let vs take the ſpring-time of the day,
                  Before the harueſt of our ioyes decay.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 29 A day may be deuided as a yeare,
                  Into foure climes, though of it ſelfe but one,
                  The morne, the ſpring, the noone, the ſummers ſphere,
                  The harueſt next, euening the winters moone:
                  Then ſowe new ſeeds in euery new dayes ſpring,
                  And reape new fruite, in dayes olds euening.
               
               
                  Elſe if too late: they will bee blaſted ſeeds,
                  If planted at the noonetide of their growing,
                  Commencers of vnthankfull too late deeds,
                  Set in the harueſt of the reapers going:
                  Melting like winter-ice againſt the ſunne,
                  Flowing like follies tide, and neuer done.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XVII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 Oflie the bed of vice the lodge of ſin,
                  Sleep not too long in your deſtructions pleſures
                  Amend your wicked liues, and new begin,
                  A more new perfect way to heauens treſures:
                  Oh rather wake and weep, then ſleep and ioy,
                  Waking is truth, ſleep is a flattring toy.
               
               
                  O take the morning of your inſtant good,
                  Be not benighted with obliuious eye,
                  Behold the ſunne which kiſſeth Neptunes floud,
                  And reſalutes the world with open skie:
                  Elſe ſleep, and euer ſleep: Gods wrath is great,
                  And will not alter with too late intreat.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Why wake I them which haue a ſleeping minde,
                  Oh words, ſad ſargiants to arreſt my thoughts,
                  If wakt, they cannot ſee, their eyes are blinde,
                  Shut vp like windolets which ſleep hath bought:
                  Their face is broad awake, but not their hart,
                  They dreame of riſing, yet are loth to ſtart.
               
               
                  Theſe were the practiſers how to betray,
                  The ſimple-righteous with beguiling words,
                  And bring them in ſubiection to obay
                  Their irreligious lawes and ſins accords:
                  But nights black coloured vale did cloud their will,
                  And made their wiſh reſt in performance skill.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 The darkeſome clouds, are ſummoners of raine,
                  In being ſomthing blacke, and ſomthing darke,
                  But cole-blacke clouds makes it poure downe amaine,
                  Darting forth thunderbolts and lightnings ſparke:
                  Sin of it ſelfe is black, but black with black,
                  Augments the heauie burthen of the back.
               
               
                  They thought that ſins could hide their ſinfull ſhames,
                  In being demi-clouds, and ſemi-nights,
                  But they had clouds enough to make their games,
                  Lodg'd in black couerings of obliuious nights:
                  Then was their vice afraid to lie ſo darke,
                  Troubled with viſions from Alaſtors parke.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 The greater poyſon, beares the greater ſway,
                  The greateſt force, hath ſtill the greateſt face,
                  Should night miſſe courſe, it would infect the day,
                  With foule riſle vapours from a humorous place,
                  Vice hath ſome clouds, but yet the night hath more,
                  Becauſe the night was fram'd and made before.
               
               
                  That ſin which makes afraid, was then afraid,
                  Although enchambred in a dens content,
                  That would not driue back feare, which comes repai'd,
                  Nor yet the ecchoes which the viſions ſent:
                  Both ſounds and ſhowes, both words and action,
                  Made apparitions ſatisfaction.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 A night in pitchie mantle of diſtreſſe,
                  Made thick with miſts and oppſite to light,
                  As if Cocytus manſion did poſſeſſe,
                  The gloomy vapours of ſuppreſſing ſight,
                  A night more vgly then Alaſtors pack,
                  Mounting all nights vpon his night-made back.
               
               
                  The moone did mourne in ſable-ſuted vale,
                  The ſtars her hand maids were in black attire,
                  All nightly viſions tolde a hideous tale,
                  The ſcrich-owles made the earth their diſmall quire:
                  The moone and ſtars diuide their twinckling eies,
                  To lighten vice, which in obliuion lyes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Onely appear'd a fire in dolefull blaze,
                  Kindled by furies, raiſde by enuious winds,
                  Dreadfull in ſight, which put them to amaze,
                  Hauing before, furie-deſpairing minds:
                  What haire in reading, would not ſtand vpright,
                  What pen in writing, would not ceaſſe to write
               
               
                  Fire is Gods Angell, becauſe bright and cleare,
                  But this an euill Angell, becauſe dread,
                  Euill to them, which did already feare,
                  A ſecond death to them which were once dead:
                  Annexing horror to dead ſtrucken life,
                  Connexing dolor to liue natures ſtrife.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Deceit was then deceau'd, treaſon betrayed,
                  Miſchiefe beguilde, a night ſurpaſſing night,
                  Vice fought with vice, and feare was then diſmayde,
                  Horror it ſelfe appal'd at ſuch a ſight:
                  Sin
                        •
                     s ſnare was then enſnarde, the fiſher cought,
                  Sinnes net was then entrapt, the fouler fought.
               
               
                  Yet all this conflict, was but in a dreame,
                  A ſhow of ſubſtance, and a ſhade of truth,
                  Illuſions for to mocke in flattring theame,
                  Beguiling miſchiefe with a glaſſe of ruth:
                  For boaſts require a fall, and vaunts a ſhame,
                  Which two vice had, in thinking but to game.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Sinne tolde her creditours, ſhe was a Queene,
                  And now become reuenge, to right their wrong,
                  With hony-mermaids ſpeech alluring ſeene,
                  Making new-pleaſing words, with her olde tongue:
                  If you be ſick, quoth ſhe, I'le make you whole,
                  Shee cures the body, but makes ſicke the ſoule.
               
               
                  Safe is the body, when the ſoule is wounded,
                  The ſoule is ioyfull in the bodies griefe,
                  Ones ioy vpon the others ſorrow grounded,
                  Ones ſorrow placed in the ones releefe:
                  Quoth ſi
                        •
                     , feare nothing, know that I am heere,
                  When ſhee alas, her ſelfe was ſick for feare.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 A promiſe worthy of deriſions place,
                  That feare ſhoulde helpe a feare, when both are one,
                  Shee was as ſick in hart, though not in face,
                  With inward griefe, though not with outward mone:
                  But ſhee claſpt vp the cloſure of the tongue,
                  For feate that words ſhould do her body wrong.
               
               
                  Cannot the body weepe without the eies?
                  Yes and frame deepeſt canzons of lament,
                  Cannot the body feare, without it lies
                  Vpon the outward ſhew of diſcontent:
                  Yes, yes, the deeper feare ſits in the heart,
                  And keeps the parliament of inward ſmart,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 So ſin did ſnare in minde, and not in face,
                  The dragons iaw, the hisſing ſerpents ſting,
                  Some liu'd, ſome dide, ſome ran a fearefull race,
                  Some did preuent that which ill fortunes bring:
                  All were officious ſeruitours to feare,
                  And her pale connizance in heart did weare.
               
               
                  Malice condemnd her ſelfe guiltie of hate,
                  With a malicious mouth of enuious ſpight,
                  For Nemeſis is her owne cruell fate,
                  Turning her wrath vpon her owne delight:
                  Wee need no witnes for a guiltie thought,
                  Which to condemne it ſelfe a thouſand brought.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 12 For feare deceiues it ſelfe in being feare,
                  It feares it ſelfe in being ſtill afraid,
                  It feares to weepe, and yet it ſheds a teare,
                  It feares it ſelfe, and yet it is obaid:
                  The vſher vnto death, a death to doome,
                  A doome to die in horrors fearefull toome.
               
               
                  His owne betrayer, yet feares to betray,
                  He feares his life, by reaſon of his name,
                  He feares lament, becauſe it brings decay,
                  And blames himſelfe in that he merites blame:
                  He is tormented, yet denies the paine,
                  He is the king of feare, yet loath to raigne.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 His ſons were they which ſlept and dreamt of feare,
                  A waking ſleepe, and yet a ſleepy waking,
                  Which paſſt that night more longer than a yeare,
                  Being griefes priſners, and of ſorrowes taking:
                  Slept in nights dungeon inſupportable,
                  Lodgde in nights-horror too indurable.
               
               
                  Oh ſleepe, the image of long-laſting woe,
                  Oh waking image of long-laſting ſleepe,
                  The hollow caue where viſions come and goe,
                  Where ſerpents hiſſe, where mandrakes grone & creep
                  Oh fearefull ſhew, betrayer of a ſoule,
                  Dieng each heart in white, each white in foule.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 15 A guilefull hole, a priſon of deceit,
                  Yet nor deceit, nor guile, in being dead,
                  Snare without ſnarer, net without a bait,
                  A common lodge, and yet without a bed:
                  A holow-ſounding vault, knowne and vnknowne,
                  Yet not for mirth, but too too well for mone.
               
               
                  Tis a free priſon a chainde libertie,
                  A freedomes caue, a ſergeant and a baile,
                  It keepes cloſe priſoners, yet doth ſet them free,
                  Their clogges not yron, but a clog of waile:
                  It ſtayes them not, and yet they cannot goe,
                  Their chaine is diſcontent, their priſon woe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Still it did gape for more, and ſtill more had,
                  Like greedy auarice without content,
                  Like to Auernus which is neuer glad,
                  Before the dead-liude wicked ſoules be ſent:
                  Pull in thy head thou ſorrowes tragedy,
                  And leaue to practiſe thy olde cruelty.
               
               
                  The merry ſhepheard can not walke alone,
                  Tuning ſweete Madrigals of harueſts ioy,
                  Caruing loues Roundelayes on euery ſtone,
                  Hanging on euery tree ſome amorous toy:
                  But thou with ſorrow enterlines his ſong,
                  Opening thy iawes of death to do him wrong.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 18 Oh now I know thy chaine, thy clog, thy fetter,
                  Thy freechainde priſon, and thy clogged walke,
                  Tis gloomy darkneſſe, ſins eternall detter,
                  Tis poyſoned buds, from Acharonticke ſtalke:
                  Sometime tis hiſsing winds which are their bands,
                  Somtime inchanting birds which binds their hands
               
               
                  Sometime the foaming rage of waters ſtreame,
                  Or clattring downe of ſtones vpon a ſtone,
                  Or skipping beaſts at Titans gladſome beame,
                  Or roaring lions noyſe at one alone:
                  Or babbling Eccho tell-tale of each ſound,
                  From mouth to skie, from skie vnto the ground.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 19 20 Can ſuch like feares folow mans mortall pace,
                  Within drie wildernes of wetteſt woe,
                  It was Gods prouidence, his will, his grace,
                  To make midnoone midnight in being ſo:
                  Midnight with ſin, midnoone where vertue lay,
                  That place was night, all other places day.
               
               
                  The ſun not paſt the middle line of courſe,
                  Did cleerely ſhine vpon each labours gaine,
                  Not hindring daily toyle of mortall force,
                  Nor clouding earth with any gloomy ſtaine:
                  Onely nights image was apparant there,
                  With heauy-leaden appetite of feare.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XVIII.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1
                     YOu know the Eagle by her ſoaring wings,
                  And how the Swallow takes a lower pich:
                  Ye kno the day is clear, & clearenes brings,
                  And how the night is pore, thogh gloomy rich:
                  This Eagle vertue is which mounts on hie,
                  The other ſin which hates the heauens eie.
               
               
                  This day is wiſedome, being bright and cleare,
                  This night is miſchiefe, being blacke and fowle,
                  The brighteſt day doth wiſedomes glory weare,
                  The pitchie night puts on a blacker rowle:
                  Thy ſaints (O Lord) were at their labors hire,
                  At whoſe heard voyce the wicked did admire.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 2 They thought that vertue had beene clothde in night,
                  Captiue to darkneſſe, priſoner vnto hell,
                  But it was ſin it ſelfe, vice, and deſpight,
                  (Whoſe wiſhed harbours do in darkneſſe dwell,
                  Vertues immortall ſoule had middaies light▪
                  
                  Miſchiefes eternall foule had middayes night.
               
               
                  For vertue is not ſubiect vnto vice,
                  But vice is ſubiect vnto vertues ſeate,
                  One miſchiefe is not thawed with others ice,
                  But more adioynde to one, makes one more great:
                  Sin vertues captiue is, and kneeles for grace,
                  Requeſting pardon for her rude-run race.
               
               
                  
                  The tongue of vertues life cannot pronounce
                  
                     
                        verse 3 The doome of death, or death of dying doome,
                  Tis mercifull, and will not once renounce
                  Repentant teares to waſh a ſinfull roome:
                  Your ſin-ſhine was not ſun-ſhine of delight,
                  But ſhining ſin in miſchiefes ſunny night.
               
               
                  Now by repentance you are bathde in bliſſe,
                  Bleſt in your bath, eternall by your deedes,
                  Behold you haue true light, and can not miſſe,
                  The heau'nly foode which your ſaluation feedes:
                  True loue, true life, true light, your portions true,
                  What hate, what ſtrife, what night can danger you?
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Oh happy, when you parde your oregrowne faults,
                  Your ſin-like Eagles clawes paſt growth of time,
                  All vndermined with deſtructions vaults,
                  Full of olde filth, proceeding from new ſlime:
                  Elſe had you beene deformed like to thoſe,
                  Which were your frinds, but now becom your foes
               
               
                  Thoſe which are worthy of eternall paine,
                  Foes which are worthy of immortall hate,
                  Dimming the glory of thy childrens gaine,
                  With cloudy vapours ſet at darkneſſe rate:
                  Making new lawes which are too olde in crime:
                  Making old-wicked lawes, ſerue a new time.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Wicked? no: bloudy lawes, bloudy? yea worſe,
                  If any worſe may haue a worſer name,
                  Men: oh no, murdrers, not of mens remorce,
                  For they are ſhamefull, theſe exempt from ſhame:
                  What? ſhall I call them ſlaughter-drinking hearts▪
                  
                  To good a word for their too ill deſarts?
               
               
                  Murder was in their thoughts, they thought to ſlay,
                  And who? poore infants; harmeleſſe innocents,
                  But murder cannot ſleepe, it will betray
                  Her murdrous ſelfe, with ſelfe diſparagements:
                  One child poore remnant did reprooue their deeds,
                  And God deſtroyd the bloudy murdrers ſeedes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Was God deſtroyer then? no he was iuſt,
                  A iudge ſeuere, yet of a kinde remorce,
                  Seuere to thoſe in whome there was no truſt,
                  Kind to the babes which were of little force:
                  Poor babes half murdred in whole murders thoght,
                  Had not one infant their eſcaping wrought.
               
               
                  Twas God which breathde his ſpirit in the childe,
                  The liuely image of his ſelfe-like face,
                  Twas God which drownd their childrē, which defilde
                  Their thoughts with bloud, their hearts with murders place:
                  For that nights tidings our old fathers ioyd,
                  Becauſe their foes by water were deſtroyd.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Was God a murdrer in this tragedy?
                  No, but a iudge how bloud ſhould be repaid:
                  Waſt he which gaue them vnto miſery?
                  No, twas themſelues which miſeries obaid:
                  Their thoughts did kill and ſlay within their hearts,
                  Murdring themſelues, woūding their inward parts.
               
               
                  When ſhines the ſun, but when the moone doth reſt?
                  When reſts the ſun, but when the moone doth ſhine?
                  When ioyes the righteous? when their foes are leaſt,
                  And when doth vertue liue? when vice doth pine:
                  Vertue doth liue when villany doth die,
                  Wiſedome doth ſmile when miſery doth crie.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 The ſummer dayes are longer than the nights,
                  The winter nights are longer than the dayes,
                  They ſhew both vertues loues and vices ſpites,
                  Sins loweſt fall, and wiſedomes higheſt raiſe:
                  The night is foe to day, as naught to good,
                  The day is foe to night, as feare to food.
               
               
                  A king may weare a crowne, but full of ſtrife,
                  The outward ſhew of a ſmall-laſting ſpace,
                  Miſchiefe may liue, but yet a deadly life,
                  Sorrow may greeue in heart, and ioy in face:
                  Vertue may liue diſturbd with vices paine,
                  God ſends this vertue a more better raigne.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9 She doth poſſeſſe a crowne, and not a care,
                  Yet cares, in hauing none, but ſelfe-like awe,
                  She hath a ſcepter without care or feare,
                  Yet feares the Lord, and careth for the lawe:
                  Aſmuch as ſhe doth riſe, ſo much ſin falles,
                  Subiect vnto her law, ſlaue to her calles.
               
               
                  Now righteouſneſſe beares ſway, and vice put downe,
                  Vertue is Queene, treading on miſcchiefes head,
                  The lawe of God ſancited with renowne,
                  Religion placde in wiſedomes quiet bed:
                  Now ioyfull hymnes are tuned by delight,
                  And now we liue in loue, and not in ſpite.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Strong-hearted vices ſobs haue pierſt the ground,
                  In the deepe ceſterne of the centers breaſt,
                  Wayling their liuing fortunes with dead ſound,
                  Accents of griefe, and actions of vnreſt:
                  It is not ſin her ſelfe, it is her ſeede,
                  Which drownd in ſea, lies there for ſeas foule weed.
               
               
                  It is the fruit of murders bloudy wombe,
                  The loſt fruition of a murdrous race,
                  A little ſtone which would haue made a tombe,
                  To bury vertue with a ſin-bolde face:
                  Me thinkes I heare the ecchoes of the vaults,
                  Sound and reſound their old-new-weeping faults.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11 View the dead carcaſſes of humaine ſtate,
                  The outſides of the ſoule, caſe of the harts,
                  Beholde the king, beholde the ſubiects fate,
                  Beholde each lim and bone of earthen arts:
                  Tell me the difference then of euery thing,
                  And who a ſubiect was, and who a king.
               
               
                  The ſelfe ſame knowledge lies in this dead ſcene,
                  Valde to the tragike cipreſſe of lament,
                  Beholde that man, which hath a maiſter beene,
                  That king, which would haue climde aboue content,
                  Beholde their ſlaues, by them vpon the earth,
                  Haue now as high a ſeat as great a birth.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The ground hath made all euen which were odde,
                  Thoſe equall, which had inequalitie,
                  Yet all alike were faſhioned by God
                  In bodies forme, but not in harts degree:
                  One difference had, in ſcepter, crowne, and throne,
                  Yet crown'd, rul'd, plac'd, in care in griefe in mone.
               
               
                  For it was care to weare a crowne of griefe,
                  And it was griefe to weare a crowne of care,
                  The king deaths ſubiect, death his empires theefe,
                  Which makes vnequall ſtate, and equall fare,
                  More dead then were aliue, and more to die,
                  Then would be buried with a mortall eie.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13 O well-fed earth with ill digeſting food,
                  O well-ill food, becauſe both fleſh and ſin,
                  Sin made it ſick, which neuer did it good,
                  Sin made it well, her well, doth worſe begin:
                  The earth more hungry then was Tantall's iawes,
                  Had fleſh and blood held in her earthen pawes.
               
               
                  Now could beleefe ſome quiet harbour finde,
                  When all her foes were mantled in the ground,
                  Before their ſin-enchauntments made it blind,
                  Their magick arts, their negromantick ſound:
                  Now truth hath got ſome place to ſpeake and heare▪
                  
                  And what ſo ere ſhee ſpeaks, ſhe doth not feare,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 14 15 16 When Phoebes axletree, was limnd with pale,
                  Pale, which becommeth night, night which is blacke,
                  Hem'd round about with gloomy ſhining vale,
                  Borne vp by cloudes, mounted on ſilence backe?
                  And when nights horſes, in the running waine,
                  Oretook the middeſt of their iournies paine.
               
               
                  Thy worde ô Lord deſcended from thy throne,
                  The royall manſion of thy powers command,
                  As a fierce man of war in time of mone,
                  Standing in midſt of the deſtroyed land:
                  And brought thy precept? as a burning ſteauen,
                  Reaching from heauē to earth, from earth to heauen
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Now was the night far ſpent, and mornings wings,
                  Flew through ſleepie thoughts and made them dream,
                  Hying apace to welcome ſunny ſprings,
                  And giue her time of day to Phoebus beame:
                  No ſooner had ſhe flowne vnto the eaſt,
                  But dreamy paſſage did diſturb their reſt.
               
               
                  And then like ſleepie-waking harts and eyes,
                  Turn'd vp the fainting cloſures of their faces,
                  Which betweene day and night in ſlumber lies,
                  Keeping their wakie, and their ſleepie places:
                  And loe, a fearing dreame, and dreaming feare▪
                  
                  Made euery eye let fall a ſleepie teare.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 18 19 A teare halfe wet from they themſelues halfe liude,
                  Poore drie-wet teare, too moyſt a wet-drie face,
                  A white-red face, whoſe red-white colour ſtriude,
                  To make anotamy of either place:
                  Two champions both reſolu'd in faces field,
                  And both had halfe yet either ſcornde to yeeld.
               
               
                  They which were wont to mount aboue the ground,
                  Hath leaden-quick-glude ſinewes forſt to lie,
                  One here one there in priſon, yet vnbound,
                  Heart-ſtriuing life and death to liue and die:
                  Nor were they ignorant of fates decree,
                  In being tolde before what they ſhould bee.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 There falſeſt viſions ſhewde the trueſt cauſe,
                  Falſe becauſe fantaſies, true becauſe haps,
                  For dreames though kindled by ſleep-idle pauſe,
                  Sometime true indices of dangers claps:
                  As well doth proue in theſe ſin-ſleeping lines,
                  That dreames are falſeſt ſhewes, and trueſt ſignes.
               
               
                  By this time death had longer pilgrimage,
                  And was encaged in more liuing breaſts,
                  Now euery ſhip had fleeting anchorage,
                  Both good and bad were puniſht with vnreſts:
                  But yet Gods heauie plague indur'd not long,
                  For anger quencht her ſelfe with her ſelfe wrong.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Not ſo, for heat can neuer coole with heat,
                  Nor colde can warme a colde, nor ice thaw ice,
                  Anger is fire, and fire is angers meat,
                  Then how can anger coole her hot deuice?
                  The ſunne, doth thaw the ice, with melting harme,
                  Ice cannot coole the ſunne, which makes it warme.
               
               
                  It was celeſtiall fire, terreſtriall cold,
                  It was celeſtiall colde, terreſtriall fire,
                  A true and holy praier which is bolde,
                  To coole the heat of angers hot deſire:
                  Pronounced by a ſeruant of thy word,
                  To eaſe the miſeries which wraths afford.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Weapons and wit are double linkes of force,
                  If one vnknit they both haue weaker ſtrength,
                  The longer be the chaine, the longer corſe,
                  If meaſurde by duplicitie of length:
                  If weapons faile wit is the better part,
                  Wit failing: weapons haue the weaker hart.
               
               
                  Praier is weake in ſtrength, yet ſtrong in wit,
                  And can do more then ſtrength, in being wiſe,
                  Thy word, ô Lord, is wiſdome, and in it,
                  Doth lie more force, then forces can ſurprize:
                  Man did not ouercome his foes with armes.
                  But with thy word, which conquers greater harms
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 23 That word it was, with which the world was framde,
                  The heauens made, mortalitie ordain'd,
                  That word it was, with which all men were namde,
                  In which one word, there are all words containde:
                  The breath of God, the life of mortall ſtate,
                  The enimie to vice, the foe to hate.
               
               
                  When death preſt downe the ſin-dead-liuing ſoules,
                  And draw'd the curtaine of their ſeeing day,
                  This word was vertues ſhield, and deaths controules,
                  Which ſhielded thoſe which neuer went aſtray:
                  For when the dead did die, and end in ſin,
                  The liuing had aſſurance to begin.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Are all theſe deeds accompliſht in one word,
                  O ſoueraigne word, cheefe of all words and deeds,
                  O ſalue of ſafrie, wiſdomes ſtrongeſt ſword,
                  Both food, and hunger, which both ſtarues, and feeds:
                  Food vnto life, becauſe of liuing power,
                  Hunger to thoſe, whome death and ſins deuoure.
               
               
                  For they which liu'd, were thoſe which vertue lou'd,
                  And thoſe which vertue lou'd, did loue to liue,
                  Thrice happy theſe, whom no deſtruction mou'd,
                  Shee preſent there, which loue and life did giue:
                  They bore the mottoes of eternall fame,
                  On diapaſans of their fathers name.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Here death did change his pale to purple hue,
                  Bluſhing againſt the nature of his face,
                  To ſee ſuch bright aſpects, ſuch ſplendent view,
                  Such heau'nly paradice of earthly grace:
                  And hid with lifes quick force, his ebon dart,
                  Within the crannies of his meagre hart,
               
               
                  Deſcending to the place from whence he came,
                  With rich-ſtor'd chariot of freſh bleeding wounds,
                  Sore-greeued bodies, from a ſoules-ſick name,
                  Sore-greeued ſoules, in bodies-ſin-ſick ſounds:
                  Death was afraide to ſtay where life ſhould be,
                  For they are foes and cannot well agree.
               
            
            
               
               Chapter XIX.
               
                  
                     
                        verse 1 2 
                     AVant deſtroier with thy hungry iawes,
                  Thy thirſty heart, thy longing aſhie bones,
                  The righteous liue, they be not in thy lawes,
                  Nor ſubiects to thy deepe oppreſſing mones.
                  Let it ſuffice that we haue ſeene thy ſhow,
                  And taſted but the ſhadow of thy woe.
               
               
                  Yet ſtay and bring thy empty car againe,
                  More aſhie veſſells do attend thy pace,
                  More paſſengers expect thy comming waine,
                  More groaning pilgrimes long to ſee thy face:
                  Wrath now attends the paſſage of miſdeeds,
                  And thou ſhalt ſtill be ſtor'd with ſoules that bleeds,
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Some lie halfe dead, while others dig their graues,
                  With weake-forſt teares, to moyſt a long-drie ground
                  But teares on teares, in time will make whole waues,
                  To bury ſin with ouerwhelming ſound:
                  Their eies for mattocks ſerue, their teares for ſpades,
                  And they them ſelues, are ſextons by their trades.
               
               
                  What is their fee? lament, their paiment? woe,
                  Their labour? waile, their practiſe? miſerie,
                  And can their conſcience ſerue to labour ſo,
                  Yes, yes, becauſe it helpeth villanie:
                  Though eies did ſtand in teares, and teares in eyes,
                  They did another foliſhnes deuiſe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4 5 So that what praier did, ſin did vndoe,
                  And what the eies did win the heart did looſe,
                  Whom vertue reconcilde, vice did forgoe,
                  Whom vertue did forgoe, that vice did chooſe:
                  Oh had their hearts beene iuſt, eyes had bin winners
                  Their eyes were iuſt, but hearts new ſins beginners.
               
               
                  They digd true graues with eyes, but not with hearts,
                  Repentance in their face, vice in their thought,
                  Their deluing eies did take the Sextons partes,
                  The heart vndid the labour which eies wrought:
                  A new ſtrange death was portion for their toyle,
                  While vertue ſate as iudge to end the broyle.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Had tongue bin ioynde with eies, tong had not ſtrai'd,
                  Had eyes bin ioyn'd to heart, heart then had ſeene,
                  But oh, in wanting eye-ſight it betrai'd,
                  The dungeon of miſdeeds where it had beene:
                  So, many liuing in this orbe of woe,
                  Haue heau'd-vp eyes, but yet their hearts are low.
               
               
                  This chaunge of ſin, did make a chaunge of feature,
                  A new ſtrange death, a miſery vntoulde,
                  A new reforme of every olde-new creature,
                  New ſeruing offices, which time made olde:
                  New liuing vertue, from an olde dead ſin,
                  Which ends in ill what doth in good begin.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7 When death did reape the harueſt of deſpight,
                  The wicked eares of ſin, and miſchiefes ſeed,
                  Filling the manſion of eternall night,
                  With heauy-leaden clods of ſinfull breed:
                  Life ſowde the plants of immortalitie,
                  To welcome olde-made new felicity.
               
               
                  The clouds, the gloomy curtaines of the aire,
                  Drawne and redrawne with the foure-winged winds,
                  Made all of borrowed vapours, darkeſome faire;
                  Did ouerſhade their tents, which vertue findes,
                  The red ſeas deepe, was made a drie trod way,
                  Without impediment, or ſtop, or ſtay.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 8 9 The thirſty windes with ouertoyling puffes,
                  Did drinke the ruddy-oceans water drie,
                  Tearing the Zones hot-cold, whole-ragged ruffes,
                  With ruffling conflicts in the field of skie:
                  So, that drie earth did take wet waters place,
                  With ſandy mantle, and hard grounded face.
               
               
                  That way which neuer was a way before,
                  Is now a troden path, which was vntrod,
                  Through which the people went, as on a ſhoare,
                  Defended by the ſtretcht-out arme of God:
                  Praiſing his wondrous workes, his mighty hand,
                  Making the land of ſea, the ſea of land.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10 That breaſt where anger ſlept, is mercies bed,
                  That breaſt where mercy wakes is angers caue;
                  When mercie liues, then Nemeſis is dead,
                  And one for eithers coarſe makes others graue:
                  Hate furrowes vp a graue, to bury loue,
                  And loue doth preſſe downe hate, it cannot moue.
               
               
                  This breaſt is God, which euer wakes in both,
                  Anger is his reuenge, mercy his loue,
                  He ſent them flies in ſteade of cattels growth,
                  And multitudes of frogges for fiſhes ſtroue:
                  Here was his anger ſhewne, and his remorſe,
                  When hee did make dry land of water courſe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The ſequele prooues what actor is the chiefe,
                  All things beginning knowes, but none their end,
                  The ſequele vnto mirth, is weeping griefe,
                  As doth miſhaps with happineſſe contend:
                  For both are agents in this orbe of weeping,
                  And one doth wake, when other falles a ſleeping.
               
               
                  Yet, ſhould mans eies pay tribute euery hower,
                  With tributarie teares to ſorrowes ſhrine,
                  He would all drowne himſelfe with his owne ſhower
                  And neuer finde the leafe of mercies line:
                  They in Gods anger wailde, in his loue ioyd,
                  Their loue brought luſt, ere loue had luſt deſtroyd.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The ſun of ioy dride vp their teare-wet eies,
                  And ſate as Lord vpon their ſobbing hart,
                  For when one comfort liues, one ſorrow dies,
                  Or ends in mirth what it begunne in ſmart:
                  What greater griefe than hunger-ſtarued moode?
                  What greater mirth than ſatisfying foode?
               
               
                  Quailes from the fiſhy boſome of the ſea,
                  Came to their comforts which were liuing ſtarude,
                  But puniſhments fell in the ſinners way,
                  Sent downe by thunderbolts which they deſerude:
                  Sin-fed theſe ſinners were, hate cheriſhed,
                  According vnto both they periſhed.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Sin-fed, becauſe their food was ſeed of ſins,
                  And bred new ſin with olde-digeſted meate,
                  Hate cheriſhed, in being hatreds twins,
                  And ſucking cruelty from tygers teate:
                  Was it not ſin to erre and goe aſtray?
                  Was it not hate to ſtop a ſtrangers way?
               
               
                  Was it not ſin to ſee, and not to know?
                  Was it not ſin to knowe, and not receiue?
                  Was it not hate to be a ſtrangers foe,
                  And make them captiues which did them releeue?
                  Yes, it was greateſt ſin firſt for to leaue them,
                  And it was greateſt hate laſt to deceiue them.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Oh hungry Canniballes which know no fill,
                  But ſtill do ſtaruing feed, and feeding ſtarue,
                  How could you ſo deceiue? how could you ſpill
                  Their louing ſelues, which did your ſelues preſerue?
                  Why did you ſucke your pellican to death,
                  Which fed you too too wel with his owne breath?
               
               
                  Oh ſay that cruelty can haue no lawe,
                  And then you ſpeake with a milde-cruel tongue,
                  Or ſay that auarice lodgde in your iawe,
                  And then you do your ſelues but little wrong:
                  Say what you will, for what you ſay is ſpight,
                  Gainſt ill-come ſtrangers which did merite right.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 15 You lay in ambuſh, oh deceitfull ſnares,
                  Inticing baites, beguiling centinells,
                  You added griefe to griefe, and cares to cares,
                  Teares vnto weeping eies where teares did dwell:
                  O multitudes of ſin, legions of vice,
                  Which thawes with ſorrow ſorrowes frozen ice.
               
               
                  A banquet was preparde, the fare, deceit,
                  The diſhes, poyſon, and the cup deſpight,
                  The table, miſchiefe, and the cloth a bait,
                  Like ſpinners web t'entrap the ſtrange flies flight:
                  Pleaſure was ſtrewd vpon the top of paine,
                  Which once digeſted, ſpread through euery vaine.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Oh ill conductors of miſguided feete,
                  Into a way of death, a path of guile,
                  Poore pilgrimes which their owne deſtruction meete,
                  In habitations of an vnknowne Ile:
                  Oh had they left that broad deceiuing way,
                  They had been right and neuer gone aſtray.
               
               
                  But marke the puniſhment which did enſue,
                  Vpon thoſe ill-miſleading villanies,
                  They blinded were themſelues with their ſelfe view,
                  And fell into their owne made miſeries:
                  Seeking the entrance of their dwelling places,
                  With blinded eies, and darke miſguided faces.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Lo, here was ſnares enſnar'd, and guiles beguilde,
                  Deceit, deceiu'd, and miſchiefe was miſlead,
                  Eies blinded ſight, and thoughts the hearts defilde,
                  Life liuing in aſpects, was dying dead:
                  Eyes thought for to miſleade, and were miſlead:
                  Feete went to make miſ-treads, and did miſ-treade.
               
               
                  At this proud fall the elements were glad,
                  And did embrace each other with a kiſſe,
                  All things were ioyfull which before were ſad,
                  The pilgrimes in their way, and could not miſſe:
                  As when the ſound of muſick, doth reſound
                  With changing tune; ſo did the changed ground.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18 The birds forſooke the ayre, the ſheepe the fould,
                  The Eagle p
                        •
                     tched low, the Swallow hie,
                  The Nightingale did ſleepe and vncontrould
                  Forſoke the prickle of her natures eie:
                  The ſeely worme was friends with all her foes,
                  And ſuckt the dew-teares from the weeping roſe.
               
               
                  The ſparrow tunde the larkes ſweet melody,
                  The larke in ſilence ſung a dirge of dole,
                  The linnet helpt the larke in malady
                  The ſwans forſooke the quire of billow-roule:
                  The drie-land foule, did make the ſea their neſt,
                  The wet-ſea fiſh did make the land their reſt.
               
               
                  
                     
                        verse 19 The ſwans the queriſters which did complaine,
                  In inward feeling of an outward loſſe,
                  And filde the quire of waues with lauing paine,
                  (Yet dauncing in their waile, with ſurges toſſe:)
                  Forſooke her cradle-billow-mountaine bed,
                  And hies her vnto land there to be fed.
               
               
                  Her ſea-fare now is land-fare of content,
                  Olde change, is changed new yet all is change,
                  The fiſhes are her food, and they are ſent,
                  Vnto drie land, to creep, to feed, to range:
                  Now cooleſt water cannot quench the fire,
                  But makes it proud in hotteſt hot deſire.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20 The eu'ning of a day, is morne to night,
                  The eu'ning of a night is morne to day,
                  The one is Phoebes clime, which is pale-bright,
                  The other Phoebus, in more light array:
                  Shee maks the mountaines limp in chil-cold ſnowe
                  Hee melts their eies and makes them weep for woe.
               
               
                  His beames ambaſſadors of his hot will,
                  Through te tranſparent element of aire,
                  Doth only his warme ambaſſage fulfill,
                  And melts the icie iaw of Phoebes heyre:
                  Yet thoſe, though firie flames could not thaw cold,
                  Nor breake the froſty glew of winters mould.
               
               
                  Here nature ſlue herſelfe, or at the leaſt
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Did tame the paſſage of her hot aſpects,
                  All things haue nature to be worſt or beſt,
                  And muſt encline to that, which ſhe affects:
                  But nature miſt herſelfe, in this ſame part,
                  For ſhee was weake, and had not natures hart.
               
               
                  Twas God which made her weake, and makes her ſtrong,
                  Reſiſting vice, aſſiſting righteouſnes,
                  Aſſiſting, and reſiſting, right, and wrong,
                  Making this Epilogue in equallnes:
                  Twas God his peoples aide, their wiſedomes frend,
                  In whom I did begin, with whom I end.
               
               
                  A Ioue ſurgit opus: de Ioue finit opus.
               
            
         
      
   