
      
         
            
            
            The Tryumphs of Honor and Induſtry.
            A Solemnity performed through the City, at Confirmation and eſtabliſhment of the Right Honorable, GEORGE BOVVLES, In the Office of his Maieſties Lieuetenant, the Lord Mayor of the famous Citty of London.
            Taking beginning at his Lordſhips going, and proceeding after his Returne from receiuing the Oath of Maioralty at weſtminſter, on the morrow next after Simon and Iudes day October 29. 1617.
            
               IN DOMINO CONFIDO
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, 1617.
         
         
            
            
            To the Worthy Deſeruer of all the Coſts and Triumphs, which the Noble Society of Grocers in bounteous meaſure beſtow on him, the Right Honourable, GEORGE BOVVLES, Lord Mayor of the famous City of London.
            
               Right Honorable,
            
            
               O
               Ʋt of the ſlighteſt labours and imployments there may that Vertue ſometimes ariſe, that may enlighten the beſt part of man, nor haue theſe kind of Tryumphs an idle Relliſh, eſpecially if they be Artfully accompliſht, vnder ſuch an eſteemed

ſlightneſſe may often lurke that fire that may ſhame the beſt perfection: For inſtance, what greater meanes for the imitation of Vertue and Nobleneſſe can any where preſent it ſelfe with more Alacrity to the Beholder, then the Memorable Fames of thoſe Worthies in the Caſtle, manifeſted by their Eſcutchions of Armes, the onely Symboles of Honor and Antiquity. The Honorable Seate that is reſerued, all men haue hope, that your Iuſtice and Goodneſſe will exactly merit, to the Honor of which I commend your Lordſhips Vertues, remaining
            
               
                  At your Honors ſeruice, T. M.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Tryumphs of Honour and Induſtry.
            
               IT hath beene twice my fortune in ſhort time to haue imploiment for this Noble Societye, where I haue alwayes mette with men of much vnderſtanding, and no leſſe bounty, to whom coſt appeares but as a ſhadow, ſo there be fulneſſe of content in the performance of the ſolemnity, which that the world may iudge of, for whoſe pleaſure & ſatisfaction, cuſtome hath yeerly framde it, (but chiefly for the honor of the City) it begins to preſent it ſelfe, not without forme and order, which is required in the meaneſt emploiment.
            
               
               The firſt Inuention.
               A Company of Indians, attired according to the true Nature of their Country, ſeeming for the moſt part naked, are ſet at worke in an Iland of growing ſpices; ſome planting Nutmeg Trees, ſome other ſpice trees, of all kinds, ſome gathering the fruits, ſome making vp bags of Pepper, euery one ſeuerally imploide; Theſe Indians are al actiue youths, who ceaſing in their labours, dance about the trees, both to giue content to themſelues and the ſpectators.
               After this ſhew of dauncing Indians in the Iland, followes triumphantly a rich perſonage, preſenting India, (the Seate of Merchandiſe) this India ſits on the top of an Illuſtrious Chariot, on the one ſide of her ſits trafficke or merchandize, on the other ſide, Induſtry, both fitted and adorned according to the property of their natures, Induſtry holding a golden Ball in her hand vpon which ſtāds a Cupid, ſignifying that Induſtry gets both wealth and loue, and with her aſſociate Trafficke or Merchandize, who holds a Globe in her hand, knits loue and peaec amongſt all Nations, to the better expreſſing of which, if you giue attention to Induſtry, that now ſets forward to ſpeake, it will be yours more exactly.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           The ſpeech of Induſtry in the Chariot.
                           
                              
                                 I Was iealous of the ſhadowing of my grace,
                              
                              
                                 But that I know this is my time and place;
                              
                                 Where ha's not Induſtry a noble friend,
                              
                              
                                 In this Aſſembly, euen the beſt extend
                              
                              
                                 Their grace and loue to me, (ioyde or amazde)
                              
                              
                                 Who, of true Fame poſſeſt but I haue rayſde,
                              
                              
                                 And after added Honors to his dayes,
                              
                              
                                 For Induſtry is the life-bloud of praiſe,
                              
                              
                                 To riſe without mee, is to ſteale to glory,
                              
                              
                                 And who ſo abiect to leaue ſuch a ſtory,
                              
                              
                                 It is as cleere as Light, as bright as truth,
                              
                              
                                 Fame waytes their age, whom Induſtry their youth.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Behold this Ball of Gold, vpon which ſtands
                              
                              
                                 A golden Cupid wrought with curious hands,
                              
                              
                                 The mighty power of Induſtry it ſhowes,
                              
                              
                                 That gets both wealth, and loue, which ouerflows
                              
                              
                                 With ſuch a ſtreame of Amity an a peace,
                              
                              
                                 (Not onely to it ſelfe adding increaſe)
                              
                              
                                 But ſeverall nations where commerce abounds
                              
                              
                                 Taſte the harmonious peace, ſo ſweetly ſounds,
                              
                              
                                 For inſtance, let your gracious eye be fixt,
                              
                              
                                 
                                    Ʋpon a Ioye, true, though ſo ſtrangely mixt.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  And that you may take the better note of their adornments, India whoſe ſeate is the moſt eminent, for her expreſſion, holdes in her hand a wedge of golde, trafficke her aſſociate, a Globe, Induſtry a faire golden Ball in her hand, vpon which ſtands a goldē 
                  Cupid, Fortune expreſt with a ſiluer wheele, Succeſſe holding a painted Ship in a Hauen, wealth a golden key where her heart lyes, Vertue bearing for her manifeſtation, a ſiluer ſhield, Grace holding in her hand a booke, Perfection, a crowne of gold.
               At which words the Pageant of ſeuerall Nations, which is purpoſely planted neer the ſound of the words, mooues with a kind of affectionate ioy, both at the honor of the dayes triumph, and the proſperity of Loue, which by the vertue of Traffick, is likely euer to continue, and for a good Omen of the Euerlaſting continuance of it, on the top of this curious and triumphant Pageant, ſhoots vp a Laurell tree the leaues ſpotted with gold, about which ſit ſix celeſtial figures, preſenting Peace, Proſperity, Loue, Ʋnity, Plenty, & Fidelity, Peace holding a branch of Palme, Proſperity a Laurell, Loue, two ioynd hands, Ʋnity two Turtles, Plenty holding fruits, Fidelity a ſiluer anchor. But before I entred ſo far I ſhould haue ſhowde you the zeale and loue of the Frenchman and Spaniard, which now I hope will not appeare vnſeaſonably, who not content with a ſilent ioy like the reſt of the Nations, haue a thirſt to

vtter their gladneſſe, though vnderſtood of a ſmall number, which is this.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The ſhort ſpeech deliuered by the Frenchman in French.
                              La multitude m'ayant monte ſur ce haut lieu, pour contempler le glorieux triumphe de ceſte Iournee, le voy quen quelque ſorte la noble dignite de la treſhonorable ſociete des Grociers y eſt repreſentee, dont meſiouiſſant par deſſus tous, le leur ſouhaite & a Monſegneur le Mayre le Comble de touttes nobles & heureuſes fortunes.
                           
                           
                              The ſame in Engliſh.
                              IT is my ioy chiefly, (and I ſtand for thouſands) to ſee the glory of this triumphant day, which in ſome meaſure requires the noble worthineſſe of the Honourable Society of Grocers, to whom and to my Lord Mayor I wiſh all good ſucceſſes.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               This Frenchman no ſooner ſets a period to his ſpeech, but the Spanyard in zeale as vertuous as he, vtters himſelfe to the purpoſe of theſe words.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              The Spanyards ſpeech in Spaniſh.
                              Ningunas de todas eſtas naciones conciben maior y ver dadera alegria en eſte triumphante y glorioſo dia que yo, no, minguna de todas ellas, porque agora

que me parece▪ que ſon tan ricas, es ſenal que los de my naciòn en tratando con ellas receberan, mayor prouecho dellas, Al my ſenior Don Maior todas buenas y dichoſas fortunas, Y a los de la honrada Compania de Eſpecicros dichoſos dessi eos, Y aſſi dios guarde a my ſenior Don Maior, y rogo à dios que todo el anno ſiguiente, puede ſer tan dichoſo, como eſta entrada ſuya, a la digmday de lu ſeniora, Guarde dios a ſu ſennoria.
                           
                           
                              The ſame in Engliſh.
                              NOne of all theſe Nations, conceiue more true ioy at this triumphant day, then my ſelf, to my Lord Mayor all faire and noble fortunes, and to the worthy Society of Grocers, all happy wiſhes, and I pray heauen, that all the yeere following may be as happy and ſucceſſefull, as this firſt entrance to your dignity.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               This expreſſion of their ioy and loue hauing ſpent it ſelfe, I know you cannot part contented, without their ſeuerall inſcriptions; now the fauour and helpe muſt be in you, to conceiue our breadth and limits, and not to thinke we can in theſe cuſtomary bounds comprehend all the nations, but ſo many as ſhall ſerue to giue content to the vnderſtander, which thus produce themſelues.
               
                  
                  
                     An Engliſhman.
                  
                  
                     A Frenchman.
                  
                  
                     An Iriſhman.
                  
                  
                     A Spanyard.
                  
                  
                     A Turke.
                  
                  
                     A Iew.
                  
                  
                     A Dane.
                  
                  
                     A Polander.
                  
                  
                     A Barbarian.
                  
                  
                     A Ruſcian or Moſcouian.
                  
               
               This fully expreſt, I arriue now at that part of Tryumph, which my Deſire euer haſtned to come to, this Caſtle of Fame or Honor, which Induſtry brings her Sonnes vnto in their Reuerend Ages.
               In the front of this Caſtle, Reward and Induſtry deckt in bright Robes, keepe a Seate betweene them for him to whom the Dayes honour is dedicated, ſhewing how many worthy

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Sonnes of the Citty, and of the ſame Society, haue by their Truth, Deſert and Induſtry come to the like honour before him, where on a ſudden is ſhewne diuerſe of the ſame Right Worſhipfull Society of Grocers, manifeſted both by their good gouernment in their Times, as alſo by their Eſcuchions of Armes, as an example and encouragement to all Vertuous and Induſtrious deſeruers in time to come: And in honour of Antiquity is ſhewne that Antient and Memorable Worthy of the Grocers Company, Andrew Bockrill, who was Maior of London the ſixteenth yeare of Henry the third, 1231. and continued ſo Mayor ſeuen yeares together.
               Likewiſe for the greater honour of the Company, is alſo ſhewne in this Caſtle of Fame, the Noble Allen de la Zouch, Grocer, who was Maior of London the two and fiftieth yeare of the ſame Henry the third, which Allen de la Zouch, for his good Gouernement in the Time of his Maioralty, was by the ſayd King Henry the third, made both a Baron of this Realme, and Lord Chiefe Iuſtice of England: Alſo that Famous Worthy, Sir Thomas Knoles, Grocer, twice Maior of this Honorable Citty, which Sir Thomas begunne at his owne charge that famous building of Guild-hall in London, and other Memorable workes, both in this Citty, and in his owne Company, ſo much Worthineſſe being

the Luſtre of this Caſtle, and ought indeed to be the Imitation of the Beholder.
               My Lord no ſooner approaches, but Reward a Partner with Iuſtice in keeping that Seate of Honor, as ouer-ioyde at the ſight of him, appeares too free and forward in the Reſignation.
               
                  Reward.
                  VVElcome to Fames bright Caſtle, take thy place,
                  This ſeate's reſerud to doe thy vertues grace.
               
               
                  Iuſtice.
                  TRue, but not yet to be poſſeſt, heare me,
                  Iuſtice muſt flow through him, before that bee,
                  Great works of Grace muſt be requird and done,
                  Before the honor of this Seate be won.
                  A whole yeeres reuerend care in righting wrongs,
                  And guarding Innocence from malicious tongues.
                  Muſt be imployde in Vertues ſacred right,
                  Before this place be fild; tis no meane fight,
                  That wins this Palme, truth, and a vertuous care,
                  Of the oppreſſed, thoſe the Loadſtones are,
                  That will gainſt Enuies power drawe him forth,
                  To take this merit in this ſeat of worth:
                  Where all the memorable worthies ſhine,
                  
                     In works of brightneſſe, able to refine,
                  All the beholders minds, and ſtrike new fire,
                  To kindle an induſtrious deſire,
                  To imitate their actions, and their Fame,
                  Which to this Caſtle addes that glorious Name.
                  Wherefore Reward, free as the Ayre or Light,
                  There muſt be Merit, or our work's not right.
               
               
                  Reward.
                  
                     IF there were any error twas my loue,
                  
                  
                     And if it be a fault to be too free,
                  
                  
                     Reward commits but once ſuch hereſie.
                  
                  
                     How ere, I know your worth will ſo extend,
                  
                  
                     Your fame will fill this ſeat at twelue months end.
                  
               
               About this Caſtle of Fame are plaſt many honorable figures, as Truth, Antiquity, Harmony, Fame, Deſert, Good works, on the top of the caſtle, Honour, Religion, Piety, Commiſeration; the workes of thoſe whoſe memories ſhine in this Caſtle.
               If you looke vpon Truth firſt, you ſhall finde her properly expreſt, holding in her right hand a Sunne, in the other a Fanne of Stars, Antiquity with a ſcrowle in her hand, as keeper of Honors Records; Harmony holding a golden Lute, and Fame not without her ſiluer trumpet, for deſert tis glorious through her owne brightneſſe, but

holdes nothing; good works expreſt with a Colledge or Hoſpitall.
               On the toppe of the Caſtle, Honor manifeſted by a faire Starre in his hand, Religion with a Temple on her head, Piety with an Altar, Commiſeration with a melting or burning Heart.
               And not to haue our ſpeakers forgotten, (Reward and Iuſtice) with whom wee entred this part of Triumph, Rewarde holding a wreath of gold, ready for a deſeruer; and Iuſtice furniſht with her Sword and ballance.
               All this ſeruice is performed before the Feaſt, ſome in Pauls Church-yard, ſome in Cheap-ſide, at which place the whole Triumphe meets, both Caſtle and Iland, that gaue delight vpon the water, And now (as duety binds me) I commend my Lord and his right honorable Gueſſe to the ſolemne pleaſure of the feaſt, from whence I preſume all Epicuriſme is baniſht; for where Honor is maſter of the feaſt, Moderation and Grauity are alwayes attendants.
               The feaſt being ended at Guild-hall, my Lord (as yeerly cuſtome inuites him) goes accompanied with the triumphe towards S. Pauls, to performe the noble and reuerend ceremonies which diuine Antiquity vertuouſly ordained, and is no leſſe then faithfully obſerude, which is no meane luſtre to the City, Holy ſeruice and ceremonies accompliſht, he returnes by torch-light to his owne houſe, the whole triumphe plac't in

comely order before him, and at the entrance of his gate, Honor a glorious perſon, from the top of the Caſtle giues life to theſe following words.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The ſpeech of Honor from the top of the Caſtle, at the entrance of my Lord Mayors Gate.
                           
                              Honor.
                              THere is no humane glory or renowne,
                              But haue their euening & their ſure ſun-ſetting,
                              Which ſhews that we ſhould vpward ſeeke our Crown
                              And make but vſe of time for our hopes bettering,
                              So to be truely mindfull of our owne,
                              Is to performe all parts of good in one;
                              The cloſe of this triumphant day is come,
                              And Honor ſtayes to bid you welcome home,
                              All I deſire for my Grace and good,
                              Is but to be remembred in your bloud,
                              With Honor to accompliſh the faire time,
                              Which power hath put into your hands; A crime
                              As great as euer came into ſins band,
                              I doo entitle a too ſparing hand,
                              Nothing deads Honor more, then to behold
                              Plenty coopt vp; and Bounty faint and cold;
                              Which ought to be the free life of the yeere,
                              For bounty twas ordaynd, to make that cleere
                              Which is the light of goodneſſe and of Fame,
                              And puts by Honor from the cloude of ſhame.
                              
                                 Great coſt and loue hath nobly bin beſtowd,
                              
                                 Ʋpon thy triumph, (which this day hath ſhowd:
                              Embrace 'em in thy heart, till times afford
                              Fuller expresſion; in one abſolute word,
                              All the content that euer made man bleſt,
                              This triumph done, make a triumphant breſt.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  No ſooner the ſpeech is ended, but the triumph is diſſolud, and not poſſible to ſcape the hands of the defacer, things that for their quaintneſſe (I dare ſo farre commend them) haue not beene vſually ſeen throgh the City; the credit of which workmāſhip I muſt iuſtly lay vpon the deſerts of Mr. Rowland Bucket, chiefe maſter of the work; yet not forgetting the faithfull care and induſtry of my well approoued friend, Maſter Henry Wilde, and Maſter Iacob Challoner, partners in the buſineſſe.
               
               
                  The ſeaſon cuts me off, & after this dayes trouble I am as willing to take my reſt.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   