
      
         
            
            HONORABLE ENTERTAINMENTS, Compoſ'de for the Seruice of this Noble Cittie. SOME OF WHICH WERE faſhion'd for the Entertainment of the Lords of his Maieſties moſt Honorable Priuie Councell, vpon the Occaſion of their late Royall Employment.
            Inuented by Thomas Middleron.
            
            Imprinted at London by G. E. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE
            
               Sir Francis Ihones, Knight, L. Maior of the Citty of London; the Right Worſhipfull, Sir Iohn Garrard, Sir Thomas Bennet, Sir Thomas Lowe, Sir Thomas Middleton, Sir Iohn Iolles, Sir Iohn Leman, Sir George Bolles, Sir William Cokayne, Knights and Aldermen; The truely Generous and Noble, Heneage Finch Eſquire, Maſter Recorder; Maſter Edward Barkham, Maſter Alexander Preſcot, Maſter Peter Probye, Maſter Martin Lumley, Maſter William Goare, Maſter Iohn Goare, Maſter Allen Cotton, Maſter Cuthbert Hacket, Maſter William Halliday, Maſter Robert Iohnſon, Maſter Richard Herne, Maſter Hugh Hamerſley, Maſter Richard Deane, Maſter Iames Cambell, Aldermen.
            
            Sheriffes and Aldermen.
                  Maſter Edward Allen.
                  
                  Maſter Robert Ducye.
                  
               
            
            
               All Brethren-Senators, Preſidents of religious, and worthy Actions, Carefull Aſſiſtants in the State of ſo vnmatch'd a Gouernment; And a'l of them being his Worthy and Horable Patrons.
            
               T. M. Wiſheth the Fulnes of that Honor, whoſe Obiect is Vertue, and Goodneſſe.
         
         
            
               THoſe Things that haue tooke Ioy (at ſeuerall Feaſts)
               To giue you Entertainment, as the Gueſts
               
                  They held moſt truely Worthy, become now
               Poore Suiters to be entertaynde by you,
               So were they from the firſt; their Suite is then,
               Once ſeruing you, to be receiude agen,
               And You, to aequall Iustice are ſo true,
               You alwaies cheriſh that, which honors You.
            
            
               Euer obedient in his Studies, to the Seruice of ſo compleate a Goodnes. Tho. Middleton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            HONOVRABLE ENTERTAINMENTS.
            On Monday and Tueſday in Eaſter weeke, 1620. the firſt Entertainment, at the houſe of the right worthy, Sr. William Cokaine then L. Mayor: Which on the Saturday following was faſhioned into ſeruice for the Lords of his Maieſties moſt Hoble. Priuy Councell; vpon which day, that noble Marriage was celebrated betwixt the Right Hoble. Charles L. Howard Baron of Eſſingham, and Mary, eldeſt Daughter of the ſaid St. William Cokaine, then L. Mayor of London, and L. Generall of the Military forces.
            One habited like a Gentleman Sewer, bearing in his hand an Artificiall Cocke, conducted by the City Muſicke, toward the high Table, a Song giuing notice of his Entrance.
            
               
                  SONG.
               ROome, roome, make roome,
               You Friends to Fame,
               Officers of worth and Name,
               Make roome, make roome,
               Behold the Bird of State doth come,
               Make roome,
               Cleere the place,
               O doe it all the grace;
               It is the King of Birds, whoſe chaunting,
               And early morning Crowing,
               So quicke and ſtrongly flowing,
               Doe's make the King of Beaſts lye panting;
               How worthy then to be brought in with Honour,
               That daunts the proudeſt in that humble manner.
            
            
               
                  The Speech.
               TWo powers at ſtrife about conceiued wrong,
               To whom this Bird ſhould properly belong,
               Were reconcil'd by Harmony: Firſt, the Sunne
               
               Cald it his Bird, cauſe ſtill when day begun
               To ope her modeſt Eye, this Creature then,
               Proclaimes his glory to the world agen;
               
                  Minerua next, Goddeſſe of Armes and Art,
               Claymd it for hers (not without iuſt deſert)
               He, like the Morning being the Muſes friend,
               And then for courage, 'tis his life, his end;
               Without wrong then thoſe properties related,
               To both, hee may be iuſtly conſecrated:
               But, Worthy Lord, how properly to you,
               Whoſe place pertakes of both; it is ſo true
               An Emblem of your worth, charge, power, & ſtate,
               None, Noblier can expreſſe a Magiſtrate;
               For all that is in this Bird, Quality,
               Is in you Vertue, Iuſtice, Induſtry,
               What do's his early morning note imply?
               But in you, early care and vigilancie;
               
                  A Duty that begets Duty to you,
               So Vertue ſtill payes, and receiues her due:
               What do's the ſtriking of his wings import,
               Ere to his Neighbour hee his ſounds retort?
               But the deere labours and inceſſant paines
               Of a iuſt Magiſtrate, that e'en conſtraines
               His Nerues, to giue more Vertue to his word,
               And beate in ſenſe into the moſt abſurd:
               The Sharpeſt is the eaſieſt to apply,
               For his quicke Spurre, Lawes ſword doth ſignifie;
               The execution of your Charge and Place,
               To cut off all crimes that are bold and baſe:
               ``Vertues ſhould be with kind embraces, heap'd,
               ``But with a Sword, Sins harueſt muſt be reap'd.
            
            
               To the Aldermen.
               My reuerence next to you, to you, that are
               The Fathers of this Citty; by whoſe care,
               Wiſedome & watchfulnes, the good cauſe thriues,
               You that are Lights and Preſidents in Liues,
               Noble Examples, Honours t'Age and Time,
               
                  This is the Top wch your good cares muſt climbe,
               ``A ceaſleſſe labour Vertue hath impos'd,
               ``Vpon all thoſe, whom Honour hath enclos'd;
               And ſuch are you, ſelected from the reſt,
               Works then that are moſt choice become you beſt;
               Place before all your Actions and Intents,
               The rare gifts of that Bird, this but preſents:
               Behold the very ſhape and Figure, now,
               Serues for a Noble Welcome, turnd into
               A Cup of Bounty, and t'adorne the Feaſt,
               Loaden with loue comes to each worthy Gueſt;
               And but obſerue the manner, there's in that,
               Freeneſſe expreſt, humility, yet State;
               Firſt you take off his head, to taſt his heart,
               Which ſhowes at this time power is laid apart,
               And bounty fils the place; then he goes round;
               To ſhew a Welcome of an equall Sound,
               To euery one a free one, through the Boord,
               So plaine hee ſpeakes the goodneſſe of his Lord,
               Take then reſpectfull Notice through the Hall,
               That heere the noble Health begins to All.
            
            
               The Cock-cup then deliuered by this Gentle man Sewer to the L. Mayor, hee beginning the Health, a ſecond Song thus honouring it.
            
               2. SONG.
               THe Health's begun,
               In the Bird of the Sun,
               pledge it round pledge it round,
               With hearty welcome it comes crownd,
               O pledge it round:
               Th
                     •
                   Ceremonies due
               Forget not as they were begun to you,
               When you are dranke to, y'are by duty led,
               Firſt to kiſſe your hand, then take off the head,
               You cannot miſſe it then,
               To put it on and kiſſe it agen;
            
            
               
               The next to whom the Health doth flow,
               It taught to honour your Pledge ſo,
               So round, round, round, round, let it goe,
               As aboue, ſo below;
               For Bounty did intend it alwayes ſo.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Entertainment.
            At Bun-hill, on the Shooting day; Another habited like an Archer did thus greet the L. Mayor and Aldermen after they were placed in their Tent.
            
               WHy this is nobly done, to come to grace
               A Sport, ſo wel becomes the Time & Place,
               Old Time made much on't, & it thought no praiſe
               Too deere for't, nor no honour in thoſe dayes,
               Not only Kings ordaind Lawes to defend it,
               But ſhinde the firſt Examples to commend it,
               In their owne Perſons honord it ſo farre,
               A Land of Peace ſhow'd like a field of Warre;
               But chiefly Henry, (Memories Fame) the Eight,
               And the Sixt Edward; gaue it worth and weight,
               By Act and fauour, (not without deſert)
               It being the comlieſt and the Manlieſt Art,
               And whereas meaner Crafts took their firſt forme
               From humble Things, as Twiſting from a worme,
               And Weauing from the Spiders limber frame;
               
                  
                  Muſicke and Archery from Apollo came:
               He cals himſelf great Maiſter of this Sport,
               In whoſe bright name faire Wiſedome keepes her Court:
               Well may this Inſtrument be firſt in Fame,
               Aboue all others that haue got a Name,
               In war or peace; when Heauen it ſelfe doth ſhow,
               ``The Couenant of Mercy, by a Bow:
               
               And as each Creature, nay, each ſenceleſſe Thing▪
               
               Is made a Glaſſe to ſee Heauens goodneſſe in;
               So though this be a meere delight, a Game,
               Iuſtice may ſee heere ſomthing ſhe may claime,
               (Without wrong done to State) and cal't her own,
               Since the greatſt power is oft through weakeneſſe known.
               What are Reproofs? with thē I firſt begin,
               But Arrowes ſhot againſt the Breſt of Sin;
               Who hits Vice home, & cleaues a wrong in twaine,
               So that it neuer comes to cloſe againe,
               Shewes not he noble Archery? Ile pray euer,
               He may be followed, mended he can neuer:
               And as a cunning Bowman markes his ground,
               And frō light things (which being toſt vp) is found
               Where the winde ſits (for his aduantage beſt)
               
                  Before he let his Arrow paſſe his Breſt;
               So the graue Magiſtrate, diſcreetly wiſe,
               Makes vſe of light occaſions that ariſe,
               To lead him on to weightier, windes a Cauſe,
               Frō things but weakly told, much ſubſtance draws
               And will the ſtate of Truth exactly trye,
               Before he let the Shaft of Iudgement flie:
               Then in this Art, there's Vertue ſtill expreſt,
               For euery man deſires heere to be Beſt,
               Their Ayme is ſtill Perfection, to outreach,
               And goe beyond each other; which do's teach
               A Noble Strife in our more ſerious Deeds,
               Aſſuring Glory to him beſt exceeds:
               And where ſome ſports ſeek corners for their ſhame
               
                  Day-light and open Place, commends this Game;
               Much like an Honeſt Cauſe, it appeares Bold
               In publicke Court, for all Eyes to behold;
            
            
               To the Archers.
               On then, Apolloes Scholers, You ne're found
               Nobler Spectators compaſt in this Ground;
               
               To whom I wiſh (worthy their Vertuous Wayes)
               Peace to their Hearts, long Health, & Bleſſed daies.
            
            
               
               
                  Vpon the renewing of that worthy and laudable Cuſtome of Uiſiting the Springs and Conduite Heads, for the Sweetneſſe and Health of the City.
               
               A Uiſitation long diſcontinued. A Water-Nimph, ſeeming to rize out of the Ground by the Conduit Head, neare the Banquetting-Houſe, thus greets the Honourable Aſſembly.
               
                  HAh? let me cleare mine Eyes, me thinks I ſee
                  Comforts approach, as if They came to me;
                  I am not vſde to e'm; I ha beene long without,
                  How comes the Vertue of the Times about?
                  Ha's Ancient Cuſtome yet a Friend? of Weight?
                  So many? rare I Goodneſſe is wak't alate
                  Out of her long Sleepe ſure; that ha's laine ſtill
                  Many a deere Day, charm'd with Neglect and Will,
                  
                  I thought I'de beene forſaken, quite forſooke,
                  For none theſe 7. yeares, ha's beſtow'd a Looke
                  Vpon my watry Habitation here;
                  I meane, of Power, that ought to ſee Me cleere,
                  
                     For yon'd faire Cities health, which Sweetnes bleſſe
                  And Vertue in full Strength, euer poſſeſſe;
                  Well fare thy Viſitation, Noble Lord,
                  
                  And this moſt Graue Aſſembly; that accord
                  In wayes of Charity and Care with Thee;
                  
                     Ioyes viſit You, as Your Loues viſit Me:
                  The Water ſtands ſo full now in mine Eyes
                  I cannot chuſe but weepe; but the Teares riſe
                  From Gladneſſe, not from Sorrow, for that's loſt
                  Now I ſee you, Vnkindneſſe yet ha's coſt
                  Many a deere Drop, ſince I beheld the Face
                  Of the laſt Magiſtrate, in Power and Place;
                  
                  I h'a done good Seruice; t'is no boaſting part
                  In one forgot, to ſpeake her owne deſert:
                  I grant my kind and louing Siſters both
                  
                     Chadwell and Amwell, haue expreſt no Sloth
                  In their Pipe-Pilgrimage, but fairely proou'd
                  Moſt excellent Seruants, houſ'de, and welbelou'd;
                  And haue, when hard Neceſſity requires,
                  Giuen happy Quench to many mercileſſe Fires;
                  Therefore am I neglected? An old Friend?
                  The Head? that to the Heart a'th City ſend
                  
                     My beſt and cleereſt Seruice, take Delight
                  To be at hand, make your Dames Pure and White;
                  Who for their ciuill Neatneſſe, are proclaim'd
                  Mirrours of women, through all Kingdoms fam'd;
                  Can I be ſo forgot? and daily heare
                  The noiſe of Water-bearers din your care?
                  Thoſe are my Almes folkes, trotting in a Ring,
                  And liue vpon the bounty of my Spring,
                  
                  Yet like dull wormes that haue no ſence at all,
                  Lick vp the Dewes, ne're look from whēce they fal,
                  The head's not minded, whēce the goodnes flows:
                  So with the worlds condition right it goes;
                  ``Bleſſings are ſwallowed with a greedy loue,
                  ``But Thanks flye ſlowly to yon'd place Aboue,
                  From whence the Euerliuing Waters ſpring,
                  Which to your ſoules eternall comforts bring:
                  The Dewes of Heauen fal on you, proſperous Fates
                  Like fruitfull Riuers, flow into your States.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Vpon diſcontinuance, and to excite them to practiſe. A Speech intended for the generall Training, being appointed for the Tueſday next enſuing the Viſitation of the Springs, but vppon ſome occaſion, the Day deferred.
               
                  Pallas on Horſebacke, on her Helmet the figure of a Cocke, her proper Creſt, thus ſhould haue greeted the L. Generall the L. Mayor Sir William Cokaine, at his entrance into the Field, the worthy Colonels, the right Generous Mr: Alderman Hamerſley, Preſident of the Noble Councell of Warre, for the Martiall Garden; the Captaines, &c.
               
                  WHy here's my wiſh, the Ioy I liue vpon,
                  Wiſedome and Valour when both meet in one,
                  Now tis a Field of Honor, Fames true Sphere,
                  Me thinks I could eternally dwell here;
                  Why here's perſection, tis a place for me,
                  
                     Pallas delights in ſuch community;
                  This Bird of Courage, (Enemy to Feare)
                  
                     Whoſe Figure on my Helmet now I weare,
                  And haue done euer from my Birth in Heauen
                  Is conſecrate to Me, as to Thee giuen,
                  Our Creſt's alike, and fits both warre and peace,
                  The Vertues are, Valour and Watchfulneſſe,
                  And both ſhine cleare now in thy preſent State,
                  
                     Field-Generall, and City-Magiſtrate:
                  
                  As I from Arts and Armes deriue my name;
                  So thou ſupplieſt two Offices, with Fame:
                  Why here the Ancient Romane Honor dwels,
                  A Praetor, Generall; Senators, Colonels;
                  Captaines, graue Citizens; ſo richly inſpir'd,
                  They can aſſiſt in Councell, if requir'd,
                  And ſet Court-Cauſes in as fayre a Forme,
                  As they doe Men, here, without Rage or Storme:
                  Lieuetenants, Enſigners, Seriants of Bands,
                  Of worthy Citizens the Army ſtands,
                  Each in his place deſeruing faire reſpect;
                  I can complaine of nothing but Neglect,
                  That ſuch a noble Cities Arm'd Defence
                  Should be ſo ſeldome ſeene; I could diſpence
                  With great occaſions, but alaſſe, whole yeares
                  
                     To put off exerciſe, giues cauſe of feares;
                  ``In getting wealth all care ſhould not be ſet,
                  ``But ſome, in the defending what you get:
                  There's fewe but haue their prouidence ſo pure,
                  (Bleſt with a faire eſtate) to make it ſure,
                  By ſtrength of writings, and in good mens hands
                  Putting their Coyne, ſecur'd by Lifes and Lands,
                  This is the common Fort to which all flye,
                  Euery man labours for Security;
                  But what's all this? (I ſpeake in Truths behalfe)
                  If neither Men, City, nor Deeds be ſafe
                  Where's now Security of State? that day,
                  When life ſtands doubtfull of her houſe of clay;
                  A ruine, which neglect of glorious Armes
                  H'as brought on many a Kingdome, rockt with charmes
                  Of lazy dulneſſe, by vnpractiſ'd men
                  Fit for no ſeruice; I reſolue you then;
                  This is Security, if you'le rightly know,
                  And do's Secure that Word which you call ſo:
                  Let not a ſmall pecuniary Expence
                  (Which is but droſſie dotage) keepe you hence,
                  You loſe all that you ſaue, after that manner,
                  
                     What i'ſt to riſe in riches, fall in honour?
                  Nay to your Safeties to commit ſelfe-treaſon,
                  Which euery thing prouides for, bleſt with reaſon,
                  Let this graue Lord's Example, (in its Prime)
                  Who perfects all his Actions with his Time,
                  Makes euen with the Years, to his faire Fame,
                  Giues His Accounts vp with a Glorious Name
                  In Field and Court, moue all men to diſcharge
                  Their manly Offices and paines at large;
                  Let euery Yeare (at leaſt) once in his Round,
                  See you like Sonnes of Honour tread this Ground;
                  And Heauen that both giues, & ſecures iuſt welth,
                  The City bleſſe with Safety, You with Health.
               
               
               
                  At the Houſe of Sir William Cokaine; Upon Simon and Iudes day following, being the laſt great Feaſt of the Magiſtrates Yeare, and the expiration of his Pretorſhip.
               One attir'd like a Mourner, enters after a made Diſh like a Herſe, ſtuck with ſable Bannerets, Drums and Trumpets expreſſing a mournfull Seruice.
               
                  
                     The Speech.
                  IMagine now, each apprehenſiue Gueſt
                  The Yeare departed; this his Funerall Feaſt,
                  
                  I, a chiefe Mourner, this a ſad Pageant, here,
                  Set with the Orphans Sigh, the Widowes Teare,
                  All ſeeme to mourne, as lockt from their reliefes,
                  Till the New Sun of Iuſtice dry their griefes;
                  And as there is no Glorious thing that ends,
                  But leaues a Fame behind it, that commends
                  Or diſapproues the Progreſſe of his Acts:
                  So in this Epitaph, ſad Truth contracts
                  A ſpacious Story, which ſpread forth at large,
                  Might inſtruct All, built vp for Power & Charge
               
               
                  
                  The Laſt Will and Teſtament of 162. finiſhing for the City.
                  
                     Inprimis, I Annus 620. do bequeath to my Succceſſor 21. all my good wiſhes, paines, labours and reformations, to bee nobly perfected by his endeuours and diligence.
                  
                     Item, I make Iuſtice my Executor, and Wiſedome my Ouerſeer, wch is, that Honorable Court which neuer failed yet to ſee Iuſtice performed.
                  
                     Item, I giue and bequeath to all the Officers, for Legacies; Truth, Temperance, Example of Humility and Gentleneſſe.
                  Laſtly, I bequeath to the whole Body of the beloued Commonalty, three ineſtimable Iewels, Loue, Meckneſſe and Loyaltie; which are alwaies the forerunners of a bleſſed proſperity; which heauen grant they may euerlaſting enioy.
               
               
                  
                     The Epitaph.
                  HEre ends a Yeare that neuer miſpent day,
                  Throgh Fames celeſtial Signes made his own way,
                  By diſcrete iudgement all his time ſtill led,
                  Which is the onely Signe gouernes the Head,
                  Mercy to wants, and Bounty to Deſert,
                  The ſpeciall Signe that rules the noble Heart,
                  A Yeare of goodneſſe, and a Yeare of right,
                  In which the honeſt cauſe ſued with delight.
                  A Yeare wherein nothing that's good, was dull,
                  Began at Moones Encreaſe, and ends at Full;
                  Full cup, full welcome: adding the Suns gift,
                  Who nearer his declining, the more ſwift
                  In his illuſtrious courſe, more bright, more cleere,
                  Such is the glorious ſetting of this Yeare,
                  
                  His beamy ſubſtance ſhines e'ne through his ſhroud
                  As the faire Sun ſhoots ſplendor through his cloud;
                  May euery Yeare ſucceeding this, ſtill haue
                  No worſe an Epitaph to decke his Graue,
                  And ſo my laſt farewell (this Teare for me)
                  Wiſhing that many may conclude like Thee.
               
            
            
               
               At the Houſe of the Right Honorable Sir Francis Ihones.
               
               The property, to which this Speech eſpecially hath Reſpect, was a deuice like a made Diſh, expreſsing Two naked Armes breaking through a Cloud, ſupporting a wreath of Lawrell, being part of the Haberdaſhers Armes.
               
                  The Firſt Entertainement, at his firſt Great Feaſt praeparde to giue Welcome to his Owne Noble Fraternitie, the Company of Haberdaſhers.
               
                  
                     The Speech preſented by a ſeruant to Comus, the great Sir of Feaſts.
                  FRee Loue, full welcome, bounty fayre, & cleere,
                  E'en as it flowes from Heauen, inhabit here,
                  And with your Liberall Vertues bleſſe the yeare,
                  
                  Make this thy Pallace thou ſmooth youth of Feaſts,
                  
                     Comus! and put Ioy into all the Gueſts,
                  That they may truely taſte in feweſt words,
                  Th' Abundant welcome yon'd Kind Lord affords,
                  Eſpecially to You, aboue the reſt,
                  Of all moſt worthy to be Firſt and Beſt;
                  You challenge two Reſpects, in Brotherhood, one,
                  Which had deſert enough came it alone,
                  Without a ſecond Vertue, but to adde
                  Vnto Your Worthineſſe, Your Loue was clad
                  With Honor, Coſt, and Care, and how applide,
                  The late triumphant Day beſt teſtified,
                  Stands in no need of my applauſe and praiſe,
                  Your Worth can of it ſelfe, it ſelfe beſt raiſe;
                  So much for Noble Action in your Right,
               
               
                  
                  Which I preſume his goodneſſe will require:
                  Now for Himſelfe, (not far to wade or ſwim)
                  I borrow of your Honours to fit him,
                  Which both preſerues me in my firſt bounds ſtill,
                  And may agree beſt with his Loue and Will:
               
               Here the Property is preſented.
               
                  Behold in this rare Symbole of Renowne,
                  The Embleme of all Iuſtice, and the Crowne
                  The faire reward for't, euer freſh and greene;
                  Which imitates thoſe Ioyes Eye hath not ſeene;
                  Theſe Armes, that for their nakedneſſe reſemble
                  E'en Truth it ſelfe, no couering, to diſſemble,
                  Nor ſhift for Bribe, but open, plaine, and bare,
                  Shows, Men of Power ſhould keep their conſcience
                  And were their Acts tranſparēt, without vaile (faire
                  Diſguize or Vizard, and ſuch neuer faile;
                  Obſerue this more, tis not one Arme alone
                  That beares this Laurell, but two ioyn'd in one,
                  
                     Mercy and Iustice, the two Props of State,
                  They muſt be both fixt in the Magiſtrate;
                  
                  
                     If wanting either, ſubiect to much harme,
                  For he that ha's but one, ha's but one Arme;
                  
                  Iudge then the Imperfection; marke agen,
                  They breake both through a Cloud; which inſtructs Men
                  How they ſhould place their Reuerence and their Loue,
                  Seeing all lawfull power, comes from Aboue;
                  And as the Laurell (which is now your due)
                  Bring due to Honour, therefore moſt to you▪
                  
                  Feares no iniurious Weather the Yeare brings,
                  But ſpite of Storms looks euer greene and ſprings,
                  
                     Apolloes Tree, which Lightnings neuer blaſt,
                  So (Honor'd Lord) ſhould burning Malice caſt,
                  Her pitchy Fires at your Triumphant State;
                  You are Apolloes Tree, a (Magiſtrate,)
                  Which no foule Guſt of Enuy can offend,
                  Nor may it euer to your Lordſhips End,
                  Health and a Noble Courage bleſſe your Dayes;
                  To this your worthy Brotherhood, fame and praiſe
               
               
                  
                  Leuity, a perſon attired ſutable to her condition, from a Window, vnexpectedly thus greets the Aſſembly in the midſt of the Feaſt.
               At the houſe of the Right Honorable Sir Francis Ihones L. Mayor, For the Celebration of the Ioyfull Feaſt of Chriſtmas laſt.
               
               
                  Leu.
                  
                     WHy well ſaid, thus ſhould Chriſtmas be
                     Lightſome, Iocond, blithe and free,
                     Now it lookes like Bounties Pallace,
                     Where euery Cup ha's his full Ballace,
                     Drowne Cares with Iuice that Grapes haue bled,
                     And make Times cheeke looke freſh and red,
                     Let nothing now but Healths goe round,
                     And no ſooner off, but crown'd
                     With ſparkling Liquors, bounding vp,
                     Quicke in Pallet, as in Cup:
                     To be heauy, to be dull,
                     
                        Is a fault ſo pittifull,
                     We bar it from the courſe of Reaſon,
                     Care muſt not peep abroad this Seaſon,
                     Nor a ſad looke dare appeare
                     Within ten Mile of Chriſtmas cheere;
                     Sighes are baniſht ten leagues farder,
                     Either Cellar, Hall or Larder;
                     To be Iouiall then and blithe
                     Is truely to pay (Chriſtmas) Tithe,
                     And where free Mirth is and impartiall,
                     
                        Chriſtmas there h'as made me Marſhiall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Seuerity, from an oppoſite window, as vnexpectedly reproues her.
               
                  Seu.
                  
                     Why how now? know you where you are? rude thing;
                     Bold and vnmanner'd Licence, dare you bring
                     Your free Speech hither, before me begin?
                     Who let this Skittiſh thing of Lightneſſe in?
                     Some call the Porter hither, yet ſtay, ſtay,
                     I'ue power in words to chaſe this toy away;
                     I wonder that the Muſique ſuffers thee
                     To come into their roome?
                  
               
               
                  Leu.
                  Why Nicety?
                  
               
               
                  Seu.
                  
                     Beleeue me honeſt Me (what e're yoube)
                     She's able to ſpoyle all your Harmony,
                     Corrupt your ayres with Lightneſſe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Leu.
                  
                     Oh fie, fie,
                     How ill you blaze my Coate, Seuerity?
                     
                  
               
               
                  Seu.
                  
                     Is this a place for you? can Lightneſſe here
                     Vnder the Hazard of her Shame appeare?
                  
               
               
                  
                  Leu.
                  
                     Why thou dull lumpiſh Thing, void of all faſhion,
                     Mirths poyſon, Enemy to Recreation,
                     Thou Melancholly wretch, ſo fil'd with ſpite
                     Thou eat'ſt thy heart, when others take delight,
                     I muſt be merry, tis my nature—
                  
               
               
                  Seu.
                  Foole.
               
               
                  Leu.
                  Dull dogbolt.
               
               
                  Seu.
                  Skit.
               
               
                  Enter below, Temperance.
               
                  Temp.
                  
                     What? this a Scolding Schoole,
                     How now? ſo hie got? and ſo lowd withall?
                     Whoſe doing wa'ſt plac'ſt you two there to braule?
                     Pray marke the Aſſembly, looke vppon e'm well,
                     Thinke where you are, and let that rude thought quell
                     Your vnbeſeeming difference, tis not heere
                     As at a Pit, here's Reuerence, Worth, and Feare.
                  
               
               
                  Leu.
                  She ſayes this place and ſeaſon ſuites not me.
               
               
                  Temp.
                  She ſayes but right in that,
               
               
                  Seu.
                  O Leuity,
               
               
                  Temp.
                  No, nor you neither,
               
               
                  
                  Leu.
                  You may be gon too,
               
               
                  Temp.
                  
                     Y'are Both Extreames, therefore no place for you,
                     
                        Lightnes becomes not, nor Seuerity,
                     
                     It muſt me betweene both, and I am Shee,
                     
                     Too Light, is bad, and too Seuere as Vilde,
                     But both well temperd, makes the mixture milde,
                     As I ſtand now betweene you, ſo it makes
                     A perfect Vertue vp, when it pertakes
                     Of each, and comes no neerer then I doo,
                     And Vertue made, We haue no neede of you,
                     Vaniſh, be gon.
                  
               
               
                  Seu.
                  
                     I giue glace willingly
                     To You, but not to Her.
                  
               
               They giue place.
               
                  Leu.
                  Nor I to Thee,
               
               
                  Tem.
                  
                     So, Thus things ſhould haue their becomming grace,
                     For Temperance fits the Reuerence of this place:
                     Graue Senators, in goodnes ſtill encreaſt!
                     
                        Long may you Liue to celebrate this Feaſt,
                     This bleſſed Seaſon of true Ioy compilde
                     In which faire Heauen and Man were reconcilde▪
                     
                     
                        Muſique? thou modeſt Seruant to this place,
                     Raiſe chaſt Delight, to doe this Seaſon grace.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           A Song?
                           Anſwered at ſeuerall places,
                           
                              
                                 Eccho! Eccho! by thy loue once to Narciſſus,
                              
                              I now coniure thee not to miſſe vs,
                              But make thy Sound
                              Vppon the Woods rebound
                              And Mountains—Ecch: And mountaines,
                              And to thy neighbouring Siſters cal,—Siſters cal,
                              Log'd in Caue or hollow Wall
                              And thoſe reſounding neere faire Fountaines
                              Ecch: Neere faire Fountaines,
                              Let e'm call to one another—To one another
                              —one another—
                              And one Siſter rayſe vp tother
                              Ecch.—vp tother—
                              Let it goe from me to you—From me to you
                              —Mee▪ To you,
                              From you to them, be iuſt and true
                              —Iuſt and True
                              
                                 Neuer ceaſe your Voyces Flight,
                              Till you raiſe vp chaſt Delight
                              
                              ——Vp chaſt Delight,
                              
                              
                                 Delight—Who calls me from my Caue
                              Twas I—Twas I, Twas I;
                              This is no Time in ſilence now to lye
                              
                                 Delight—Who I?
                              O I;
                              This is a Seaſon of all I oy compilde,
                              In which faire Heauen and Man were reconcilde
                              Ecch—Heauen and Man were reconcilde,
                              Ecch-Reconcilde,
                              Behold how many a worthy Guest
                              
                              
                                 Are met to celebrate this Feast.
                              
                              
                                 Delight—I ſee it plaine, O blame me then,
                              I ne're will ſhowe ſuch Sloth agen;
                              
                                 For whoſe delight am I now raiſde?
                              Oh for the Citties!
                              
                              
                                 Delight—How? for the Citties?
                              
                              Ecch—For the Citties:
                              
                              
                                 Del. To faile a Miſtris ſo renown'd it were a thouſand pitties,
                              
                                 
                                 Ecch—Thouſand pitties.
                              Thoſe are her Honor'd Sonnes you now behold,
                              
                                 Del. Heauen bleſſe them all, with Graces manifold.
                           
                           
                              To the Muſique.
                              
                                 Temp. So!
                              Tis thankfully accepted, y'haue expreſt,
                              Your ſeruice well and fully to this Feaſt:
                              
                              Adorn'd and honor'd in each happy part,
                              With thoſe moſt reuerend Patrons to Deſert:
                           
                           
                              The Cloſe!
                              Ioy neuer faile your meetings, good ſucceſſe
                              All your Endeuours, and your Fortunes bleſſe,
                              Gladnes of heart dwell euer in your Breſts,
                              And Peace of faire Workes bring you glorious Reſts.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Inuention.
               At the Houſe of the Right Honorable SIR Francis Ihones, L. Maior. For the ſolemne feaſt of Eaſter laſt, vpon the Times of that bleſſed and laudable Cuſtome of Celebrating the memory of Pious workes in this Cittie, at Saint Mary Spittle.
               
               The foure Seaſons of the Yeare, Spring, Summer, Autumne and Winter, In a Song into foure parts diuided, Call vp Flora, the Goddeſſe of the Spring, who in a Bower, deckt with Artificiall Flowers, appeares vpon the Muſicall Inuocation.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                           
                              The Song! at ſeuerall Windowes.
                           
                              Spring
                              
                                 FLora, Flora!
                                 We call thee heere,
                              
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 We call thee heere,
                                 From forth thy fragrant Bower,
                              
                           
                           
                              Spri.
                              
                                 Thou Queene of euery laughing Flower,
                                 Appeare!
                                 Appeare to vs,
                              
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 To vs appeare:
                                 Thou Banquet of the Yeare,
                              
                           
                           
                              Spri.
                              
                                 Or if a Name may be more ſweet, more deere.
                                 Harke, Summer harke,
                              
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 Marke, Autumne, marke,
                                 How coughing Winter mournes to ſee
                                 This ſmiling Houre,
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              
                                 Would it were nipt for me,
                                 But ſoft I feele no ſuch decay
                                 But I may liue to kiſſe faire May,
                                 
                                 And in the Morne and Euening howers,
                                 Leaue my cold ſweats vpon the Flowers.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Spri.
                              Alaſſe poore Mumps, at thy weake power We laugh,
                           
                           The Sun will riſe and take thy cold Kiſſe off. And now behold.
                           
                              Win.
                              —Oh—Oh—O—
                           
                           
                              Autum.
                              
                                 He's ſtrucke cold
                                 At Floraes firſt appearing,
                                 Looke, in a Sound,
                                 Will drop to'th ground.
                                 Helpe, helpe, helpe, he wants your cheering.
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              
                                 Oh I confeſſe
                                 Feild Empereſſe,
                                 The Beauty of thy power amazes,
                                 I am content to ioyne
                                 With thoſe three Friends of thine,
                                 And helpe to chant thy prayſes;
                              
                           
                           
                              All.
                              
                                 Now all the Seaſons of the Yeare agree
                                 To giue, (Faire Flora) the prime place to Thee.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                              Flora, riſing in her Bower, calls forth two of her Seruants.
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 Where's Hyacinth! the Boy Appollo loude,
                                 And turnde into a Flower?
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Hy.
                              Here, Queene of ſweetnes.
                           
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 
                                    Adonis! thou that for thy beauteous chaſtity,
                                 Wert turnde into the chaſteſt of all Flowers,
                                 (The cloſſe-infolded Roſe) blowen into Bluſhes
                                 It is ſo mayden-modeſt,
                              
                           
                           
                              Ad.
                              
                                 What's thy pleaſure
                                 Faire Empreſſe of ſweete Odours,
                              
                           
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 Willing Seruants!
                                 I haue Employment for you both, and ſpeedy,
                              
                           
                           
                              Beth.
                              We waite with much Ioy to receiue the charge on't;
                           
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 Haſt, to the two Aſſiſting Magiſtrates,
                                 
                                 Thoſe worthy Citty Conſulls,
                                 
                                 Beare our ſweete wiſhes to e'm, and ſpeake Ioy
                                 From vs, to both their Feaſts,
                                 And to that part of their Graue-worthy Gueſſe
                                 
                                 
                                    Which here we miſſe to day, though here be thoſe
                                 Whom we ought more eſpecially to Honor,
                                 Say though we cannot there our ſelfe appeare,
                                 Becauſe we owe our greater ſeruice here,
                                 Yet that they ſhal not faile of all their due,
                                 We ſend the wiſhes of our Heart by you.
                              
                           
                           
                              Hy.
                              Which ſhall be faithfully tendred,
                           
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 Tis preſum'd;
                                 But to this faire Aſſembly preſent now
                                 I, and theſe yeelding Sweets all their heads bow
                                 In honour of this Feaſt, of the Day, chiefe,
                                 Made ſolemne by the workes of your Reliefe,
                                 Your Cares, your Charities, the holy Vſe
                                 Of pious exerciſe; all which infuſe
                                 Bleſſings into your Fortunes, you abound
                                 In temporall things, cauſe bleſſed fruits are found
                                 Vpon the Stocks you graft on, marke the Encreaſe;
                                 You plant poore Orphans in a ground of Peace,
                                 And carefully prouide, when fruit time comes,
                                 You gather Heauens Ioyes for't, in infinite Summer;
                                 This day you view'd the Garden of thoſe Deeds,
                                 
                                 That bleſſe the Founders; and all thoſe ſucceeds
                                 
                                    In Zeale and Imitation; you ſaw there,
                                 Vertues true Paradiſe, dreſt with your Care;
                                 (Your moſt religious Care) and thoſe Blew Sets,
                                 
                                 They are the Cities Bancke of Violets
                                 
                                 That ſmels moſt ſweet to Heauen; neuer ceaſe then
                                 You worthy Praeſidents for Times and Men,
                                 
                                 Till Charitie ſpring, (by your Examples giuen)
                                 As thick on Earth, as Rewards ſtand in Heauen;
                                 
                                 If there were ſloth or faintnes tow'ard good works;
                                 (As bleſt be Heauen there is not) Time inſtructs,
                                 The Seaſon of the Yeare, for as the Ground,
                                 The heauieſt and dul'ſt Creature can be found,
                                 Yet now begins both in her Meades and Bowers
                                 
                                 To offer vp her Sacrifice, in Flowers,
                                 
                                 How much more ought that Earth with a Soule bleſt,
                                 Which is of euery of you here poſſeſt,
                                 To ſpring forth Workes of Piety and Loue,
                                 To gratifie thoſe Dewes fall from Aboue;
                                 And as the humbleſt Flower that euer grew,
                                 Ha's not his Sent alone, but Vertue too,
                                 Good for Mans griefes; ſo tis not Mans full Fame
                                 To haue a Chriſtian Sauour, or a Name,
                                 
                                    An empty voice of Charity and Reliefe,
                                 He muſt apply Eaſe to his Brothers griefe;
                                 'Faith is the Sent and Odour of the Flower,
                                 'But Work's the Vertue, that makes good the power;
                                 Tis like the Tincture of thoſe Roabes you weare,
                                 In which cleare Veſture you to me appeare
                                 Like Borders of faire Roſes; and worne hie
                                 Vpon the Cities forehead; that rich Dye
                                 
                                 As it is reuerend, honourable, graue,
                                 So it is pretious, wholeſome; which doth craue
                                 A double Vertue at the Wearers hands,
                                 
                                    Iuſtice and Mercy; by which goodneſſe ſtands:
                                 Thus Honour ſtill claimes Vertue for his Due,
                                 And may both euer lay iuſt claime to you:
                                 What? the foure Seaſons of the Yeare ſtruck dumbe?
                                 I lookt for a kind Welcome, now Im'e come.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           2. Song, by the foure Seaſons! called the Song of Flowers.
                           
                              Spr.
                              
                                 WElcome, O welcome, Queene of ſweetnes
                                 welcome, in the nobleſt manner,
                                 
                                    With all thy Flowers, thy ſweete breath't Maides of Honour;
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 Flower guntle! I begin with Thee,
                           
                           
                              Aut.
                              Fayre Flower of Chryſtall! that's for me,
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              Apples of Loue! there ſweetneſſe dwels;
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              Puh, giue me Canterbury Bels;
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              Faire double-Gold cups, griefes expelling,
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 Agnus Caſtus, all excelling,
                           
                           
                              Aut.
                              
                                 Venus Bath! the louelieſt pride of Iune,
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              Giue me that Flower, cald, Go to bed at noone,
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              
                                 Bleſſed Thiſtle, fam'd for good,
                           
                           
                              Sum.
                              
                                 Shepheards Pouch, for ſtanching blood,
                           
                           
                              Aut.
                              Faire yallow Knight-wort, for a foule relapſe,
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              And Ladies▪ Mantle, good for Maydens Paps,
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              
                                 Tuft Hyacinth! that crownes the Bower,
                                 
                                 Cald of ſome, the Virgins Flower;
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              
                                 Take that for me, more good I feele
                                 In Ruffling Robin, and Larkes Heele.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              
                                 There is a Sweete, Vnnamed yet,
                                 The root is white, the Marke of pure Delight,
                                 
                                    Bearing his Flowers faire and hie,
                                 The colour like a purple Dye:
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              What is the name tis bleſt withall?
                           
                           
                              Spr.
                              
                                 Liue-long! it ſo the Shepheards call;
                           
                           
                              Win.
                              
                                 
                                    Liue-long? tis Vertues promis'd Due
                                 And may it Long remaine with You
                                 
                                 Honor'd Patrons,
                                 Vertuous Matrons,
                                 Whoſe Lifes and Acts this City graces,
                                 Daily ſtriuing,
                                 And reuiuing
                                 Workes worthy your renowne and places.
                              
                           
                           
                              Flo.
                              
                                 So ya're confirm'd; from your harmonious Cloſes
                                 May Sweetneſſe drop, as Hony-Dew from Roſes,
                              
                              Theuturning, to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen.
                              
                                 A bleſſed Health poſſeſſe you, and a long,
                                 That in this latter Spring of your graue yeares,
                                 
                                    You may be greene in Vertues, and grow ſtrong
                                 In works of Grace, which ſoules to Heauen endeers;
                                 your good Cares, here, Iuſtice, and well ſpent houres
                                 Crowne you hereafter with eternall Flowers.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Hyacinth, and Adonis, ſent forth by Flora, to the 2. other Feaſts, thus ſets off their Employments.
               
                  THe goddeſſe Flora, Empreſſe of the Spring,
                  
                  Chuſing (this Feaſt) her Flowry Soiourning,
                  Vnder the Roofe of the chiefe Magiſtrate,
                  
                  Whoſe power layes iuſt claime to the greateſt ſtate,
                  Hath ſent me forth, not meaneſt in her Grace,
                  To breath forth her ſweet wiſhes to this place;
                  Firſt to the Maſter of this bounteous Feaſt,
                  To ſpeake her ioy; next, to each worthy Gueſt;
                  And though ſhe cannot now her Selfe appeare,
                  Becauſe ſhe owes her greater Seruice there,
                  Yer her Hearts Loue to euery one I bring,
                  To whom ſh'as ſent a Preſent of the Spring.
                  
                     Then fals into the former ſpeech of Flora, making
                  
                  Uſe of her diuine inſtructions.
               
               
                  Here followes the worthy and Noble Entertainments of the Lords of his Maieſties moſt Honourable Priuy Councell; at the Houſes of the Lord Mayor, and Sheriffes.
               The firſt Entertainment vpon Thurſday in Eaſter weeke beeing the fift of Aprill, 1621. And vpon the ſixeteenth of the ſame Month thoſe Perſons of Honor receiued their ſecond Noble welcome, in a free and Generous Entertainment, at the houſe of the Right Worſhipfull, Mr. Sheriffe Allen; Flora the Perſon vſed before, thus prepared for them.
               
                  Flo.
               
               
                  AM I ſo happy to be bleſt agen?
                  With Theſe! the choice of many thouſand
                  For Royall Truſt ſelected, and a Care
                  That makes you Sacred; may the world compare men,
                  
                     A Confidence with yours? from ſo compleate
                  And excellent a Maſter? Or ſo great
                  And free a Loue can any Nation ſhowe
                  In Subiect to the Soueraigne, then doth flow
                  From this moſt thankfull Citty? Waues of Loue
                  Ee'n ouerwhelme each other, as they moue,
                  All ſtriuing to be firſt, they runne in one
                  To'th Oceans Breſt! (the Kings Affection.)
                  And you of Honor! that doe oft appeare
                  In preſence of a Maieſty ſo cleere,
                  So mighty in Heauens bleſſings, be ſo kind
                  To grace with Words what He ſhall euer find,
                  And tis a glorious Truth, and well beſeemes
                  Places and Perſons of your faire Eſteemes,
                  Not all the Kingdomes of the Earth, containe
                  A Citty freer to her Soueraigne,
                  
                  More faithfull, and more carefull; obſerue here
                  His Highnes excellent Tryall; Loue and Feare
                  
                  Make vp a Subiects duty, to his King,
                  
                  As Iuſtice and ſweete Mercy makes vp Him;
                  
                  So two fold Uertue two-fold Dutie, cheeres,
                  He knew their lones, now came & toucht their fears
                  
                  
                     To try their Temper, (O bleſt Heauen) he found
                  It was the Feare he lookt for, had it's ground
                  Vpon Religion, Reuerence, ſweete Reſpect,
                  
                     Loue lookt not Louelier, nor Diuinelier deckt,
                  Each reprehenſiue word He did impart
                  Flewe, and cleaude faſt to their obedient Heart,
                  
                  Twas fire within their boſome, 'could not reſt,
                  Till in ſome ſerious manner, they'de expreſt
                  Their duteous Care, with all ſpeede put in Act
                  
                  Their Soueraignes ſacred pleaſure, to coact
                  Where manners failde, and force, as with a Pill
                  From Humours rude, the Venom of the Ill;
                  'A Kings owne Admonition, againſt Crimes,
                  'Is Phiſicke to the Body of the Times.
                  And herein did He Imitate the Higheſt,
                  
                  (To whom it beſt becomes Him to be nigheſt)
                  To chaſten, where he loues, it is the Seale
                  Of the Almighties fauour, He doth deale
                  So with his Choſen, doe not languiſh then,
                  Thou Prince of Citties, cauſe the King of Men
                  
                  Diuinely did reprooue thee, Know, tis Loue,
                  Thou art his Choſen Cittie, and wilt prooue
                  
                     (As thou haſt euer beene) faithfull and free,
                  The Chamber of his ſweete Security:
                  Then in a Health of loy your Hearts expreſſe,
                  Whilſt I breath welcome to thoſe Noble Gueſſe.
                  
               
               
                  The Song of welcome, after which Flora thus Cloſes the Entertainment.
                  
                  A Truſt of Honor, and a Noble Care
                  Still to diſcharge that Truſt, Keepe your Fames faire,
                  You haue proceeded carefully; goe on,
                  And a full Praiſe Crowne your Progreſſion.
                  
               
               The laſt Entertainment full as Noble and worthy as the former, vpon the Saturday enſuing, being the 21. of the ſame Moneth, at the Houſe of the equally Generous and bounteous, the Right Worſhipfull, Maſter Sheriffe Ducy.
               
               Flora, this the third time, in her Bower, beginning to ſpeake, interrupted, by her two Seruants, Hyacinth and Adonis.
               
               
                  Flo.
                  GOod Heauen
               
               
                  Hy.
                  
                     Fye, this is vſurpation meerely,
                     Speake thrice together? there's no right in this:
                  
               
               
                  Flo.
                  What's that?
               
               
                  Ado.
                  
                     I haue the iuſter cauſe to take exceptions,
                     This is the place I ſeru'd in, lately ſeru'd in,
                     
                        And by her own appointmēt, my wrong's greateſt.
                  
               
               
                  Flo.
                  Here's a ſtrange ſudden boldneſſe a' both ſides a' me,
               
               
                  Hy.
                  
                     Wa'ſt not ſufficient grace for you to ſpeake
                     At the chiefe Magiſtrates houſe, there, where that Bower
                     
                     Was firſt erected, but to ſhift your ſeate
                     From place to place, pull downe, and then ſet vp,
                     I wonder how ſhe ſcapes Informers, truſt me.
                  
               
               
                  Ad.
                  Beleeue me ſo doe I, ſh'as fauour ſhowne her.
               
               
                  Flo.
                  So, this becomes you well,
               
               
                  Hy.
                  
                     There's right in all things,
                     We might haue kept our places as we held e'm,
                     There's little Conſcience in your dealing, thus,
                     You might haue left the Lower Bookes for vs,
                     For our poore ſeruice.
                  
               
               
                  Flo.
                  
                     Thus I anſwere you,
                     Taking my Preſident from the iuſt care
                     Of thoſe cleare Lights of Honour, ſhining faire
                     
                        To their Workes End; you ſee before your Eyes
                     The Truſt that was committed to their wiſe
                     And diſcreet Powers (for his Highneſſe Vſe)
                     They put not off to others, with excuſe
                     Of wearineſſe, or paines; as they begun,
                     In their owne Noble Perſons ſee all done:
                     So, by their ſweet Example, I that am
                     Your Queene and Miſtris, and may rightly blame,
                     And taxe the boldneſſe of your ruder blood,
                     I doe not thinke, or hold my ſelfe too good
                     In mine owne Perſon, to commend their Cares
                     That haue ſo iuſtly ſeru'd their King, in Theirs,
                     Now you pull in your Heads.
                  
               
               
                  Both.
                  Pardon ſweet Queene.
                  
               
               
                  Flo.
                  
                     Yet why ſhould Anger in my brow be ſeene
                     They came but to ſhew duty to the Time,
                     Contention to doe Seruice was their Crime,
                     That's no ill looking fault; but 'tis ſtill knowne,
                     'They that giue Honour, loue to doe't alone,
                     It brookes no Partnerſhip:—To giue this laſt
                     
                        
                        Duty her Due, as others before paſt,
                     Though it came now from men of meaner Rancke,
                     
                     Where welth was ne're known to oreflow the bank
                     Like Spring-Tides of the Rich, that ſwell more hie,
                     Yet tak't for Truth, it comes as cheerefully,
                     All ſmiling Giuers; and well may it come
                     With ſmooth and louing Faces, the ſmall Summe
                     That they returne, is thouſand times repaide
                     In Peace and Safety, beſides Soueraigne Ayde
                     For each Hearts Grieuance, (to its full content)
                     By this high Synode of the Parliament;
                     
                     Before whoſe faire, cleare, and Unbribed Eyes,
                     (When it appeares) Corruption ſincks and dies,
                     Secure Oppreſſion once, comes trembling thither
                     (Stead of her hard heart knoks her knees together
                     This Benefite is purchaſ'd, this Reward
                     To which all Coyne is droſſe to be compar'de:
                  
               
               
                  But, the faire Workes concluded, on all parts,
                  Your Care, which I place firſt of all deſerts,
                  And it becomes it, t'as beene nobly Iuſt,
                  
                     You haue diſcharg'd with Honor your hie Truſt:
                  The Cities Loue, I muſt remember next,
                  And faithfull Duty, both deuoutly mixt;
                  And (as the State of Court ſets laſt, the Beſt,)
                  His boundleſſe Goodneſſe, not to be expreſt,
                  That is your King and Maſter, Bleſſings fall
                  Vpon His Actions; Honor, on you All.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   