
      
         
            
            
            THE SVNNE
in Aries. A NOBLE
SOLEMNITY PERformed
through the Citie, at the ſole
coſt and charges of the Honourable and ancient
Fraternity of DRAPERS, at the confirmation
and eſtabliſhment of their moſt Worthy Brother
the Right Honourable, EDVVARD BARKHAM,
in the high Office of his Maieſties Lieutenant,
the Lord Maior of the famous
Citie of LONDON. Taking beginning at his Lordſhips
going, and perfecting it ſelfe after his returne
from receiuing the Oath of Maioralty at WESTMINSTER,
on the morrow after SIMON
IVDES day, being the 29. of
October. 1621. By THO. MIDDLETON. Gent.
            AT LONDON:
Printed by Ed. All-de, for H. G. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE HONOVR
OF HIM, TO VVHOM
THE NOBLE FRATERNITY
of Drapers, his worthy Brothers haue dedicated
their loues in coſtly Triumphes, the Right
Honourable, EDVVARD BARKHAM, Lord
Maior of this renowned
CITIE.
            YOur Honour being the Center, where the Lines
            Of this Dayes glorious circle meetes and ioynes;
            Loue, Ioy, Coſt, Triumph, all by You made bleſt;
            There do's my Seruice too, deſire to reſt:
            
               At your Lordſhips
command,
THO. MIDDLETON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE SVNNE
IN ARJES.
            
               
                  PIſces, being the laſt of the Signes,
and the Wayne of the Sunnes
Glory; how fitly and deſiredly
now the Sunne enters into
Aries, for the comfort and refreſhing
of the Creatures, and
may bee properly called the
Spring time of Right and Iuſtice;
obſerued by the Shepheards Kalender in the
Mountaine, to proue a happy Yeare for poore mens
cauſes, Widdowes, & Orphans Comforts; ſo much
to make good the Sunnes Entrance into that noble
Signe; I doubt not but the Beames of his Iuſtice will
make good themſelues.
            And firſt, to begin with the Worthy loue of his
Honourable Societie to his Lordſhip, after his Honours
returne from Weſtminſter, hauing receiued
ſome ſeruice vpon the water: the firſt Tryumph by
land attends his Lordſhips moſt wiſhed arriuall, in
Pauls Church-yard, which is a Chariot moſt Artfully
framed & adorned, bearing the Title of the Chariot
of Honour: In which Chariot many Worthies
are plac'd, that haue got Trophies of Honour by their

Labours & Deſerts, ſuch as Iaſon, whoſe Illuſtration
of Honour is the Golden Fleece, Hercules with his
Ne plus vltra, vpon Pilaſters of Siluer, a fayre Globe,
for conquering Alexander; a Gilt Lawrell for triumphant
Caeſar, &c. Iaſon at the approach of his
Lordſhip, being the Perſonage moſt proper (by his
Manifeſtation) for the Societies Honour, lends a
voyce to theſe following words.
            
               The Speech preſented by Jaſon.
               BE fauourable Fates! and a faire Skie
               Smile on this Expedition, Phoebus Eye
               Looke cheerefully,—the Barke is vnder Sayle
               For a Yeares voyage, and a bleſſed Gale
               Be euer with it; 'Tis for Iuſtice bound,
               A Coaſt, that's not by euery Compaſſe found;
               And goes for Honour, Lifes moſt precious Trading,
               May it returne with moſt Illustrious Lading;
               A thing both wiſht and hop'te for;—I am Hee
               To all Aduenturous Voyages, a free
               And bountifull well-wiſher, by my Name
               High Iaſon, firſt Aduenturer for Fame,
               
               which now rewards my danger, and o're-tops
               The Memory of all Perill, or her ſtops;
               Aſsiſted by the noble Hopes of Greece,
               'Twas I from Colchis fetcht the Golden Fleece;
               Am One of the firſt Brothers (on Record)
               Of Honour got by Danger: So, great Lord!
               There is no Voyage ſet forth to Renowne,
               That do's not ſometimes meete with Skies that frowne,
               
                  
With Guſts of Enuie, Billowes of deſpight,
               Which makes the Purchaſe once atchieu'd, more bright:
               "State is a Sea; he muſt be wiſe indeede
               "That ſounds It's Depth, or can the Quick ſands heede,
               And Honour is ſo nice and rare a Prize,
               'Tis watcht by Dragons, Venamous Enemies;
               Then no ſmall care belongs too't,—but as I
               With my aſsiſting Argonautes, did try
               The Vtmoſt of Aduenture, and with bold
               And conſtant Courage, brought the Fleece of Gold;
               Whoſe Illuſtration decks my Memory
               Through all Poſterities, naming but Mee:
               So, Man of Merit, neuer faint or feare,
               Thou haſt th' Aſsiſtance of Graue Senators, here,
               Thy Worthy Brethren; ſome of which haue paſt
               All dangerous Gulfes, and in their bright Fames plac't,
               They can Inſtruct and guide thee; and each one
               That muſt aduenture, and are comming on
               To this great Expedition, They will bee
               Cheerefull and forward to Encourage Thee;
               And Bleſsings fall in a moſt infinite Summe
               Both on thoſe paſt, Thy Selfe, and thoſe to come.
            
            Paſſing from this, and more to encourage the labour of the
Magiſtrate, hee is now conducted to the Maſter-Triumph called
the Tower of Vertue, which for the ſtrength, ſafety and perpetuity,
beares the Name of the Brazen Tower; of which, Integrety
keepes the Keyes, Vertue being indeed as a Brazen wall
to a City or Common-wealth, & to Illuſtrate the proſperity it
brings to a Kingdome, the Top-Turrets or Pinacles of this Brazen
Tower ſhine bright like Golde, and vpon the Gilded Battlements
thereof, ſtand 6. Knights, 3. in Siluered, and 3. in Gilt
Armour, as Vertues Standerbearers or Champions, holding 6.
little Streamers, or ſiluer Bannerets, in each of which are diſplayed

the Armes of a Noble Brother and Benefactor, Fa
                     ••
                  e
ſounding forth their praiſes to the world, for the Encouragement
of after Ages, and Antiquity the Regiſter of Fame containing
in her Golden Legend, their Names & Titles; as that of
Sir Henry Fitz-Aiwin Draper, L. Maior foure and Twenty
yeares together; Sir Iohn Norman, the firſt that was rowed in
Barge to Weſtminſter with Siluer Oares, at his owne coſt and
charges; Sir Francis Drake, the Sonne of Fame, who in two
Yeares and tenne Monthes, did caſt a Girdle about the world:
The vnparaleld, Sir Symon Eyre, who built Leaden Hall (at his
owne coſt a Storehouſe for the Poore both in the vpper Lofts
and lower; the Generous & memorable Sir Richard Champion,
and Sir Iohn Milborne, two bountifull Benefactors; Sir Richard
Hardell in the Seat of Magiſtracy 6. yeares together, Sir
Iohn Poultney, 4. yeares, which Sir Iohn founded a Colledge
in the Pariſh of St. Lawrence Poultney, by Candlewicke ſtreete,
Iohn Hinde, a Reedifier of the Pariſh Church of St. Swithin by
London Stone. Sir Richard Pipe, who being Free of the Leather
ſellers, was alſo from them tranſlated to the Ancient and
Honorable Society of Drapers; and many whoſe names for
breuities cauſe I muſt omit, and haſten to the Honour and Seruice
of the Time preſent: From the Tower, Fame a perſonage
properly adorned, thus ſalutes the Great Mr. of the Day and
Triumph.
            
               The Salutation of Fame.
               VVElcome to Vertues Fortreſſe, ſtrong, and cleere,
               Thou art not onely ſafe, but glorious, heere;
               It is a Tower of Brightnes; ſuch his Truth,
               
               Whoſe Strength and Grace feeles a perpetuall Youth;
               The walls are Braſſe, the Pyramid's fine Gold;
               Which ſhowes, 'tis Safeties and Proſperities Hold;
               Cleare Conſcience, is Lieutenant; Prouidence, there,
               Watchfulnes, Wiſedome, Conſtancy, Zeale, Care,
               Are the ſixe Warders; keepe the Watch-Tower ſure,
               That nothing enters but what's iuſt and pure,
               
                  
For which effect, both to affright and ſhame
               All ſlothfull Blouds, that bluſh to looke on Fame,
               
               An Enſigne of good Actions Each diſplayes,
               That worthy Workes may iuſtly owne their Praiſe;
               And which is clearelieſt to be vnderſtood,
               Thine, ſhines amidſt thy Glorious Brotherhood,
               Circled with Armes of Honour, by thoſe, paſt,
               As now with Loues Armes, by the Preſent, grac't,
               And how thy Word do's thy true Worth diſplay;
               Fortunae Mater, Diligentia,
               Faire Fortunes Mother (all may reade, and ſee)
               Is Diligence, endeuouring Induſtrie:
               
               See here the Glory of Illuſtrious Acts
               All of thy owne Fraternity, whoſe Tracts
               'Tis comely to pursue all Thy Lifes Race,
               Taking their Vertues, as thou hold'ſt their place:
               Some, Colledge Founders, Temple-Beautifiers,
               Whoſe bleſt Soules ſing now in caeleſtiall Quires;
               Erecters ſome, of Granaries for the Poore,
               Though now conuerted to ſome Rich mens Store
               (The more the Ages miſery) ſome ſo rare
               For this Fam'd Citties Gouernment, and Care,
               They kept the Seate foure Yeares, with a faire name,
               Some ſixe; but One, (the Miracle of Fame)
               Which no Society, or Time can match,
               Twenty foure Yeares compleate, he was Truths watch,
               He went ſo right and Euen; and the Hand
               Of that faire Motion, Bribe could ne're make ſtand.
               And as Men ſe their Watches by the Sunne,
               Set Iuſti
                     •
                  e but by that which Hee h
                     •
                  s done,
               And keepe it Euen, ſo, from Men to Men,
               No Magiſtrate neede ſtirre the worke agen:
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
It lights into a Noble hand to Day,
               And ha's paſt many; Many more, it may.
            
            By this Tower of Vertue, his Lordſhip being gracefully
conducted toward the new Standard, one in a cloudy
Ruinous Habit Leaning vpon the Turret, at a Trumpets
ſounding, ſuddenly ſtarts and wakes, and in Amazement
throwes off his vnſeemely Garments.
            
               What Noyſe is this? Makes me from Ruines Wombe,
               Hah? bleſſe me, (Time) how braue am I become?
               Fame fixt vpon my Head? beneath me, round,
               The Figures of Illuſtrious Princes, crownde
               As well for Goodnes, as for State by Birth,
               Which makes e'm true Heires both to Heauen and Earth?
               Iuſt 6 in Number; and all bleſſed Names,
               Two Henryes, Edward, Mary, Eliza, Iames,
               
               (That Ioy of honeſt Hearts;) and there behold
               His honour'd Subſtitute, whom Worth makes bold
               To vndergoe the Weight of this Degree;
               
                  Vertues faire Aedifice rais'd vp like mee:
               Why here's the Cities Goodnes; ſhowen in either,
               To raiſe two worthy Buildings both together;
               For when they made that Lords Election free
               I geſſe, that Time their charge did perfect Mee:
               Nay note the Cities Bountie in both, ſtill,
               When they reſtore a Ruine, 'tis their Will
               To be ſo Noble in their Coſt and Care
               All blemiſh is forgot, when they repaire:
               For what ha's beene Reedified alate
               But lifts it's Head vp, in more glorious State:
               "'Tis Grown a Principle; Ruines, built agen,
               "Come betterd both in Monuments and Men:
               
                  
The Inſtance is apparent; On then, Lord,
               
               Ee'n at thy Entraence thou'dſt a Great mans Word;
               The nobleſt Teſtimonie of faire Worth
               That euer Lord had, when he firſt ſtood forth
               Preſented by the Citie: Looſe not then
               A Praiſe ſo deere, beſtowde not on all Men;
               Striue to preſerue this Famous Citties pea
                     •
                  e
               Begun by yon' firſt King, which do's encreaſe
               Now by the laſt; from Henry that ioynde Roſes
               To Iames that Vnites Kingdomes, who encloſes
               All in the Armes of Loue, Malic't of None,
               Our Hearts find that, whē Neighbouring Kingdoms grone;
               Which in the Magiſtrates Duty, may well moue
               A Zealous Care, in all, a Thankfull Loue.
            
            After this, for the full cloſe of the Fore-noones Triumph;
neere S. Lawrence Lane, ſtands a Mountaine Artfully
rayſde and repleniſht with fine woolly Creatures;
Phoebus on the Top ſhining in a full Glory, being circled
with the 12. Caeleſtiall Signes, Aries plac't neere the principall
Rayes, the proper Signe for Illuſtration; thus greetes
his Lordſhip.
            
               Bright Thoughts, Ioy and Alacrity of Heart
               Bleſſe thy great Vndertakings, 'tis the part
               And property of Phoebus, with his Rayes,
               To cheere and to Illumine Good-mens Wayes;
               Eagle-Eyde Actions, that dare behold
               His Sparkling Globe, depart, tryed all like Gold;
               'Tis Bribery and Iniuſtice, Deedes of Night
               That flye the Sunne-beame, which makes good Works bright
               Thine looke vppon't, Vndazled, as one Beame
               Faces another, as wee match a Iem
               
                  
With her Refulgent fellow; from Thy Worth
               Example Sparkles, as a Starre ſhootes forth:
               This Mount, the Type of Eminence and place,
               Reſembles Magiſtracies Seate, and Grace;
               The Sunne, the Magiſtrate himſelfe, Implyes;
               Theſe woolly Creatures, all that Part which Lyes
               Vnder His charge and office, (not vnfit)
               Since Kings and Rulers are (inholy Writ)
               With Shepheards paraleld, nay from Shepheards Rear'd,
               And People and the Flock as oft cohaerd;
               Now, as it is the Bounty of the Sunne
               
               To ſpread his Splendors, and make Gladnes runne
               Ouer the drooping Creatures; it ought ſo
               To be His proper Vertue, that do's owe
               To Iuſtice his lifes Flame, (ſhot from Aboue)
               To cheere oppreſſed Right with lookes of Loue,
               
               Which nothing doubted; Truths reward light on you,
               The Beames of all cleare Comforts ſhine vpon You.
            
            The Great Feaſt ended, the whole ſtate of the Triumph attends
vpon his Lordſhip both to Paules, and homeward; and
neare the Entrance of his Lordſhips Houſe, two Partes of the
Triumph ſtand ready planted, viz. The Brazen Tower, and
the Triple-Crowned Fountaine of Iuſtice; this Fountaine being
adorn'd with the liuely Figures of all thoſe Graces and Vertues
which belong to the faithfull diſcharging of ſo high an Office;
as Iuſtice, Sincerity, Meeknes, Wiſedome, Prouidence,
Aequality, Induſtry, Truth, Peace, Patience, Hope, Harmony;
all Illuſtrated by proper Emblems and expreſſions; as Iuſtice,
by a Sword; Sincerity, by a Lambe; Meeknes, by a Doue; Wiſd
                     •
                  me
by a Serpent; Prouidence, by an Aegle; Aequality, by a
ſiluerd Ballance: Induſtry, by a golden Ball, on which ſtands a
Cupid; intimating, that Induſtry brings both Wealth and Loue;
Truth with a 
                  •
               anae of Starres, with which ſhe chaſes away Error;

               Peace, with a Branch of Laurell; Patience, a Sprig of
Palme; Hope, by a ſiluer'd Anchor; Harmony, by a Swan; Each
at Night holding a bright burning Tapor in her hand, as a Manifeſtation
of Purity: His Lordſhip being in ſight, and drawing
neare to his Entrance; Fame, from the Brazen Tower cloſes vp
the Triumph, his Lordſhips honourable welcome, with the
noble Demonſtration of his worthy Fraternities Affection; in
this concluding Speech.
            
               Fame.
               
                  I Cannot better the Compariſon
                  Of thy faire Brotherhoods Loue, then to the Sunne
                  
                  After a great Ecclipſe; for as the Sphaere
                  
                  Of that Caeleſtiall Motion, ſhines more cheere
                  After the Interpoſing Part is ſpent,
                  Then to the Eye before the Darknes went
                  Ouer the bright Orbe; ſo Their Loue is ſhowne
                  With a Content paſt Expectation▪
                  
                  A Care that ha's beene comely, and a Coſt
                  That ha's beene Decent; cheerefull, which is moſt;
                  Fit for the Seruice of ſo great a State,
                  So fam'd a Cittie, and a Magiſtrate.
                  So worthy of it all, ha's beene beſtowde
                  Vpon thy Triumph, which ha's clearely ſhorrde
                  The Loues of thy Fraternity, as great;
                  For thy firſt Welcome to thy honour'd Seate:
                  And happily is Coſt requited then,
                  "When Men Grace Triumphs, more then Triumphs, Men;
                  "Diamonds will ſhine though ſet in Lead, True worth
                  "Stands alwayes in leaſt neede of ſetting forth:
                  What makes Leſſe Noyſe then Merit? or Leſſe Showe
                  Then Vertue? 'tis the Vndeſeruers, owe
                  All to Vaine-glory, and to Rumour, ſtill;
                  Building their Praiſes on the Vulgar Will;
                  
                     
All their Good, is without e'm, not their owne,
                  When wiſe men to their Vertues are beſt Knowne:
                  Behold you' Fountaine with the Tripled Crowne,
                  And through a Cloude the Sunne-beame piercing downe,
                  So is the worthy Magiſtrate made vp;
                  The Triple Crowne, is Charity, Faith, and Hope,
                  
                  Thoſe three Caeleſtiall Siſters, the Cloude too
                  That's Care, and yet you ſee the Beame ſtrikes through;
                  A Care diſcharg'd with Honour, it preſages,
                  And may it ſo continue, to all Ages;
                  It is thy Brotherhoods Armes, how well it fits
                  Both Thee, and All, that for Truthes Honour ſits:
                  The Time of Reſt drawes neere; Triumph muſt ceaſe
                  Ioy to thy Heart, to all a Bleſſed peace.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            FOr the Frame-Worke of the whole Triumph;
with all the proper Beauties of Workmanſhip,
the Credit of that, iuſtly appertaines to the deſerts
of Maſter Garret Criſmas, a Man excellent in his Art,
and faithfull in his Performances.
            
         
      
   