
      
         
            
            
            SIR ROBERT SHERLEY, SENT AMBASSADOVR IN THE NAME OF THE KING OF PERSIA, TO SIGISMOND THE third, King of POLAND and SVVECIA, and to other Princes of EVROPE.
            His Royall entertainement into CRACOVIA, the chiefe Citie of POLAND, with his pretended Comming into ENGLAND.
            
               Alſo, The Honourable praiſes of the ſame Sir Robert Sherley, giuen vnto him in that Kingdome, are here likewiſe inſerted.
            
            LONDON Printed by I. WINDET, for Iohn Budge, and are to bee ſold at his Shop at the Great South doore of Pauls. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORTHIE and well experienſt Gentleman, Sir THOMAS SHERLEY, Sonne to that happy Father, Sir Thomas Sherley, and Brother to that Noble Gentleman, Sir Robert.
            
               Worthie Sir,
            
            
               THe ſelfe ſame office of loue and due prayſes which the world put it ſelfe into, at your long deſired ariuall in England, fals happily vpon me to performe the like duetie toward your worthy Brother, nor can I recite more Encomiums of his Actions, then thoſe of your owne hath rightly and properly challenged to themſelues; Ile ſpeake thus much of you both, and the world ſhal iudge it free from flattery, you well may bee owne Brothers in birth, that are ſo neere kinne to one another in Actions of Fame and Honour: ſo commending you both to eternizing memory of your owne Vertues and Fortunes, I remaine an vnworthy obſeruer of them both.
            
               Your Worſhips, in his moſt ſelected ſtudies,
THOMAS MIDLETON.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               READER, This Perſian Robe, ſo richly wouen with the prayſes onely of Sir ROBERT SHERLEY (thy Conntriman) comes to thee at a lowe price, though it coſt him deere that weares it, to purchaſe ſo much fame, as hath made it ſo excellent. It is now his, foreuer, Thine ſo long as it is his; for euery good man (as I hope thou art) doth participate in the Renowne of thoſe that are good, and vertuous.
            
               He hath bene a traueller a long time, giue him now a welcome home; the Armes of his owne Country embracing him, will bee more ioyfull to him, then all thoſe of ſo many forraine Kingdomes, with which he hath ſo often beene honoured.
            If a man that hath ventured through the world, may deſerue thy loue, thou canſt not choſe, but beſtow as much of it vpon him, as vpon any. Looke vpon him truely, and thou ſhalt find a large generall Chronicle of time writ in a little Volume.
            Hee comes laden with the Trophyes of Warre, and the honors of Peace. The Turke hath felt the ſharpneſſe of his ſword, and againſt

the Turke is hee now whetting the ſwords of Chriſtian PRINCES. Much more could I ſpeake of him, but that I ſhould doe wrong to the common Lawes of ciuilitie, by taking away that Reuerence from Strangers, whome (from Countryes afarre off) you ſhall preſently heare giuing ample teſtimonies of his Nobleneſſe.
            Vale:
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Newes from PERSIA and POLAND, touching Sir Robert Sherley, being ſent Ambaſſadour to diuers Princes of EVROPE, fam'd aſwell for his Wiſedome and experience, as for his knowledge and vnderſtanging of many Tongues.
            
               ALbeit that man can receiue his Birth but from one place, yet is hee Borne a Fréeman of all the Cities of the world The whole earth is his Country, and he that dwelleth fardeſt off. is by the lawes of nature, as neer to him in loue as his kindred & acquaintance. This General Charter being giuen by the King of this Uniuerſall Crowne, to all Nations, hath cauſed men from time to time, (by the vertue of that Priuiledge) to forſake the places of their firſt being, and to trauell into other Countries. The benefits that kingdomes haue gotten by this meanes, cannot in ſo ſmall a volume, (as this in hand) bée comprehended. Trauell is the golden Mine that inricheth the pooreſt Country, and filleth the barrenneſt with abundant plenty. It is the chaine that at firſt tyed Kingdomes together, and the Muſicall ſtring that ſtill maintaines them in Concord, in Leagues and in Unity. The Portugalls haue hereby Crowned themſelues and there Poſterity with garlands of neuer dying honour. The Spaniards

haue their names (for this) ſo deepely ingrauen in the Chronicles of Fame, that they can neuer bee forgotten. The French likewiſe and the Dutch, haue raiſed their glories to a nobler height, onely by theſe Aduentures. In imitation of all whoſe labors, or rather in Emulation of all their Fames, our Engliſhmen haue not onely Stept as farre as any of them Al, but gone beyond the moſt, and the beſt of them. And not to reckon thoſe men of worth (in this kinde) of our owne Nation, whoſe voyages and trauells (by ſea and land) to ſet down, were able to fil whole volumes, I will onely at this time (not with a loud and ſhrill trumpet, as they deſerue, but as it were vppon an inſtrument tuned and directed by another) giue onely a ſoft touch at the Praiſes of this worthy Gentleman (Sir ROBERT SHERLEY) of whoſe aduentures, dangers, & various fortunes, both good and bad, to draw a true picture in the right & liuely colors; would as eaſily feed mens eies with gazing admiration, as the large pictured tables of others haue filled them with wonder.
            Being therefore contented (at this time) to ſwim but in a ſhallow ſtreame, of his Fame, ſithence greater ſayles are likely héereafter (and that very ſhortly) to ſwell with the true report of his actions, You ſhall vnderſtand that Sir ROBERT SHERLEY, after a long, a chargeable, and a dangerous progreſſe through moſt (if not all) the Kingdomes in Europe, receiuing entertainment from the Princes of thoſe Dominions, ſitting to ſuch a ghueſt, deſire of glorie ſtill more and more burning within him. At the length, he left Europe, and trauelled into Aſia, receiuing noble entertainment at the hands of the King of Perſia, In whoſe Court he ſo well and ſo wiſely bore himſelfe in all his Actions, that the Perſian (with much of his loue, of which hee taſted moſt plenteouſly) heaped on his head many honorable fauours.
            That common enemy of Chriſt and Chriſtians, (the

Turke) lifting vp his ſword continually (for the moſt part) not onely againſt the Polack, the Hungarian, Bohemian, and other Princes of Chriſtendome, but alſo thirſting after the rich Empire of Perſia, and ſhewing a mortall hatred to that Kingdome by being euer vp in Armes againſt it; It was thought fit that (the Perſian himſelfe confeſſing and worſhipping Chriſt,) Ayde ſhould bee required at the hands of Chriſtian Princes in the Perſians behalfe, againſt ſo barbarous, ſo ambitious and ſo generall an enemy. Heerupon the honor of ſuch an Embaſſy, was conferred (by the King of Perſia) vpon Sir Robert Sherley, as a man worthy and apt to treate with Chriſtian princes in ſo weighty a buſineſſe, hee himſelfe being a Chriſtian born, and a gentleman that had Trauelled, and by experience knew the conditions, State, and pollicies of moſt of their Kingdomes.
            Firſt therefore was he imployed into Poland, where by Sigiſmund (the King of Poland and of Suecia) hee was receiued with great magnificence, and applauſe both of the Polack himſelfe and of his people.
            And becauſe it is not fit, that euery Common and popular eare, ſhould ſtand liſtning to the priuate buſineſſe of Princes in a Deſeignement, that concernes the Uniuerſall ſtate of Chriſtendome, wee will not therefore at this time bée interpreters of the Perſians Embaſſy but rather waite his expected comming who hath in charge to deliuer it by word of mouth himſelfe.
            In the meane time not withſtanding (forbearing to reckon vp the rich preſents giuen by the Poland King, to Sir Robert, the honors done to him, by the Poliſh Lords, and the fauors throwne vpon him by the Common people) You ſhall bée witneſſes onely, to thoſe, (not vnworthy) prayſes of Him, by which his Fame (amongſt Schollers by thoſe of the better ſort) was lifted vp, at the time of his ſtaying in Poland.
            
            
               
               A fourefold Anagram vpon Sir Robert Sherleys Name.
               
               ROBERTVS SHERLAEIVS.
               
                  1 Heus Labor, Tueris Res.
                  
                  2 Seruus, aſt Hero Liber.
                  
                  3 Libertas, ero Seruus.
                  
                  4 Virtus, Labores ſere.
                  
               
            
            
               Encomions or Praiſes, as well vpon the Name, as the negotiation of Sir ROBERT SHERLEY, an Engliſh Knight, ſent Ambaſſadour from the King of the Perſians, to the Princes of Europe.
               
               MErcurius, ſeeing the Embaſſadour ready to take his iourney, reſigneth vnto him his office, as being meſſenger or Herald to the Gods, according to the fiction of Poets, and with that office beſtoweth the gift of eloquence vpon him, becauſe he may haue power to perſwade the princes to whom he is ſent: and withal, addes a wiſh, that thoſe Chriſtian Kings whom he is to ſollicite, may not be cold in ioyning their forces together, but that they may enter into an honorable, a piou
                     •
                   and inuiolable league againſt that common enemy, the Turke.
               
                  Mercuries ſpeech.
                  THou (O Sherley) beeing borne an Engliſhman, art ſent from the Perſian Empire to the Kingdomes that

lye in Europe, thy place is full of honour, thy meſſage of waight: diſcharge thou therefore boldly thoſe thinges, which the greate Lord of Persia, commands thée to doe▪ It is not chance, that throwes this high office vpon thee, but a full Synode (or Parliament) of all the Gods, doe appoint thée to bée their Meſſenger, to the great Kings of the earth. For this cause, I that am Heauens winged Meſſenger, ſeeing thee ready to depart, preſent my ſelfe thus before thée, and vttering onely ſo much, as in the letters of thy name lyes myſtically hidden, and that is this,
                  
                     Heus Labor,—tu Res hoc ore Tueris
                     Perſarum.—
                  
                  O exceeding Labor! yet thou art the man, that muſt defend the ſtate of the Perſians, euen by the force of my eloquence. Go on therfore, be thou Mercurius in the Courts of Kinges: I giue thee my place; I giue it to thée, that art more worthy of it then my ſelfe. O that the princes of Europe, would knit an indiſſoluble league together, with thy Maſter (the Perſian Monarch,) and tye all their Sinewes to one Arme, that a noble Warre may be begotten. Let Bellona (the goddeſſe of battailes) breath courage into the breaſts of ſouldiers; and let no Country bee diſhonoured by bearing men, that haue no hearts to come into the fielde. O let not that couetous Dragon, which once watched the golden firmament, ſleepe in the boſomes of Kings, and with his poiſon, infect them with that couetous diſeaſe of hoording vp gold. Caſt off (O you Princes) your ſenſuall pleaſures, and let it bee your Ambition to weare Garlands of Oake, which are the Crownes of Conquerors. Prefer immortall Fame before all thoſe Dangers, ouer which you muſt of neceſſity paſſe, be they neuer ſo inuincible in the ſhew of vndertaking, and aſpire onely to that life which ſhall remaine, when your bodyes lye dead. Heauen (in your doing ſo) ſhall ſmile vpon your enterpriſes▪ Hell ſhall bée conquered, and that hel-hownde broode of Mahomet
                     
bée vtterly confounded. Uniuerſall peace ſhall Crown the world, and the Barbarous Turks, feele the Sinewes and puiſſant Arms of Europe.
                  
               
            
            
               To the Nations (vnto whome the Ambaſſadour is ſent, on great and ſerious affaires, as rightly may be coniectured.) A deſire & wiſh is made, that all Kings in Chriſtendome, may entertaine this holy Warre, with the ſame courage, conſtancie and zeale, that the Perſian doeth.
               HHearken O you Polanders, Italians, French, & you Germaines; Enrich your Chronicles, with an Act of a wonder neuer heard of in the world before: For beholde, a Brittaine, is ſent on a royall meſſage, from the King of the Perſians. A Brittaine is ſent, but who is it? Such a one hee is, as by his name (beeing before Anagramatizde) hée may apparantly be deciphered.
               Aſt Liber, Seruus Hero.
               Free-borne and a ſeruant onely vnto his Soueraigne▪
               
               Hee, euen hee, is ſent to you (O you Nations of Europe,) from the confines of the Perſians, bringing along with him, the name of his Lord, and with that name, the ſound of an Approaching warre.
               The deſtinies begin to promiſe ſome great matter: The God of Battailes (heereupon) ſpeakes chéerefullly. God himſelfe prepares the Armour; muſter your ſelues together therefore (O you Kings) and with a religious defence, draw your ſwords againſt the Turkes.
            
            
               
               A gratulatorie compendious Speech, to Sir ROBERT SHERLEY, commending both his Vertue, and preſent Fortune.
               
                  O Sherley, thou that art an honour to the Perſians, aſwell as to the Britaines: within whoſe head dwelleth experience and wiſdome, and vpon whoſe tongue eloquence writeth her charmes: whatſoeuer hee was, that at firſt durſt ſay that Fortune was Blind and that ſhee beſtowed extraordinary benefits vpon vndeſeruing men, let him know, that all this while hee hath bin in an error: for Fortune had more eyes then Argus, when ſhee Crowned this Engliſhman with ſo many Perſian honors and offices, That Monarch (O thou Renowned Britaine) whoſe ſword is dreadfull to the Thracian Tyrant, makes thee a partner in the cares and burdens of his empyre: for he hath ſeene, yea he hath euer ſeene, and found thee conſtant in execution of all his iuſt and Royall commandes.
            
            
               The Empire of the Perſian is here commended: The Kings and Princes of Europe being called to giue witneſſe, how much glory the dexteritie of Sir ROBERT SHERLEY, hath added to the Perſian Monarchie: Vpon which, he appeares to the Perſians a Gentleman of ſuch merit, as that England may very iuſtly accuſe Perſia of wrong, for detaining him from her.
               THe same of the Perſian Empire doth not grow vp only in a meane Souldier, for their Cities are full of renowmed

and worthy Captains: from the Ancient diſcipline and Stratagems of warre, are the glories of the Perſians ſprung vp and continue famous, But (O thou honoured Engliſhman) ſhee deriued her firſt principles from thy practiſe and knowledge. Farre be my words from the baſe ſeruitude of flattery: for within a ſhort time, Kings ſhall riſe vp as witneſſes of what I ſpeake. Let thine owne Country enuy the kingdome of Perſia for enioying this honor, (which by thee is giuen her) yea, let her challenge thée to be deliuered backe againe as her owne, yet let her clayme be made in ſuch maner, that England and Perſia, may not grow into quarrell about thée, But rather thus let them both ſhare thée. Let rich Perſia enioy thy preſence, and reckon thée in the number of her Citizens, & bee proud in the poſſeſſion of a man, ſo worthy: Let England glorie that ſhee alone, is happy in thy Birth, and that ſhe beares the honor of giuing thée thy name. But howſoeuer, (O thou, the Dignitie and Luſter of two renowned Kingdomes) Goe thou on, in thine intended ambaſſage, and performe theſe Heaſts, which the great Perſian thy Lord hath impoſed vpon thy Integrity.
            
            
               A ſhort Speech vttered as it were by the whole body of the Poliſh Court, to ROBERT SHERLEY Ambaſſadour from the inuincible King of the Perſians.
               
               IT is not thy rich garments Embroydered ſo thicke with gold, and wouen by Grecian workemen, that drawes our eyes into admiration by beholding thee: It is not thy ſparkling Jewels, nor thoſe coſtly pretious ſtones

that adorne thy Kobe, which dazle our ſight. It is not thy comely ryding, nor ſkilfull managing of that Thracian courſer, vpon whoſe back thou ſicteſt, whilſt the proud beaſt it ſelfe, Champs on the gliſtering bit in diſdaine to bee ſo curbed, that makes vs to looke after thee, It is not that victorious Semyter of thine, wherewith thou haſt made the earth drunke ſo often with ſo much bloud of thoſe, that are enemies to the Perſians, that cauſeth vs to ſtand gazing at thy preſence: No it is the beauty of thy minde wherewith our eyes are inchanted. It is the excellent muſicke of thy tongue, that ſo ties our eares to thy charmes, Thou being able to ſpeake and to anſwere ſe many ſeuerall nations, in their owne proper languages.
            
            
               
                  Englands Complaint to Perſia for her SHERLEY.
               
                  O Perſia! thou glorious kingdome, thou chiefe of Empires; the Palace ſometimes where Wiſedome onely kept her Court, the Land that was gouerned by none but by wiſemen: Yet muſt I tell thee, and with griefe doſt thou inforce me to tell thee, that againſt all Law of Nations, thou robbeſt me of my ſubiect. Why ſhould the right of another bée thine? It is Juſtice for euery one to kéepe their owne. But thou makeſt vp thy gaine by my loſſe. Is this Equitie? Is this tollerable? Ceaſe to doe it: and ſend home (O Perſia) That ſonne of mine to me that am his mother: for to me onely is he due. But (aye me) the honors of his owne Country, and the palaces of my Kingdome, are by him (belike) neglected and ſeeme not worth the looking on; And though to the eye of the world I may perhaps appeare beautifull and great, yet in his eye, I ſhew no bigger then a ſmall corner of the worlde. I doe enuy thée

therefore (O Perſia) onely for him: yet ſithence I cannot enioy him, Fare thou well, O thou my darling, and with that farewell beare along with thée, the Praiſes which I giue thee. I rob Perſia, Perſia robs not me: My loſſe is to mée more honour: for the Perſian Empire, borrowes her brightnes from the beames of one of the Sonnes of England.
            
            
               SHERLEY to his natiue Countrey.
               O Thou my Country, if I ſhould pay back into thy hands ſo much as by bond is due vnto thee from me, I ſhould then lay downe my life at thy feete. But my thoughts ayme at greater matters, It is not Breath I would pay thée, but Fame: Take thou from me ſo much Honor, as may make mée liue for euer. Liberty is the Gole to which I run, but ſuch a liberty it is, as may frée me from the common baſeneſſe of the multitude, and make me worthy to be reſpected by the eye of a King.
               
                  Seruus hero, I am a ſeruant to that greate Maiſter, to whoſe feete all the Perſians bow and doe reuerence: I am his ſeruant, that I may bee his meſſenger, and beare the Treatyes of ſuch a King, to other Kings in Chriſtendome. I am deſtin'de out, to deliuer his minde in their owne languages, to Forrain Princes and to the Monarches of the earth. Let them therefore come together, and quicklie ſhall the Turkiſh fury bee calmed, and beeing weakened in her owne ſtrengths, ſhall bee glad to knéele to the power, and mercy of others. And thou, (O my Natiue Country), if thou wouldeſt bee pleaſed to knit thy forces in this iuſt and vniuerſall Warre, to what Dignities mayſt thou aduance thy ſelfe? Whatſoeuer is diſhonourable, hath a baſe deſcention, and ſincks beneath Hell, But Whatſoeuer is

good and honeſt, lifts vp the vnblemiſhed brow on high, and makes it Leuell with the front of heauen.
            
            
               The Authors wiſh and requeſt to vertue, that ſhee would giue vnto SHERLEY ſuch a fruitfull harueſt of his Labours, that hauing Conquered the hardneſſe of them, his Name may aſpire to the full height of his deſert.
               OUertue! the nobleſt and boldeſt guide, thou that giueſt to men the due Crowne of Praiſes, proſper thou the honoured enterpriſes of Sherley: But touching thoſe paths which muſt leade him to titles of fame and honour, make them euen and certaine before him; He hath no deſire to haue his name eaten out by the ruſt of idleneſſe, no; hee will neuer vnworthily ſink beneath his owne propoſed fortune.
            
            
               Another of the ſame Author, touching Sir Robert Sherley being called as it were by Fate, to manage the affaires of Foraine Princes.
               WHat is the cauſe that Sherley hath not all this while liued in the ſame Country, that firſt lent him breath? This is the reaſon, a ſpirit ſo greate was not to bee contained within ſo ſmall a circle, as his Country. Beſides,
               
                  He is the child of Fate and highly ſings
                  Of kingly Embaſsies to none but Kings.
               
               Crownde with theſe prayſes as you heare in Poland,
                  
and leauing the ſame of his memorable actions behind him, bending his coarte to other Princes of Chriſtendome with the ſame Royall Embaſſage of honorable, and Chriſtian confederacie againſt Mahomet & his Adherents, it ſhal not bee amiſſe here to ſpeake of the Kingdome of Perſia, where Sir Robert receiued ſuch honourable entertainment, ſutable to his noble Actions, and the vertues of his minde, as alſo the maners, faſhions, rites, and cuſtomes, that are and haue beene obſerued by the Perſians; and firſt, for their Religion which they haue obſerued of old, doing worſhip and reuerence in their vpright zeale to the Sunne, Moone, Uenus, Fire, Earth, Water, and Winds, erecting neyther Altars nor Statues, but in open Fields offring their ſacrifices, which Sacrifices were ſuperſtitious, and full of idle Ceremonies too tedious to be here reherſed: For their Kings; the golden line of them is drawn out of one family, that cuſtome amongſt the Perſians neuer as yet ſuffred change or alteration, and ſo ſeuere their lawes are in effect, to the puniſhing of all rebellious treaſonable and diſobedient people, that whoſoeuer bee bee that is found repugnant in the leaſt demeanor to the will and affection of the King▪ hee is preſently ceazde vpon by the Tormentors, his head and armes chopt off, and with his deteſted body throwne into ſome common field, without eyther graue or couering: And for their palaces & royall manſions, this hath euer beene the continued cuſtome amongſt them, that euery King hath had his ſeate Royall erected on ſome high hill or mountaine, the Bowels of which hee makes his ſafe Treaſure houſe, where all his riches, Jewels, and Tribute moneyes are with excéeding carefulneſſe kepte hid and ſecret; And ſo much they do deteſt Sterility and Barenneſſe, that from the higheſt to the loweſt they take many wines in mariage, counting the fruitfull propagation of the Empire, the onely happineſſe they can rayſe to it, and ſo much they thirst after humane fruitfulneſſe, that the Kings themſelues

propound great gifts and rewards, To thoſe that in one yeare brings forth the greateſt harueſt of mankinde; From fiue yeare olde to foure and twenty the male children practiſe to ride greate horſes, to throw the Uulnerable and Ineuitable darte, to ſhoote in Arbaliſts or long ſteele bowes, and all ſuch manly exerciſes which ſhames many other Chriſtian Countries, and may iustly vpbraide them of effeminacie and Lazyneſſe.
               Their victuals for the moſt part, by which the cōmon ſort of people are ſed & doe liue by, are Acorns, and Hedge-peares, their Breade courſe and hard, their Drinke the running Springs, For their Apparrell, the Princes and thoſe that liue ingreateſt reſpect amongſt them, adorne their bodies with a Triple robe, and another garment in the faſhion of a cloake hanging downe to their knées, the inward linings all of white ſilks & the outward facing like poudred Ermins, In Somer for the moſt part they walke in purple, the winter refuſes no color, about their temples they weare a great Tyara, being a ſtately ornamēt high & round with a Cone at the top, from which deſcends a rich faire pendant of ſome coſtly embrodered ſtuffe, as Tiſſae, &c.
               Attirde in ſome of which ordinary Perſian habits his Agent Maſter Moore is lately arriued in England, bringing happy tidings of this famous Engliſh Perſian, as alſo of his comming to England to the excéeding great Joy of his Natiue Country, laden with honours through euery kingdome, as the deſeruing ornaments of his vertue and labour; And thus, ingenuous Reader, haue I ſet down by true and moſt credible Information a briefe Epitome of Sir Robert Sherlyes entertainement into Cracouia the chiefe Cittye of Poland, together with all thoſe ſeuerall ſpeeches deliuered to him by the Schollers of that Countrye, which although they may ſeeme to the nice eare of our times, not altogether ſo pure and poliſhed as the refined labours of many engliſh wits, yet therein they ſtriued to expreſſe both their faſhion and affection to the worthy vertues of Sir

                  Robert, & for a taſt of their Stile and manner of writing, it ſhalnot be amiſſe, if you caſt your eye vpon theſe verſes following, compoſed by a Scholler worthily reputed in that Cuntry, one Andraeas Loeaechius, & thoſe are they which at this I borrow to ſhut vp the honorable praiſes of our Famous Engliſh Traueller.
            
         
      
      
         
            Ad illuſtriſsimum & maximi tum ingenij tum animi virum, Dom. Robertum Sherlaeum, Equitem Anglum Regis Perſarum nomine ad Europae PP. legatum.
            
            
               AEmule Honos Animo Proauis, Lux alta, Britannae
               Qui gentis peſſum non ſinis ire Decus;
               Non vni dat Cuncta Polus, ſed Carmina Apollo,
               Mars vires, Arcas Nuncius Ingenium.
               Haec cuncta vnus habes, eſt vis, ſunt ora deſerta,
               Numina auara aliis, prodiga facta tibi;
               Perſia ſeiactat gemino in te munere, Martis
               Pectore belligeri; Palladis ingenio,
               Tantus honore licet, te Scoti hannd ſubtrahe Vena,
               At Venam excedit pondere vatis Amor.
               Immò Cenſendum ſatis eſt Ceciniſſe Poetam
               Quod tibi ſe faſſus carmine & ore rudem;
               Parua loquor, ne te venturis ſubtrahe ſaeclis:
               At Fidei, ut Famae ſue ſce parare modum.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   