
      
         
            
            
            The Triumphs of Truth.
            A Solemnity vnparalleld for Coſt, Art,
and Magnificence, at the Confirmation and
Eſtabliſhment of that Worthy and true Nobly.
Minded Gentleman, Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON,
Knight, in the Honorable Office of his Maieſties
Lieuetenant, the Lord Maior of the
thrice Famous Citty of LONDON.
            
               Taking Beginning 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   Lord-ſhips going
and proceeding 
                  〈…〉
               e from receiuing
the Oath of Ma
                  〈…〉
                Weſtminſter, on the
Morrow o
                  •
                
               
                  〈…〉
                and Iudes
day, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                19 1613.
            All the Showes, Pa
                  〈…〉
               , Chariots; Morning, Noone,
and Night-Triumphes.
            Directed, written, underdeem'd into Forme from the Ignorance
of ſome former times and their
Common Writer.
            
               By Thomas Middleton.
            
               LONDON.
Printed by N
                  〈…〉
                dwelling at the ſigne of the
Hand, o
                  〈…〉
                
               
                  •••••
               rne-Bridge. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE GREAT EXPectation
of Vertue and Goodneſſe,
and moſt worthy of all thoſe Coſts and Honors,
which the Noble Fellowſhip and Society and Grocers,
and generall Loue of the whole City, in full heap'd bounties
beſtow vpon him, the truly. Generous and Iuditious,
Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight, Lord Maior
of the Honorable Citty of London.
            
               AS often as we ſhall fixe our
thoughts vpon the Almighty
Prouidēce, ſooften they
returne to our capacities
laden with Admiration, either
from the Diuine workes of his Mercy,
or thoſe incomprehenſible of his Iuſtice:
but here to inſtance onely his Omnipotent
Mercy, it being the Health and Preſeruation
of all his workes: and firſt not onely
in raiſing, but alſo in preſeruing your L.
from many great and inſident dangers, eſpecially

in forraine Countries in the time
of your Youth and Trauels: and now with
Safety, Loue and Triumph, to eſtabliſh
You in this yeares Honor: crowning the
Perfection of your Daies, & the Grauity
of your Life, with Power, Reſpect & Reuerence.
Next, in that my ſelfe (though
vnworthy) being of one Name with your
Lordſhip, notwithſtanding all Oppoſitions
of Malice, Ignorance and Enuy, ſhould
thus happily liue, protected by part of that
Mercy (as if one Fate did proſperouſly
cleaue to one Name) now to do Seruice to
your Fame and Worthineſſe, and my Pen,
onely to be employd in theſe Bounteous
and Honorable Tryumphs, being but ſhadowes
to thoſe Eternall Glories that ſtand
ready for Deſeruers, to which I commend
the Deſerts of your Iuſtice, remaining euer
            
               To your Lordſhip, in the beſt
of my obſeruance,
Thomas Middleton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE TRYVMPHS
Of Truth.
            
               SEarch all Chronicles, Hiſtories,
Records, in what language or letter
ſoeuer; let the inquiſitiue man
waſte the deere Treaſures of his
Time and Eye-ſight, he ſhall conclude
his life only in this certainty,
that there is no ſubiect vpon
earth receiued into the place of
his gouernement with the like State & Magnificence
as is the Lord Maior of the Citty of London. This being
then infallible (like the Miſtreſſe of our Triumphs)
and not to be denied of any, how carefull ought thoſe
Gentlemen to be, to whoſe diſcretion and Iudgement
the weight and charge of ſuch a buſineſſe is entirely
referred and committed by the whole Society, to haue
all things correſpondent to that Generous and Noble
freeneſſe of coſt and liberality, the ſtreames of Art, to
aequall thoſe of Bounty; a Knowledge that may take
the true height of ſuch an Honorable Solemnity; the
miſerable want of both which in the impudent common
Writer, hath often forc'd from me much pitty and
ſorrow; and it would heartily grieue any vnderſtanding
ſpirit to behold many times ſo glorious a fire in

bounty and goodneſſe offering to match in ſelfe with
freezing Art, ſitting in darkneſſe, with the candle out,
looking like the picture of Blacke Monday.
            
            But to ſpeake truth, which many beſide my ſelfe can
affirme vpon knowledge, a care that hath beene ſeldome
equal'd, and not eaſily imitated, hath been faithfully
ſhowne in the whole courſe of this buſineſſe,
both by the Wardens and Committies, men of much
vnderſtanding, induſtry, and carefulneſſe, little weighing
the greatneſſe of expence, ſo the coſt might purchaſe
perfection, ſo feruent hath beene their deſire to
excell in that (which is a learned and vertuous Ambition)
and ſo vnfainedly pure the loues and affections
of the whole Company to his Lordſhip; If any
ſhall imagine that I ſet fairer colours vpon their Deſerts,
then they vpon themſelues, let them but reade
and conceiue, and their owne vnderſtandings will
light them to the acknowledgement of their errors.
Firſt, they may here behold loue and bounty opening
with the morning, earlier then ſome of former yeares,
ready at the firſt appearing of his Lordſhip, to giue
his eare a taſte of the dayes ſucceeding glory, and thus
the forme of it preſents it ſelfe.
            At Soper-lane end a Senate-houſe erected, vpon which
Muſitians ſit playing; and more a quicken time, a
ſweet voyce married to theſe words:
            
               
                  THE SONG.
                  Mother of many honorable Sounes,
                  Thinke not the Glaſſe too ſlowly runnes
                  That in Times hand is ſet,
                  Becauſe thy worthy Sonne appeares not yet:
                  Lady be pleas'd, the hower growes on,
                  Thy ioy will be compleate anon;
                  
                     
Thou ſhalt behold
                  The man enrold
                  In Honours bookes, whom Vertue raiſes,
                  Loue-circled round,
                  His triumphs crownd
                  With all good wiſhes, prayers, and praiſes.
               
            
            After this ſweet aire hath liberally ſpent it ſelfe, at
the firſt appearing of the Lord Maior from Guild-hall
in the morning, a Trumpet plac'd vpon that Scaffold,
ſounds forth his welcome; then after a ſtraine or two
of Muſicke, a Graue Foeminine Shape preſents it ſelfe,
from behinde a ſilke curtaine, repreſenting London, attired
like a reuerend Mother, a long white haire naturally
flowing on either ſide of her: on her head a
modell of Steeples and Turrets, her habite Crimſon
ſilke, neere to the Honourable garment of the Citty:
her left hand holding a Key of gold, who after a comely
grace, equally mixt with Comfort and Reuerence,
ſends from her lips this Motherly ſalutation.
            
               The ſpeech of London.
               Honour and Ioy ſalute thee, I am raiſd
               In comfort and in loue to ſee thee, glad
               And happy in thy bleſsings, nor eſteeme
               My words the leſſe, cauſe I a woman ſpeake,
               A womans counſell is not alwayes weake.
               I am thy Mother, at that name I know
               Thy heart do's reuerence to me, as becomes
               A Sonne of Honour, in whoſe ſoule burnes cleere
               The ſacred lights of diuine feare and knowledge,
               I know, that at this inſtant, all the workes
               Of Motherly loue in me, ſhowne to thy Youth
               When it was ſoft and helpleſſe, are ſum'd vp
               
                  
In thy moſt gratefull minde, thou well remembreſt
               All my deere paines and care, with what affection
               I cheriſh thee in my boſome, watchfull ſtill
               Ouer thy wayes,
               Set wholeſome and Religious Lawes before
               The foot-ſteps of thy youth, ſhow'd Thee the way
               That lead thee to the Glory of this Day.
               To which (with teares of the moſt fruitfull ioy
               that cuer Mother ſhed) I welcome Thee.
               Oh I could be content to take my part
               Out of Felicity onely in weeping,
               Thy Preſence and this Day is ſo deere to me.
               Looke on my age (my Honorable Sonne)
               And then begin to thinke vpon thy Office:
               See how on each ſide of mee hang the cares
               Which I beſtowd on Thee, in ſiluer haires.
               And now the Faith, the Loue, the zealous Fires
               With which I cheer'd thy Youth, my Age requires,
               The duty of a Mother I haue ſhowne,
               Through all the Rites of pure affection,
               In Care, in Gouernment, in Wealth, in Honour,
               Brought Thee to what thou art, thow'ſt all from mee,
               Then what thou ſhouldſt be I expect from Thee.
               Now to Thy Charge, Thy Gouernment, Thy Cares,
               Thy Mother in her age ſubmits her yeares.
               And though (to my abundant griefe I ſpeake it,
               Which now ore-flowes my ioy) ſome Sonnes I haue
               Thankleſſe, vnkind, and diſobedient,
               Rewarding all my Bounties with Neglect,
               And will of purpoſe wilfully retire
               Themſelues, from doing grace and ſeruice to me,
               When they haue got all they can, or hope for, from me,
               The thankfulneſſe in which Thy Life doth moue,
               
                  
Did euer promiſe fairer fruits of Loue,
               And now they ſhow themſelues, yet they haue all
               My bleſsing with them, ſo the world ſhall ſee
               'Tis their vnkindneſſe, no defect in me;
               But go Thou forward (my thrice Honor'd Sonne)
               In waies of goodneſſe, Glory is beſt wonne
               When Merit brings it home, diſdaine all Titles
               Purchaſ'd with Coine, of Honor take Thou hold,
               By thy Deſert let others buy't with Gold;
               Fixe thy moſt ſerious Thought vpon the Weight
               Thou goeſt to vndergo, 'tis the iuſt Gouernment
               Of this Fam'd Citty, (Mee) whom Nations call
               Their brighteſt Eye, then with great care & feare
               Ought I to be ore-ſeene to be kept cleare.
               Spots in deformed Faces are ſcarce Noted,
               Faire cheekes are ſtain'd if ner'e ſo little blotted.
               See'ſt thou this Key of Gold? it ſhowes thy charge,
               This place is the Kings Chamber, all pollution,
               Sinne and Vncleanneſſe muſt be lock't out here,
               And be kept ſweet, with Sanctity, Faith & Feare,
               I ſee Grace take effect, Heauens Ioy vpon her,
               'Tis rare, when Vertue opes the Gate to Honor,
               My bleſsing be vpon thee, Sonne, and Lord,
               And on my Sonnes all, that obey my word.
            
            Then making her Honour, as before, the Waites of
the Citty there in ſeruice, his Lordſhip and the Worthy
Company, are lead forward toward the water ſide,
where you ſhall finde the Riuer deck't in the richeſt
glory to receiue him; vpon whoſe Chriſtall Boſome
ſtands fiue Iſlands art-fully garniſhed with all manner
of Indian Fruite-Trees, Drugges, Spiceries; and the
like, the middle Iſland with a faire Caſtle eſpecially
beautified.
            
               
But making haſte to returne to the Citty againe,
where Triumph waites in more Splendor and Magnificence,
the firſt then that attends to receiue his Lordſhip
off the water at Bainards Caſtle, is Truths Angell
on Horſe-backe, his Raiment of white Silke powdred
with Starres of Gold: on his head a Crowne of Gold,
a Trumpeter before him on Horſe-backe, and Zeale
the Champion of Truth, in a Garment of Flamecoloured
Silke, with a bright haire on his head, from
which ſhoot Fire-beames, following cloſe after him,
mounted alike, his Right hand holding a flaming
Scourge, intimating thereby that as hee is the manifeſter
of Truth, he is likewiſe the chaſtizer of Ignorance
and Error.
            
            
               The Salutation of the Angell.
               I haue within mine Eye my bleſſed Charge,
               Haile Friend of Truth, Safety and Iay attnds thee;
               I am Truths Angell, by my Miſtreſſe ſent
               To guard and guid thee, when thou took'ſt thy Oath
               I ſtood on thy Right hand, though to thy eye
               In viſible forme I did not then appeare,
               Aske but thy Soule t'will tell thee I ſtood neere;
               And 'twas a Time to take care of Thee then
               At ſuch a Marriage before Heauen and Men,
               (Thy Faith being wed to Honor) cloſe behinde thee
               Stood Errors Miniſter, that ſtill ſought to blinde thee,
               And wrap his ſubtill miſts about thy Oath,
               To hide it from the nakedneſſe of Troth,
               Which is Truths pureſt glory, but my light
               Still as it ſhone, Expeld her blackeſt ſpite;
               His Miſts fled by, yet all I could deuiſe,
               Could hardly keepe them from ſome Peoples eyes,
               But thine they flew from, thy Care's but begun
               
                  
Wake on, the Victory is not halfe yet wun,
               Thou wilt be ſtill aſſaulted, thou ſhalt meete
               With many dangers, that in voyce ſeeme ſweet,
               And waies moſt pleaſant to a worldlings eye,
               My Miſtreſſe ha's but One, but that leads hye
               To yo'n triumphant Citty follow mee,
               Keepe thou to Truth, Eternitie keepes to thee.
            
            
               ZEALE.
               On boldly Man of Honor, thou ſhalt win,
               I am Truths Champion, Zeale, the Scourge of Sin.
            
            The Trumpet then ſounding, the Angell and Zeale
ranke themſelues iuſt before his Lordſhip, & conduct
him to Pauls-chaine, where in the South-yard Error
in a Chariot with his infernall Miniſters attends to aſſault
him, his Garment of Aſh-colour Silke, his head
rowld in a cloud, ouer which ſtands, an Owle, a Moale
on one ſhoulder, a Bat on the other, all Symboles of
blinde Ignorance and Darkneſſe, Miſts hanging at his
Eyes: cloſe before him rides Enuy his Champion, eating
of a humane heart, mounted on a Rhenoceros, attired
in Red Silke, ſutable to the bloudineſſe of her
manners her left Pap bare, where a Snake faſtens, her
Armes halfe Naked, holding in her right hand a Dart
tincted in bloud.
            
               The greeting of Error.
               Art come? O Welcome my triumphant Lord,
               My Glories Sweet-heart! how many millions
               Of happy wiſhes hath my loue told out
               For this deſired minute, I was dead
               Till I enioyd the Preſence, I ſaw nothing,
               A Blindneſse thicker then Idolatry,
               Cloue to my Eye-bals, now I am all of Light,
               Of Fire, of Ioy, Pleaſure runs nimbly through mee,
               
                  
Lets ioyne together both in State and Triumph,
               And down with beggarly and friendleſſe Vertue,
               
               That hath ſo long impoueriſh't this faire Citty,
               My Beaſts ſhall trample on her naked breaſt,
               Vnder my Chariot-wheeles her Bones lye preſt,
               She ner'e ſhall riſe againe, great Power this day,
               Is giuen into thy hand, make vſe on't Lord,
               And let thy Will and Appetite ſway the Sword,
               Downe with them all now, whom thy heart enuies,
               Let not thy Conſcience come into thine Eyes
               This twelue-month, if thou lou'ſt reuenge or gaine,
               Ile teach thee to caſt miſts, to blinde the plaine
               And ſimple eye of Man, he ſhall not know't,
               Nor ſee thy Wrath when 'tis vpon his throte,
               All ſhall be carried with ſuch Art and Wit,
               That what thy Luſt Acts, ſhal bee counted fit,
               Then for Attendants that may beſt obſerue thee,
               Il'e picke out Seriants of my band to ſerue thee,
               Heres Gluttony and Sloth, two pretious Slaues,
               Wil tell thee more then a whole heard of Knaues,
               The worth of euery Office to a Haire,
               And who bids moſt, and bow the Markets are,
               Let them alone to ſmell, and for a need,
               They'l bring thee in Bribes for Meaſure and light Bread,
               Keepe thy eye winking, and thy hand wide ope,
               Then thou ſhalt know what Wealth is, and the ſcope
               Of rich Authority, Ho tis ſweete and deere,
               Make vſe of Time then, thou'ſt but one poore Yeare,
               And that will quickly ſlide, then be not nice,
               Both Power and Profite cleaues to my Aduice,
               And what's he lockes his Eare from thoſe ſweet Charmes,
               Or runs not to meet Gaine with wide-ſtretch't Armes,
               There is a poore thin thred-bare thing, cal'd Truth,
               
               
                  
I giue thee warning of her, if ſhee ſpeake
               Stop both thine eares cloſe, moſt Profeſſions breake
               That euer delt with her, an Vnlucky thing,
               Shee's almoſt ſworne to nothing, I can bring
               A thouſand of our Pariſh, beſides Queanes,
               That nere knew what Truth meant, nor euer meanes.
               Some I could cull out here, e'en in this Throng,
               If I would ſhow my Children, and how ſtrong
               I were in faction; 'ldſſe poore ſimple Stray,
               Shee's all her life time finding out one way:
               Shee' as but one fooliſh way, ſtreight on, right forward,
               And yet ſhe makes a toyle on't, and goes on
               With Care and Feare forfooth, when I can run
               Ouer a hundred with delight and pleaſure,
               Backe-waies, and by-waies, and fetch in my Treaſure
               After the wiſhes of my heart, by ſhifts,
               Deceits, and ſlightes, and Ile giue thee thoſe giftes;
               Ile ſhow thee all my corners yet vntold,
               The very nookes where Beldams hide their gold,
               In hollow wals and chimneies, where the Sun
               Neuer yet ſhone, nor Truth came euer neere,
               This of thy Life Ile make the golden yeare: Follow me then.
               
                  Enuy. Learne now to ſcorne thy Inferiours, thoſe muſt loue thee,
               And wiſh to eate their Hearts, that ſit aboue thee.
            
            
               Zeale ſtird vp with Diuine Indignation, at the Impudence
of theſe Hel-hounds, both forces their retirement,
and makes way for the Chariot wherein Truth
his Miſtreſſe ſits, in a cloſe garment of white Sattin,
which makes her appeare thin and naked, figuring
thereby her ſimplicity and neereneſſe of heart to
thoſe that embrace her; a roabe of white ſilke caſt
ouer it, fil'd with the eies of Eagles, ſhewing her deep

inſight, and height of wiſedome, ouer her thrice ſanctified
head a milke-white Doue, and on each ſhoulder
one, the ſacred Emblemes of Purity, Meekeneſſe,
and Innocency, vnder her Feete, Serpents, in that ſhe
treads downe all Subtelty and Fraud, her Fore-head
empal'd with a Diadem of Stars, the Witneſſe of her
Eternall deſcent; on her Breaſt a pure round Criſtall,
ſhowing the brightneſſe of her thoughts and actions;
a Sun in her Right-hand, then which, nothing is truer,
a fan fild all with Starres in her left, with which ſhe
parts Darkeneſſe, and ſtrikes away the vapours of Ignorance;
if you hearken to Zeale her Champion after
his holy anger is paſt againſt Error, and his crue, hee
will giue it you in better tearmes, or at leaſt more
ſmoothly and pleaſingly.
            
               The ſpeech of Zeale.
               Bold Furies, backe, or with this ſcourge of Fire
               Whence ſparkles out Religious chaſt-deſire
               Ile whip you downe to darkeneſſe; this a place
               Worthy my Miſtreſſe, her Aeternall Grace
               Be the full obiect to feaſt all theſe eies
               But Thine the firſt, hee that feeds here is wiſe;
               Nor by the naked plaineneſſe of her weeds
               Iudge thou her worth, no burniſht gloſſe Truth needs;
               That Crowne of Starres ſhowes her deſcent from heauen;
               That Roabe of white fild all with Eagles eies,
               Her piercing ſight through hidden myſteries;
               Thoſe milke-white Doues her ſpotleſſe Innocence;
               Thoſe Serpents at her feete her victory ſhowes
               Ouer deceite and guile, her rankeſt foes,
               And by that Criſtall Mirrour at her Breſt,
               The cleereneſſe of her Conſcience is expreſt;
               
                  
And ſhowing that her deeds all darkeneſſe ſhun,
               Her Right-hand holds Truths Symbole, the bright Sunne;
               A Fan of Starres ſhee in the other twiſts,
               With which ſhee chaceth away Errors miſts:
               And now ſhee makes to thee, her ſo euen Grace,
               For to her Rich and Poore looke with one Face.
            
            
               The Words of Truth.
               Man rayſd by Faith and Loue, vpon whoſe Head
               Honour ſits freſh, let not thy Heart be led
               In ignorant waies of inſolence and pride
               From Her, that to this day hath bene thy guide;
               I neuer ſhowed thee yet more Paths then one,
               And thou haſt found ſufficient That alone
               To bring Thee hether, then go forward ſtill,
               And hauing moſt power, firſt ſubiect thy Will,
               Giue the firſt Fruits of Iuſtice to thy Selfe,
               Then doſt thou wiſely Gouerne, though that Elfe
               Of Sin and Darkeneſſe ſtill oppoſing mee,
               Counſels thy Appetite to Maſter Thee.
               But call to minde what brought thee to this Day,
               Was Falſhood, Cruelty, or Reuenge the way?
               Thy luſt or pleaſures? peoples curſe or hate?
               Theſe were no waies could raiſe Thee to this State
               The ignorant muſt acknowledge, if then from Mee,
               Which no Ill dare deny, or Sin controule,
               Forſake mee not, that can aduance thy ſoule:
               I ſee a bleſſed yeelding in thy Eye,
               Thou'rt mine, leade on, thy Name ſhall neuer dye.
            
            Theſe words ended, they all ſet forward, this Chariot
of Truth and her coeleſtiall hand-maids the Graces &
Vertues, taking place next before his Lord ſhip, Zeale
and the Angell before that, the Chariot of Error following

as neere as it can get, all paſſing on, till they
come into Pauls Church-yard, where ſtand ready the
fiue Ilands, thoſe dumbe Glories that I ſpake of before
vpon the water, vpon the heighth of theſe fiue
Ilands ſit fiue perſons repreſenting the fiue Sences,
Viſus, Auditus, Tactus, Guſtus, Olfactus, (or) Seeing,
Hearing, Touching, Taſting, Smelling; at their feete
their proper Emblemes, Aquila, Ceruus, Araneus,
Simia, Canis, an Eagle, a Hart, a Spider, an Ape, a
Dogge.
            
            No ſooner can your eyes take leaue of theſe, but
they may ſuddenly eſpy a ſtrange Ship making toward,
and that which may raiſe greater aſtoniſhment,
it hauing neither Saylor nor Pilot, onely vpon a
white ſilke ſtreamer theſe two words ſet in letters of
Gold, Veritate Gubernor, I am Steer'd by Truth; the
Perſons that are contained within this little Veſſell
are onely foure; a King of the Moores, his Queene,
and two Attendants of their owne colour, the reſt of
their followers, people the Caſtle that ſtands in the
middle Iland, of which company two or three on the
top appeares to ſight, this King ſeeming much aſtonied
at the many eies of ſuch a multitude, vtters his
thoughts in theſe words.
            
               The Speech of that King.
               I ſee amazement ſet vpon the faces
               Of theſe white people, wondrings, and ſtrange gazes,
               Is it at mee? do's my Complexion draw
               So many Chriſtian Eyes, that neuer ſaw
               A King ſo blacke before? no, now I ſee
               Their entire obiect, the're all meant to thee
               (Graue Citty Gouernour) my Queene and I
               
                  
Well honor'd with the Glanees that by,
               I muſt confeſſe many wilde thoughts may riſe,
               Opinions, Common murmurs, and fixt Eyes
               At my ſo ſtrange arriuall, in a Land
               Where true Religion and her Temple ſtand:
               I being a Moor, ethen in Opinions lightneſſe
               As far from Sanctity as my Face from whiteneſſe;
               But I forgiue the Iudgings of th'Vnwiſe,
               Whoſe Cenſures euer quicken in their Eyes,
               Onely begot of outward forme and ſhow,
               And I thinke meete to let ſuch Cenſurers Know,
               How euer Darkeneſſe dwels vpon my Face,
               Truth in my ſoule ſets vp the Light of Grace;
               And though in daies of Error I did runne
               To giue all Adoration to the Sunne,
               The Moone & Stars; nay Creatures baſe and poore,
               Now onely their Creator I adore:
               My Queene and People all, at one time wun,
               By the Religious Conuerſation
               Of Engliſh Merchants, Factors, Trauailers,
               Whoſe Truth did with our Spirits hold Commerſe
               As their affaires with vs, following their path
               Wee all were brought to the true Chriſtian Faith:
               
               Such benefite in good Example dwels,
               It oft hath power to conuert Infidels;
               Nor could our Deſires reſt, till wee were led
               Vnto this place, where thoſe good Spirits were bred;
               And ſee how we arriu'd, in Bleſſed Time,
               To do that Mihreſſe Seruice, in the Prime
               Of theſe her Spotleſſe Triumphs, and t'attend
               That Honorable Man, her Late ſworne Frend.
               If any wonder at the ſafe Arriue
               Of this ſmall Veſſell, which all Wethers driue
               
                  
According to their Rages, where appeares
               Nor Marriner nor Pylot (arm'd' gainſt feares)
               Know this came hether from mans guidance free,
               Onely by Truth Steer'd; as our Soules muſt bee;
               And ſee where one of her faire Temples ſtands,
               Do Reuerence, Moores, bow low, and Kiſſe your hands,
               Behold our Queene.
            
            
               Queene.
               Her Goodneſſes are ſuch
               Wee cannot Honour Her, and Her Houſe too much.
            
            All in the Shippe and thoſe in the Caſtle bowing
their bodies to the Temple of Saint Paul, but Error
ſmiling betwixt Scorne and Anger to ſee ſuch a deuout
humility take hold of that complexion, breakes
into theſe,
            
               Error.
               What, haue my Sweete-fac'ſt Deuils forſooke me too,
               Nay, then my charmes will haue enough to doo?
            
            But Time, ſitting by the Frame of Truth his
Daughters Chariot, attir'd agree-able to his Condition,
with his Hower-glaſſe, Wings, and Sithe, Knowing
beſt himſelfe when it is fitteſt to ſpeake, goes forward
in this manner:
            
               This Time hath brought t'effect, for on thy Day
               Nothing but Truth and Vertue ſhall diſplay:
               Their Virgin Enſignes, Infidelity,
               
               
                  Barbariſme and Guile ſhall in deepe Darkeneſſe lye.
               O I could euer ſtand ſtill thus, and gaze,
               Neuer turne Glaſſe agen; wiſh no more daies
               So this might euer laſt, pitty the Light
               Of this rich Glory muſt be caſde in Night;
               But Time muſt on, I go, 'tis ſo decreed,
               To bleſſe my Daughter Truth, and all her ſeed
               With Ioyes Immortal, Triumphs neuer ending:
               And as her Hand lifts mee, to thy Aſcending
               
                  
May it be alwaies ready (worthy Sonne)
               To haſten which, my Howers ſhall quickly run,
               Seeſt thou you place,Saint Pauls Croſſe. thether Ile weekely bring thee,
               Where Truths coeleſtiall Harmony Thou ſhalt heare,
               To which I charge Thee bend a ſerious Eare:
               Leade on, Times ſwift Attendants.
            
            Then the fiue Ilands paſſe along into Cheape-ſide,
the Ship next after them; the Chariot of Truth ſtill
before his Lord-ſhip, and that of Prror ſtill chac'ſt before
it, where their Eies meete with another more ſubtile
Obiect, planting it ſelfe cloſe by the little Conduite,
which may beare this Character, the True
Forme and Faſhion of a Mount Triumphant, but the
Beauty and Glory thereof ouer-ſpred with a thicke
Sulphurous Darkeneſſe, it being a Fog or Miſt raiſde
from Error, enuiouſly to blemiſh that Place which
beares the Title of Londons Triumphant Mount (the
chiefe Grace and Luſter of the whole Triumph) at
the foure corners ſit foure Monſters Errors Diſciples,
on whom hangs part of the Miſt for their cloathing,
holding in their hands little thicke Clubbes, coloured
like their Garments; the Names of theſe foure
Monſters, Barbariſme, Ignorance, Impudence, Falſhood,
who at the neere approaching of Truths Chariot, are
ſeene a little to tremble, whilſt her Deity giues life to
theſe words.
            
               Truth.
               VVhat's here? the Miſt of Error? dare his Spight
               Staine this Triumphant Mount? where our delight
               Hath bene Diuinely fixt ſo many Ages,
               Dare darkeneſſe now breathe forth her Inſolent Rages,
               And hang in poyſnous Vapours o're the Place
               
                  
From whence wee receiu'd Loue and return'd Grace?
               I ſee if Truth a while but turne her Eies,
               Thicke are the Miſts that o're faire Citties riſe:
               Wee did expect to receiue welcome here,
               From no deform'd Shapes but Diuine and Cleere,
               In ſteed of Monſters that this place attends;
               To meete with Goodneſſe and her Glorious Frends,
               Nor can they ſo forget mee to bee far,
               I Know there ſtands no other enuious Bar:
               But that foule Cloude to Darken this Bright Day,
               Which with this Fanne of Starres Ile Chace away.
               Vaniſh Infectious Fog that I may ſee
               This Citties Grace, that takes her Light from Mee.
            
            At this her powerfull command, the Vaniſh, giue
Way, Cloude ſuddenly riſes, and changes into a
bright ſpredding Canopy, ſtucke thicke with Starres,
and beames of Gold, ſhooting forth round about it,
the Mount appearing then moſt rich in Beauty and
Glory, the foure Monſters falling flat at the Foote of
the Hill; that graue Foeminine Shape, figuring London,
ſitting in greateſt Honour; next aboue her in the moſt
eminent place, ſits Religion, the Modell of a faire Temple
on her Head, and a burning Lampe in her Hand,
the proper Emblemes of her Sanctity, Watchfulneſſe,
and Zeale; on her right Hand ſits Liberality, her head
circled with a Wreath of Gold, in her hand a Cornucopia,
or Horne of Abundance, out of which ruſheth a
ſeeming Floud of Gold, but no way flowing to Prodigality;
for as the Sea is gouern'd by the Moone, ſo is
that wealthy Riuer by her Eie, (for Bounty muſt bee
led by Iudgement) and hence is Art-fully deriued
the onely difference betweene Prodigality and Bounty,
the one deales her Giftes with open eyes, the

other blind-fold; on her left ſide ſits Perfect Loue,
his proper Seate being neereſt the Heart, wearing vpon
his Head a wreath of white and red Roſes mingled
together, the Antient Witneſſe of Peace, Loue and Vnion,
wherein conſiſts the Happineſſe of this Land, his
Right hand holding a Sphaere, where in a Circle of
Gold, is contained all the 12 Companies Armes; and
therefore cal'd the Spaere of true Brother-hood, or Annulus
Amoris, the Ring of Loue: vpon his left hand
ſtand two Billing Turtles, expreſſing thereby the happy
Condition of mutuall Loue and Society: on either
ſide of this Mount are diſplaid the Charitable and Religious
workes of London (eſpecially the worthy Company
of Grocers) in giuing maintenance to Schollers,
Souldiers, Widdowes, Orphans, and the like, where
are plac'd one of each number: & on the two Heights
ſit Knowledge & Modeſty; Knowledge wearing a Crowne
of Starres, in her Hand a Perſpectiue Glaſſe, betokening
both her High Iudgement, and Deepe In-ſight,
the Brow of Modeſtie circled with a Wreath all of red
Roſes, expreſſing her Baſhfulneſſe and Bluſhings, in
her hand a Crimſon Baner, fild with Siluer Stars, figuring
the white Purity of her Shamfaſtneſſe, her cheeks
not red with Shame or Guilt, but with Virgin-Feare,
and Honor. At the Backe of this Triumphant Mount,
Chaſtity, Fame, Simplicity, Meekneſſe, haue their Seats,
Chaſtity wearing on her Head a Garland of white Roſes,
in her Hand a white Silke Banner, fild with Starres
of Gold, expreſſing the aeternity of her vn-ſpotted
Pureneſſe: Fame next vnder her, on her a Head a
Crowne of Siluer, and a Siluer Trumpet in her hand,
ſhowing both her Brightneſſe and Shrilneſſe: Simplicity
with a Milke-white Doue vpon her Head, and

               Meekeneſſe with a Garland of mingled Flowers, in her
hand a white Silke Banner with a red Croſſe, a Lambe
at her Feet, by which both their Conditions are ſufficiently
expreſt; The Mount thus made glorious by
the Power of Truth, and the Miſt expeld, London thus
ſpeakes.
            
               London.
               Thicke Scales of Darkneſſe in a Moments ſpace
               Are fell from both mine Eyes, I ſee the Face
               Of all my Friends about me (now) moſt cleerely,
               Religions Siſters, whom I Honour deerely;
               Oh I behold the worke, it comes from Thee
               
               
                  Illuſtrious Patroneſſe, thou that mad'ſt me ſee
               In Dayes of blindeſt Ignorance, when this Light
               Was ee'n extinguiſht, Thou Redeem'ſt my ſight;
               Then to Thy Charge (with Reuerence) I commend
               That worthy Son of mine, thy vertuous Friend,
               Whom on my Loue and Bleſſing I require,
               To obſerue Thee Faithfully, and his Deſire
               To imitate Thy will, and there lye bounded,
               For Power's a Dangerous Sea, which muſt be ſounded
               With Truth and Iuſtice, or Man ſoone runs on
               'Gainſt Rockes and Shelues to Diſſolution;
               Then that thou maiſt the Difference euer know,
               Twixt Truth and Error, a few words ſhall ſhow;
               The many Wayes that to blind Error ſlide
               Are in the entrance broad, Hell-mouth is wide,
               But when Man enters farre, he findes it then
               Cloſe, Darke and Streight, for Hell returnes no Men;
               But the One ſacred Way which Truth directs,
               Onely at Entrance Mans Affection Checks,
               And is there ſtrict alone, to which place throngs
               All Worlds Afflictions, Calumnies and wrongs.
               
                  
But hauing paſt thoſe, then thou find'ſt a way
               In bredth, whole Heauen, in length, aeternall Day,
               Then following Truth, ſhe brings Thee to that way;
               But firſt obſerue what workes ſhe here requires,
               Religion, Knowledge, Sanctity, Chaſt Deſires,
               Then Charity, which Bounty muſt expreſſe,
               To Schollers, Souldiers, Widdowes, Fatherleſſe;
               Theſe haue beene ſtill my Workes, they muſt be thine,
               Honour and Action muſt together ſhine,
               Or the beſt part's Eclipſt, behold but this,
               Thy very Creſt ſhowes Bounty, here 'tis put,
               Thou giu'ſt the open Hand, keepe it not ſhut;
               But to the Needie, or Deſeruing Spirit,
               Let it ſpred wide, and Heauen enrowles that Merit;
               Do theſe, and proue my Hopefull Worthy Sonne,
               
               Yet nothing's ſpoke, but needfully muſt bee done.
               And ſo lead forward.
            
            At which Words the whole Triumph moues in his
richeſt glory toward the Croſſe in Cheape, at which
place Error full of Wrath and Mallice to ſee his Miſt
ſo chaced away, falles into this Fury.
            
               Error.
               Heart of all the Fiends in Hell!
               Could her Beggarly Power expell
               Such a Thicke and Poiſonous Miſt
               Which
                     •
                   ſet Enuies Snakes to twiſt;
               Vp Monſters, was her Feeble Frowne
               Of Force to ſtrike my Officers downe?
               Barbariſme, Impudence, Lies, Ignorance,
               All your Hell-bred Heads aduance,
               And once againe with Rotten Darkneſſe ſhroud
               This Mount Triumphant, drop downe ſulphurous Cloud.
            
            
               
At which the Miſt falles againe, and hangs ouer all
the Beauty of the Mount, not a Perſon of Glory ſeene,
onely the foure Monſters gather courage againe, and
take their Seates, aduancing their Clubs aboue their
Heads, which no ſooner perceiu'd, but Truth in her
Chariot making neere to the place, willing ſtill to reſcue
her Friends and Seruants, from the Powers of Ignorance
and Darkneſſe, makes vſe of theſe Words,
            
               Truth.
               Dare yet the workes of Vglineſſe appeare
               Gainſt this Dayes Brightneſſe, and ſee Vs ſo neere?
               How bold is Sinne and Hell, that yet it dare
               Riſe againſt Vs? but know (Perditions Heire)
               T'is Idle to contend againſt our Power,
               Vaniſh againe Fowle Miſt from Honors Bower.
            
            Then the Cloud diſperſing it ſelfe againe, and all the
Mount appearing Glorious, it paſſeth ſo on to the
Standard, about which place, by Elaborate action from
Error it falles againe, and goes ſo darkned, till it comes
to S. Laurence lane end, where by the former words by
Truth vtter'd, being againe chac'd away, London thus
gratefully requites her Goodneſſe.
            
               London.
               Aeternities bright Siſter, by whoſe Light,
               
                  Errors infectious Workes ſtill flye my Sight.
               Receiue thy Seruants Thankes; Now perfect Loue
               Whoſe Right hand holds a Sphaere, wherein doe moue
               Twelue bleſt Societies, whoſe belou'd encreaſe,
               Stiles it the Ring of Brother-hood, Faith and Peace,
               
               From thy Harmonious Lips let them all taſte,
               The Golden Counſell that makes Health long laſt.
            
            
               Perfect Loue then ſtanding vp, holding in his right

hand a Sphaere, on the other, two Billing Turtles,
giues theſe words.
            
               Perfect Loue.
               Firſt then I baniſh from this Feaſt of Ioy,
               All Exceſſe, Epicuriſme, both which deſtroy
               The Healths of Soule and Body, no ſuch Gueſt
               Ought to be welcome to this Reuerend Feaſt
               Where Truth is Miſtreſſe, who's admitted here,
               Muſt come for Vertues loue more then for Cheere,
               Theſe two white Turtles may example giue
               How Perfect Ioy and Brother-hood ſhould liue,
               And they from whom Graue Order is expected,
               Of rude Exceſſe muſt neuer bee detected;
               This is the Councell which that Lady calles
               
                  Golden Aduice, for by it no man falles
               Hee that deſires Dayes healthfull, ſound and bleſt,
               Let moderate Iudgement ſerue him at his Feaſt,
               And ſo lead on, may Perfect Brother-hood ſhine,
               Still in Sphaere, and Honor ſtill in thine.
            
            This Speech ſo ended, his Lordſhip and the Companies
paſſe on to Guild-hall; and at their Returning
backe, theſe Triumphs attend to bring his Lordſhip
toward Saint Pauls Church, there to performe thoſe
yearely Ceremoniall Rites, which Antient and Graue
Order hath determined, Error by the way ſtill buſie
and in Action to drawe Darkneſſe often vpon that
Mount of Triumph, which by Truth is as often diſperſt:
then all returning homewards full of Beauty and
Brightneſſe, this Mount and the Chariot of Truth,
both plac'd neere to the Entrance of his Lordſhips
Gate, neere Leaden-hall; London, the Lady of that
Mount; firſt giues vtterance to theſe words,
            
               
               London.
               Before the Day ſprang from the Mornings Wombe
               I roſe, my Care was earlier then the Light,
               Nor would it reſt till I now brought Thee Home,
               Marrying to one Ioy both thy Day and Night;
               Nor can we call this Night, if our Eyes count
               The Glorious beames that dance about this Mount,
               Sure did not Cuſtome guide'em, Men would ſay
               Two Noones were ſeene together in one day,
               The Splendor is ſo piercing, Triumph ſeemes
               As if it ſparkled, and to Mens eſteemes
               Threw forth his Thankes, wrapt vp in Golden Flames,
               As if hee would giue Light to reade their Names
               That were at Coſt this Day to make him ſhine,
               And be as free in Thankes, as they in Coine,
               But ſee Time checkes me, and his Sithe ſtands ready
               To cut all off, no State on Earth is ſteady,
               Therefore Graue Sonne the Time that is to come,
               Beſtow on Truth, and ſo Thour't welcome Home.
            
            
               Time ſtanding vp in Truths Chariot, ſeeming to
make an offer with his Sithe to cut off the Glories of
the Day, growing neere now to the Seaſon of Reſt
and Sleepe, his Daughter Truth thus meekely ſtayes
his Hand.
            
               Truth.
               Father deſiſt a while till I ſend forth
               A few Words to our Friend, that Man of Worth:
               The Power that Heauen, Loue, and the Cities choyce,
               Haue all confer'd on Thee with Mutuall voyce,
               As it is Great, Reuerend, and Honorable,
               Meet it with equall Goodneſſe, ſtriue t'excell
               Thy former Selfe, as thy Command exceeds
               Thy laſt-yeares State, ſo let new Acts, old Deeds;
               
                  
And as great men in Riches and in Birth
               (Heightning their Blouds, and ioyning Earth to Earth,)
               Beſtow their beſt houres and moſt ſerious cares
               In chuſing out fit Matches for their Heires:
               So neuer giue Thou ouer day or howre
               Till with a Vertue thou haſt matcht this Power:
               For what is Greatneſſe if not ioyn'd with Grace?
               Like one of High-bloud that hath married Baſe.
               Who ſeekes Authority with an Ignorant Eye,
               Is like a man ſeekes out his Enemy:
               For where before his Follies were not ſpred
               Or his corruptions, then theire cleerely read
               Ee'n by the eyes of all men; 'tis ſo pure
               A Criſtall of it ſelfe, it will endure
               No poyſon of Oppreſſion, Bribes, Hir'd Law,
               But 'twill appeare ſoone in ſome cracke or flaw,
               How e're men ſooth their hopes with Popular breath,
               If not in Life, she'ile finde that crack in Death:
               I was not made to fawne or ſtroake fin ſmooth
               Bee wiſe and heare me then that cannot ſooth:
               I haue ſet Thee High now, bee ſo in Example,
               Made thee a Pinacle in Honors Temple,
               
               Fixing ten thouſand Eyes vpon thy Brow
               There is no hiding of thy Actions now,
               They muſt abide the Light, and imitate Mee,
               Or bee throwne downe to Fire where Errors bee.
               Nor onely with theſe words thy eare I feede,
               But giue thoſe part that ſhall in Time ſucceed,
               To thee in preſent, and to them to come
               That Truth may bring you all with Honour home
               To theſe your Gates, and to thoſe, after theſe
               Of which your owne good Actions Keepe the Keyes;
               Then as the Loues of thy Society
               
                  
Hath flowde in Bounties on this Day and Thee,
               Counting all Coſt too little for true Art,
               Doubling rewards there where they found Deſert,
               In Thankefulneſſe, Iuſtice, and Vertuous care
               Perfect their hopes, thoſe thy Requitals are;
               VVith Fatherly Reſpect embrace'em all,
               
                  Faith in thy Heart, and Plenty in thy Hall,
               
                  Loue in thy VValkes, but Iuſtice in thy State,
               
                  Zeale in thy Chamber, Bounty at thy Gate:
               And ſo to Thee and theſe a Bleſſed Night,
               To thee Faire Citty, Peace, my Grace and Light.
            
            Trumpets ſounding Triumphantly,
            
               Zeale, the Champion of Truth on Horſe-backe, his
head circled with ſtrange Fires, appeares to his Miſtreſſe,
and thus ſpeakes:
            
               See yonder, Lady, Errors Chariot ſtands,
               Brauing the Power of your incenſt commands,
               Emboldned by the priuiledge of Night
               And her blacke Faction, yet to crowne his Spight
               VVhich Ile confound, I burne in Diuine wrath.
            
            
               Truth.
               Strike then, I giue thee leaue to ſhoote it forth.
            
            
               Zeale.
               Then here's to the deſtruction of that Seate,
               There's nothing ſeene of Thee but Fire ſhall eate.
            
            At which, a Flame ſhootes from the Head of Zeale,
which faſtening vpon that Cariot of Error ſets it on
Fire, and all the Beaſts that are ioynde to it.
            The Fire-worke being made by Maiſter Humphrey
Nichols, a Man excellent in his Art: and the

whole Worke and Body of the Triumph, with all the
proper Beauties of the Workemanſhip moſt Artfully
and Faithfully performed by Iohn Grinkin: and thoſe
furniſhed with Apparrell and Porters by Anthony
Monday, Gentleman.
            This proud Seate of Error lying now onely glowing
in Imbers, (being a Figure or Type of his Lord-ſhips
Iuſtice on all wicked offenders in the Time of his
Gouernement,) I now conclude, holding it a
more learned Diſcretion to ceaſe of my
ſelfe, then to haue Time cut mee off
rudely, and now let him ſtrike
at his pleaſure.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  TAM ROBVR · TAM ROBOR. IN-COLIS ARBOR IOVIS. 1610. ❀
                  NO
                  ♃
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
         
         
            
            The Song with the Note.
            
               
                  〈♫〉
               
MOther of many honorable Sonnes, thinke not

                  〈♫〉
               
thy glaſſe too ſlowly runs, That in Times hand is

                  〈♫〉
               
ſet, becauſe thy worthy Sonne appeares not yet,

                  〈♫〉
               
Lady be pleaſd the houre growes on, thy ioys will be

                  〈♫〉
               
compleat anon, thou ſhalt behold, the man in-rold,

                  〈♫〉
               
in honors-booke whome vertue raiſes, loue circled,

               
                  〈♫〉
               
round, his tryumphes crownd, withall good wiſhes,

                  〈♫〉
               
prayers and praiſes.
            VVhat greater comfort to a Mothers heart,
            Then to behold her ſonnes Deſert:
            Goe hand in hand with loue,
            Reſpect and Honor (Bleſſings from aboue)
            It is of power all greefes to kill,
            And with a floud of ioy to fill.
            Thy Aged Eyes,
            To ſee him riſe,
            VVith Glory dect, where Expectation.
            Grace, Truth, and Fame,
            Met in his Name,
            Attends his Honors Confirmation.
            
               BASSVS.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   