
      
         
            
            
            THE TRIVMPHS of Loue and Antiquity.
            An Honourable Solemnitie performed through the Citie, at the confirmation and eſtabliſhment of the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn, Knight, in the office of his Maieſties Lieutenant, the Lord Maior of the Famous Citie of London.
            Taking beginning in the morning at his Lordſhips going, and perfecting it ſelfe after his returne from receiuing the oath of 
                     〈…〉
                  ralty at Weſtminſter, on the morrow after Symon and Iudes Day, October 29. 1619.
            
               By THO: MIDDLETON. Gent.
            
            
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            
               LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES. 1619.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONOVR OF HIM, TO WHOM THE NOBLE FRAternity of Skinners, his worthy Brothers, haue dedicated their Loues in Coſtly Triumphs, The Right Honorable, Sir WILLIAM COCKAYN, Knight, Lord Maior of this Renowned Citie. And Lord Generall of his Military Forces.
            
               LOue, Triumph, Honor, all the glorious graces,
               This Day holds in her gift; fixt Eyes, and Faces
               Apply themſelues in Ioy all to Your Looke:
               In Duety then, my Seruice, and the Booke,
            
            
               At your Lordſhips Command,
THO. MIDDLETON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The Triumphs of Loue and Antiquity.
            
            
               IF Forreine Nations haue beene ſtruck with admiration at the Forme, State, and Splendour of ſome yearly Triumphs, wherein. Art hath bene but weakely imitated, and moſt beggerly worded: there is faire hope that things where Inuention flouriſhes, Cleare Art and her gracefull proprieties, ſhould receiue fauour and encouragement from the content of the Spectator, which (next to the ſeruice of his Honour, and honourable Society) is the principall Reward it looks for; and not deſpairing of that common fauor (which is often caſt vpon the vndeſeruer, through the diſtreſſe and miſerie of Iudgement) this takes delight to preſent it ſelfe.
            
               And firſt to beginne early with the Loue of the Citie to his Lordſhip, let mee draw your attentions to his Honours entertainment vpon the water, where Expectation big with the Ioy of the Day, but beholding to free Loue for Language and expreſsion, thus ſalutes the Great Maiſter of the Day and Triumph.
            
               The Speech, to entertaine his Lordſhip vpon the Water.
               
               
                  HOnor and Ioy double their B
                        〈…〉
                     ,
                  I, the Dayes Loue, the Cities g
                        ••••
                     er all Loue.
                  Salute thee in the Sweetneſſe 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  All▪ that behold me worthily, may ſe
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  How full mine eye ſtands of the Ioy 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  The more, becauſe I may with Confidence ſay,
                  Deſert and Loue will be well matcht too day:
                  And herein the great'ſt pitty will appeare,
                  This match can luſt no longer then a yeare.
                  T
                        ••
                      let not that diſcourage thy good wayes,
                  Mens Loues will laſt to crowne thy end of dayes,
                  If thoſe ſhould fuile, which cannot eaſly dye,
                  Thy good workes wed thee to Aeternity.
                  Let not the ſhortneſſe then of Time diſmay
                  The largeneſſe of thy worth; gaine euery day,
                  
                     So many yeares Thou gainſt, that ſome haue loſt;
                  For they that thinke their Care is at great coſt
                  If they do any good, in Time ſo ſmall,
                  They make their Yeare but a poore Day in all.
                  For as a Learned Man, will comprehend
                  In Compaſſe of his Howre, Doctrine ſo ſound,
                  Which giue another a whole yeare to mend,
                  He ſhall not equall, vpon any ground:
                  So the Iudicious vvhen he comes to beare
                  This powerfull Office, ſtrucke vvith Diuine feare,
                  Collects his ſpirits, redeemes his howres with care,
                  Thinkes of his Charge, and Oath, what Tyes they are,
                  And with a Vertuous Reſolution then
                  Workes more good in one yeare, then ſome in Ten.
                  Nor is this ſpoken any to detract,
                  But all t'encourage to put Truth in Act.
                  Me thinkes I ſee Oppreſſion hang the head,
                  Falſhood and Iniury with their guilt ſtrucke dead
                  At this Tryumphant Hovvre, Ill Cauſes hide
                  Their Leprous Faces, daring not t'abide
                  The Brightneſſe of this day; and in mine eare
                  Me thinkes the Graces Siluer Chimes I heare.
                  Good vviſhes are at vvorke novv in each hart,
                  Throughout this ſphere of Brotherhood play their part,
                  Chiefly thy Noble owne Fraternity,
                  As neere in hart, as they're in place to thee.
                  The Enſignes of whoſe loue Bounty diſplayes,
                  
                     Yet eſteemes all their Coſt ſhort of thy praiſe:
                  There will appeare elected Sonnes of Warre,
                  Which this faire City boaſts of for their Care,
                  Strength and experience, ſet in Truth of heart;
                  All great and glorious Maiſters in that Art
                  Which giues to man his Dignity, Name and Seale,
                  Prepar'd to ſpeake Loue in a Noble Peale.
                  Knowing two Tryumphs muſt on this day dwell,
                  For Magiſtrate, one, and one for Coronell,
                  Returne Lord Generall, that's the Name of State
                  The Souldier giues Thee; Peace, the Magiſtrate.
                  On then, Great Hope, here that good care begins,
                  Which now earths Loue and▪ Heauens hereafter wins.
               
               At his Lordſhips returne from Weſtminſter, thoſe worthy Gentlemen, whoſe loues & works were prepared before in the concluſion of the former Speech by water, are now all ready to ſalute their Lord Generall with a Noble Valley, at his Lordſhips Landing: and in the beſt and moſt commendable Forme, anſwerable to the nobleneſſe of their free Loue and Seruice, take their march before his Lordſhip, who beeing ſo Honourably conducted, meetes the firſt Tryumph by land, waiting his Lordſhips moſt wiſhed arriuall, in Paules Church yard, neere Paules Chaine,
                  
which is a Wilderneſſe, moſt gracefully and artfully furniſh't with diuerſe kindes of Beaſts bearing Furre, proper to the Fraternity, the Preſenter, the Muſical Orpheus, Great Maiſter, both in Poeſy and Harmony, who by his excellent Muſicke, drew after him wild Beaſts, Woods and Mountaines; ouer his Head an Artificiall Cocke, often made to crow, and flutter with his wings. This Orpheus at the approch of his Lordſhip, giues life to theſe words.
            
            
               The Speech deliuered by Orpheus.
               
               
                  GReat Lord, Example is the Cryſtall Glaſſe,
                  By which wiſe Magiſtracy ſets his face,
                  Fits all his Actions to their comlieſt Dreſſe,
                  For there he ſ
                        ••
                     t honour and Seemelineſſe;
                  Tis not like flauring glaſſes, thoſe falſe Bookes
                  Made to ſet Age, back, in great Courliers Lookes;
                  Like Clocks on Reuelling nights, that nere goe right,
                  Becauſe the ſports may yeeld more full delight,
                  But when they breake off then they finde it Late,
                  The Time and Truth appeares, ſuch is their State,
                  Whoſe death by flatteries is ſet back, awhile,
                  But meetes'em in the midſt of then ſafe Smile.
                  Such horrors th
                        •
                     ſe forgetfull things 
                        ••
                     end,
                  
                     That onely minde their ends, but not their End;
                  Leaue them to their falſe Truſt; Liſt Thou to me,
                  Thy power is great, ſo let thy vertues be,
                  Thy care, thy watchfulneſſe, which are but things
                  Remembred to thy praiſe, from thence it ſprings,
                  And not from feare of any want in Thee,
                  For in this Truth I may be comely, free,
                  Neuer was man aduanc'd, yet waited on
                  With a more Noble Expectation;
                  That's a great Worke to perfect: and as Thoſe
                  That haue in Art a Maſtry, can oppoſe
                  All comers, and come off with Learned Fame,
                  Yet thinke not skorne ſtill of a Schollers name
                  (A Title which they had in ignorant youth:)
                  So he that deales in ſuch a weight of Truth
                  As th' execution of a Magiſtrates place,
                  Though neuer ſo exact informe and Grace,
                  Both from his owne Worth, and mans free Applauſe,
                  Yet may he cal'd a Labourer in the cauſe,
                  And be thought good to be ſo, in true care,
                  The Labour being ſo glorious, iuſt, and faire.
                  Behold then in a rough Example here
                  The Rude and thonny wayes thy care muſt cleare,
                  Such are the vices in a City ſprung,
                  As are yon' Thickets that grow cloſe and ſtrong:
                  Such is oppreſsion, Coſnage, Bribes, falſe Hires,
                  
                     As are yon' catching and entangling Briers:
                  Such is Gout-Iuſtice, that's, Delay in Right,
                  Demurs in Suites, that are as cleare as Light.
                  Iuſt ſuch a Wilderneſſe is a Common-wealth,
                  That is vndreſt, vnpruin'd, wilde in her health;
                  And the rude multitude, the Beaſts a'th wood,
                  That know no lawes, but onely Will and Blood:
                  And yet by faire Example, Muſicall Grace,
                  Harmonious gouernment of the Man in place,
                  (Of faire Integrity, and wiſedome framde)
                  They ſtand as mine doe, rauiſht, charmde, and tamde.
                  Euery wiſe Magiſtrate that gouerns thus,
                  May well be cald a powerfull Orpheus.
                  
               
               
                  Behold yon' Bird of ſtate, the vigilant Cocke,
                  The Mornings Herald, and the Plow-mans Clocke,
                  At whoſe ſhrill Crow the very Lyon trembles,
                  The ſturdieſt Prey-taker that here aſſembles;
                  How fitly d'os it match your Name, and power
                  Fixt in that Name now by this glorious Houre,
                  At your iuſt Voyce to ſhak the bold'ſt offence
                  And ſturdieſt ſinne, that ere had reſidence
                  Inſecure man, Yet with an equall Eie,
                  Matching graue Iuſtice with faire Clemency;
                  It being the property Hee chiefly ſhower,
                  To giue Wing-warning, ſtill before he Crowes,
                  To Crow before he ſtrike, by his clapt Wing,
                  
                     To ſtir himſelfe vp firſt (which needfull thing
                  Is euery mans firſt duty) by his Crow
                  A gentle call, or warning, which ſhould flow
                  From euery Magiſtrate, before he extend
                  The Stroake of Iuſtice, he ſhould reprehend,
                  And trie the vertue of a powerfull word,
                  If that preuaile not, then the Spurre, the Sword.
                  See, herein honors to his Maieſtie
                  Are not forgotten, when I turne, and ſee,
                  The ſeuer all Countries, in thoſe faces, plaine,
                  Allowing Fealty to one Soueraigne,
                  The Noble Engliſh, the faire Thriuing Scot,
                  
                  Plaine hearted Welch, the Frenchman bold and hot,
                  The ciuilly inſtructed Iriſh man,
                  
                  And that kind Sauage, the Virginian;
                  
                  All louingly aſſembled, 
                        ••
                     n by Fate;
                  This thy Daies Honour to congratulate.
                  On then; and as your ſeruice fills this place,
                  So through the Citie doe his Lorſhip Grace.
               
               At which words, this part of Triumph moues onward and meetes the full Body of the Shew in the other Paules Church yard: then diſperſing it ſelfe, according to the ordering of the Speechess following, one part which is the Sanctuary of Fame, plants it ſelfe neere the little Conduit in Cheape; another which bath the Title of the Parliament

of Honor, at S. Laurence Lane end, Vpon the Battlements of that beautious Sanctuary, adorned with ſix & twenty bright burning lamps, hauing Alluſion to the ſix and twenty Aldermen, (they being for their Iuſtice, Gouernment and Example, the Lights of the Citty) a Graue Perſonage, crownd with the Title and Inſcription of Example, breathes forth theſe ſounds.
            
            
               Example.
               
                  FRom that rough Wildernes, which did late preſent
                  The perplext State, and cares of Gouernment,
                  Which euery painfull Magiſtrate muſt meete;
                  Here the Reward ſtands for thee, a chiefe Seate
                  In Fames faire Sanctuary, where ſome of old
                  Crownde with their Troubles now, are here enrolde
                  In Memories ſacred ſweetneſſe, to all ages;
                  And ſo much the Worlds Voyce of Thee preſages.
               
               
                  And theſe that ſit for many, with their graces
                  Freſh as the Buds of Roſes, though they ſleepe,
                  In thy Society had once high places,
                  Which in their good Workes they for euer keepe;
                  Life cald 'em in their Time, Honours faire Stars,
                  Large Benefactors, and ſweet Gouernors.
                  If here were not ſufficient Grace for Merit,
                  Next Obiect, I presume, will raiſe thy Spirit.
               
               
                  In this Maiſter-peice of Art, Fames Illuſtrious Sanctuary, the Memory of thoſe Worthies ſhine gloriouſly, that haue beene both Lord Maiors of this Citie, and Noble Benefactors, and Brothers of this worthy Fraternity, to wit,
               
                  S. Henry Barton, S. William Gregory, S. Stephen Iennings, S. Thomas Mirfen, S. Andrew Iudd, S. Wolſtone Dixe, S. Stephen Slanye, S. Richard Saltonſtall: And now the Right Honourable Sir William Cockayn.
               
               That Sir Henry Barton an Honour to Memory, was the firſt, that for the ſafety of Trauellers, & ſtrangers by night through the Citie, cauſed lights to be hung out frō Alhollontid to Candlemas; therefore in this Sanctuary of Fame, where the beauty of good actions ſhine, he is moſt properly and worthily recorded. His Lordſhip by this time Gracefully conducted toward that Parliament of Honour, neere S. Laurence Lane end, Anti quity from its Eminence, thus gloriouſly ſalutes Him.
            
            
               
                  Antiquity in the Parliament of Honor.
               
                  GRaue Citie Gouernor! ſo much honour doe me,
                  Vouchſafe thy preſence and thy patience to me,
                  And I'le Reward that Vertue with a Story,
                  That ſhall to thy Fraternity add Glory,
                  
                     Then to thy Worth no meane part will ariſe,
                  That art ordaynde Chiefe for that glorious Prize.
                  Tis I, that keepe all the Records of Fame,
                  Mother of Truths, Antiquity, my Name;
                  No Yeare, Moneth, Day, or Houre, that brings in place
                  Good Workes and Noble, for the Cities Grace,
                  But I Record; that After Times may ſee
                  What Former, were, and how they ought to be,
                  Fruitfull, and Thankfull, in faire Actions flowing,
                  To meete Heauens bleſsings, to which much is owing;
                  For inſtance, Let all Gratefull Eyes be plac'ſt
                  Vpon this Mount of Royalty, by Kings, grac'ſt,
                  Queenes, Prince, Dukes, Nobles, more by numbring gain'd
                  Then can be in this narrow Sphere contain'd.
                  7. Kings, 5. Queenes, onely one Prince alone,
                  8. Dukes, 2. Earles, Plantagenets twenty one;
                  All theſe of this Fraternity made Free,
                  Brothers and Siſters of this Company;
                  And ſee with what propriety, the Fates
                  Haue to this Noble Brotherhood knit ſuch States;
                  For what Society, the whole Citie brings,
                  Can with ſuch Ornaments Adorne their Kings,
                  Their onely Robes of State, when they conſent
                  To ride moſt glorious, to High Parliament;
                  And marke in this their Royall intent ſtill,
                  For when it pleaſde the Goodneſſe of their Will,
                  To put the richeſt Robes of their Loues on
                  
                     To the whole Citie, the Moſt, euer came
                  To this Society, which Records here proue,
                  Adorning their Adoruers, with their Loue;
                  Which was a Kingly AEquity:
                  Be carefull then, Great Lord, to bring forth Deedes,
                  To match that Honor, that from hence proceedes.
               
               At the cloſe of which Speech, the whole Triumph takes leaue of his Lordſhip, for that Time, and till after the Feaſt at Guild-hall, reſts from Seruice. His Lordſhip accompanied with many Noble perſonages, the Honorable Fellowſhip of Ancient Magiſtrates and Aldermen of this Citty, the two new Sheriffes, the one, of his owne Fraternity (the complete Brotherhood of Skinners) the Right Worſhipfull M. Sheriffe Deane, a very Bountifull and worthy Citizen, not forgetting the Noble paines and loues of the Heroyick Captaines of the Citty, & Gentlemen of the Artillery Garden, making with two glorious Rankes a manly & Maieſtick paſſage for their Lord General, his Lordſhip, thorough Guild-hall yard; and afterward their Loues to his Lordſhip reſounding in a ſecond Noble Volley.
               Now, that al the Honors before mentioned, in that Parliamēt, or Mount of Royalty, may arriue at a cleere and perfect Manifeſtation, to preuent

the ouer-curious & Inquiſitiue Spirit; the Names and Times of thoſe Kings, Queenes, Prince, Dukes and Nobles, free of the Honorable Fraternity of Skinners in London, ſhal here receiue their proper Illuſtrations.
               
                  Anno 1329. K. Edward the third, Plantagenet, by whom, in the firſt of his Reigne this worthy Society of Skinners was incorporate, Hee, their firſt Royall Founder and Brother, Q Philip his wife, yonger Daughter of William Earle of Henalt, the firſt Royall Siſter, ſo gloriouſly vertuous, that ſhe is a rich ornament to Memory, Shee both founded and endowed Queenes Colledge in Oxford, to the continuing eſtate of which, I my ſelfe wiſh all happineſſe: This Queene at her death deſired three curteſies, ſome of which are rare in theſe dayes. Firſt, that her debts might be payd to the Merchants; ſecondly, that her gifts to the Church might be performed: thirdly, that the King when he died would at Weſtminſter be interred with her.
               
                  Anno 1357. Edward Plantagenet, ſurnamed the Black Prince, ſonne to Edward the third, Prince of Wales, Duke of Guien, Aquitaine, and Cornwall, Earle Palatine of Cheſter.
               In the Battell of Poitiers in France, hee with 8000. Engliſh againſt 60000. French, got the victory,

tooke the King, Philip his ſonne, ſeuenteene Earles, with diuerſe other Noble perſonages, priſoners.
               King Richard the Second, Plantagenet, this K. being the third Royall brother of this honorable Company, and at that time the Society conſiſting of two Brotherhoods of Corpus Chriſti, the one at S. Mary Spittle, the other at S. Mary Bethlem without Biſhops Gate, in the eighteenth of his Reigne graunted them to make their two Brotherhoods one, by the name of the Fraternity of Corpus Chriſti of Skinners; which worthy Title ſhines at this day gloriouſly amongſt 'em: and toward the end of this kings reigne, 1396. a great feaſt was celebrated in Weſtminſter Hall, where the L. Maior of this City ſate as Gueſt.
               
                  Anno 1381. Q. Anne his wife, daughter to the Emperour Charles the 4 and ſiſter to Emperor Wenzlaus, whoſe modeſty then, may make this Age bluſh now; ſhe being the firſt that taught women to ride ſideling on horſebacke; but who it was that taught 'em to ride ſtradling, there is no Records ſo immodeſt that can ſhew me, onely the impudent Time, and the open profeſsion; this Faire Preſident of womanhood dyed at Sheine, now Richmond, for griefe wherof K. Richard her Lord abandoned and defaced that goodly houſe.
               
                  
                  Anno 1399. K. Henry the 4. Plantagenet, Surnamed Bullingbrooke, a forth Royall Brother: in his time, the Famous Guild hall in London was erected, where the Honorable Courts of the Citie are kept, and this Bounteous Feaſt yearely celebrated.
               In the Twelth yeare of his Reigne, the Riuer of Thames flowed thrice in one day.
               Q. Ioane, or Iane, Ducheſſe of Britten, late wife to Iohn, D. of Britten, and Daughter to the King of Nauarre; another Princely Siſter.
               
                  Anno 1412. K. Henry the 5. Plantagenet, Prince of Wales, proclaimed Maior & Regent of France, He won that famous Victory on the French, at the Battaile of Agincourt.
               
               Q. Catherine his Wife, Daughter to Charles 6. K. of France.
               
               K. Henry the 6. Plantagenet, of the Houſe of Lancaſter.
               
               K. Edward the 4. Plantagenet, of the Houſe of Yorke.
               
               This King feaſted the Lord Maior, Richard Chawrye, and the Aldermen his Brethren, with certaine Commoners, in Waltham Forreſt; after dinner rode a hunting with the King, who gaue him plenty of Veniſon, & ſent to the Lady Maioreſſe, and her Siſters the Aldermens Wiues, 2.

Harts, 6. Bucks, and a Tun of Wine, to make merry, and this Noble feaſt was kept at Drapers Hall. An. 1463. Q. Elizabeth Grey, his Wife, Daughter to Richard, Wooduile, Earle Riuers, & to the Dutcheſſe of Bedford; ſhe was Mother to the Lord Grey of Ruthen, that in his time was Marqueſſe Dorſet.
               
               K. Richard the 3. Brother to Edward 4. D. of Gloceſter, and of the Houſe of Yorke.
               
               
                  Lionel Plantagonet, 3 Sonne to the 3 Edward, D. of Clarence, and Earle of Vlſter; Philip his Daughter, and Heire, married Edward Mortimer, Earle of March, from whom the Houſe of Yorke deſcends.
               
                  Henry Plantagenet, Grandchild to Edmond Crouchbacke, 2. Sonne to Henry 3.
               
                  Richard Plantagenet, Father of Edward 4. D. of Yorke, and Albumarle, Earle of Cambridge, Rutland, March, Clare, and Vlſter.
               
               
                  Thomas Plantagenet, 2. Sonne of Henry 4.
               
                  Iohn Plantagenet, 3 Sonne of Henry 4. So Noble a Souldier, and ſo great a terror to the French, that when Charles the 8. was mooued to deface his Monument (being buried in Roane) the King thus anſwered: Pray let him reſt in peace being dead, of whom we were all afraid when he liued.
               
                  Humfrey Plantagenet, 4 Sonne of Henry 4.
               
                  Iohn Holland D. of Exceter.
               
               
                  
                  George Plantagenet brother to Edward the 4.
               
                  Edmond Plantagenet Brother to Edward the 4.
               
                  Richard Neuill Earle of Salisbury and Warwick. cald the Great Earle of Warwick.
               
               
                  Iohn Cornwell Knight, Baron Fanhope.
               
               
                  The Royall Somme.
                  7: Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 7. Dukes. 1. Earle 21. Plantagenets
                  7. Kings, 5. Queenes, 1. Prince. 8. Dukes. 2. Earles. 1. Lord, 24. Skinners.
                  
                  The Feaſt ended at Guild-hall, his Lordſhip (as yearely Cuſtome inuites it) goes accompanied with the Triumph before him towards S. Paules, to performe the noble and reuerend Ceremonies which Diuine Antiquity religiouſly ordained, and is no leſſe then faithfully obſerued. Holy Seruice and Ceremonies accompliſht, his Lordſhip returnes by Torch-light to his owne houſe, the whole Triumph plac'ſt in comely and decent order before him, the Wilderneſſe, the Sanctuary of Fame, adornd with Lights, the Parliament of Honor, and the Triumphant Chariot of Loue, with his Gracefull Concomitants; the Chariot drawne with 2. Luzarns: neer to the entrance of his Lordſhips gate, Loue, prepar'd with his welcome, thus ſalutes him,
               
            
            
               
               Loue.
               
                  I Was the firſt, Graue Lord, that welcomde Thee
                  To this Dayes Honor, and I ſpake it free,
                  Iuſt as in euery heart I found it plac'ſt,
                  And tis my turne againe now to ſpeake laſt;
                  For loue is circular (like the bright Sunne,)
                  And takes delight to end where it begun,
                  Though indeed neuer ending, in true Will,
                  But rather may be ſayd beginning ſtill;
                  As all great workes are of Caeleſtiall Birth,
                  Of which, Loue is the Chiefe in Heauen and Earth.
                  To what Bleſt ſtate then are thy Fortunes come,
                  Since, That both brought thee forth, and brings thee home▪
                  
                  Now, as in common courſe which cleeres things beſt,
                  Ther's no free gift but lookes for thankes at leaſt;
                  A Loue ſo bountifull, ſo free, ſo good
                  From the whole City, from thy Brotherhood,
                  (That Name I ought a while to dwell vpon,)
                  Expect ſome faire Requitall from the Man
                  They'ue all ſo largely Honord. What's deſirde?
                  That which in Conſcience ought to berequirde,
                  Oh thanke 'em in thy Iuſtice, in thy Care,
                  Zeale to right wrongs, Workes that are cleere & faire,
                  And will become thy Soule (whence Vertue ſprings)
                  As thoſe rich Ornaments thy Brother Kings.
                  And ſince we cannot ſeparate Loue and Care,
                  
                     For where Care is, a Loue muſt needes be there,
                  And Care where Loue is; tis the Man and Wife,
                  Through euery Eſtate that's fixt in Life;
                  You are by this the Cities Bride-groome proou'd,
                  And She ſtands wedded to her beſt Belou'd;
                  Then be, according to your Morning-Vowes,
                  A Carefull Husband, to a Louing Spouſe;
                  And Heauen giue you great Ioy (both It and Thee;)
                  And to All Thoſe that ſhall Match after Yee.
               
            
            
               The names of thoſe Beaſts, bearing Furr, and now in vſe, with the Bountifull Society of Skinners.
               
               
                  The moſt of which preſented in the Wilderneſſe, where Orpheus praedominates!
                  
                  
                     ERmine, Foyne, Sables, Martin, Badger, Beare,
                     Luzerne, Budge, Otter, Hipponeſſe and Hare,
                     Lamb, Wolf, Fox, Leopard, Minck, Stote, Miniuer,
                     Racoone, Moaſhye, Woluerine, Caliber,
                     Squirrell, Moale, Cat Musk, Ciuet, Wild & Tame,
                     Cony white, Yellow, Black muſt haue a Name;
                     
                     
                        The Ounce, Rowſ-Gray, Ginner, Pampilion,
                     
                        Of Birds, the Vu lur, Bitter, Eſtridge, Swan;
                     Some worne for Ornament, and ſome for Health,
                     All to the Skinners Art bring Fame and Wealth.
                  
                  
                     The Seruice being thus faithfully performed, both to his Lordſhips Honour, and to the Credit and content of his moſt generouſly-bountifull Society, the Seaſon commends all to ſilence; yet not without a little leaue taken, to reward Art with the comely Dues that belong vnto it, which hath beene ſo richlie expreſt in the Body of the Triumph, with all the proper Beauties of Workemanſhip, that the Citie may (without Iniury to Iudgement) call it the Maiſter-piece of her Triumphs; the Credit of which Workemanſhip, I muſt iuſtly lay vpon the Deſerts of Maſter Garret Criſmas, and Maiſter Robert Norman, ioyn'dPartners in the performance.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   