
      
         
            
            
            THE
GHOST
of Lucrece
            By T. M. Gent.
            AT LONDON
Printed by Valentine Simmes.
1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOrable,
and my very bountiful good Lord,
my Lord Compton, T. M. wiſheth the fruit
of eternall fruition.
            
               Comptus honos, honor eſt Comptono, & Compton honore.
            
            
               THou, that rock'ſt comely honour in thine armes,
            Thou patr
                  ••
                to the child-houſe of my vayne,
            Thou hiue vnto the Muſeshony ſwarmes,
            And Godfather to th'iſſue of my braine,
            To thee, Baptizer of mine infant lines,
            With golden water in a ſiluer Font:
            Thy bountie, gold▪ thy finger
                  •
                ſiluer twines,
            Siluering my papers inke, as they were wont.
            To thee (the bloudy Chriſtall of a Ghoſt,
            Wrapt in a fierie web) I ſpin to thee.
            To thee, (the thawer of Dianaes froſt:
            
               Tarquin the hotte in Lucrece Tragedie.)
            To thee I conſecrate theſe aſhie fires,
            She quencht in bloud, he burnt in his deſires.
            
               Bound by your Ho. bounty,
T. M.
            
         
         
            
            Caſtiſsimo, puriſsimoque Lucretiae
Spiritui; Thomas Medius
& Grauis Tonus primum
Surge vociferat.
            —Tu caſtitatis imago,
            Surgito! Tarquinium Phlegetontis imagine notū,
            Noſcito! Tu caeptis (nam te mutauit & illum,)
            Adſpirato meis! poſtremo tempore mundi,
            Ad ſu a perpetuum deducito crimina carmen.
            
               Caſtiſsimo Spiritui tuo
addictiſsimus.
T. M.
            
         
         
            
            The Prologue.
            
               REach me a quill from the white Angells wings,
               My paper from the Via Lactea,
               
               My inck from Ioues-high-Nectar-flowing-ſprings,
               My Muſe from Vesta: Awake Rhamnuſia;
               
               Call vp the Ghoſt of gor'de Lucretia:
               
               Thrice hath the trumpet of my pens round ſtage
               Sounded a Surge to her bloudie age.
            
            
               Sad ſpirits, ſoft harts, ſicke thoughts, ſoules ſod in teares,
               Wel humourd eies, quicke eares, teare-wounded faces,
               Enrouled-Veſtals, Dians Hemiſpheres,
               Rape-ſlaughtered Lucreces, all martyrde Graces,
               Be ye the audience, take your tragicke places:
               Here ſhal be plaide the miſeries that immures
               Pure Diamond hearts, in Chriſtal couertures.
            
            
               
               Black ſpirits, hard harts, thick thoughts, ſouls boild in luſt,
               Drie fierie eies, dull eares, high bloudy lookes
               Made of hot earth, moulded in fire and duſt,
               Deſires true Graduates, reade in Tarquins bookes:
               Be ye our ſtages Actors; play the Cookes:
               Carue out the daintieſt morſel, thats your part,
               With luſt-keene Faulchon euen in Lucrace heart.
            
            
               Now weepeth Lucrece with a trine of eies,
               Quenching the fire of Luſt with teares and bloud,
               Changing thoſe eie-lampes (which were wont to riſe
               Like beames of morning) to a mourning clowde,
               Her heart (the pureſt eie) to a redde-ſea-floude:
               Her ghoſt the Idea of her ſoule reſumes,
               Which Phoenix-wiſe burnes in her owne perfumes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE GHOST
of Lucrece
            
               
                  MEdeas Magicke, and Calipſoes drugges,
               
                  Circes enchauntments, Hecates triforme
               Weanes my ſoule ſucking at Reuenges dugges,
               To feed vpon the aire. What wind? what ſtorme
               Blew my diſſeuered limmes into this forme?
               And from the Virgin-Paradiſe of death,
               Coniures my Ghoſt with poetizing breath?
            
            
               The candle of my ſhame burnes in the skie,
               Set on the croſſe-Poles of the firmament,
               To feare away diuine Virginitie,
               And light this world below, that being bent
               To follow me, they goe not as I went:
               But when I hope to ſee the candle waine,
               Then Tarquins ſpirit falls on the ſnuffe againe.
            
            
               
               So that the ſnuffe, (the ſauour of my ſhame,
               That ſtinckes before the throne of chaſtitie)
               Is ſtill rekindled with veneriall flame,
               To ſhew that Tarquins planet plants in me,
               The roote of fierie bloud, and luxurie:
               Firſt forcing with his breath, one flames retire,
               Then takes my bloud for oyle, his luſt, for fire.
            
            
               Now burnes the beacon of my ſoule, indeede,
               Too high for fame, but low enough for fume:
               Saints, keep your cloiſter-houſe, Veſta make ſpeede,
               Take in thy flowers, for feare the fire conſume
               Thy eternall-ſweete-Virginitie-perfume:
               For Luſt, and Bloud are mingled in one lampe,
               To ſeale my ſoule with Rape and Murders ſtampe.
            
            
               
               Before my ſhame, yon candle had no fire,
               Veſtals nil feard me, the world ſaw me not,
               Shame was the tinder, and the flint deſire
               That ſtrucke in Tarquins boſome, and begot
               A childe of fire, a firebrand, and ſo hot,
               That it conſumde my chaſtitie to duſt,
               And on my heart painted the mouth of luſt.
            
            
               Was I the cradle? O my chaſtitie,
               To rocke and lull this baſtard firebrand,
               N
                     •
                  rſt with my bloud, we and with my tragedie,
               Fed at my kniues ſharpe point vpon my hand,
               Borne and reborne, where ere my ſpirites ſtand?
               I was the cradle
                     •
                   ſee the fie
                     •…
                  e dart,
               That burnes Dianaes temples in my heart.
            
            
               
               Behold this blade varniſht with bloud and teares,
               Bloud from my heart, teares from my ſtilling eies,
               Behold (I ſay) this knife, whereon appeares
               
                  Veſtaes Vermiſion melting from her skies,
               And teares of pearles in bloudy miſteries;
               This is the Tragicke knife, here you may ſee,
               Teares ſtriue for fame, and bloud for chaſtitie.
            
            
               Right hand, thou act'ſt Reuenges hand aright:
               This knife and thou haue ſworne to kiſſe my breaſt,
               Thou art my Veſtaes antidote, to fright
               Luſt from the bed of Colatinus reſt:
               Performer of thy vow (hand) be thou bleſt.
               For thou in this haſt ſhowne me what thou art,
               Driuing the foe from ſcaling of my heart.
            
            
               
               Come ſpirit of fire, bred in a wombe of bloud,
               Forgd in a furnace by the Smith of hell,
               Begot and formed in that burning floud,
               Where Plutoes Phlegetonticke tennants dwell:
               And ſcalded ſpirits in their fiery cell,
               Breathes from their ſoule the flame of luxurie.
               From that luxurious clime I coniure thee.
            
            
               Now is my tyde of bloud: Come, quench thy ſoule,
               The ſluces of my ſpirit now runs againe:
               Come, I haue made my breaſt an luorie bowle,
               To hold the bloud that ſtreameth from my veyne,
               Drinke to my chaſtitie which thou haſt ſlaine:
               " But (woe the while) that labour is in vaine.
               " To drinke to that which cannot pledge againe
            
            
               
               Quaffe thine owne fill, and let that luſtfull flame:
               (That circuits in the circle of thy ſpirite
               Pledge thy deſire, carowſing off my ſhame,
               Which ſwimmes amidſt my bloud, and doth inherite
               The portion of my ſoule without a merite:
               And if this ſpring of bloud cannot ſuffize,
               Ile raine downe teares from my Elementall eies.
            
            
               Thou art my nurſe-child, Tarquin: thou art he,
               In ſteede of milke, ſucke bloud, and teares, and all,
               In liew of teats: Lucrece, thy nurſe, euen ſhe,
               By tragicke art ſeene through a Chriſtall wall,
               Hath carued with her knife thy feſtiuall:
               Here's bloud for milke, ſucke till thy veines run ouer,
               And ſuch a teat, which ſcarce thy mouth can couer.
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin the rauiſher oh at that name
               See how mine eies diſſolueth into teares.
               
                  Tarquin the Roman: I deſcribe my ſhame,
               Frorm Rome it came, a Romane name it beares.
               
                  Tarquin my gueſt: lo, here began my feares:
               
                  Tarquin from Ardea poſtes, hence ſprang the fire,
               " For Ardeas name ſounds ardent hot deſire.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin my kinſman: O Diuinitie,
               Where art thou fled? haſt thou for ſooke thy ſphaere?
               Where's Vertue, Knight-hood, and Nobilitie?
               Faith? Honor? Pietie? they ſhould be neere,
               For kinſman ſounds all theſe they are not here.
               
                  Tarquin my kinſman: was it thou didſt come,
               To ſacke my Colatines Collatium?
               
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin my kinſman, too vnkindly done,
               And by a kinſman too: my Ghoſt auers it,
               Doth thereſore that ſame name of kinred run,
               To ſee their kin-redde, and with bloud prefers it?
               " O enemie to faith, that ſtill defers it.
               Had Tarquin neuer luſtfull Tarquin beene,
               
                  Lucrece the chaſte ſhould haue chaſte Lucrece ſeene.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the Prince: had Rome no better heires,
               Thou miſtris of the world no better men,
               Thou Prodigalitie of Natures faires,
               Are Tygers kings? mak'ſt thou thy throne a den?
               Thy ſiluer-glittering ſtreames, blacke Lernaes fen?
               Thy ſeauen hilles that ſhould or'e looke thy euilles.
               Like ſeauen helles to nurſe vp Roman diuelles.
            
            
               
               To thee, (that makſt the Moone thy looking glaſſe,
               To view thy triple crowne, and ſeauen-fold head)
               To thee, I ſay, (the Ghoſt of what I was)
               Plaines mee and it, ſith thou ſo long haſt fed
               The rauiſher, and ſtarude the rauiſhed.
               " If Veſtaes lines were euer writ in thee,
               " Then weigh the blotting of thoſe lines in mee.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the Prince: ſham'ſt thou to heare thy name?
               
                  Rome, tis thy heire, ſham'ſt thou to call him ſonne?
               
                  Tarquin the Prince, lo Ile repeate thy ſhame,
               A Roman heire, from him to thee I runne,
               Ile ſhame you both before my ſhame be done:
               
                  Tarquin the Prince, Tarquin the Roman heire,
               Thus wil I haunt, and hunt you to diſpaire.
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin the traytor: bid my ſpirit riſe,
               And call vp al the ſenſes of my ſoule,
               " For treaſon ſhould be guarded with more eies,
               Then was Ioues lo vnder his controule,
               " For treaſons guile doth winne the traitors gole:
               
                  Tarquin the traytor: watch when time's in ſeaſon,
               " For treaſon doth betray all things to treaſon.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the lecher: virgin chaſtitie,
               Melts at the heate of that luxurious word,
               (Like maiden ſnow vpon a promontorie,
               Kiſsing the un her heauenly louely Lord,
               Then dies, and melts into a watry ford:)
               So did my chaſtities-white-ſnow attire,
               Diſſolue in bloud, at Tarquins luſtfull fire.
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin the night-owle: Chaſtitie beware,
               Thou art beſet with millions of deceits,
               Thy eies haue leaden liddes, they take no care,
               Thy ſenſes rockt aſleepe, and thy conceites
               Tempred with ſilence, feare nor ſnares, nor baites:
               Onely the veſtall pureneſſe of thy ſoule,
               Bade me beware that Night-obſeruing owle.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the Night-owle: in whoſe flaming eies,
               Luſt and Deſire banded their balles of bloud,
               Chaſing my ſpirit with fiery miſteries,
               Vnto the hazard where deſtruction ſtoode,
               Ready to ſtrike my ſoule into a clowde:
               So when the Sunne had ſeene my vapour riſe,
               Then with his beames to daſh me from the skies.
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin the Night-owle: watch deſtruction,
               What? hath the eies of Luſt no Iiddes at all?
               Or doe they houer for confuſion,
               Anſwering in ſilence when affections call?
               " When luſt awakes, the eie liddes neuer fall:
               " But like a courſer holding reaſons raine,
               " Doth ſhut the eies, and opens them againe.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the Night-owle Vesta, looke about,
               The fourth allarum of my feares now rings,
               And yet the houre of dread is ſcarce runne out,
               For midnights face more force of terror brings,
               To thinke on that, my ſinewes ſhake like ſtrings:
               And chaſtitie which yet had ſpirit and breath,
               Lay quauering at my heart to tune her death.
            
            
               
               
                  Tarquin the Night-owle: turne the glaſſe againe,
               Fiue times my tongue, the hammer of my ſoule,
               (That beates vpon my breath, and ſtrikes a ſtraine,
               " Sounding all quauers, thats the ſong of dole:)
               Fiue times my tongue did euen my tongue controule,
               " For feare is ſuch a ſlaue, and coward elfe,
               " That fearing others, runnes and feares himſelfe.
            
            
               
                  Tarquin the Night-owle: Enter trecherie,
               
                  Sextus Tarquinius, this ſixt houre is thine,
               Farewell my life, farewell my chaſtitie,
               Farewel (though not mine now) that which was mine,
               Thy grapes are now deuour'd, alas poore vine:
               The Tyr-ant with his force of luxurie,
               Tires mean Ant, through imbecillitie.
            
            
               
               Now enters on the ſtage of Lucrece heart,
               Blacke appe
                     •
                  ites in flamde habiliments:
               When they haue acted all, then they depart.
               Rape entring next, armed in murders tents,
               Wrackes Veſtaes tennants, and takes all her rents:
               " This ſhewes that Veſtaes Deitie is poore,
               " She hath the ſtalke, but Ve
                        ••…
                     
                   hath the ſtore.
            
            
               This is the tragicke ſceane: bleede hearts, weepe eies,
               Flie ſoule from bodie, ſpirit from my veines,
               Follow my chaſtitie where ere it lies,
               Which my vnhalowed body now refraines,
               Looke to the lampe of chaſtitie, it waines:
               The ſtarre which guided all my elements,
               Pulls in her head, and leaues the firmaments.
            
            
               
               Rape in his pawes of bloud, and fangs of Luſt,
               Hath ſtainde th'immaculate lillie of my field,
               And hath ſepulchred in the ſhade of duſt
               
                  Dianaes milken robe, and Veſtaes ſhield,
               " VVhen Tygers prey, the ſeely lambes muſt yeeld:
               VVhen Tarquin poſtes from Ardea, by and by
               
                  Lucrece muſt looſe her life and chaſtitie.
            
            
               O Colatine, where ſleepes thy troubled ſpirite?
               VVhat new come Morpheus hath arreſted thee?
               Doth thy heart ſoundly ſleepe? doth nothingſtirre it?
               Deare Colatine, awake, wert thou with mee
               The arches of mine eies would waken thee
               For teares like waues ruſh at my eie liddes doore,
               Striuing together who ſhould goe before.
            
            
               
               Come Colatine the foe hath ſackt thy cittie,
               
                  Collatium goes to wracke: come Colatine,
               
               Come Colatine, all pietie and pittie
               Is turnde to pettie treaſon: what is thine
               Is ceazde vppon long ſince: and what is mine
               " Carried away: true man thou ſleepſt at Rome,
               " Euen while a Roman theefe robs thee at home.
            
            
               Come Colatine, tis Lucrece bids thee come,
               Or ſhal I ſend my purſeuant of grones
               Vnto prowde Rome from poore Collatium,
               
               To make all priuate means by publique mones,
               Diſcourſing my blacke ſtorie to the ſtones?
               Come Colatine, tis Tarquins dreadfull drum,
               That coniures me to call, and thee to come.
            
            
               
               Thy Lucrece bed, which had faire canopies
               Spangled with ſtarres like to the firmament,
               And curtaines wrought with many deities,
               Reſembling Ioues white lacteall element,
               Are ſtained now by luſt and reuiſhment,
               The ſtarres out ſtarde, the deities defied,
               Theſe I had ſtorde, the other deified.
            
            
               The night before Tarquin and Luſt came hither,
               (Ill token for a chaſte memoriall,)
               My maides and I poore maide, did ſpin together,
               Like the three ſiſters, which the Fates we call,
               " And Fortune lent vs wheeles to turne withall;
               Round goes our wheeles like worlds, on mine alone
               Stoode fortune reeling on a rowling ſtone.
            
            
               
               Yet was my heart ſo light, that ſtill I ſaid,
               Sing merrily my maides, our wheeles goe round,
               (VVho would not ſing and ſpin, and be a maide,
               To ſerue ſo ſweete a Goddeſſe, and be bound
               Apprentiſe, where ſuch miſtreſſes abound?)
               Sing merrily my maides (againe ſhe ſayes,)
               For Veſta is the Goddeſſe of our layes.
            
            
               Maidens, quoth I, but thinke what maidens be,
               " They are the verie ſtring that ties their hearts,
               " The pillars of their ſoules pure puritie,
               " The diſtillations of th'eſſentiall parts,
               " Both good deſeruers, and the good deſarts:
               Then ſeeing Veſta hath ſo many trades,
               Go round our wheeles, ſing merrily my maides.
            
            
               
               VVhat nimble fingers hath Virginitie,
               To twiſt the thread, and turne the wheele about?
               O Virgines, that ſame pearle of chaſtitie
               Shines like the Moone, to light your thoughts throughout,
               " Pure cogitations neuer harbours doubt,
               But like the faireſt-pureſt chriſolite,
               Admits no bruiſe without a cracke with it.
            
            
               Spin merily my maiden-paradiſe,
               Thus with a merrie cheere I whirld their wheels,
               And made them rid at once more then at twice,
               " Such prettie pleaſure true affection feeles,
               " That times olde head runnes ſwifter then his heeles:
               " For mirths fledg'd wings, are of ſo quicke a flight,
               " I hat maks the morn ſeem noon, the noon ſeem night
            
            
               
               My maides, thoſe ayrie ſinewes in your hands,
               Were of a finer thred then that you ſpinne,
               It was a merry age in golden bands,
               When Saturne ſowed the earth, and did begin
               To teach bad husbands a new way to win:
               " Then was true labour exerciſde and donne,
               " When gods did reele, what Goddeſſes had ſponne.
            
            
               Thoſe times are waxen balde, a prowder ayre
               Blowes in the heauen, and breathes vpon the earth,
               That age is out of date, another heyre
               Claimes his poſſeſſion by an yron birth,
               And in an yron throne of death and dearth
               Rules this yong age, ſucking vntill it whine,
               Euen at the dugges of Plutoes proſerpine.
            
            
               
               Thus like Diana by a lillie fount,
               Sate I amidſt my veſtall elements,
               Thus did my ſelfe ſtill with my ſelfe account,
               To free my thoughts from chained diſcontents
               And ſtirre vp mirth, the nurſe of nouriſhments:
               Thus with a lightſome ſpirit and ſoules carouſe,
               I like a huſwife cheriſht vp my houſe.
            
            
               When Roman dames tickled with pride and luſt,
               Rauiſht with amorous Philoſophie,
               Printed the meaſures of their feete in duſt,
               Tempring their bloud with Muſickes harmonie,
               " (The very Synode-houſe of Venerie)
               Then I at home inſteade of melodie,
               Grated my wheele vpon the axeltree.
            
            
               
               How like Arachne turned I my wheele?
               Each of my maids how like a ſhepheardeſſe?
               Had Colatine my ſhepheard held the reele,
               We foure might well haue made a country meſſe,
               " But one abroade, makes one at home the leſſe:
               My Colatine my ſhepheard was at Rome,
               
               And left poore me to feede his flocke at home.
            
            
               Is Venus made a Laundreſſe to the Court?
               
                  Cupid her ſonne elected for a page?
               No maruaile if Dianaes ſtarres doe ſport
               With Venus planets vpon Cupids ſtage:
               " Yron muſt haue fire, this is an yron age:
               " Our ſoules like ſmithes with anuills of deſire,
               " Beate on our fleſh, and ſtill we ſparkle fire.
            
            
               
               The Princes Court is eu'n a firmament,
               All wrought with beames by day, and ſtarres by night,
               The Prince himſelfe the ſunnie element,
               From whence all beames and ſtarres do borow light,
               To paint their faces with a red and white:
               Thoſe beames embaſſadors of his bright array,
               Thoſe ſtarres his counſellors by night and day.
            
            
               How comes it then? ſpeake, ſpeake, Iniquitie,
               Thou blur of kingdomes, and thou blot of Kings,
               Thou Metamorphoſis of puritie,
               That ſhap'ſt the greater things to leſſer things,
               How comes it then, that Cupids bow-ſtring ſwings
               About the heeles of time? Iniquitie,
               It is the halter of thy luxurie.
            
            
               
               Thou haſt burnt out the humour of thy bones,
               And made them powders of impietie,
               To ſtrew about the earth as thicke as ſtones,
               Like wombes of luſt, in toombes of lecherie,
               And all thy ſinewes, O Iniquitie,
               Are ſo dried vp, and now ſo ſlender ſponne,
               " That Venus makes them bow-ſtrings for her ſonne.
            
            
               Where is the ſpring of blouds virginitie,
               That wont to ſerue thy veines like conduit heads,
               And clenſe thy ceſterne of iniquitie,
               With maiden-humours from chaſte Floraes meads?
               Then ſlepſt thou like a Lorde, in Honors beds:
               Then Vertue was thy bedfellow, now know,
               " As great an ebbe followes as great a flow.
            
            
               
               Loe, vnder that baſe tipe of Tarquins name,
               I cypher figures of iniquitie,
               He writes himſelfe the ſhamer, I the ſhame,
               The Actor hee, and I the tragedie,
               The ſtage am I, and he the hiſtorie:
               The ſubiect I, and he the rauiſher,
               He murdring me, made me my murderer.
            
            
               O Luſt, this pen of mine that writes thee luſt,
               Lies blaſted at the ſulphure of thy fire,
               The quill and fethers burnt to aſhie duſt,
               Like duſt and aſhes flies before Deſire,
               Vnable to endure thy flamd attire:
               " For in the skie of contrarietie,
               " The winners life is, when the looſers die.
            
            
               
               If l proceede: O fierie Incolants,
               Of that vaſt hell, which Pluto tearmes his haule,
               
                  Tarquins companions, ye I ſay that haunts
               The bankes of burning baths, to you I call,
               Send me Prometheus heart t'endite withall:
               And from his vultures wings a pen of bloud,
               Thrice ſteept and dipt in Phlegetonticke floud.
            
            
               Then ſhall I ſtamp the figure of the night
               On Tarquins brow, and marke him for her ſonne,
               The heire of darkneſſe, baſtard of the light,
               The clowde of heauen, th'e clipſer of the ſunne,
               The ſtaine in Veſtaes cheekes, which firſt begunne
               In Tarquins fleſh, begot of fiery duſt.
               " O thou the hell of loue, vntutred Luſt.
            
            
               
               " It bribes the fleſh to warre againſt the ſpirit,
               " With tickling bloud muſtring in euerie vaine,
               " It weanes the conſcience from her heauenly merit,
               " Deprauing all chaſte thoughts, het maiden traine,
               " It makes the heart thinke, and vnthinke againe:
               " It taints the breath with fire, the braine with bloud,
               " And ſets a diuel where a God had ſtood.
            
            
               Beeing in the eie, Luſt is a Cockatrice,
               
               " Hemlocke in taſte, a canker in the thought,
               " And in the life a moth, which in a trice
               Conſumes that treaſure which ſo deare was bought,
               And coſt ſo many dropps of bloud (for nought)
               So many ſtreames of bloud, and baths of ſweate,
               To bathe our ſpirites, and to quench our heate.
            
            
               
               O hell-eyde Luſt, when I behold thy face
               Praefigured in my Ghoſt, drawne in my mind,
               I thinke of Sydons flowers that grow apace,
               And fauour thee by qualitie and kind,
               " They looke like faith before, and fame behind:
               But if thou ſauour theſe well-fauoured euills,
               They haue the ſight of gods, the ſent of deuills.
            
            
               If I had like a curious herbaliſt,
               Meaſurde thy quantitie by qualitie,
               Or Eſculapius-wiſe, on Reaſons fiſt,
               Had planted vertue by the propertie,
               Or with the lapidaries policie
               " Made choice by inſight, thats the note of wit,
               And not by outward hue to iudge of it,
            
            
               
               Then like that skilfull Eſculapius,
               
               (Setting apart the colour of deceit)
               I might haue knowne Tarquin from Tyreus,
               
               And Lucrece bed from Philomelaes baite,
               
                  Vesta concei
                     •
                  'd what Venus did conceit:
               But wanting Eſculapius in my choice,
               I left ſweete verdure for a flattering voice.
            
            
               " Did Beautie that ſame bauins blaze, incenſe thee?
               " That flower of 
                     •…
                  me which buds with vanitie,
               " That ſtring of fortunes wheel, which doth commence thee
               The graduate of hell borne iniquitie,
               Was beautie made the marke of luxurie?
               Then heauens from henceforth let the world behold
               " Beautie in lead, deformitie in gold.
            
            
               
               Say Beauties beames dazled thy clowdie eies,
               " This Beautie hangs but at the heeles of time,
               And when times wings a loftier meaſure flies,
               Then Beautie like poore Iearus muſt clime,
               Or plunge into the puddle of her ſlime:
               " For Beauties limmes are of a waxen frame,
               " And melts like Icarus wings at euery flame.
            
            
               Sawſt thou the colours which quaint Phydias drew,
               In dead-liue pictures with a touch of art.
               Such red and white hath Beautie being new,
               Made onely to amazeth' amazers heart,
               Yet Phydias colours piercing like a dart
               Were ſtaind with euery breath, and loſt their prime,
               " So Beauties blot drops from the pen of time.
            
            
               
               But O my heauen, ſhall I forget thy ſpheres,
               O ſpheres of heauen, ſhall I let paſſe your skies?
               O skies which weares out time, and neuer weares,
               Shall I make dim the tapers of your eies?
               O eies of heauen, Sunne, Moone, and ſtarres that riſe
               To wake the day, and free impriſoned night,
               Shall my obliuious vapour clowde your light?
            
            
               T'is thou ô chaſtitie, ſhall I ſorſake thee,
               Or drowne thy memorie in my bloudy ſtreame?
               Remember ô my ſoule, did ſhe not make thee
               Out of Dianaes ribbes? did not that beame,
               (Which gliſters in thy ſpirit like Ioues-eie-gleame,)
               Reflect from Vestaes face vpon thy heart,
               Like Phoebus brow the pride of heauens art.
            
            
               
               O thou that mak'ſt the Via Lactea whiter,
               " That virgin-gallery of maieſticke Ioue,
               
               " Faire Iunoes maze, to foote it, doth delight her,
               " The ſiluer path of heauen, and bath of loue,
               There ſits the lambe, the ſwanne, the turtle doue,
               Enſignes of peace, of faith, and chaſtitie:
               " O ſiluer ſtage to golden harmonie.
            
            
               " That quire of ſaints in virgin-ornament,
               " Where Angells ſing like queriſters of heauen,
               " Where all the Martyrs kneele the element
               " Where Cynthiaes robe, and great Apolloes ſteauen,
               Hangs at the altar of this milken hauen:
               And to conclude, not able to begin,
               I write of that which fleſh hath neuer ſeene.
            
            
               
               Twas thou ô chaſtitie m'eternall eie,
               The want of thee made my ghoſt reele to hell,
               Twas thou ô chaſtitie, that guild'ſt the skie
               With beames of vertue, it is thou doſt dwell
               In that white-milken-chriſtall-ſiluer cell:
               Thou laundreſſe to the gods aud goddeſſes,
               Waſhing their ſoules in fonts of holineſſe.
            
            
               O thou that deckſt our Phoebus in the Eaſt,
               Circling his temples with ſpirituall beames,
               And guides his veſtall chariot to the weſt,
               Through that pure chriſtall tracke of lacteall ſtreames,
               Siluering his wheeles with alablaſter gleames,
               Then tempring the bright porphurie of his face,
               " With chaſte Endimions bluſh, the die of grace.
            
            
               
               That doing dutie to his father Ioue
               
               Vpon his knee of fire, bids him ariſe,
               And bleſſing all his beames with kiſſing loue,
               Like a maieſticke father guilds his eies,
               To adde a rarer ſhine vnto the skies,
               Then takes his chariot with a brighter pride,
               And cries alowd, S. Vesta be my guide.
            
            
               S. Veſta, O thou sanctifying Saint,
               That lends a beame vnto the cleereſt Sunne,
               Which els within his fiery courſe would faint,
               And end his race ere he had halfe begun,
               Making the world beleeue his power were done,
               His oyle burnt out, his lampe returnde to ſlime,
               His fires extinguiſhde by the breath of time.
            
            
               
               " O thou the pearle that hangs on Iunoes brow,
               " Like to the Moone the maſſie pearle of night,
               " Thou iewel in the eare of Ioue, to ſhow
               The pride of loue, the puritie of light,
               " Thou Atlas of both worlds, vmpire of right:
               " Thou hauen of heauen, th'aſſigner of each ſigne,
               " Sanctities ſaint, Diuinities diuine.
            
            
               " O thou the ſiluer taper of the Moone,
               Set in an alablaſter candleſticke,
               That by the bed of heauen at afternoone,
               Stands like a lillie (which faire virgins picke,
               To match it with the lillie of their cheeke:
               " Thou lillie lambe, thou chriſtall fether'd doue,
               That neſtles in the pallace of thy Ioue.
               
            
            
               
               O touch my veins againe, thou bloud diuine,
               O feede my ſpirit thou foode angelicall,
               And all chaſte functions with my ſoule combine.
               Colour my ghoſt with chaſtitie, whoſe All
               Feedes fat leane Death and time in generall:
               Come ſiluer doue, heauens alablaſter nunne,
               Ile hugge thee more then euer I haue donne.
            
            
               
                  Lucrece, alas, thou picture of thy ſelfe,
               " Drawne poore and pale by that old painter time,
               " And ouerdaſht by Death that meagre elfe,
               Which dries our element of bloud to thime,
               And tempreth our old aſhes with new ſlime:
               
                  Lucrece I ſay how canſt thou Lucrece bee?
               " Wanting a God to giue a life to thee.
            
            
               
               Bleede no more lines, (my heart,) this Knife, my pen,
               This bloud my incke, hath writ enough to Luſt,
               " Tarquin, to thee thou very diuell of men
               I ſend theſe lines, thou art my fiend of truſt,
               To thee I dedicate my toombe of duſt:
               To thee I conſecrate this little-Moſt,
               Writ by the bloudy fingers of my Ghoſt.
            
            
               This little ſcrole of fire (that burnes my hand,
               In repetition of thy fiery name)
               I fold vpon my heart (my bloudy land)
               And to thy ghoſt my ghoſt doth ſend the ſame,
               " Intituled, The lines of bloud and flame,
               
               " The Ghoſt of Lucrece, thats the Ghoſt of bloud,
               " The Ghoſt of Tarquin, thats the fiery floud.
            
            
               
               Now for thy title, and deſerued ſtile,
               In dedication to thy worthineſſe,
               " To thee the ſecond of Cocytus Ile,
               " Chiefe ſenior to the Phlegetonticke meſſe,
               " High ſteward vnto Plutoes holineſſe:
               " Temprer of flames, the L. Tyſiphonie,
               
               My bloudy fires begs patronage of thee.
            
            
               Now lacke I nothing but the poſt of hell,
               To flie like Veſtaes arrow from my bow
               With theſe my red hot newes, and then to tell
               " How many times my heart did ebbe and flow,
               (Like ſeas) with teares aboue, and bloud below:
               And from poore Lucrece mouth tell Tarquin thus,
               That Philomel hath writ to Tyreus.
               
            
            
               
               Here ſtops the ſtreame of tragicke bloud and fire,
               And now Melpomene hales my ſpirit in,
               The ſtage is downe, and Philomelaes quire
               Is huſht from prick-ſong: Acherons bells begin
               To call our ghoſts clad in the ſpirits of ſin:
               Now Tyreus meets with rauiſhde Philomel,
               
               
                  Lucrece with Tarquin; in the haule of hell.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Epilogue.
            
               
                  RHamnuſia in a chariot of Reuenge,
               Heapt vp with Ghoſts of bloud, and ſpirits of fire,
               Hath pilde vp Lucrece Ghoſt, ſo to auenge
               Her chaſte vntimely bloud, of flamde deſire:
               Now at the barre of hell (Reuenges quire)
               Pleades Lucrece with a tongue of teares and blouds,
               Firſt ſpeakes her heart, and then her eies, in flouds.
            
            
               Can death that ſhrimpe of ſpirits, that bonie wretch,
               That meagre-element, that begger god,
               From Lucrece skie ſuch heauenly colours fetch?
               From beauties wriſt to wreſt that golden rod,
               Which makes all red and white diſpearſe abroad?
               Deaths power is come, and beauties triumph paſt,
               She was as chaſt as faire, as faire as chaſt.
            
            
               Her haire which in Arachnes fineſt loome,
               Was kiſt with ſiluer ſhickles, O that haire,
               Which made Collatium ſhine in ſpight of Rome,
               
               Keaming her trefses, like Ioues golden heire,
               He made Rome bright, ſhe made Collatium faire: (breath
               That haire which daunc'ſt in beames before her
               Serues now to ſtuffe the gaping ribbes of death.
            
            
               
               Her eies the curious fabricke of her world,
               
                  Apolloes touchſtones where he tride his beames,
               And when her eies outmatcht his fires: he hurld
               His crowne of ſplendour into quenching ſtreames,
               Raging to ſee beauties enrowled theames
               Writ in her eie-rowles: but alas, thoſe eies
               Which liu'de in beautie, now in beautie dies.
            
            
               Her tongue which Orpheus tunde beforehe dide,
               And ſtrung before he 
                     •
                  ou
                     •
                  nied vnto hell,
               That new Pernaſſus by a riuers ſide,
               Where muſicke ſoiournes, and the Muſes dwell,
               O tongue of hers, Dianaes ſiluer bell,
               That rung chaſte praiers to the church of heauen,
               Now ſhe of it, and it of her bereauen.
            
            
               Her breath which had a violet perfume
               Tempred with roſe alverdure, O her breath,
               Through diſcorde of her tongne, did all conſume
               Vnto the ayre of earth, ſhe did bequeath
               That penſion of her life, from life to death:
               How ill was this beſt owde on Death, that elfe,
               " Which robs all others, yet ſtill poore it ſelfe.
            
            
               
               Her teates, twixt whom an alablaſter bridge
               Parts each from other; like two chriſtall bowles
               (Standing aloofe vpon the bodies ridge)
               Beares chaſtities white-Nectar-flowing ſoules,
               O valley deckt with Floraes ſiluer roules:
               Why giueſt thou ſuck to death? it wil be fed,
               For know, death muſt not die till all be dead.
            
            
               And to conclude, her all in euery ſphaere,
               (That like the Sunne on chriſtall elements)
               Did ſhine in cleereneſſe bright, in brightneſſe cleere,
               Her head her skies, her ſoule her firmaments,
               Now ſtaind by death, before by rauiſhments:
               Firſt Tarquin-life, clad her in deaths array,
               Now Tarquin-death, hath ſtolne her life away.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   