
      
         
            
            
            A ryghte excellente treatiſe of Aſtronomie, made in the Thuſcane or Italian tongue, by maiſter Antonius De Montulmo, called in latin Facies coeli, the face of the Heuēs wherin a man may ſee tofore hand the mutations of the ayre that ſhall happen for this preſent yeare of our lorde 1554, & 1555, next folowyng, declaryng alſo what diſeaſes, warres, peſtilence, dearth of victuals ſhal happen to them that dwelle in the eyght climate vnder the eleuation of the pole Artike 52. degrees as the inhabitantes of the moſt part of England do dwelle. Tranſlated into Engliſh by Frederike van Brunſwike.
            
            
               Imprinted at London, by Thomas Marſhe, dwellyng in Fleteſtrete, at the ſygne of the princes armes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               FOr aſmuche, as God whiche is the begynnynge of all Creatures, (good gentle reader) hath made man to his own ſimilitude and likenes, whereby he is almoſte cōparable to the holy Aungels of God, who is it then that wyll denye that man maye by the diſpoſicion of the ſtarres prognoſticate thynges to come, as Beroſus Chaldeus writeth, that holy Noe did vnto the Armenians & Scithians after the vniuerſall deluge or floude, wherfore thei called hym the partaker of the mind of God. Moreouer, S. Hierome writeth, that what ſo euer can be comprehēded with humane vnderſtanding is ruled by the wheles of the ſunne. Wherefore in aſmuche as bothe the diuine & the prince of Philoſophers Ariſtotle in his boke de generatione & corruptione confeſſeth that propter acceſſum & receſſum ſolis in curculo obliquo fiūt generationes & corruptiones ī mūdo ſublunari: It foloweth that knowynge the diſpoſicion of the

celeſtiall bodies, by the whiche all elementate bodies be ruled, that we men may by the ſcience of Aſtronomie (whiche ſcience Petrus Caneracenſis calleth worthyly naturall theologie (prognoſticatyng as is aforſayd thyngs to come, as mutations of the ayre, peſtilences, and al other infirmities, warre penurie, peace, or plentie of virtuals, whyche depende of the heauens as ſeconde cauſes of God, to ſuche effectes, appoynted wherfore (good gentill reader) the premiſſes beyng wel penſed, I deſyre the not to take all thynges that ſhall bee prognoſticated in this yeares prognoſtication and the next yeres prognoſtication as contigentes of fatall neceſſitie, but that it ſhall chaunce, if god doo not forbyd, thus I bydde thee well to fare.
            
               
               ¶ The firſt Chapiter.
               
                  COnſideryng firſte the enteryng of the Sunne into the firſte minute of the hed of Aries, in ye ninth ſphere whiche is the firſte beginnyng of our yere Aſtronomical, I find the twentie and fower of Libra aſcendent, theightene of Scorpio, the beginnyng of the ſeconde houſe, the twentie and one of Sagitari the beginnyng of the third houſe, the ſecond of Aquarius the beginnyng of the fowerth houſe, the eight of Piſces the beginnyng of the .v. houſe, the third of Aries, the beginnyng of the ſixt houſe, the twentie and fower of Aries the beginnyng of the ſeuenth houſe, the eightene of Taurus, the beginnyng of the eight houſe, the twentie and one of Gemini, the beginnyng of the nineth houſe, the ſeconde of Leo the beginnyng of the tenth houſe, the eight of Virgo, the beginnyng of the eleuēth houſe, the third of Libra the beginnyng of the twelueth houſe, Sull in the firſte of Aries, Luna in the eightene degree of Gemini, Saturnus in the twentie and two degre of Piſces, Iupiter .xxix.

of Virgo retrograde. Mars the .xxvi. of Piſces, Venus in the xiii. of Piſces, Mercurius in the eighte of Piſces, I take vpon this figure, Mercurius to be the lorde of the firſt quarter of the yere, vntill the Sunne entre vnto the firſt of Cancer, whiche ſhalbe the .xii. of Iune this yere, and I make Venus partaker with hym. Wherefore as for the diſpoſicion of the aire, it ſhalbe rainy and ſtormie, ſpecially the moſte parte of all Marthe nexte, and greate windes, and in Aprill next haile, ſpecially about the

                  
nineth of Aprill many daies before and many daies after the daie aforeſaied. And in Maie rainie and windie, ſpcially the firſt weeke before Whitſondaie. Thus I haue generally touched the diſpoſiciō of the firſt quarter of this yere.
            
            
               ¶ The ſeconde Chapiter, of the diſpoſicion of the next quarter Aſtronomicall, beginnyng the .xiii. of Iune twentie and twoo minute after .vii. of the clocke in the Mornyng.
               THE figure of the whole heauen, ſhalbe thus, the degre aſcendent, the fiueth of Leo, the twētie and fower of Leo, the ſeconde-houſe, the fowerteneth of Virgo, the beginnyng of the thirde houſe, the thirtene of Libra, the beginning of the fowerth houſe, the twentie and ſixe of Scorpio, the beginnyng of the fiueth houſe, the nineth of Capricorne, the beginnyg of the ſixte houſe, the fiueth of Aquarie, the beginnyng of the ſeuenth houſe, the twentie and fower of Aquarie, the beginnyng of theight houſe, the fowertenth of Piſces, the beginnyng of the nineth houſe,

the thirtene of Aries, the beginnyng of the .x. houſe, the .xxvi. of Taurus, the beginnyng of the eleuenth houſe, the .ix. of Cancer, the beginnyng of the twelueth houſe, Sol in the firſte minute of Cancer, Luna in theightene of Scorpio, Saturnus in the firſt minute of Aries, Iupiter in the .xxv. of Virgo, Mars the fowerth of Gemini, Venus theight of Cancer, Mercurius in the fiftene of Gemini. And the lady of the houre ſhalbe Venus. Vpō this figure I perceiue that Sol is the chiefeſt dominatour of

                  
the ſeconde quarter before mencioned, who committeth his diſpoſicion by a quarter aſpert of Saturne, beyng lorde of the eight houſe, the houſe of death, by the whiche it is ſignified, that there that be this yere greate death, and ſpecially this quarter, whiche ſhalbee very hotte and drie.
            
            
               ¶ The .iii. Chapiter of the third quarter of the yere aforeſaid, that is to ſaie, thentrie of the Sunne into the firſt minute of Libra, the thirtene of September, eighte houres, fiuetene minutes, fortie ſecondes after Noone.
               THE ſite or figure ſhalbee this of the heauens at the tyme and hower aforeſaied, the ſixt of Gemini the aſcendente, the thirde of Cancer, the beginnyng of the ſeconde houſe, the third, the eightene of Cancer, the third of Leo, the fowerth houſe, the twentie and fiue, of Leo the fift houſe, the ſixte houſe the eleuenth of Libra the ſixte of Sagitari the ſeuenth houſe, the thirde of Capricorne theight houſe, the .xviii. of Capricorne the nineth houſe, the .iii.

of Aquarius the tenth houſe, the .xxv. of Aquarius the .xi. houſe the .xi. of Aries the .xii. houſe, the ſunne in the fyrſte minute of Libra, the moone in the .i. degree of Taurus, Saturnus in the 27. of Piſces retrogade ♃, in the xi. of Libra, ☿, in the .v. of Leo, Venus in the ii. of Scorpio, ♂ in the .xix. of Libra retrograde, vpō this figure I ſee Venus to be ladye of this quarter and I finde Sol to be Lord of the houre, and that Luna from Taurus with an appoſite aſpecte committeth her diſpoſicion to

                  
Venus, and Venus ouer Mars by aquarte aſpecte by the whiche it is ſignified that in that quarter aboute the beginnyng ſhalbe greate thonder, and aboute the ende rainie weather.
            
            
               ¶ The fourth chapter of the .iiii. quarter of the yere of our lord aforeſaied, that is to ſaie, the entre of the ſūne in to the firſt minute of Capricorne .xii. houres xlvii. minutes .xxxii. ſecō
                  des after none in the xi. of December the yere aforeſaied.
               THe figure of the heauens thalbee thus as foloweth, the degree aſcendente, the nineth of Libra, the thirde of Scorpio the ſeconde hous, the thirde houſe, the fowerth of Sagitarie the xi. of Capricorne the beginnyng of the fourth houſe, the 17. of Aquarie the fifth houſe, the .xv. of Piſces the .vi. houſe, the ix. of Aries the ſeuenth houſe the .iii. of Taurus the. viii, houſe, the fourth of Gemini the ninth houſe, the eleuenth of Cancer the tenth houſe. 17.

of Leo the eleuenth houſe, the ſixtene of Virgo the twelue houſe, the Sunne in the firſte Minute of Capricorne, the Moone in the third of Leo, Saturnus in the twentie and fower of Piſces, Iupiter in the twentie and nine of Libra, Mars in theightene of Virgo, Venus in the ſeuentene of Aquarius, Mercurius in the thirtene of Capricorne, vpō this figure I perceiue Venus to be lady and Mercuri her parteiner, wherefore it ſhalbee moche enclined to Rain and winde moſte parte of this quarter.
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The fyft Chapiter declaryng the fygure of the heauens at the eclipſe of the ſunne, whiche ſhall be the yeare aboue ſayde, xxix. of Iune vii. houres .xxxi. minu. after noone.
               ☉ The firſt houſe whiche is called the aſcēdent the .iii. of Capricorne, the .ii. houſe, the xiiii. of Aquarie, the thirde houſe, the viii. of Aries, the eight of Taurus, the fourthe houſe, the xxvi. of Taurus the .v. houſe, the eleuenth of Gemini, the vi. houſe, the third of Cancer the ſeuenth houſe, the xiiii. of Leo the eight houſe, the viii. of Libra the ninth houſe the tenth houſe, theight of Scorpio, the xxvi. of Scorpio the eleuenth houſe the xi of Sagittarius the xii. houſe, the ſon in the xvii. of Cancer, ye moone alſo in the xvii. of Cancer. Saturne in the firſt degree of Aries, Iupiter in ye xxvii. of Virgo, Mars in ye xvi of Gemini, Venus in ye xxix. of Cancer, Mercurius in ye xxviii. of Gemini I take vppō this figure celeſtial Iupiter to be lorde, who is in the eight houſe, & in the dominion

of Mercurius, whiche ſignifieth great death ſhal happen through hote feuers ſubuertyng the memorie of men, makyng them to raue & to rage as madde men without any reaſon, and this ſhal happen moſte amonge noble men and amongeſt boyes not paſſyng .xiiij. yeares, and amongeſt yonge women.
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The figure of the heauens at the tyme of the Eclipſe of the moon, which ſhalbe theight of December xiiii. houres .xx. minutes after noone the yeare of our Lorde aboueſayd, 1554.
               
                  ☽ The degree aſcendēt the 23. of Libra, the xvi. of Scorpio the ſeconde houſe: the thirde houſe the .xix. of Sagittarie, the fourth hous the firſte of Aquarius the fifth houſe the vi. of Piſces, the ſecond of Aries the vi. hous, the ſeuenth hous the xxiii. of Aries theight houſe, the xvi. of Taurus, the .xix. of Gemini the ninth houſe, the tēth houſe the firſt of Leo, the eleuenth the vi. of Virgo, the xii. houſe the ſecond of Libra, the ſunne in the .xxvii. of Sagittary, the moon in the xxvii. of Gemini eclipſed in the ninth houſe of the heauēs Saturnus in the 24 of Piſces in the fiueth houſe, Iupiter in the .xxviii. of Libra in the firſt houſe of the heauens, Mars in the xvii. of Virgo in the xi. houſe of Venus in ye xiiii. of Aquari in ye fourth houſe, Mercurius in ye nynth of

Capricorne in the thirde houſe, I take vpon this figure celeſtiall Mercurius to bee Lorde, and the moone to bee the particular lady of the houſe of henour and kyngdomes, who beyng totally obſcured and darkned in the nynth houſe ſignifieth that there ſhalbe an occaſion of vniuerſall mournyng.
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The particular declaracion of the wether for this preſente yere. Anno. Domini. 1554.
               
                  ¶ Ianuary.
                  
                     THE firſte daie ſomewhat enclined to bee colde and moieſt, but the trinalle aſpect of Iupiter and Mars excityng and ſtirryng vp a Northeaſt winde will make Snowe: the ſeconde daie more windie and cold then before. The thirde daie faire and whitiſhe ruddie cloudes ſparkelyng aboute the ſkie, and a ſtrong North eaſt winde. The fowerth daie very faire, the winde eaſterne. The .v. at mornyng very windie, but at a .xi. of the clocke, or els at midnight, it will thawe the ſnow that fell afore. The ſixe, cloudie & moiſt The ſeuen daie it ſhalbee thawe. The viii. ſomewhat faire in the mornyng, a ſmall eaſt winde, but aboute .xii. of the clocke, it will be fairer wether then before, and all the .ix. daie windie. The .x. daie ſomewhat enclined to moiſture, but that is to bee thoughte that the trinall aſpect of Sol and Iupiter, beyng Orientall, will ſtirre a Northe Eaſte

winde, that the effecte of this moiſture ſhall not appeare. The eleuenth in the mornyng faire, but afterwardes colde, and cloudy wether. The twelue daie in the Mornyng, ſomewhat windie. The thirtene daie more windie then before, and whitiſhe cloudes ſparkeled aboute the heauen, and all the daie faire. The fowertene daie faire weather. The .xv. daie windie, more then before: The ſixtene ſomewhat colde, and moieſt. The ſeuentene, colde and moieſt: The .xviii. ſomewhat windie and faire weather. The nineteneth daie faier and more windie: the twētie daie in the mornyng ſomewhat windie, and ſomewhat towardes night enclined to coldneſſe and moiſture: the like weather the .xxi. daie, the .xxii. daie temperate wether: the. xxiii daie ſomewhat windie weather: The xxiiii. faire in the Mornyng, but a litle before noone and after, colde and rain, but it wil breake vp, and be faire about fower aclocke in the after noone, again the fiue & twentie daie windie: the .xxvi. daie colde and cloudie till nighte, but then it will breake vp: The .xxvii. faire weather, and windie all that daie. The xxviii. daie cloudie, and colde, but about

one of the clocke after Midnighte, this weather will chaunge, and it will bee faire the .xxix. daie, & in the after noone waxe windie: the thirtie daie ſomewhat enclined to colde and moieſture, but I thinke the applicaciō corporall betwixt Mars & Mercurie, will cauſe windes, takyng awaie theſaied enclinacion of moieſture: the .xxxi. daie faire, & windie.
               
               
                  ¶ Februarie.
                  THE firſt daie of Februarie very windie: the ſecōd a faire daie: the iii. a colde cloudie daie: the .iiii. a colde, and ſomewhat a moieſt daie: the v. windy: the .vi. faire: the .vii. ſomewhat colde and moiſt, and that ſhall continue all the eight daie: the .ix. daie faire & ſomewhat windie, but about .ix. of the clocke at night, this faire wether wil chaunge to a colde, and moiſt wether: the .x. ſomewhat windie, and cloudie withall: the xi. daie ſomewhat windie, & a faire daie the .xii. daie colde, and cloudie: the .xiii. ſomewhat enclined to raine: The .xiiii. ſomewhat windie: the xv. more windie then before, with ſhowers the ſame day and ſome Haile withall, becauſe of the Coniunccion corporall of Venus and

Mercurius, and Sol, and Mars, with an applicaciō of Mars vnto Saturne, whiche will cauſe the wether aboueſated. The ſixtene daie ſomewhat temperatly colde. The ſeuentene daie faire wether, and ſunnie. The eightene daie cloudie, and ſomewhat moieſt. The. xix daie faire wether. The .xx. daie winde, ſpecially in the forenone, but in the after Noone, ſomewhat enclined to driſlyng rain. The .xxi. ſhalbee enclined to moieſture. The .xxii. faire wether. The xxiii. ſomewhat enclined to moieſture. The .xxiiii. ſomewhat enclined to windineſſe and faire wether. The .xxv. ſhalbee cloudie, and ſomewhat enclined to moieſture with Haile. The .xxvi. faire weather, and ſomewhat windie. The xxvii. rain and Haile, and a colde daie. The .xxviii. daie rain, and Haile, with greate coldneſſe.
               
               
                  ¶ Marche.
                  THE firſte daie of Marche ſomewhat windie, and at night a cold driflyng Rain, and therefore a manne might ſaie very litle, or none. The thirde daie rain and haile, and the ſame ſhall continue almoſte till eighte

of the clocke in the nighte, then it will breake vp. The .v. daie altogether colde wether, rain, and Haile. The ſixt daie in the after Noone ſomewhat windie. The ſeuenth, Rain, colde weather, and Haile. The ſame wether the eight daie but towardes nighte ſomewhat faire, and diſpoſed to winde, and ſmall driſlyng rain. The nineth daie greate blaſtes of windes, keping rain awaie, rain with ſome lightenyng and thunder the tenth daie. The eleuenth daie a litle winde with rain. The twelueth cloudy The. xiii, rain, and ſome Lightenyng before, and aboute Sunne riſyng that daie, and in the after noone faire weather. The fowertenth daie, becauſe of the oppoſicion of Mars and Iupiter, there ſhalbee rain, and lightenyng, or thunder. The fiuetenth daie ſomewhat enclined to moieſture. The ſixteneth ſomewhat Cloudie, colde, and windie with ſome ſhowers the ſeuēteneth daie The eighteneth daie, becauſe of the cō
                     iunccion of Saturnus, and Venus, very colde, and greate rain. The ninetēth daie becauſe of the coniunccion of Saturnus and Marcurius Rainie, and ſomewhat windie withall, the twentie

and .xxi. day rayne: the .xxii. day faire weather, and very greate wynde with darke cloudes: the xxiii. faire weather. the xxiiii. cloudye and colde: the .xxv. daye fayre, and ſomewhat wyndye: the xxvi. daye all the mornyng tyll after noone, ſomewhat colde, cloudy and wyndye: The xxvii. daye fayre, and a ſtronge wynde, bycauſe of the coniunction of Mars and Mercurius, in a fyry ſygne, that is to ſay, in Aries. the xxviii. fayre: the xxix. a fayre day. the .xxx. wyndy, and cloudye: the xxxi. fayre weather.
               
               
                  ¶ Apryll.
                  THe fyrſt of Apryl the yere aboue ſayd a very fayre hotte day: the ſecond a temperate daie: the .iii. a fayre daye ſomewhat hote: the fourth day a faire day: the .v. day a fair daye: the .vi. daye a fayre day: the .vii. viii .ix. days of Aprill, ſhowers ſhal happen with ioyned, or myxed with hayle, and temperate wynd: the .x. day faire: the .xi. day ſomwhat diſpoſed to be faire with reddyſhe cloudes bryngyng▪ with them ſomtime an Aprill ſhoure. A faire

day ſhall the xii. be: the xiii. day windy. the xiiii. day colder then it was before, and cloudy: the xv. day a faire day: the xvi. a faire daye with white and redde Cloudes, ſparkeled aboute the ſkye: the xvii. day a fayre day, and ſomwhat a wyndye daye: the .xviii. daye more wynd, and that al the nyght folowyng tyll fiue a clocke in the mornynge, in the xix. of April then colder then before and cloudy: the. xx day wyndye: the .xxi. day more wyndy then before: the .xxii. daye colde driſlyng rayne, with a lytle wind: the xxiii. ſomewhat cloudy, but after one howre after noone wyndye: the xxiiii. fayre weather: the xxv. ſomewhat wyndye and fayre, and hotte at nyghte: the xxvi. daye ſwete ſhoures, but after towarde nyghte fayre weather: the xxvii. wyndye, in the begynnyng, and cloudye towardes nyghte: the xxviii. in the mornynge, and moſte parte of the day, wyndy and temperate weather: the xxix. temperate weather and the xxx. alſo, becauſe of the trinall aſpect betwixt Sol, and Iupiter in terreſtriall ſignes, whyche cauſeth temperate drought.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Maie.
                  THe firſt daie faire wether with a temperate winde. The ſeconde daie ſomewhat Cloudie in the mornyng, but moſte parte of the daie, after faire, and hotte. The thirde daie faie, and windie in the after none. The fowerth daie cloudie, and windie. The fiurth daie, faire and hot. The ſixth day faire wether. The ſeuenth daie temperate wether. The eight daie ſomewhat windie. The nineth daie raine, windie withall and haile. The tenth daie faire and ſomewhat windie. The eleuenth windie, colde, and rain with haile. The twelueth daie in the fore Noone faire wether. The thirteneth daie ſomwhat windie. The fowerteneth daie a faire daie. The fifteneth ſweete ſhowers of Rain, with redde and ſomewhat whitiſhe cloudes ſparkeled aboute the heauen. The ſixtene daie cloudy, and ſomewhat colder then before. The .xvii. daie faire in the mornyng aboute Sunne riſyng, but within an hower or twoo, ſomwhat diſpoſed to ſhowers of milde Rain. The eighteneth till it bee noone and paſte, windie and faire, but ſomewhat

cloudier then before, in the afternoone. The nineteneth faire weather. The twentie daie faire, but after none cloudie. The .xxi. faire, and a breakyng vp of theſaied Cloudes. The .xxii. faire and ſomwhat temperatly windie. The xxiii. daie faire, but aboute midnighte ſomewhat enclined to moieſture. The xxiiii. faire and ſomewhat windie all that daie and night alſo, but the .xxv. aboute the Sunne riſyng cloudie. The xxvi. faire and clere wether, in the mornyng, and in the after noone ſomwhat to wind enclined. The .xxvii. and. xxviii daie enclined to faire wether and drie, with lightnyng alſo. The .xxix. the wether ſhalbe faire and windie, but therewith cloudie. The .xxx. daie very windy the .xxxi. daie windie with cloudes like to bryng ſhowers, but it ſhall holde vp.
               
               
                  ¶ Iune.
                  THE firſt of this monethe ſhalbe faire and temperate wether. The ſeconde windie and temperate. The thirde in the mornyng faire, but after noone cloudie. The fowerth a tē
                     perate weather with ſome winde. The fiueth cloudie, as though it would rain

but the quarte aſpect betwixt Sol and Iupiter wyll take it awaye: the ſixte daye greate wyndes with rayne and hayle: the ſeuen th daye wyndye: the eyght day in the mornynge fayre, but about after noone rayne and hayle: the nynthe day drye and ſomwhat wyndy. the tenthe fayre, and ſomewhat hotter then before: the eleuenth ſhall be a cold and moyſte daye. And you ſhall haue aboute the xii. of Iune aforeſayd rayne and hayle: the xiii. of Iune aforeſayde in the mornynge cloudye, in the afternoone fayre, but ſomewhat to hotte, the xiiii. of Iune aforeſayde ſommewhat wyndy in the mornynge, and the ſame wynde is lyke to continue all the ſame day, the xv. of Iune aforeſaid cloudy in the forenoone, but after noon faire and ſomwhat hot wether: The .xvi. of Iune aforeſaid in the morning ther ſhalbe a litle ſwete dew of raine, y xvii. of Iune in the mornyng ſomwhat windye, but faire wether with whyte cloudes, but at tenne a clocke cloudye and cloſe, and at after noon: and ſpecially that nyght ſomewhat hotter then it was before, the xviii. daye aboute the after noone wyndye ſomewhat hotter then before:

The .xix. fayre and at nyght very hote, the .xx. aboute .ii. of the clocke at after noone ſome ſwete dewe of rayne ſhall falle, but very lyttell to ſpeake of: all the reſte of the day it ſhall bee wyndye and all the nyght alſo: The xxi. altogether cloudye. The xxii. fayre and hote, but aboute mydnyght a lyttell ſweete ſhower of rayne. The xxiii. daye faire weather and ſommewhat hoate. The xxiiii. a fayre daye. The xxv. day fayre weather, but ſome cloudes, bryngynge with them ſome dewe of rayn. But the xxvi. day in the mornyng cloudy, and al the nyght folowynge very hoate: The xxvii. daye in the after noone wyndye, with whityſhe cloudes ſparkeled about the heauen: The xxviii. day windy and cloudy: The xxix. fairer weather, and ſommewhat hotter then before: The xxx. day wyndy wether, and temperate and fayre.
               
               
                  ¶ Iuly.
                  THe firſt of Iuly ſhall be a cloudy and moyſt daye, the ſeconde daye fayre and very hoate. The thirde temperate. The fowerthe verye hoate.

The fiueth daie tēperate, and at night cloudie and cloſe wether. The ſixt daie colde and rain. The ſeuenth daie hotte wether & faire. Theight to rain ſomewhat diſpoſed, and theſame weather ſhalbe the nineth daie as the eight daie The tenth faire and temperatly hotte, but in the after noone Cloudie. The eleuenth daie colde and moiſt, but about ſixe of the clocke, the twelueth day afore noone it will breake vp, and bee a faire and temperate hotte daie, till after thre of the Clocke in the after Noone, then will bee cloudie wether, the thirteneth daie ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, but it is to bee feared leaſt theſaied enclinacion bee annichilate through the applicaciō of Mercurie to Iupiter, beyng in a temperat manſion, the fowerteneth windie, and faire temperate wether, but aboute the Sunne ſettyng cloudie, and ſo all that night, the fiftene daie ſomewhat diſpoſed to moieſture, the ſixteneth, the weather faire and a hotte after noone, the ſeuenteneth daie windie and temperate, the eighteneth faier wether, and more windy then before, the nineteneth temperate, ſomewhat colder weather then before, the

twentie daie a temperate daie, the .xxi. daie windie and redde, and whitiſhe cloudes, ſparkeled aboute the heauens, and at night lightenyng, the .xxii. enclined to moieſt the .xxiii. ſomewhat cloudie, the .xxiiii. a faire hotte daie, becauſe of the corporal coniunccion of Sol and Mercurius in the fier ſigne of Leo, the xxv. daie cloudie, and aboute nine of the clocke at night, very hotte, the .xxvi. daie faire, the .xxvii. daie cloudie, the .xxviii. daie temperatly faire, the .xxix. windie, the thirtie, a temperate daie, theſame wether the .xxxi. daie.
               
               
                  ¶ Auguſt.
                  THE firſt daie cloudie, the ſecond a faire temperate daie, and after Noone and at nighte very hotte, the thirde a faire hotte daie, the fowerth daie a temperate daie, the .v. daie faire and hotte in the fore Noone, but afterwardes ſomwhat enclined to moiſture the ſixth daie in the mornyng faire, and at after noone cloudie, the ſeuenth faire and temperate in the after Noone, and at nighte ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, the eighte daie a faire mornyng, and all daie. The nineth very windie.

And the tenthe ſomewhat enclined to colde and moieſture: the eleuenth daie, faire wether & temperate: the twelueth ſome rain, or els the thirteneth daie: the fowerteneth daie faire and ſomewhat windie: The fifteneth daie cloudie and windie in the after noone: The ſixtene daie faire: the ſeuētene daie cloudie and looke as though it would Rain, and it ſhall not: theightene faire wether, and ſomewhat windie: the nineteneth cloudie, and after midnight faire and windie: the twentie daie temperate dry wether: The one and twentie, windie and cloudie: The twoo and twentie in the mornyng, faire and pleaſaunt: the thre and twentie daie hotte and faire weather: the fower and twentie faire weather, and a pleaſaunte ſtill winde. The fiue and twentie, ſixe and twentie, ſeuē and twentie, faire weather, and greate windes: The eighte and twentie, more hotte then before, and alſo more windy the nine and twentie daie faire wether, theſame the thirtie daie alſo: the thirtie and one, a faier and a hotte daie.
               
               
                  ¶ September.
                  
                     
THE firſt daie a faire daie: the ſeconde daie faire in the mornyng, but in the after Noone colde and rain with ſome haile withall: theſame weather with ſome winde, and temperately cloudie, alſo the thirde daie: the fowerth ſomwhat enclined to moiſture in the after noone, but in the mornyng it ſhalbe temperatly windie: The fiueth a colde cloudie afore Noone, but in the after noone temperatly windie, & faire temperate wether. The ſixe daie ſomewhat windie, but towardes night, cloudie, and enclined to moieſture. The ſeuenth daie, cloudie in the mornyng, and ſomewhat colder then before, but in the after noone, it will not be ſo colde as before: the eight windie, the nineth a temperate cloudie daie. The tenth daie cold and cloudie. The eleuenth cloudie and temperate, and towardes night, clerer wether and fairer wether then before. The twelueth daie ſomewhat windie. The thirtene enclined to coldneſſe and moieſture, but aboute ten of the clocke afore midnighte it will breake vp, and be faire and drie the nexte daie The fiftene cloudy & cold, ſomwhat more then before, but towardes night, the cloudes

will breake vp, and it will bee al nighte faire, and ſixtene windie, and the ſeuentene in the mornyng more windie, but at after Noone colde and cloudie The eightene daie faire weather. The nineteneth daie windie. The twentie cloudie in the fore Noone, but towardes night faire. The one and twentie, faire weather and drie in the mornyng, but after Noone colde and moieſt, and aboute the hower of fiue at after Noone ſomewhat temperately windie, and ſo all night long. The twoo and twentie, temperate wether. The thre and twentie faire weather. The xxiiii. Cloudie. The fiue and twētie, very windie The xxvi. faire and windie. The .xxvii. great windes and faire weather. The eighte and twentie faire weather. The nine and twētie, ſomewhat enclined to rain. The .xxx. cloudie, and ſomewhat windy
               
               
                  ¶ October.
                  THe firſt daie faier wether, and ſomewhat windie. The ſecond daie Raine in the fore Noone, but I thinke the ſixtile aſpecte of Mars and Iupiter, will make the after noones wether faire. The third in

the after noone wyndy. The fourth in the after noone cloudye, and towardes nyght inclined to driſlynge rayne. The fifth in the after noon wyndy. The ſixt faire in the forenoon, and at night cloudye, and as though it would rayne: the ſeuenth day colde and moyſt, the eyght day colde and cloudy: the .ix. aboute .vii. a clocke at nyghte: and after all the nyght wyndy and temperate weather, the .x. faire wether, the xi. faire, and the xii. alſo: but aboute .x. a clocke at nyght cloudy. The xiii. lyke to rayn, but it wil hold vp, the .xiiii. day wyndy: The xv. towarde nyght faire: The .xvi. towardes nyght wyndy: but after mydnyght more windy then before: the xvii. cloudy: the xviii. faire cleere wether: the xix. very wyndy and faire weather, the xx. faire wether, the .xxi. ſomwhat enclined to moiſture: the xxii. cloudy and cold, the xxiii. fair & tēperate wether, the xxiiii. ye ſame wether, the xxv. faire wether, the xxvi. in thafter noon, & towardes night, & the nyght tyme very rayny: the xxvii. about after noon very faire. The xxviii. fair metely, the xxix. al day cloudy, and the night rain: the xxx. faire, the xxxi ſomwhat faire and cloudy in the after none

with inclination to moyſture.
               
               
                  ¶ Nouembre.
                  THe firſt day ſomwhat faire, and redde cloudes with blackeneſſe in them, bryngyng with them an inclination to moyſture, but not withſtandyng it is lykely to holde vp as is aforeſayd. The .ii. day rayne. The third daye faire and drye, and a froſte in the mornyng, and about noone ſomewhat diſpoſed to rayn. The fourth ſomwhat diſpoſed to moyſture, and cloudy withall, with ſome rayne, and haile, or els as they call it ſlete. The fifth day the ſame wether: The vi. towardes night faire: The vii. day faire tyll night, and about xii. of the clocke at nyght cloudes lyke to bryng vs ſome rayne: The .viii. ſomwhat rayny: The ix. a faire and drye day, at night a froſt: The x. day the ſame wether: The xi. cloudy, and ſomewhat wyndy: The xii ſomewhat fair wether, but I feare that there ſhalbe rayne becauſe of the trinall aſpecte of Mercurius and Saturnus in Scorpio & Piſces beeyng watrye ſygnes: The xiii. cloudye and wyndye: The xiiii. ſomme

what fayre. The xv. daye drye: The xvi. at after noone wyndye: The xvii. fayre weather: The xviii. day at one of the clocke in the after noone ſomwhat diſpoſed to rayne: The xix. ſomewhat fayre: The xx aboute v. of the clocke in the mornyng cold and rayne: But thre houres afore noone it wyll breake vp and be a faire day: The xxi. a faire day: The xxii. day a very fair day: The xxiii. about after noone enclined to coldenes and moyſture: The xxiiii. in the after noone faire: The xxv. cloudy: The xxvi. fayre wether: The xxvii. towards night cloudy: the xxviii. day about after noon a lytle dryſlynge rayne: The xxix. daye rayne: The xxx. day rayne.
               
               
                  ¶ Decembre.
                  THe fyrſte, day faire and wyndy: The .ii. day cloudy and wyndye: The iii. day colde and cloudye: The fourth in the after noone after ii. of the clocke wyndy: The fift day cold and rayne with ſleete or ſnowe myngled withall: The ſyxte day colde and moyſte: The vii. cloudes, and lyke to rayne: but about v. of the clocke in the

mornyng ſomewhat faire wether. The viii. at afternoon cloudy, but after and about ii. a clocke after mydnyght faire wether. The ix. at after noon ſomwhat wyndy. The x. m
                        •
                     tely faire and dry temperate wether, but after .v. a clocke at nyght cloudye. The .xi. daye temperate and fayre. The xii. day towardes night great raine. The xiii. day faire weather and dry aboue heade: a fayre daye the the xiiii. The xv. a fayre day, & a great froſt. The xvi. aboute viii. of the clocke at nyght faire wether. The xvii. cloudy: The xviii. cloudy, colde, and raine: The xix after noone faire wether: The xx. fayre: The xxi. and xxii. wyndy: but the xxii. at nyght a greate froſte: The xxiii. colde and moyſt. The xxiiii. day mylde ſhoures of rayne. The xxv. all the forenoone cloudy, but after mydnyght very wyndy. The xxvi. a faire day. The xxvii. about after midnyght, rayn: The xxviii. faire, colde; and dry wether: The xxix. about ſunne riſyng faire: but after xi. a clocke afore noon cloudy. The xxx. day in the mornynge ſomewhat faire, and wyndy The xxxi. cloudye, and ſomwhat wyndy.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The .vii. Chapiter of the infirmities that ſhall bee in the aforeſaied yere of our Lorde. M.D.liiii. and in euery quarter therof.
               
                  SHE ſtandyng of Soll in the firſte of Aries, and in the ſixte houſe of the heauens, ſignifieth that the infirmities, which ſhal happen in the firſte quarter of the yere aforeſaied, ſhalbe in the heddes of men, as madneſſe, and other hotte infirmities aboute the brain, becauſe that he is Lorde of the ſixt houſe, whiche houſe ſignifieth of his owne nature, diſeaſes, and infirmities. More ouer Mars the ſanguinolent planet, beyng in the ſixte houſe, at the tyme of the Eclipſe of the Sunne, ſignifieth that there ſhalbe many hotte and drie agues, as Tercians, whiche come of corrupt bloude, and colour ſuperaboundante, in the ſeconde quarter of the yere aboueſaid, and many diſeaſes, whiche ſhall happen in mē
                  nes Neckes alſo in theſaied quarter, whiche ſhall riſe of corrupt bloude and choler ſuperabundaunte in the ſeconde

quarter of the yere aboueſaid, and many diſeaſes, whiche ſhall happen in mē
                  nes neckes alſo in theſaied Quarter, whiche ſhall ariſe of corrupte bloudde, and puſcules, and antraces, and peines in mennes eares alſo. And in the thirde Quarter of the yere aboueſaied, there ſhalbee many diſeaſes raignyng in the raines, and in the ſecret places, becauſe of Venus, beyng impedite in the reuolucion figure in the ſixte houſe, and that in the ſigne of Scorpio. Finally in the fowerth quarter of the yere aboueſaied there ſhalbe many diſeaſes in the yies, and in the belies of menne, and women and in their neckes, ſhoulders, and armes, many infirmities.
            
            
               ¶ The .viii. Chapiter of warres, and contencions.
               FIrſt Soll in the ſixt houſe, and in his exaltacion, ſignifieth that the Seruile and ignoble people will hate their nobilitie, and will looke to exalte theim ſelues againſt theim, and that in the firſte Quarter of the yere aboueſaied, and Saturnus in the ſigne of Piſces, ye princely planete Iupiters houſe, mingled with the beames of ♂

the Sanguinolent ſignifieth that there ſhalbe bloudſhed emong noble menne, and greate contencions, whiche ſhal at laſt be pacified by noble men of religiō in the nexte quarter of the yere. Mars in Gemini a mannely ſigne, ſignifieth manſlaughter, and in the thirde quarter, Mars in Leo, and in the fowerth houſe, ſignifieth contencions, and that many ſhall in that reuolucion come to their end by the ſweard. Finally Mars in the fowerth and laſte quarter, ſignifieth bloudſhed, and warres, becauſe he is in ♀ whiche is a Signe of humaine forme, & in the twelue houſe, the houſe of enemies and contencions.
            
            
               ¶ The .ix. Chapiter of Cattall, and all other thynges, whiche ſerue for Victualles, as wheate, barley, Beanes, & ſuche like.
               FIrſt in the firſt quarter, Mars beyng Lorde of Aries, combuſt in Piſces, and impedite with thenuious beames of Saturne ſignifieth death of ſhepe in that reuolution aforeſaid, and Mars in the face of

Taurus, in 
                     •
                  ight Sphere Impedite, ſignifieth death of Rine in the ſeconde quarter of the yere aboue ſayd. Venus alſo in the reuolution of the third quarter of the yere aforeſaid, in the ſixt hous vayng Lady of Taurus, ſignifieth that Rine ſhall haue many infirmities.
               Moreouer, in the fowerth quarter Venus the Ladie of the ſigne of Taurus, beyng in the fiueth houſe, whiche is her ioye, ſignifieth that Calues, Rine, and oxen, ſhall proſpere well that laſt quarter, wheate in th
                     •
                   firſt quarter ſhalbe but of metely lowe price, but in thende of the firſte quarter, aboute Whitſontide, it ſhall ariſe vp to a more higher price. Barleie ſhalbee of a vile price, to ſpeake of, in the beginnyng of the firſte quarter, that is to ſaie, in Marche, but in Aprill it ſhal ariſe in price more. Beanes ſhalbe of a metely reaſonable price in the firſte quarter aforeſaied. Wines ſhalbe of a meane price, and hony ſhalbe of a lower price, then it hath wont to bee. Many apples this yere ſhalbe, ſpecially of Sweetynges, and fuche like. Moreouer in the ſecond quarter wheat ſhalbe of meane price, and very litle of it theſaied quarter. Barleye in the ſecande

quarter ſhalbe of a greate price, and this Harueſt therof no great plentie. Beanes ſhall bee of a greate price, this ſeconde Quarter, and litle ſtore of theim this Harueſt. Muche hony ſhalbe this Somer, and more good cheape then it hath been. Alſo there ſhalbee noſtore of grapes this yere, and there ſhalbe very fewe Nuttes this yere.
            
            
               ¶ The figure of the firſte quarter Aſtronomicall, of the yere of our Lorde, a. M.CCCCC.LV. beginnyng the tenth of Marche fowertene howers, fower minutes after Noone.
               THE degree aſcendente the xxvi. of Sagittarius, the ſecond houſe the thirde of Aquarius, the .xxvii. Piſces the third houſe, the firſt of Taurus fiue, the fowerth houſe, the ninetene of Taurus the fiueth houſe, the fift of Gemini: the ſixte houſe, the xxvi. of Gemini, the ſeuenth houſe the third
                     •
                   of Leo, the eight houſe, the twentie and ſeuen of Virgo, the nineth houſe, the tenth houſe, the firſt of Scorpio, the .xix. of Scorpio the eleuenth houſe, the .xii.

houſe, the fift of Sagitarius, the ſunne in the firſt minute of the ſigne of Aries, and in the thirde houſe of the heauens, Luna in the thirtie of Libra, and in the tenth houſe of the heauen, Saturnus in the third of Aries, in the thirde houſe of the heauen, Iupiter in the ſeconde of Scorpio in the tenth houſe retrograde, Mars in the tenth of Virgo, in theight houſe of the heauēs. Venus in the .xxiii. of Piſces, combuſt in the thirde houſe of the heauens, Mercurius in the twē
                  tie of Piſces in the ſeconde houſe of the

                  
heauens combuſte, I take vpon this figure, Luna to bee Ladie, and Mercurius partaker, who committeth her diſpoſicion to Iupiter, and thereby maketh hym Lorde of the yere, whiche ſignifieth that the wether ſhalbe temperate, and the winde North and temperate, notwithſtandyng ſometyme moiſture withall.
            
            
               ¶The ſite, or figure of the heauen at the tyme of the Eclipſe of the Moone, the fowerth of Iune in the yere of our Lorde God, a M.D.l.v. and .xiiii. howers, and xxxii. minutes at after noone.
               
                  ☽ The degree aſcendent the ſeconde of Gemini, the degree of the ſeconde houſe, the firſte of Cancer the thirde houſe, the fiftene of Cācer. The fiueth of Leo, the fowerth houſe. The .xxi. of Leo the fiueth houſe, the fiueth of Libra the ſixt houſe, the ſeuenth houſe, the ſeconde of Sagitarie, the eight houſe, the firſte of Capricornus, the nineth houſe the fiftene of Capricornus, the tenth, the firſt of Aquarius, the xi. the .xxi. of Aquarie,

the twelue houſe the fift degre of Aries The Sunne in the twentie and three of Gemini in the firſt houſe, the Mone in the twentie and three of Sagittari, in the ſeuenth houſe, the Planete Saturnus in the thirten of Aries, in the twelf houſe, Iupiter the twētie and fower of Libra in the twentie and fower of Libra in the ſixt houſe: Mars in the twentie and twoo of Virgo in the fifte houſe Venus in the nineth of Taurus in the twelue houſe of the heauens. Mercurius in the firſte of Gemini in the firſte houſe, and orientall, whom I perceiue

                  
to bee lorde of this forſayde Eclipſe of the Moone, who goeth to the Sextile aſpecte of Saturne, Lorde of the houſe of honour, who beyng impedite, and in the Sygne of Aries his falle, becauſe it is appoſite to Libra his exaltation ſignifieth a meruailous depreſſion and falle of a great man of honoure.
               And as for diſeaſes and inf
                     •
                  rmities there is none almoſte by this Eclipſe ſignified, but colde reumes and ſuche lyke moyſture in mens heades, whyche diſeaſes Iupiter in the ſyxt houſe wyll with his corporall preſence much mitigate.
            
            
               The ſite of the heauens at the ſeconde quarter Aſtronomicall of the yeare aboue written begynnyng at the entryng of the ſonne into the fyrſt minute of Cancer the xi. of Iune. M.D.Lv.
               THe fyrſt degree aſcendent, the viii. of Libra, the fyrſt of Scorpio the .ii. houſe, the fyrſt of Sagit. the third houſe, the .x. of Capri.

iiii. houſe, the xviii. of Aquarius, the v. houſe, the xvi. of Piſces, the vi. houſe, the viii. of Aries the vii. hous, the firſt of Taurus the eight houſe, the firſt of ♊ the ix. houſe, the x. of Cancer, the tenth houſe, the eleuenth houſe the xviii. of Leo, the xvi. of Virgo the xii. houſe, the ſonne in the fyrſte minute of Cancer, the Moone in the ſeuenth degree of Aries, and in the vii. houſe of the heauen. Saturnus in the xiii. degre of Aries in the vii. houſe alſo, Iupiter in ye xxiiii. of

                  
Libra in the fyrſte houſe, Mars in the xxvi. of Virgo in the xii. houſe. Venus in the xviii. of Taurus in theight houſe Mercur. in the xi. of ♊ in the ix. houſe, whom I take to be Lorde of this quarter: who committeth his diſpoſition to Saturne by a ſextile aſpect: Wherfore I take that the aire this quarter ſhalbe very cloudy, wyndye, and raynye, more then to ſuche a hotte tyme of the yere is conuenient, bycauſe that Saturne is impedite, and his declination meridian more then two degrees from the Ecliptike lyne. And becauſe there chaunceth this Quarter a dreadful Coniunction of Iupiter and Mars, in Libra I wyll the nexte Chapiter ſhewe the ſite, and fygure of the heauens, and the hower and minute of the ſayd coniunction.
            
            
               ¶ The ſite or figure of the heauens the .vi. of Auguſt at the Coniunction of Iupiter and Mars in the ſygne of Libra in the▪ xxvii. degree .xlvi. min. at vii. a clocke at after noone, and .iiii. minutes paſt.
               
                  
THe degree aſcendente the xii. of Aquarius the ſeconde houſe, the xv. of Aries, the .xx. of Taurus thirde houſe, the fourthe houſe, the ix. of Gemini, the xxiii. of Gemini, the v. houſe, the ix. of Cancer the vi. houſe, the ſeuēth houſe the xii. of Leo, theight houſe the xv. of Libra, the xx. of Scorpio the ix. houſe, the ninth houſe of Sagittarie the x. houſe, the xxiii. of Sagittarie the xi. houſe, the ix. of Capricorne the twelfth houſe, the ſunne in the xxiii. of Leo in the ſeuenth houſe, the xvi. of Aries the moone, and in the ſeconde houſe, Saturne in the fourtenthe of Aries retrogradus, Iupiter and Mars in the xxvii. of Libra, and xlvi. minut. coniuncte in the .viii. houſe of the heauens, Venus in the .xxi. of Cancer in the ſixte houſe of the heauens, Mercurius in the .xvi. of Virgo in the ſeuenth houſe, of this coniunction, Saturnus in the xiiii. of Aries retrograde, and in the ſeconde houſe is Lorde and chiefe Dominatoure, who ſignifieth to men that great loſſe ſhal happen to them by death of theyr ſhepe. Moreouer Iupiter lorde of the houſe of honoure, and Mars lorde of the nynthe houſe, whiche

houſe ſignifieth religion & the miniſters therof being cōiunct in a humain ſygne in the 
                     •
                  yghte houſe, the houſe of deathe ſygnifieth that mortalitie ſhall fall vppon Menne: That is to ſay, by ſodeyne deathe and feuer tertians, and impoſtumes ryſyng of corrupt bloude, and by other lyke hotte and choleryke diſeaſes. Fynally after this coniunction ſhall folowe muche wyndē, terrible lyghtnynge and fyres in the ayre, and greate drithe and a greatte peſtilence vppon men alſo.
               
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The ſite or figure of the heauens at the begynnyng of the thyrde quarter Aſtronomical, whiche ſhall be the .xiii. daye of September fowertene houres xxviii. minutes after noone, M.D.lv.
               THe degree aſcendent, the xxi. of Leo, the .x. of Virgo the ſecond houſe: the thirde of Libra the third houſe: the .vi. of Scorpio, the fourth houſe, the xix. of Sagittarie the fifte houſe, the xxvi. of Capricorne the ſixt houſe, the xxi. of Aquari
                     •
                   the ſeuenth houſe, the tenth of Piſces theight houſe, the third of Aries the ninth houſe the ſixt of Taurus, the tenth houſe, the xix. of Gemini the xi. houſe, the xii. hous the xxvi. of Cācer, the ſunne in the firſt minute of Libra in the third houſe, the moone in the xii. of Virgo in the ſecōd houſe, the planette Saturne in the xi. of Aries retrograde in the nynthe houſe, Iupiter in the v. of Scorpio direct in ye fourth houſe of Mars in the .xxiiii. of Scorpio in the .iiii. hous, Venus in the

ſeuēth of Virgo in the firſt houſe, Mercurius in the .xxv. of Virgo in the ſecōd retrograde. I take vpon this figure celeſtiall Sol to be chiefeſt dominatour and Venus his partner, bycauſe ſhe is Lady of the reuolution houre, and ſo is with an oppoſite aſpectiunct to Saturn with a receptiō one of an other, for Sol is in the exaltation of Saturn, and Saturne in the exaltation of Sol, but Saturne beyng retrograde in the ix. houſe

                  
ſignifieth that men ſhalbee irreligions and no pitie or mercy almoſt emongſt men, and that there ſhall bee no reuerence to the miniſters of religiō. More ouer the wether ſhall be cold and cloudy, and the ayre with blackenes almoſt always couered.
            
            
               ¶ The life or figure of the heauens at the fourth quarter Aſtronomicall of the yere of our Lord M.D.Lv. beginnyng the .xi. of Decembre xviii. howers .xl. minutes after Noone.
               THe degree aſcendent, the xi. of Sagittarie, the xi. of Capricorn the ſeconde houſe, the fyrſte of Piſces the third houſe, the tēth of Aries, the fourth houſe, the fourth of Taurus the fifth houſe, the xxi. of Taurus the ſixte houſe, the xi. of Gemini the ſeuenth houſe, the xi. of Cancer the eight houſe, the firſt of Virgo the ninth houſe, the tenthe of Libra the tenthe houſe: the fourthe of Scorpio, the xi,

houſe, the twelue houſe the twētie and one of Scorpio, the Sunne in the firſte houſe, in the firſt minute of Capricorne the Moone alſo the firſt houſe in the .x. degree of Sagitarie, the Planete Saturne direct, but notwithſtādyng ſlowe of courſe in the ſeuenth of Aries in the fowerth houſe, Iupiter in the twentie and fower of Scorpio, in the twelueth houſe, Mars in the ſeconde of Aquarius in the ſeconde houſe, Venus in the twentie and eight degree of Sagitarie in the firſt houſe, Mercurius in the .xix.

                  
of Capricorne in the ſeconde houſe, I take of this reuolucion, Luna to be the chiefeſt ladie, who committeth her diſpoſicion to Venus, Ladie of the ſertile, beyng in the aſcendent, with a coniunccion corporal, whiche ſignifieth that m
                     •
                   ſhall haue many infirmities in their thies and armes in this reuoluciō, and the wether ſhalbe tēperate, with ſometyme milde driſelyng rain.
            
            
               ¶ The particular declaracion of the wether for this preſente yere. Anno. Domini. 1555.
               
                  ¶ Ianuary.
                  SHe firſt daie in the after noone rain and windie, the ſecōd daie rain all the after noone, and at night alſo, the third daie ruddy cloudes, with blackneſſe mingled with all and rain, the fowerth daie in the after Noone, and after greate Rain, and almoſte all the nighte long, Rain alſo, the fiueth daie towardes Nighte faire weather, but the daie aforeſaied ſhalbee Rainie, becauſe of the Sextile aſpecte of Soll to Saturne, thei bothe beyng in moſte manſions, the ſixte daie ſomewhat enclined to rain, the ſeuenth

daie ſomewhat ruddie cloudes, & blackneſſe mingled with thē, bringyng ſome rain. The eight daie faire wether, and toward night windie, and rain. The ix. daie rainie. The tenth daie in the after Noone faire, and ſomewhat windie. The eleuenth daie at after noone rain. The twelueth in the morning faire wether. The thirtenth at after noone rain The fowerteneth a temperate daie, the fifteneth a faire daie in the after noone but about the fore noone, and the night afore rain, and windie wether ſhalbee, the ſixtene ſomewhat enclined to rain, the .xvii. in the mornyng ſomwhat faire but red cloudes coueryng the heauens, ſhall bryng ſome rain after noone. The xviii. daie, becauſe of the quart aſpect of Iupiter and Mercurius, ſhalbee verie windie. The .xix. daie ſomewhat driſſelyng and rainie, the .xx. daie white and read cloudes, bringyng with them ſhowers of rain, the .xxi. the ſame weather: The .xxii. daie windie and faire, in the fore noone the .xxiii. daie cold and moiſt the .xxiiii. daie blacke cloudes, rain and windes alſo, the. xxv daie cold & rainie, becauſe of the corporall coniunccion of Saturnus and Venus, in the ſigne of

Piſces, the twentie and ſixe daie colde and moieſt, the twentie and ſeuen daie towardes night rain, and ſome windineſſe in the aire, the twentie and eighte daie windie and faire weather, the. xxix daie faire wether. The thirtie daie rain and blacke cloudes, with cold weather.
               
               
                  ¶ Februarie.
                  THE firſte daie colde and moieſt. The ſeconde daie ſomewhat enclined to moiſture, the third daie in the after noone ſomewhat faire, but at night, and ſpecially after midnighte windie, and ſomwhat enclined to rain, the fowerth afore noone, ſomewhat enclined to moiſture, but after none faire wether, the fiueth daie rain, ſpecially about noone, and at one of the clocke, becauſe of a Sextile aſpecte betwixt Saturne, and Mercurius, the ſixt daie, becauſe of the appoſicion of Sol and Luna in Aquarius, and Leo, whiche bee rainy ſignes rain, the ſeuēth daie ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, the eighte daie a faire daie, becauſe of the cōiunccion Corporall, of Luna and Mars, in Virgo a drie ſigne, the nineth daie rain with winde, the tenth daie very windie

becauſe of the quarte aſpect of Mercurius to Iupiter retrograde, the eleuēth rain with winde, the twelueth windie and faire whitiſhe Cloudes aboute the heauens, becauſe of the trinall aſpecte of Soll and Iupiter retrograde. The thirtene daie in the mornyng faire wether. The fowerteneth at noone ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, and after noone more enclined to rain then afore The fiftene daie a faire daie, and readdiſhe cloudes ſparkled aboute the heauens, the ſixtene daie about after none, rain, the ſeuentene daie at after noone faire weather. The eightene at after noone rainy. The ninetene windie and rain alitle, the twentie towardes night windie, the twentie and one, aboute eleuen of the clock afore noone rain, but towardes night faire weather, the .xxii. towardes nighte, cloudie and rain, the xxiii. becauſe of the appoſicion of Soll, and Mars, faire wether, and red cloudes, bringyng with thē ſome rain ſome times, the .xxiiii. becauſe of the coniunccion of Saturne & Venus, in the moiſt manſion cold wether, and rain, the .xxv. daie faire weather, the .xxvi. daie rain and windie the after noone. The .xxvii.

                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
daie ſomewhat faire at the after noone and towardes night, ye .xxviii. daie rain.
               
               
                  ¶ Marche.
                  THE firſt daie windie with a litle driſelyng Rain, the .ii. daie ſomewhat rainy wether, the third daie rainie wether, the fowerth and .v. rainy becauſe of the coniunccion corporall of Venus and Sol, in the watrie ſigne of Piſces, ye .vi. daie towardes night faire red cloudes, and winde with alitle rain the .vii. in the after noone ſomewhat rē
                     perate wether, the .viii. cloudie & moieſt wether, the .ix. temperate wether, the .x. daie white cloudes aboute the heauens ſparkled, the .xi. becauſe of the coniunccion of Venus & Mercurie in the waterie ſigne of Piſces, rainie and windy the xii. alſo the ſame wether, the .xiii. cloudie, cold wether, rain and haile, becauſe of the corporal coniunccion of Sol, and Saturnus that daie, the .xiiii. towardes nighte, and at night rain .xv. ſomewhat inclined to rain, the .xvi. in the mornyng ſomewhat faire wether, the .xvii. &. xviii rainie wether, becauſe of the coniunccion of Saturne & Mercuri, the .xix. daie, ſomwhat faire wether, the .xx. daie faire

wether, the .xxi. in the mornyng rain, becauſe of the coniunccion of Luna, and venus in Piſces a watry ſigne, the. xxii at mornyng cloudie, but it will breake vp at after noone, the .xxiii. daie windie, ſpecially at nighte, the .xxiiii. ſomewhat ruddy cloudes, bringing with thē ſome rain, the .xxv. in the mornyng ſome driſlyng rain, the .xxvi. aboute noone, cold & cloudy, the. 27. faire before noone, but in thafter noone itis like to rain ſomwhat but alitle, the .xxviii. daie aboute noone windie, but towardes night therewith cloudy, the .xxix. after noone alitle rain, the .xxx. daie about after none very windy, the .xxxi. daie greate windes, becauſe of thoppoſicion of Iupiter & Mercuri.
               
               
                  ¶ Aprill.
                  THe firſt daie faire, the ſecōd daie windie, and at after noone hotte, the third a faire daie, but towardes nighte ſomewhat enclined to rain, the fowerth daie faire, and temperate wether, becauſe of the coniunccion corporall of Iupiter & Luna, in Libra, an airie ſigne, the .v. in the morning cloudy the .vi. a faire daie, ſpecially in the after noone, the .vii. daie a faire after none▪ & ſomewhat hotter then before, the eight

daie, and ſpecially in the morning, windie, & after ſomewhat enclined to coldneſſe, and moieſture in the after noone, and the ſame night alſo, the nineth daie ſomewhat a faire daie and very windy with white Cloudes ſparkeled aboute the heauens, becauſe of thoppoſicion of Soll, and Iupiter in a fierie and airie ſignes, the tēth in the mornyng cloudie the eleuenth ſomwhat enclined to rain, the: xii. daie, a faire mornyng, but afternoone colde and cloudie, the .xiii. daie about after noone windie, the .xiiii. about the riſing of the ſunne faire, and temperate, the .xv. faire and hotter then before becauſe of the trinall aſpect of Sol and Mars in yearthly ſignes, the .xvi. in the mornyng windy, and after noone faire and ſomewhat hotter then before, the xvii. ſomewhat driſelyng rain, becauſe of the cōiunccion of Venus and Luna, in Piſces, the .xviii. daie cold, and cloudie the moſte part of al the daie & night alſo, the .xix. daie faire, and temperate wether, the .xx. alſo faire, and ſomwhat enclined to ſweete raine. The .xxii. theſame weather, the .xxiii. drie temperate wether, ye .xxiiii. daie a metely faire daie The .xxv. in the mornyng a faire daie,

but after colder and cloudy: The xxvi. windy and fayre wether the xxvii. cloudy and temperate weather: the xxviii. faire wether, but ſomwhat wyndy and cloudy, becauſe of the ſextile aſpecte of Saturnus, and Mercu. the xxix. a faire and hotte weather all the nyght longe, becauſe of the coniunction of Mars & Luna in Virgo: The xxx. daye in the mornyng ſomewhat wyndye, and afternoone ſommetyme ſweete ſhoures, but moſte parte faire weather.
               
               
                  ¶ Maye.
                  THe firſt daie a faire tēperate day the ſecond day cloudy and ſomewhat inclined to moiſture, but it is lyke to holde vp, not withſtandynge bycauſe the ſignificators of this rayne bee in temperate manſyons, and the moon alſo. The third day faire wether and wyndy, bycauſe of the coniunction of Iupiter and Luna in Libra an ayry ſigne. The .iiii. ſomwhat ruddy & ſomtyme rayne. The .v. day colde, bycauſe of the coniunction of Saturnus & Venus in the ſigne of Aries: The vi. windy and raynye weather, bycauſe of the

quart aſpect of Mars and Mercurius and the firtile aſpecte of Venus and Mercurius the ſayde vi. day, The vii. windie and cloudie til night, but in the night aboute .viii. of ye clocke ſomewhat faire wether, and about x. of the clocke ſomewhat inclined to moiſture. The viii. day ſomewhat faire wether. the .ix. day cloudie wether, and the tenth daye in the mornyng ſomewhat inclined to moiſture, but at after noone ſpeciallye towardes nyght faire wether and ſomwhat windie. The xi. day ſwete ſhowers of raine. The xii. day in the after none faire wether. The .xiii. faire and windie The xiiii. day red white cloudes, ſometyme ſome moiſture. The .xv. day wyndy with ſometymes rayne a lytle in a quantitie, The xvi. day cold and cloudy with cloudes troubling the heauen like to bring ſome raine, but it wyll hold vp as it is afore ſaied. The xvii. a faire day the xviii. ſomewhat faire wether. The xix. ſome winde and raine. The .xx. daye faire wether, but towardes night cloudie. the xxi. day becauſe of the oppoſition of Iupiter and Venus in Aries & libra a faire temperate day with white cloudes ſparkeled about the heauens. The

day cloudie. The xxiii. daye colde and cloudie alſo, becauſe of the ſextile aſpect Saturne and Sol. The xxiiii. day cloudie and ſomewhat in clined to moiſture The .xxv. day cloudie, but about thre of the clocke at after noone it will ſomewhat breake vp. The xxvi. in the afternoone wyndie and metely faire wether the xxvii a faire day, and the xxviii daye alſo the xxix. cloudi. The xxx. day a metely faire day. The .xxxi. day faire wether and wyndie.
               
               
                  Iune.
                  THE firſt day a faire hoote daye becauſe of the quarte aſpecte of Mars, and Sol. The ſecond alſo the ſame wether, the thirde daye wyndie and cloudie. The .iiii. day a fair day, the v. day a faire day & windie, the ſixt dai inclined to moiſture, the ſeuenth day inclined to wynde. ye viii daye ſomewhat inclined to raine, the nynth faire wether and ſomwhat wyndie. the tenth day in the fore noone wyndie, the xi. in the after noone faire temperate wether The xii. wyndie and cloudie. ye xiii. daie faire wether and wynde, the xiiii daye

cloudie: The xv. day ſwete ſhowers of ſmall raine: but towardes night and al night long it wyll be faire and breake vp: The xvi day cloudy, the xvii. windy bycauſe of the coniunction of Luna & Mercurius in Gemini: the xviii. a fayre temperate day: The .xix. a colder daye then before, and cloudy alſo: the xx. in the mornyng faire wether and alſo windy: The xxi. day cloudye: the xxii. towardes nyght windy: but al the moſte parte of the day metely faire: the xxiii. day ſomwhat cloudy wether: the xxiiii. inclined to moiſture, the xxv. day white and red cloudes ſparkled about the ſky with wynde, bringyng with them ſome rayne: The xxvi. cloudy and colder then before: The xxvii. a faire windy day, & the xxviii. alſo: The xxix. ſomwhat cloudy: The xxx. fayre wether.
               
               
                  ¶ Iuly.
                  THe firſte day cloudy, the ſeconde day cloudy, and that becauſe of the quarte aſpect of Saturnus & Mercurius, the third day a fayre daye all the fore noone, but in the after noon cloudye. The fourth in the after noone ſomewhat rainy, and towardes nyght

faire wether, the v. a faire daye, but becauſe of the ſextile aſpecte of Saturnus and Venus the heuen ſhal be ouer caſt with cloudes like to brynge ſome rayn, but notwithſtanding it wil be as is aforeſaied a faire days. The ſixt a metely fair wether. The ſeueth a metely temperate wether, the eight daye a faire day with great wynde and white cloudes couering almoſt the heauens, and this becauſe of the quarte aſpecte of Sol and IVPITER, & MARCVRIVS quarte aſpecte to Iupiter alſo. The ix. a faire day and a hote but that temperately, becauſe of the application of Luna to Saturne. The tenth day a metely faire day in the afternoone. the xi ſomewhat inclined to moiſture and the xii. day alſo, the xiii. ſome raine is lyke to happen, but the moſt of the wether ſhall be temperately cloudie the xiiii in the afternoone cloudie, the xv temperate wether and cloudes in the ſkye lyke vnto the ſkales of yron, the xvi day fayre temperate wether, The. xvii ſomewhat faire wether, the xviii. day cloudie, the .xix. daye a faire daye and ſomewhat wyndye, the .xx. daye ſomewhat moiſte weather, the .xxi. daye

temperate wether the xxiii. day temperate wether, the xxiiii. a faire hotte day, ſpecially in the after noone: the xxv. in the mornyng wyndy, the xxvi. faire wether: the .xxvii. a faire daye, the xxviii. ſomewhat cloudy but drie wether: the xxix. fayre wether: the xxx. windy: The xxxi. ſomewhat enclined to driſlynge ſwete raine.
               
               
                  ¶ Auguſt.
                  THe firſt day faire wether bicauſe of the application of Mars to Iupiter in the ſigne of Libra, the ſecond daie cloudy all the moſte part of the day, but at night faire clere wether, the nynth day faire in the mornyng ſpecially, and almoſte all day, the fowerth in the after noone enclined to ſom rain, the fiueth ſomewhat enclined to moieſture: the ſixte a fayre day, and whitiſh redde cloudes ſparkeled about the heauens, and ſometimes notwithſtādyng cloudy, and that bycauſe of a quart aſpect betwixt Luna and Mars, and of a corporall cōiunction of Saturnus and Luna, the ſeuēth day faire wether, and wyndy, the viii. day ſommewhat faire

wether: the nynth at after noone faire and hote: the tenth cloudy: the xi. a metely faire day: the xii. a faire temperate wyndy day, bicauſe of the ſextile aſpect of Sol and Iupiter: the xiii. a temperate day: the xiiii. in the mornyng about vii. a clocke faire: but about ix. a clocke ſomewhat enclined to rayne, and afternoone faire wether: the xv. ſomwhat enclined to cloudines: the xvi. a temperate wether: the xvii. faire and hote wether: the xviii. fair temperate wether: the xix. wyndy: the xx. cloudy: the xxi. day faire and temperate weather: the xxii. a faire day: the xxiii. a faire day, bycauſe the ſextile aſpect of Sol and Mars: the xxiiii. cloudy: & lyke to rayn: the xxv. ſomwhat enclined to moiſture: the xxvi. widy, the xxvii. cloudy, but towardes night, faire wether: the xxviii. ſomwhat enclined to wynde: the xxix. ſomewhat more cloudy then before: the xxx. metely faire: the xxxi. faire and hotte.
               
               
                  ¶ September.
                  THe firſt day ſomwhat windy: the ſecond daie cloudy, and cold wether: the thirde daye a temperate daie ſommewhat cloudy lyke to

raine, but it wil holde vp as before ſaid the .iiii. faire wether, but ſometime red cloudes bringing with them ſome rain the v. daye metely faire wether, and temperat and dry, the vi. cloudy, the. vii faire, and temperate, the viii. metelye faire, the. ix faire, and that in a temperate manſion alſo the x. theſame wether the xi. cloudy, the xii. faire becauſe of the quarte aſpecte of Mars to Luna, and the ſertile of Venus to Iupiter, the xiii. a faire temperate daie, the xiiii. faire & windie, and that becauſe of a ſextile betwixt Mars, and Mercurius. The xv. faire, the xvi. colde and cloudie. the .xvii. ſōwhat ēclined to moiſture, ye xviii. faire temperat wether, becauſe of the cōiunction of Luna, and Iupiter in Scorpio ye houſe Mars, the xix. windie, ye xx. a fair dai becauſe of the corporal coniunction of Luna & Mars in Scorpio, with ſomtimes redde cloudes bringyng with the ſome raine, the xxi. Cloudie, ye xxii. ſomewhat windy. ye xxiii. til it be paſt iii. clock in the after none windie but afterward becauſe of the Sunnes oppoſition with Saturnus colde, & cloudie: ye xxiiii. daye ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, ye xxv. faire wether, ye xxvi. cold, and cloudy the

twentie and ſeuen metely faire. The twentie and eight, tēperate wether, the xxix. temperate and windy, the .xxx. faire
               
               
                  ¶ October.
                  THe firſt daie metely faire wether the ii. daie enclined to moieſture, The iii. a temperate daie, the .iiii. tēperate, but ſomwhat cloudie, becauſe of the trinall aſpecte of Saturnus and Mars in fierie ſignes, the v a tēperate daie, the ſixte metely faire weather, the ſeuenth daie a temperate weather, the eight daie ſome what temperate, and towardes night windie, the▪ nineth daie a temperate daie, and blacke cloudes like to bryng ſome rain, but it ſhall hold vp, becauſe of Saturne and Venus, the .ii. ſignificatours of this moieſture, bee bothe in the temperate Manſions, the tenthe metely temperate, the eleuenth daie faire wether; the twelueth becauſe of the ſextile aſpecte of Mercurius and Mars, one in an airie ſigne, an other beyng in a fierie ſigne, the thirtene day colde and cloudie, the fowertenth temperate, with an inclinacion to moiſture the fiftenth faire in the after noone, the ſixtene enclined to moiſture. The .xvii.

ſomewhat enclined to droughte about hed, theightene toward euenyng, faire white and red cloudes, with wether alſo, the ninetene a faire daie, the twentie daie metely faire wether. The .xxi. daie temperate wether, the .xxii. temperatly windie. The .xxiii. faire, and ſomewhat windie, the .xxiiii. in the mornyng faire, and in the euenyng cloudes like to rain but it will holde vp, becauſe Venus the ſignificatrix of this rain, is a good tēperate manſion, the .xxv. faire and windie the. xxvi faire wether, till twoo a clocke in the after noone, but afterward very colde and cloudie, the .xxvii. a faire temperate daie, the .xxviii. greate windes & white cloudes aboute the heauens, the xxix. daie towards night windie, the. xxx great windes, becauſe of the coniuncciō of Mercuri & Iupiter, the .xxxi. cloudie.
               
               
                  ¶ Nouembre.
                  THe firſt daie faire wether, the .ii. cloudie aboute noone, till three a clocke, and then metely faire wether, the .iii. daie, becauſe of the coniunccion of Mercurius and Sol in a moiſt ſigne, and a moieſt manſion alſo, ſignifieth rain with ſome wind, the .iiii. cloudie,

the .v. and .vi. faire weather, the .vii. faire and temperate, theight temperat, and in deede neither faire nor foule, the nineth milde Rain, becauſe of the coniunccion of Iupiter, & Venus in Scorpio, a moieſt ſigne, and a moiſt manſiō alſo, the .x. daie rain & haile, or els ſome ſnowe withall, becauſe of the quarte of Saturnus & Mars in moſt manſiōs, ye ſame wether moſt part of the next day, the .xii. day ſomwhat enclined to gentle & ſmall rain The .xiii. daie the ſame wether, the xiiii. cloudie. The .xv. enclined to moieſture. The .xvi. cloudie in the after noone. The .xvii. faire weather and froſte. The .xviii. a faire drie daie from rain. The .xix. cloudie, becauſe of the trinall aſpect of Saturnus and Sol. The xx. in the after Noone like to rain, but it will holde vp. The .xxi. ſomewhat cloudie. The .xxii. faire in the for noone but in thafter noone windie, the .xxiii. cloudie, the .xxiiii. faire wether, the .xxv. cloudie, and as though it would rain, but it will holde vp, becauſe Saturne & Venus (whoſe trine aſpect cauſeth the wether aforeſaid) be in fierie ſignes, & temperate manſiōs, the .xxvi. faire, the. xxvii cloudie, the .xxviii. metely faire, the .xxix.

ſomewhat cloudie, the .xxx. metely faire
               
               
                  ¶ Decembre.
                  THe firſt daie cold and rain withall, becauſe of the quart aſpect of Saturnus and Mercurius in a moieſt manſion. The ſecond daie ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, the thirds faire wether and white cloudes ſpackled about the heauēs, the fowerth faire and temperate wether with ſome▪ wind the fiueth ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, the ſixt in the mornyng faire, and all the moſte parte of the daie Cloudie and very colde, the ſeuenth windie, the eight in thafter noone metely faire, the nineth ſomewhat windie, the tēth more windie, in eſpecially at after-noone, the eleuēth a metely faire day about noone but afterwarde cloudie, the twelueth daie ſomewhat enclined to moieſture, the thirtenth daie metely faire wether, but ſomwhat to muche enclined to moiſture, the fowertenth daie cloudie. The fiuetenth windie in the after noone, the xvi. a faire drie daie, but towards night cold and cloudie, the xvii. daie ſomwhat faire wether, the .xviii. cold, cloudie and rain with ſome Snowe, becauſe of the

quart aſpecte of Sol to Saturnus, and a ſextile of Mars to Saturnus, and a quart of Saturnus to Venus. The. xix daie metely faire temperate weather, with winde, about ten of the clocke, the xx. daie colde and cloudie, the .xxi. ſomewhat windie, and ſome Rain, the .xxii. daie faire temperate wether. The .xxiii. ſomewhat windie, the .xxiiii. in the mornyng faire and windie, but afterwarde cloudie weather, the .xxv. a faire colde daie, the. xxvi, daie cloudie, the xxvii. day faire and temperate, the .xxviii. daie metely faire, with often tymes ſweete ſhowers, and alitle winde. The .xxix. daie windie, but after noone cloudie, the. xxx a faire daie. The .xxxi. daie enclined to coldneſſe and moieſture.
               
            
            
               ¶ Of thinfirmities that ſhalbee this preſente yere.
               
                  FIrſt Mercuri lorde of the houſe of diſeaſes, in ye firſte beginning of the firſt quarter, beeyng in the ſigne of Piſces his fall, and in the ſeconde cadent from the aſcendente, ſignifieth that men ſhall haue infirmities in their ſhinne bones, ſecrete places

and Belies, and theſe diſeaſes ſhall happen moſte vpon boies, and olde women aboute the age of .lx. and vpon the learned ſort of men alſo. Iupiter lorde of the houſe of infirmities directe, and in the aſcendent of the ſeconde quarter of the yere, ſignifieth that there ſhalbee no infirmities in that quarter, but peines in the yies of men, and aboute their knees alſo, whiche diſeaſes ſhall happē moſte vpon noble men, and vpon yong noble maidens alſo. Moreouer Saturnus, beyng Lorde of the houſe of infirmities in the thirde quarter, and impedite in Aries, and in the nineth houſe ſignifieth, there ſhalbe quarterne agues, whiche ſhalbe great, & reumes ſtillyng out of mennes heddes into their Lightes, and tremblyng of Sinewes, and peines in their knees and yies, through corrupte bloude, becauſe Mars in the ſigne of ♏. Finally, Venus in the fowerth quarter, is figured Ladie of the ſixt houſe, beeyng in Sagitarius in the aſcendent alſo, ſignifieth that men ſhall haue no infirmities, but ſuche as happen through ſurfettes of drinkyng, and immoderate venerious actes.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of warres, and contencions.
               MArs in a humain ſigne in theight houſe, ſignifieth that mortal war ſhall happen emongeſt men, and the more becauſe of his retrogradacion this euill effecte and diſpoſicion ſhalbee more vehement, and this ſhall appeare more in the Southe partes, and in the Eaſte partes, then in any other places. Mars alſo in the ſecond quarter of the yere aforeſaid, and in the .xxvii. of Virgo in the .xii. houſe, the houſe of enemies ſignifieth warre and bloudſhed Mars in the ſigne of Scorp. & in the .iiii. houſe of the heauēs, ſignifieth that many ſhalbe ſlain with the ſweard, and that in the iii. quarter of the yere aforeſaid. Finally Mars in the. iiii quarter, and in the reuolucion therof in the ſeconde houſe, the houſe of ſubſtaunce, ſignifieth that there ſhalbe great ſpoile of the ignoble people by ſouldiours, and men of war, becauſe he is in Aquari, whiche ſigne is the fall of the Sunne, and the houſe of cloudie Saturne, whiche planete ſignifieth diggers, and deluers of the yearth and ſuche ignoble people and perſones.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of Cattall, and all other thinges, whiche ſerue for victualles, as wheate, barley, beanes, and ſuche like.
               FIrſt Mars beyng Lorde of the eight houſe impedite, ſignifieth that in the firſte quarter of the yere aforeſaied, Shepe ſhall die muche, and in the ſeconde quarter alſo. More ouer in the third quarter. Mars in Scorpio, ſignifieth that Shepe ſhall not die in the Reuolucion of the ſaied Quarter, and in the fowerth and laſte Quarter, Mars in the ſeconde houſe, ſignifieth that Shepe ſhall not die, but very fewe. Venus in the firſt quarters Reuolucion, in the ſeconde houſe Retrograde, ſignifieth that Wolle ſhalbee but of a metely lowe price in that quarter, and Venus in the ſeconde quarter, and in the eight of Taurus, and in the eight houſe of enemies, ſignifieth that Wolle ſhalbee higher of price muche more then before it was in ye firſt quarter. And Venus in the ſeuenth of Virgo, and the firſte houſe of the heauens, at the reuolucion of the ſecond quarter

ſignifieth that wool ſhalbe verye dere, and higher of price then before. Moreouer in the iiii. quarter of the reuolution of the yere aforeſaid. Venus peregrine in the aſcendent, ſignifieth that there ſhalbe greate plentie of woulle emōgſt men, and it ſhall not be dere. Venus Ladie of Taurus retrograde, ſignifieth that Rine, or calfes ſhal not proſper in the firſt quarter but metely ſo, but in the nexte quarter, Ryne and calues ſhalbe of a good, and high price, and ſo alſo in the third quarter of the yere aforeſayd, but in the .iiii. quarter Venus in thaſcē
                  dent and impedite out of all her dignities, ſignifieth that the price of Oxen, Ryne, and Calues, ſhal fall in the ſaid quarter. Whete in the firſte Quarter lowe of pryce, and in the ſeconde quarter within the which harueſt falleth no greate abundaunce of Wheate, and in that quarter it ſhalbe but of a low price Moreouer in the .iii. quarter, ſpecially ii. wekes afore Michelmas, wheat ſhalbe good cheape, and in the fourth quarter lowe of price wyl wheate be. Barley ſhall be of a metelye lowe price in the firſie quarter of the yeare. Barley alſo in the ſeconde quarter of the yere

of a metely lowe price: but in this ſeconde quarter in the whiche harueſte falleth, there ſhal therof be good plētie Barley in the thirde quarter ſhall bee good cheape .ii. weekes afore Mighelmaſſe, but about fouretene daies afore Hallontyde deere agayne: but that dear the ſhall not longe continue.
               Barley in the fowerth quarter of the yeare meetely good cheape, and lyttell of it amongeſt menne. Beanes in the fyrſt quarter of the yere aforſaid good cheape, and of lowe price. Beanes in the ſecond quarter of metely reaſonable price, and that ſomwhat of the higheſt, and of theim great plentie in this ſeconde quarter. Beanes of a meetely good price in the thirde quarter. Beanes in the fourth quarter good cheape. And generally for moſte thynges neceſſary, this yere wil be plentyfulle enoughe, ſpecially all the Somer, for all the chiefe frutes of the earthe.
            
            Finis.
            
         
      
   