
      
         
            
            
               
1607 Lamentable newes out of Monmouthſhire in Wales.
            CONTAYNING, The wonderfull and moſt fearefull accidents of the great ouerflowing of waters in the ſaide Countye, drowning infinite numbers of Cattell of all kinds, as Sheepe, Oxen, Kine and horſes, with others: together with the loſse of many men, women and Children, and the ſubuerſion of xxvi Pariſhes in Ianuary laſt 1607.
            
               depiction of flood
            
            
               LONDON Printed for W. W. and are to be ſolde in Paules Church yarde at the ſigne of the Grey-hound.
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               REader, when theſe newes were brought, & an importunitie vſed to me, that I would giue thē ſome forme, & beſtow an exhortation on them, I was vnwilling, both in regard of that ſhort ſpace (of leſſe then one day which was limited to vndertake the matter) and alſo in reſpect of the vſual vnfaithfullnes of men ordinarily in reporting of ſuch accidents as theſe bee: whereby it often falleth out, that the relater of them reapeth much diſcredit. But when I could not haue theſe iuſt excuſes taken, I began and finiſhed this buſineſſe, as the ſhorte

ſpace wold permit me. And now I offer it vnto thee, read it with that good affection wherewith I doe preſent it, and I am ſure, it both may and will profit thee by putting thee in remembrance why God doth puniſh others, that ſo thou maiſt thy ſelfe in time looke vnto thine own courſes, leaſt he proceed in the ſame or ſome more grieuous maner with thee: for our vices are the ſerpēts of our ſoules, ſtinging them to death, vnleſſe we looke vp vnto him that was nailed vppon the Croſſe, that ſo we may be cured of them, & be brought to forſake and relinquiſh them. Well then, ſeeing that it is meere wickedneſſe to change or alter good lawes, to awake ſtrife, or wilfully to maintaine it; to abate nobility, & exalt the vnworthy; to baniſh gods ſeruants, and to

honour the graceleſſe; to loue flatterers and diſpraiſe the vertuous & plaine dealers; to imbrace delights and paſtimes, & neglect works of duty and office, to account vanitie a mother, and pure religion a ſtep-mother; & in a word to regard nothing but idleneſſe, riot, and wantonneſſe; and that the Lord vſeth from time to time, to reueale his wrath from heauen againſt theſe and ſuch like impieties: the Lord of his goodnes purge our land daily, more and more, from ſuch of them as doe beare anye rule in it: that ſo Gods indgements bring auerted, wee may haue his mercies continually multiplyed vpon vs and ourpoſteritie, vnto the worlds end.
            Amen.
            Farwell.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Wofull newes from Wales. Or The lamentable loſſe of diuers Villages and Pariſhes (by a ſtrange and wonderfull Floud) within the Countye of Monmouth in Wales; Which hapned in Ianuary laſt paſt 1607. whereby a great number of his Maties. Subjectes, Inhabiting in thoſe partes, are vtterlye vndone.
            
               THE holye Scriptures teacheth vs, that when as God had framed the Heauens, Earth, Sea, Aire and all that in them is, hee then created Mankinde the laſt of all: euen as it were a little briefe or conciſe Mappe, a ſumme or an abridgement of the whole Worldes perfections: to the intent, that beholding is ſoone
               
as he was made this comely and gloriour Theater of nature repleniſhed with all things profitable and delightful, either for ſoule or body, he might preſētly be put in remēbrance how much he was obliged vnto his and their Creator: yea admoniſhed what occaſion and cauſe he had to loue him in true ſinceritie of affection, to obey his ſtatutes in integritie of deuotion, to worſhip and glorifie him, who in infinite and aboundantly ineffable mercie, had ordeyned him ſouereigne Lord and maiſter ouer all his creatures. But the text doth ad a point more notably to be obſerued: namely that the Lord made mankinde euen in his owne Image and likeneſſe: the which was placed not onely in the erternall figure of his body, as Auidius wickedly maintained, but euen both in ſoule and body, ſeeing ſin doth conſiſt in both, which is the contrarie thereunto: and alſo that the renewing of the ſame againe in vs, is the ſanctification of the one, as well as of the other: nay, as waxe is apter to receiue a print then clay; ſo the Soule being a ſpirit, and ſo neerer vnto the Diuine nature in the eſſence of it;
            It tooke more into it of Gods Image, and did better expreſſe it then the bodie either did or could

doe, wherfore the Lords Image wherin hee created our firſt parēts, was placed partly in mās ſubſtāce, eſpecially in his ſoule, and in the eſſentiall partes powers, and forces of it, & partly alſo in certain qualities, and in a certaine honour, dignitie, and glory, wherewith they were adorned: for firſt the verye ſubſtāce of Adams ſoule did reſemble Gods eſſēce, in the ſimplicity, inuiſiblenes, & immortallitie therof, and alſo in that power which it inioyed to know and will.
            Againe, as God is but one in the world, ſuſtayning, quickning with life, and gouerning the ſame, ſo there is but one ſoule in the body, which beeing whole in euerie part therof without either augmē
               tation or deminution ruleth it, giuing vnto it life, ſence and motion. Further alſo, the ſoule is like vnto God in the faculties of the ſame, conſidering that as there is but one onely deuine eſſence in the Godhead, & yet three diſtinct perſons in reſpect of their external actiōs, ſo the ſoule is but one, howſoeuer it cōſiſteth of three eſſential faculties: the intelletiue, the ſenſitiue and the vegetatiue. Moreouer as for the qualities of the ſoule, it did in wiſdome, Juſtice tne hollines reſemble God, as appeareth, in that

               Paul exhorteth vs to bee renued vnto theſe partes of his image as the moſte excellent: On the other ſide, as for the body, it did reſemble God in that immortalitie wherein at the firſt it was created: Againe, the ſeueral members of the bodie, reſembled the varietie of his perfections, & therefore in reſpect of their diuers vſes they are often in y• ſcriptures, Metaphorically aſcribed to him, as handes to ſhew vs his omnipotence, and eyes to teach to vs his prouidence: Beſides, in his verie bodie man reſembled God, in regard of a certaine imperious maieſtie conſpicuous therein; but principally in his face, & countinance which cauſed all y• liuing Creatures to ſtand in aw of him. Briefly the whole man both ſoule and bodie, did and doth ſtill in ſome ſmall meaſure reſemble God, in that his dominion wherin as a little God, he is by the Lord appointed ſoueraigne ruler ouerall thinges both in the earth, ſea, and ayre. No to the deuil the old Serpent, being falne through his tranſgreſſion into wretchedneſſe and miſerie, and enoying the bleſſednes in which he ſawe our firſt pa
                  •
               e
                  〈…〉
               s were planted in earthlye Paradice. he poſſeſſed the bodie of a ſerpent, & there in did come & tēpt Euah the mother of vs al, to diſobey

the Lord in taſting of y• fruit which hee had forbidden her & her huſband vpon paine of death to medle withal. What ſhold I ſay more? he drew her by his wiles to heare him accuſe god of vnkindnes: frō hearing to ſuſpition of his loue, from ſuſpition vnto direct rebellion againſt his law: ſhee took of y• meat prohibited & eat therof. yea not ſo cōtented ſhe did intice & allure by perſwaſions her husband, vnto the ſame capitall crime & office againſt the diuine maieſtie, ye worlds creator. The fact being thus notoriouſlie committed, the Lord came & gaue his ſentence vpon ye malefactors, namely that they ſhould among other puniſhments ſpecified in the text, returne vnto earth from whence they were taken:
            Thus of immortall they were made mortal, children of death and corruption, but happy it had been if this calamity had extended no further then themſelues: 
                  •
               las Adam was a publick perſon, & receiued graces for al his poſteritie, and therefore if hee had ſtood, we had likewiſe done ſo, but hee falling. wee fall together with him into the ſame calamityes which ſin brought him into, euen into all miſeries leading vnto death, and death it ſelfe vnto temporall and eternall, vnleſſe wee bee redeemed by

our bleſſed mediator and redeemer Jeſus Chriſt our Sauiour. So yt howſoeuer manye of the olde worldes Patriarkes liued ſeauen, eight, and nine hundred yeares, by meanes not onelye of their owne temperance, but alſo of a ſingular bleſſing of God beſtowed on them, to the end they might the better finde out artes and Sciences which required long experience: fill alſo the world the ſooner with people, haue their obodience vnto the Lord the more fully tride. and the more purelye conuay true religion vnto their poſteritie, as not paſſing through the handes of many perſons, yet you ſee ſtil at the laſt they dyed: the power of originall ſin, the wages wherof is death, alwaies at y• lēgth taking hold vpon them, and becauſe they vſed the benefit of their long life, not in ſuch holy maner as the Lord required, but grew ſhameleſſe in all euill courſes, wee ſee that Almightie God being mooued vnto wrath by their enormous vices, ſent a floud vpon them, and ſwept them away from the ſace of the earth, like dung and excrements, onely preſeruing faithfull Noah and his houſholde, together with ſome reliques of the creatures, in an Arke which he had cauſed him to frame for that ſeruice: and as for

their poſteritie in Noahs linage, who repeopled the world againe, we ſee that the Lord did abridge their yeares by many hundreds from thoſe which their forefathers did inioy that ſo they and wee to the worldes end might bee perpetuallye mindefull of their & our departure out of this vale of miſerie, wherein wee haue no certaine habitation or inheritāce, but are continually ſubiect vnto the arreſt of death & hels priſon, vnleſſe in time we get all the debts of our offences cācelled by being made heires of the riches of Gods lone in his Sonne Chriſt Jeſus, for death ſtriketh with more dartes then one, he hath euen almoſt infinite wayes to ſeize vppon vs, when from the Lord he hath his licence.
            Thus wee ſee ſometimes men conſume away & languiſh: ſometimes the Peſtilence doth deſtroy them: ſometime the ſword, and ſometimes famine: euerie one ſome thing or another according to the ſpeech of the Poet, Happie is he that is ſo prouided as y• in deed no kinde of death is ſuddaine to him: & ſeeing examples vſe to mooue vs, let vs ſeriouſly thinke vpon the late inundation of waters, which hath euen a
                  •
                vnawares ſurpriſed many who little expected ſuch an accident, that ſo by the due noting

of it, wee may bee incited to prepare our ſelues for ſome tempeſt in one kinde or another, as terrible vnto vs as that hath been to thē knowing that theſe prodigious ouerflowinges of the waters, howſoeuer natural cauſes, as Gods inſtruments doe claim their partes in thē yet they proceed from the Lords own direction, who by his puniſhing of others with thē, doth threaten grieuous calamities, euē againſt our vice, vnles I ſay ſpeedy repentance, & amendment doe auert his feareful wrath & iudgemen frō vs, apparātly kindled in many kindes within theſe few yeares laſt paſt againſt vs. It hath alreadie by the pen of another beene related, what great harme hath beene doone by the deluge of waters inuading Somerſetſh. & couering neere the Severne 20, mile in cōpas, to the ruine of al creatures & places which lay within y• circuite: further it hath beene ſhewed yt al Erent marſh is couered, & y• ſea got vp between Barſtable and Briſtowe as high as Bridge-water: what is done in Herefordſh Gloceſterſh. & diuers other bordering places vpon y• ſeas, it cannot yet in ſpecial be recorded vpon ground of certaintye: but touching Monmothſh. in Wales, the report of one in place of authoritie, & that not vpon a bare heareſay, is this.
            
               
               IN the month of Ianuarie laſt paſt vpon a Tueſday, the Sea being very tempeſtuouſly moued by the windes, ouer-flowed his ordinary Bankes, and did drowne 26. Pariſhes adioyning on the Coaſt ſide, in the foreſaide Countrey of Monmouth-ſhire, the particulars whereof doe follow: all ſpoyled by the greeuous and lamentable furie of the waters.
               
                  Matharne.
                  Porteſcuet.
                  Caldicot.
                  Vndye.
                  Roggiet.
                  Lanihangiell.
                  Ifton.
                  Magor.
                  Redwicke.
                  Gouldenlifte.
                  Naſhe.
                  Saint Peire.
                  Lanckſtone.
                  wiſton.
                  Lanwerne.
                  Chriſtchurch.
                  Milton.
                  Baſhallecke.
                  
                     
Saint Brides.
                  Peterſton.
                  Lambeth.
                  Saint Mellins.
                  Romney.
                  Marſhfield.
                  Wilfricke.
               
            
            
               
Now all kinde of Cattle being for twentie foure miles in length, and foure in breadth, were drowned: R
                  •
               kes and mowes of corne torne out of their places and carried away. Againe, the Sea hath beaten down at the foreſaid times, a great multitude of houſes, ſcattering and diſperſing the poore ſubſtance of innumerable perſons. So that the damage done in the foreſaid places, both in cattel and other goodes, is ſuppoſed to amount vnto the value of aboue an hundreth thouſand pounds.
            But alas, a man wil giue all that hee hath, ſo that his life may bee preſerued & this is it which wee eſtéeme of aboue all worldly treaſures: howſoeuer, as one ſaid well of olde, it being nothing but a bridle and miſerable fetter, which chaineth the pure and euerlaſting ſoule, vnto the vile, ſinfull, and corruptible bodie. But ſurely there is none eyther ſo greate an Oratour, or elſe ſo mightie an Enchaunter as life is; for it doeth perſwade vs vnto the contrarie of that which wee both ſée & féele: for although we know our owne frailty, and

that we muſt needes die, yet what wrongs, what hatreds, what labours, & what vnſpeakeable wretchedneſſe will men endure, rather then leaue theſe their clay houſes, wherein they are but Tenants at Will, ſubiect to be diſpoſſeſſed at Gods pleaſure. Wel, ſaide the Roman wiſe man: That ſéeing the flowers of life be but luſts and pleaſures, falſe ſhewes, ſhadowes, and vanities, the fruites thereof but labour, care, ſickneſſe, and tediouſnes, yea the trée it ſelfe but corruption and frailety? Oh what reaſon haue men to doate vpon it? why ſhould death be ſo fearefull vnto them: eſpecially when hauing their portion in Chriſt Jeſus, they are well aſſured that their felicity is not in this life to be expected, but in the world to come. Into the which, Death is our Ferriman: and conſequently our aduantage: as the Scripture tearmeth him. Neuertheleſſe, ſéeing life is precious, as Natures bleſſing, left with vs by the Lord in truſt, and to be redemanded by him, and obediently yéelded vp by vs at his pleaſure, for his glory: how happy woulde thoſe that endured the foreſaide loſſes haue thought themſelues,

if ſo bee that they had but eſcaped away with their liues. But poore wretches, the moſt of them were drowned, by the foreſaid invndation: not as though I did iudge them all miſerable who did die therein. For as Koper ſaith touching the flood which did ſurpriſe the olde worlde: in the firſt iudgement, wherein the tranſgreſſing Angels were to be cenſured, and in the laſt day of Aſſizes generall: onely the reprobate haue beene and ſhal be condemned, the elect ſaued. But in iudgements that fal out betwéene; neyther the elect alone are preſerued, nor the reprobate onely are deſtroyed. And yet no doubt many of them, yea the moſt were prophane, as the reſidue of all our Countrey is, in reſpect of the multitude: for pride, gluttony, drunkenneſſe, the very Metropolitane City of all the Prouince, of vices, fornication, and all ſortes of vncleaneneſſe, the which the Lord threatneth to puniſh where he findeth them, in a feareful manner: doe euen walke vp and downe like Rulers in all places. And what ſhall I ſay concerning the contempt of the Miniſterie of the word, and the manifold wrongs continually offered

euen vnto the moſt reuerend and faithful Miniſters of the ſame. Is the couetouſneſſe of our yron hard hearted age, vnknowne to any man? doeth it not deſtroy and corrupt daily more and more, both Church and Common weale among vs? hath it not ſtollen almoſt into euery corner, and crept wei neare into euery heart, maring all where it commeth? But hee is blinde who noteth not the ſeuerall kindes of oppreſſion euery where practiſed: and the lying and diſſimulation euery where vſed. In a word, ioleneſſe, one of thoſe ſinnes which cauſed Sodome to bee deſtroyed, is moſt palpably to bee noted in all ſtates and conditions of men among vs: both in Church and common-weale: while the Cleargie doth nothing but looke for liuings, and leaue the labours of their function: and the Gentry eſtéeme more of their Hawkes, Howndes, and other their vainer pleaſures, then the godly diſcharging of their offices wherein the Lord hath ſet them? And ſhal wee then imagine that they were onely good that are gone in this calamity of waters? Certainely, as I make no queſtion, but

God hath had his faithful ſeruants among them: ſo I doubt not, but that the greateſt part of them were euen as the reſt of our Nation is at this daye: lewde and prophane wretches, whom the Lord hath thus plagued, for to recall vs if it be poſſible from our filthy practiſes: leſt at once hee be prouoked to poure downe the ful vialls of his wrath vpon vs. And therefore, if wee be wiſe, let other mens harmes make vs warie, leſt cuſtom in vice make it grow euen another nature to vs. Wherefore aboue all things, let vs take héed that long eſcape of puniſhment, or the vaine hope of long life do not delude vs, & make vs run on ſtil into our ſins like the hard horſe into the battel: for our life is but like the Gourd of Ionas, or the pilgrimage of Iacob, the daies whereof 
                  〈◊〉
                as few as euil: yea it is like unto the viſton of Eſdras, goodly too looke vpon, but vaniſhed in a moment: And therefore, there is nothing more perillons to be entertained by vs then the Mot of Epicures, (o thanatos vden pos:) death belongs not to vs: ſéeing we are therby brought to be careleſſe of our actions. But to return vnto our foreſaid narration.
            
               
The foreſaid waters hauing gotten ouer their wonted limittes, are affirmed to haue runne at their firſt entrance with aſwiftneſſe ſo incredible, as that no Gray-hounde coulde haue eſcaped by running before them. And they yet couer twenty foure miles in length, and foure and more in breadth: which it the water were quite gone againe, be not to be recouered within the ſpace of fiue or ſixe yeares, to bee ſo ſeruiceable ground as formerly they haue béene: yea, and there is no probabilitie that that part of the Countrey, wil euer be ſo inhabited againe in our age as it was before this floud, howſoeuer it hath heretofore bene reputed, the richeſt and the fruitfulleſt place in all that Countrey.
            Moreouer, the land ouerflowed with the Seuerne ſea, is valued at aboue fortie thouſand pounds by the yeare, only in the ſaid Country of Monmouth, which is yet vnder the waters, and to hee recouered againe from them at the Lords good pleaſure.
            Further, among other matters, theſe things are related as certaine truths. As that a certaine man and a

woman heuing taken a trée for their ſuccour, and eſpying nothing but death before their eyes: at laſt among other things which were carried along in the ſtreame, perceyued a certaine Tubbe, of great largeneſſe to come néerer and néerer vnto them, vntill it reſted vppon that Tree wherein they were: Juto which (as ſent vnto them by GODS prouidence) committing themſelues they were carryed ſafe, vntill they were caſt vppe vppon the drie ſhoare.
            Againe, of a maide ceilde, not paſſing the age of foure yeares: it is reported, that the mother thereof, perceiuing the waters to breake ſo faſt into her houſe, and not being able to eſcape with it, and hauing no clothes on it, ſet it vpon a beame in the houſe, to ſaue it from being drowned. And the maters ruſhing in a pace, a little Chicken as it ſéemeth, flew vp vnto it, (it being found in the boſome of it, when 
                  •
               s helpe came to take it downe) and by the heate thereof, as it is thought, preſerued the childes life in

the middeſt of ſo colde a tempeſt.
            An other little childe is affirmed to haue bene caſt vpon land in a Cradls, in which was nothing but a Catte, the which was diſcerned as it came floating to the ſhore, to leape ſtill from one ſide of the Cradle vnto the other, euen as if ſhe had bene appointed ſtereſman to preſerue the ſmall barke from the waues furie.
            Moreouer one Miſtreſſe Van, a gentlewoman of good ſorte, whoſe liuing was an hundred pound and better by the yeare, is auouched, before ſhe could get vppe into the higher roomes of her houſe, hauing marked the approach of the waters, to haue bene ſurpriſed by them and deſtroyed, howſoeuer, her houſe being diſtant aboue foure miles in breadth from the ſea.
            Beſides theſe thinges in Monmouth-ſhiere, alreadie ſpecified: One Miſtreſſe Mattheus of Landaffe in Glamorgin Shiere, dwelling ſome foure miles in breadth frō the Sea, is ſaid to haue lost foure

hundreth Engliſh Ewes. Much corn is likewiſe there deſtroyed in that Countrey, many houſes ruinated, and many other kindes of Cattell periſhed. The number of men that are drowned, are as yet not knowne to exeéede abaoue twentie hundred. A multitude more then did, had periſhed for want of foode, and extremitie of colde, had not the right Honourable the Lord Herbert, ſonne and heire to the Carle of Worceſter, and ſir Waltar Mountague, Knight, brother vnto the Recorder of London, who dwell neare vnto the foreſaid places, ſent out boates, (fetched tenne miles compaſſe vpon Waines) to reléeue the diſtreſſed. The Lord Herbert himſelfe (as the relation is) going himſelfe, vnto ſuch houſes as he could, that were in extremitie, to miniſter vnto them prouiſion of meate and other neceſſaries. And theſe are the things touching theſe foreſaid places, which haue béen deliuered as truthes vnto vs, of vndoubted veritie. And there we leaue them.
            As for our ſelues, ſéeing we are all of vs ſubiect vnto

the like ſinnes that others are: and that theſe when wée dayly fall into them, doe like the bloud of Abell, ſollicite the wrath and vengeance of the Lord to be powred downe vpon vs. Let vs thinke vpon the iudgementes which God hath inflicted vpon others for their vices, that ſo wée may be the more auerted from the like offences. Thus did Dauid doe. And the Prophet Hab: doth witneſſe, that the grieuous plagues which euen in a viſion hée did ſée ſhould came vpon the Chaldeans, did make him to quake and tremble: what would he haue done, it ſo be that hée had ſeene the very actuall execution of them? would not hée haue applied them vnto his owne perſon, remembring that his miſerie by nature was as great as any others? But no man-careth to knowe himſelfe and his owne deſeruings: euerie one dalighteth to marke his brethren, and their infirmities, being therein like vnto thoſe Lamiae or Faicies: concerning which, Plutarch ſpeaketh, who when they went abroad, filled their heads with

eyes, but when they came home againe, plucked them out, and put them vp in boxes: As for his owne breath, each one thinketh it to be ſwéet enough, as the Prouerbe ſpeaketh. The Lorde of his mercie graunt, that we may learne in time to be wiſe vnto our owne health and ſaluation, leaſt that theſe water-flouds in particular, prooue but forerunners vnto ſome ſcarefull calamities, more generall.
            FINIS.
         
      
   