
      
         
            
            
            THE HONOVR of Chiualrie.
            Set downe in the moſt Famous Hiſtorie of the Magnanimious and Heroike Prince Don Bellianis: Sonne vnto the Emperour Don Bellaneo of Greece.
            
            Wherein are deſcribed, the ſtraunge and dangerous Aduentures that him befell.
            
            With his loue towards the Princeſſe Florisbella: Daughter vnto the Souldan of Babylon.
            
            Engliſhed out of Italian, by L. A.
            
            
               
                  Sed tamen eſt triſtiſſima ianua nostrae,
               
               
                  Et labor eſt vnus tempora prima pati.
               
            
            
               VERITAS VIRESSIT VVLNERE
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creede. 1598.
         
         
            
            
            To the right Worſhipfull his ſpeciall Patron, Maiſter Iohn Rotherham, Eſquire, one of the ſixe Clarkes of her Maieſties moſt Honourable Court of Chauncery.
            
            
               SVch, ſo great, and infinit are the fauors (Right Wo. Sir) that from the bounteous liberallitie of your faire conditions, I haue without deſert receiued: that by no meanes, in no reſpect nor in the leaſt degree, my greateſt duetie can no way ſatiſfie by any actiue deede: Saue with a willing minde, alwayes acknowledging it ſelfe vnable to cancell the great bondes for the ſame. Which in my doubtfull thoughts reuoluing, beeing by perſwaſions wonne, to pubiſh the excerciſe of ſome vacant houres: & remēbring that at your Wo. houſe at Semars, I began the practiſe of the Italian tongue (as theſe fewe ſheetes of paper there commenced, doe beare teſtimonie) I cannot but in ſigne of my dutie, preſent this ſlender indeuor to your Wo. kinde acceptance, crauing pardon for this audacious boldeneſſe; which confidently hoping to obtaine, I doe then beſeech you, to patronage it, as the firſt token of my thankfull heart (beeing deſtitute of all other meanes to doe it:) Whoſe rude and harſh diſcourſes, cannot in his infāt growth yet better pleaſe, through the myſhe couert of groſſe barbariſme, in an vnpoliſht wit, onely ſupporting her weakenes, againſt al accidents of inſuing harms,

on the ſtrongpiller of your fauourable lookes, which graunted, my wandring deſires ſhall triumph in the victorie of their owne wiſhes: and reſt incouraged to labour in their ſecond ſowing, with more perfection, to your laſting praiſes. Whoſe continuing loue, I onely pray, may by no ſiniſter occaſions, drowne mee in the obliuious center of forgetfulneſſe, from your deare remēbrance, which is the anchorage of my hopes, that no longer in a mortall world doo wiſh may breath, then from your dutie they decline, or the grateful memorating (being al I craue) of your incomparable merits. Whoſe life with many, many yeares increaſe, in all earthly happineſſe, with augment of dignities in this terrene orbe, and in the future, the crowne of ioyes, infallible, the onely ſole Ruler of them both, may grant you in all largeſſe.
            
               Your VVorſhips humblie deuoted.
L. A.
            
         
         
            
            To all gentle Readers.
            
               EVen as a yong child newly, (as I may ſay) crept frō his cradle, indeuouring to pronoūce with perfection, his natural language for his future vſe, is firſt inſtructed to ſpell, before he be put to reading, & to read, ere hee expound: So I, whoſe rough skill, and harſh vnfiled wit, wanting the practiſſe of continuing time, being disfurniſ
                  •
               t of Natures helpes, and Artes polliſht diſciplines, muſt ſeeme to goe, before I may preſume to flie, truſting to my owne vnfledged winges, leaſte with raſh aſſpiring Icarus, I ouerwhelme my helpes in the recordleſſe Caue of euerlaſting diſgrace. I ſpeake this (moſt courteous and gentle Readers) for that I had ſome fewe monethes paſte, onely for my priuate recreation, in idle houres, imitated in this Hiſtorie, the inuention of a forraine wit, whoſe conceit beeing commended by diuers Gentles, of no meane deſert, haue by their importunate intreaties, forced me (altogether vnwilling) to make known the rude excerciſe of my vacant leaſure, which at length to ſatisfie their requeſtes (not my deſires) I did reſolue to doe, onely thereby to make you ſport, in the tedious paſſage of theſe winter nightes, if other paſtimes doe not diſturbe it. For on this ſole hope it onely leanes, that beeing the firſt ſprigge of a young plant, ſet in a barren ground, ouergrowne with weeds, ſo it wil obtaine your general gentle

acceptance, with a fauourable pardon for this raſh preſume. Defending it with the ſhield of your fauours, which will be a ſufficient tower, wel armed againſt al ſcandalizing tongus, that but make an ecchoing noyſe, with their ayrie wordes, to harme none ſaue themſelues, by the rebounding backe of their reprochfull tauntes, euen on their barking ſelues. But walled with hope, that the gentleneſſe of your vertues, will nothing derogate from your names, by kindly accepting my good-will, I end: praying, that all preſent and enſuing happineſſe, and content, may euery way anſwere your owne wiſhes: requesting, that where you diſlyke, there you would mildely amend, and not vtterly condemne.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Honor of Chiualrie, ſet downe in the moſt famous Hiſtorie of the Inuincible Prince Don Bellianis, ſonne vnto the Emperour Don Bellaneo of Greece, wherein are deſcribed his aduentures, and loue towards the Princeſſe Florisbella, Daughter to the Soldane of Babilon.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  
                     Howe the Emperour Don Bellaneo married the Princeſſe Clarinda, daughter vnto T
                              •
                           leiano King of Spaine.
                     
                  
               
               
                  WHen the Grecian Monarchie flouriſhed with moſt glorie, triumphing ouer the greateſt part of Chriſtendome, as is recorded in the large annuall Regiſters of Friſtone (ſurnamed the Wiſe) preſeruers of the neuer dying fame, & euer memorable acts of the worthies of this time: There then ſoly ſwaied the awful imperious Crowne and Septer, an Emperour named Don Bellaneo, who through his rare vertues, gentle affabilitie, gallant conditions, royall and heroycke déedes, his admirable regard, and moſt great care in the adminiſtration of equall iuſtice to his ſubiects, not taking the ones right to make the other rich, was of them ſo highly admired, loued, and reuerenced, that the ſuperfluitie of words in reuealing it, would unpoueriſh rather then inrich the perpetuitie of his neuer dying glorie. This

Emperour was altogether in his youth inclined and inflamed with deſire ofhaughtie attempts, the conquering offorraine Nations, Kingdomes, and Signories, wherein he neuer reſted, continually betaking himſelfe (clad in abilements of militarie armes, in field againſt his foes, manifeſting his vncredible valour, and his well knit ſinowes, which nothing diſagréed from the greatneſſe of his minde. The famliar vſance of his nobles and vaſſales was ſuch, that they might bee rather tearmed his companions and fellowes, then ſubiects. Hee alwayes would hazard his perſon in greateſt and moſt difficult daungers offered him, accounting that honour to bée ſupremeſt, which was obtained with moſt toyle and perill, and iudging it better that ſtraungers ſhoulde blaze abroade the greatneſſe of his militarie fortune and magnanimitie in warre, then the commending of his Souldiours déedes, inſo much that their chéefeſt acts in the perilous battels, was to guard their Lorde: for ſo great was his couragious heart, not fearing mightie and puiſiant Giants, nor the ſtrength of admired Knights, but as pretending all honour to himſelfe, and eſteeming it but little, would as it were headlong, runne where hée founde moſt daungers, that ſometimes his whole campe might hardly defende him from the furie of contrarious Squadrons, where his heroicke thought could not harbour the leaſt ſigne of pale trembling feare: in which kinde of life hee more ioyed, then if hee liued among all the delicious and delighting pleaſures, that any Monarches could yéelde in greateſt plentie. Whereby his all wondering fame was ſo vulgarde, throughout the farre remoted Nations of the ſpacious Orbe, which they accounted as a blazing comet, preſaging the future ruine, that his bare name cauſed in them ſuch agues of timerous feare, as dooth the furious thunder (renting the darkened welkin with mightie ſhowers of earth drowning waters) in the heartleſſe multitude of ruſticke countrey ſwaynes. By which hée became ſo odious to all his enemies▪ that they would

often giue their owne bloud as a reward for his death, foreiudging his life would bee their vtter deſolation. But hauing conſumed the greateſt parte of his youth in hoſtile armes, by counſell, and importunitie of his nobilitie and ſubiects, beeing often thereto vrged (though againſt his will) hée returned with wreathes of immortall tryumph, to the famous and euer-glorious Cittie of Conſtantinople, from whence were diſpatched in his behalfe, to demaunde in marriage the Princeſſe Clarinda, Daughter to Toloian, King of Heſperia, to whome in Embaſſy were ſent perſonages ſufficient to make knowne his high magnificence, among whome went as cheefe the King of Hungaria (coſin to the Emperour, and the Prince of Macedon, with many Dukes and Lords, with the haughtieſt pompe and royalleſt ſhew of Embaſſage that euer went to any Potentate. This vnderſtood by the Iberian king, he in perſon came to meete them, muſing at the ſodaine comming of ſuch ſtates to ſeeke him from ſo farre Countreyes: who beeing ſeene of them, with great courteſie that abounded in them, alighted, dooing him that dutie that might appertaine to ſuch a King: who perceiuing it, with the like ſolemnitie entertained them, where ouerpaſſing theyr gréetings, they remounted a horſebacke, and by the way breefely diſcourſed of many things, vntill they arriued at the famous Cittie Hiſpalis, where they were receiued againe with many verie ſumptuous ſhewes, prepared onely for that purpoſe, to expreſſe the riches and greatneſſe of his ſtate: and approaching the royall Pallace of Hiſpalia, they alighted, the King Toloian leading in one hande the King of Hungarie, and Macedon in the other hande, entred the great Hall, where the Quéene and the Princeſſe Clarinda with diuers Péeres, expected theyr arriuall, and moſt maieſtically receiued them anewe, and the King of Hungarie knéeled to the Quéene, deſiring to kiſſe her hande, but ſhee refraining it, tooke him vp in her armes, imbracing and honouring him as worthily as the dignitie of

his eſtate merited, dooing the like vnto the Macedonian Prince and other Nobles, that alſo proſtrated themſelues before the Princeſſe, who entertained them with ſuch gallant grace, that they greatly admired at her rare beautie, and ſingular perfections, thinking themſelues verie happie, to haue ſo abſolute a Ladye for theyr Empreſſe. No ſooner ended theyr ſalutations, but the Tables beeing layde, they ſate downe, and were vſed according to their magnificence: afterward they had appointed them large and rich lodgings, by his maieſties command, retaining in the pallace (the more to honour them) the two kings. The next morning were ſummoned the chéefe Lords to parleament, and their preſent audience to the Kingly Embaſſadors, who being thither ſent for to theyr Senate houſes, deliuered from their Lord and Emperour their Embaſſey: for which the Spaniſh king reſted highly contented, and replied he was fully determined to accord with the Emperours requeſt, therwith remaining highly ſatiſfied, and ſo they might prepare themſelues, for in ten daies ſhe and they ſhould be prouided of al neceſſaries: wherat they greatly reioyced, ſo did the Quéene and Princeſſe with that marriage, hauing before heard of the Emperors rare and abſolute conditions. At length all things ordered, they departed, leauing the Court in great ſolitude through the princeſſes abſence, who with her traine continued their daily iourneyes, till they came to Conſtantinople, where they were welcommed, and the nuptials ſolemnized with moſt magnificent tryumphs, torneyes, and all manner of paſtimes, according to the greatnes of ſuch eſtates.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  
                     The birth of Don Bellianis of Greece, and of a ſtraunge aduenture did befall him a hunting, by which he parted from the Emperour his father.
                  
               
               
                  NOw the Hiſtorie doth record, that in proceſſe of time the Emperour Don Bellaneo had of the Empreſſe Clarinda thrée ſonnes, the eldeſt called Don Belianis of Greece, that inherited the Empire after his fathers death: the ſecond Don Clarineo of Spaine: the third, Don Lucidamor of Theſſalie, who not onely in valour and Millitarie diſcipline, equalled their Father, but excelled all others of their tyme, in all gallaunt and woorthie heroicall exerciſes: inſomuch that all men had them in high admiration, ſpecially the prince Don Bellianis, that was educated according as his royall ſtate merited, and the heire of ſuch an Empire required, vntill hee came to the age of eight yéeres, in which no Donzell in all the Court (though he doubled his yéeres) could excell him (there being verie manie) chiefly the Prince of Macedons ſonne, by name Don Brianell: another of the King of Hungarie, called Don Arſileo the ſtrong, through his exceſſiue ſtrength: for beeing knighted, he would often betwéene his armes ſmoother puiſſant knights, ſo that nex
                     •
                  
                  ▪ the Prince he was accounted chiefeſt. In which time they were inſtructed and taught thoſe thinges as fitted ſuch Princes, wherein they ſo well profited, but ſpecially the prince Don Bellianis, who much applied himſelfe to Muſicke, that in thoſe dayes none ſurpaſſed him: that the Emperor ſéeing him ſo much giuen vnto it, was not ſ
                     ••
                  rke in prouiding for him, the excellenteſt tutors that might be found: to whom, and thoſe he had, the Prince highly rewarded. In which worthie exerciſe,

he buſied himſelfe, till he perfected the age of twelue yeare, with ſuch forwardneſſe, that euerie one admired him, aſſuredly imagining, that within the compaſſe of the whole earth, was not a more excellent and rarer ſpirit,
               At this time hee was taught the ſcience of Armes, in which hee ſhewed himſelfe ſo expert, as it were a thing hee ſhoulde by inheritaunce poſſeſſe, that he ſéemed to néede no teacher. In this exerciſe he ſpent two yeares. About which time the Emperour beeing deſirous to hunt in a ſpacious Forreſt, thrée miles diſtant from the Cittie, and beeing prouided of all neceſſaries, hee departed to it with the Empreſſe, his ſonne Don Belianis, (leauing his two Brethren in Court, that then deſired not to go with them) but there accompanied him Don Brianell, and the Prince Arſileo, with manie Knights and Lordes of high eſteeme, with ſo great and royall traine, as they were going to pitch a battell. The Prince Don Belianis did lead by the reynes the Empreſſe his mothers Palfrey, and the Emperour went conforted with the Princes Aiſileo, and Don Brianell, of wheme hee reſted greatly ſatiſfied.
               In this equipage, within a while they arriued at the place where ſtraight theyr ſport beganne, that with the noyſe of hounds and hornes, they drowned the Eccho of theyr owne voyces. A while after, from that ſide the Empreſſe ſ
                     •
                  t, there iſſued foorth a Lion, and a Beare, with ſo ſwift a courſe, that though they would haue hidde themſelues, they could not find anie place. The Lion ranne ſtraight againſt the Prince, who although it ſomewhat ſcarde him, did not therefore feare him, but with an vndaunted heart, ſet himſelfe before him, with his ſworde in hande, which at his ſide he wore. But the Lion ioyned with him ſo ſuddainlie, that he wounded him ſorelie in the foreheade, and griping him betwéene his armes, thruſt one of his pawes into his fleſh, making a déepe wounde: but the Prince not diſmaied thereat, nor looſing his couragious minde, gaue ſuch a thruſt from his armes downewardes,

right to his heart; that the Lion through extreame paine left him. Then looking towardes the Empreſſe, ſawe that the Beare with diueliſh furie, hauing ouerthrowne the Prince his Cooſen, (agaynſt which his great ſtrength nought preuailing) dragged ouer the Mountaine toppes, which hée ſeeing, (although grieuouſlie wounded, and the Lion not ſtyrring) ſtraight tooke his horſe, and with all ſpeede ſollowed the way the Beare had taken, not reſpecting the many Knights that want in his reſcue, nor the Empreſſe outcries, forbidding his enterpriſe, fearing hee ſhoulde faint through the murh blood hée had loſt by his woundes: but counterpoyſing all theſe thinges with the great loue hée bare his Cooſen, ſtayed not, but in all haſte thruſt himſelfe into thoſe greate and thicke Groaues, through which hee left groat quantitie of his blood, that it was no little eaſe vnto him, beeing on foote. For the way was ſo thicke, and naught, that it was vnpoſſible for him to ride therein. For elſe the running of his Horſe woulde haue putte him in extreame daunger. But continuing his way through that fearefull Groaue, following the noyſe of a lamentable and pittifull crie which hée hearde: and beeing vnable to paſſe further through wearie fayntneſſe, ſet him downe: and ſeeing howe much bloud hee had loſt by his woundes, and the daunger which hee knewe his louing Cooſen to bée in, put him into a melancholie ſorrowe. But long was he not ſo, by reaſon of a great noyſe that ſuddanly aroſe out of the Thicket thereby, whereat hee faintlie beganne to riſe. And looking what might bée the cauſe thereof, ſawe the moſt horrible and fearefull Beare, haſting to the place where hee was: but hee ſetting himſelfe before him to hinder his further hurting his Cooſen. The Beare eſpying him, furiouſlie ranne to aſſault him, but by the Lions experience, hée caſt himſelfe aſide, and ſo let him paſſe with his diueliſh furie, and turning about to ſtrike him, perceyued the Beare to runne in a Caue that was at the foote of a ſtéepie Mountaine there adioyning:

whereat verie ioyfull of ſuch a miſchaunce, went to his co
                     •
                  ſen, who amazed at that hée had ſéene, was likewiſe comming to him, & with great loue embracing him, and ſéeing his wounds bléede verie faſt, ſaid: without doubt, (good c
                     〈…〉
                  ) you are ſore wounded, wherefore I pray you reſt here while I ſeek out our companie, and ſée your wounds dreſſed. I am no
                     〈…〉
                  s preſent (replied Don Belianis) in ſuch neceſſitie, but may accompanie you, yet would I gladlie knowe what ſtraunge aduenture is in you hollowe Caue. For as God ſhall helpe me, we hither are not come, without ſome ſpeciall ſecret. It behooues not you now (ſayd Arſileo) for your wounds will not ſuffer you to knowe the ende of this ſtraunge aduenture. For in the lingring of your cure, you may endaunger your ſelfe greatly. Neuer may it be ſaid (replied Don Belianis) that I hence part and not know it. Whereupon hand in hand they went till they came to the Caue, whoſe obſcure darkneſſe was able to baunt the ſtouteſt heart. But thoſe hautie Princes arriued there fearleſſe of any thing, and had ſcarce entred the ſame ten paces, but Don Arſileo vnable to paſſe further, was, (mauger his ſtrength) thruſt forth: and though hee aſſayed to reenter, yet could hee not, but was with greater force ſtill rebated backe: which extreamly gréeued him, ſéeing he could not enter to helpe his cooſen. Meanewhile, hee heard within a rumour of great blowes, as if many Knights were in fight togither. For after the Prince parted from his cooſen, he went forwards through the Caue, beating his head againſt the walles on euery ſide, till he had paſſed that great darkneſſe, that hee founde himſelfe in a Hall, where he ſawe a huge Piller, with certaine Arabian letters, which hee going to reade, by the light that procéeded from a Window thereby, was forbidden it by a moſt deformed Giant, that ſéeing himſelfe before (hauing in his hande bounde with a mightie Chaine, the monſtrous Beare cauſer of his comming thither) with a terrible ecchoing ſound of his hearſe voyce, thus ſpake.
               Thou art not permitted (poore captiue donzell) to reade

the Letters of the brazen Piller, for I will hinder thée thereof, béeing héere placed for the ſame purpoſe, vntill the Prophecie bee fulfilled which it containeth. The Prince reſted greatly amazed to ſée ſo miſſhapen a Monſter, that hee ſuppoſed him ſome infernall ſhadowe, ſooner then a mortall ſubſtaunce. But hee with a neuer daunted minde, made this replie. I maye not enter battell with thée (thou fearefull beaſt) hauing not yet receyued the order of Knighthoode, which if I had, although thou ſhouldeſt neuer ſo much gaineſay it, yet I woulde not go hence, vntil ſuch time as I had read them.
               No reaſon ſhall ſerue thee (replied the Giant) to kéepe thée from death by my handes, for here was I ſet for that purpoſe to welcome him with it, that ſhoulde preſume to enter this my forbidden habitation. And ſo ending his ſpéech, hée let looſe the furious Beare, which with his diueliſh pawes ranne agaynſt the Prince, and the Giant laying hand to a great ſmiter hanging at his ſide, did the like, and beeing nigh him, reached him a mightie blowe on the heade: but hee that feared more the Giants Smiter then the Beares ſtrength, though bigge and ougly, got betwéene the Giants armes, that hee coulde not hurt him, making the blowe vaine, and the Smyter with the ſwifte force it carried, lighted on the grounde, and flewe out of hande. Meanewhile the Prince ſtrooke the Gyant vppon the thigh, that no more hurt him then had it fallen on an Adamant: which hee perceyuing, turned to the Beare, yet coulde no more wounde him then the Gyant: which vered him to the heart, and 
                     •
                  ſeeing the Giant returned vppon him, got behinde the Piller, whereon the Letters were, vſing it as a Shéelde. But the Giant at this time ſuddainly came vppon him, that hee coulde ſcarce effect it, who rayſing his ſteeled Smyter with both his handes, gaue ſuch a mightie blowe on the heade, that hee thought it parted in two, yet it did him no harme, ſaue that the ſtrength thereof forced him backewardes two or

thrée ſteppes. At this time the Beare looke holde of his arme with his pawes, that renting his hunting Jacket, wounded him ſor
                     •
                  lie: but ſeeing himſelfe in ſo immenent daunger, was once againe forced to take the Piller for his defence, whereon hée eſpied a Sworde fixed, whoſe workemanſhip was ſuch, that the like in no tyme was euer ſeene, wherein he more at that time reioyced, then had hee béene inueſted vniuerſall Lorde of the whole earth, or made a greater Monarch then his Father. And without delay ſtepping to it, verie eaſilie and lightlie drewe it foorth, which hee had no ſooner done, but that there was heard a moſt horrible noyſe, as if the diſſolution of the worlde were then, that vnable to ſtande, was faine to get holde of the Piller. Yet ſcarce was the earthquake paſt, but that deformed Giant prepared himſelfe to fight, which the Prince ſeeing, and ioyfull with the obtained ſword, therewith thruſt at his bodie with the vtmoſt ſtrength of his arme, that the Sworde appeared at his backe, that ſtraight the Giant fell to the grounde, as dooth ſome mightie Oake, rent with a Whirlewind by the rootes. And looking for the Beare, founde him alſo deade, as thinges that had no longer tearme of life, then the laſting of the inchauntment, which ended with the drawing of the Swoorde from the Pillar. And that noyſe beeing heard of Don A ſileo, that remayned at the Caues mouth, tryed if hee might againe enter it, which without anie trouble hee did. And taking his hunting Jaueline with him, hee c
                     •
                  ſt himſelfe reſolutelie into it, and came to Don Belianis, at the time hée ended the Giants life, and was giuing thankes to God, that hee had deliuered him from ſo great perill and daunger, and with wonderous gladneſſe to ſee themſelues againe togither, ranne to embrace each other, and Arſileo thus ſayde. You haue not béene long (deare Cooſen) though ſo ſor
                     •
                  lie wounded, as you were in 
                     〈…〉
                  ng this ſo ſtaunge and moſt maruaylous aduenture, to your admyrable honour, and blaſing fame, whereby I doo aſſuredlie beleeue, you will terminate

all others with like expedition. So that the perpetuall recorde of your Fathers glorious name (which hee in manie yeares with his great paine obtayned) will bee, with the neuer dying memorie of your famous déedes, and the eternitie of your actes, in ſhort time extinguiſhed, and in obliuious darkneſſe ouerwhelmed. No not ſo (good Cooſen, replyed Don Belianis) but let vs reade theſe Letters fixed vpdon this Pillar, which coſt mee noleſſe bloud, then if they contained ſome matter of great importaunce: which they read to this effect.
               
                  
                     A Prophecie, and is fulfilled in the 37. Chapter.
                     In the time to come when the fiercenes of the couragious Lions by the greatnes of my skill ſhalbe put in greater feare by them that in valour had ſo great part, the fearfull keepers of my caue being ſlain, and the ſword won, wherwith the liuing ſhalbe loſt, and 
                           •
                        he dead put in poſſeſſion of the reobtained, with the greateſt ſtrangeneſſe of obtainers, which vntil that time was euer heard of, ſhalbe reſtored to theirroyall blooud, and the true poſſeſſors know en.
                  
               
               Greatlie were the two Princes amazed hereby, not vnderſtanding thoſe woordes, though plainelie they were meant by Don Pelianis, ſeeing hee had ended the aduenture. Great is the 
                     •
                  eede (ſayde Don Bi
                        •
                     ile
                        •
                     
                  ) you ſeeme to haue of preſent care for your woundes which I ſee to bee ſo deepe, that I feare you may fall into ſome notable daunger, throngh the great quantitie of bloud you haue loſt. Which was true, for though the Prince with the ioy of his good ſucceſſe, and in beholding his rich Swoorde, thought not on his great and daungerous wounds, which were ſuch that if anie other of leſſe, and weaker conſtitution, and couragiouſneſſe of minde had had them, coulde not ſo haue ſuſtained himſelfe.

But while they were thus talking, from a moſt ſumptuous Chamber, there iſſued forth a beautious Damſell, cloathed in a Crimſon ſattin robe, ſo great, that the traine thereof trayled on the ground.
               This Lady was led betwéene two Knights, auncient and of great grauitie, and on her attended twelue Damſels in the ſame liuerie, all ſhewed by their faces ſome heauie cauſe of melancholike ſorrow, who beeing before the Prince, proſtrated themſelues on the ground: which hee ſeeing, did alſo the like, and intreated them to riſe: to which ſhee ſaid. I will not riſe moſt excellent Prince, vntill firſt you haue graunted mee my demaunde: I doo graunt it (gracious Ladie) ſayde the Prince, and not onelye that, but manye others, for my deſire is onelye for to ſerue ſuch as your owne ſelfe.
               I do render many infinit thanks (replied ſhe) neither did I looke for leſſe from ſo high and honoured a Prince as you, guarded with ſuch royall bountie, and magnificent excellencie: and ryſing, tooke him by the hand, and entred the Chamber, which, though Don Belianis had ſéene manye verye fayre and rich, in his Fathers Pallace, yet iudged hée that to bée royalleſt hée might ſée: for the walles ſéemed of chriſtall, through which appeared ſuch diuerſitie of pictures, as the whole Uniuerſe coulde ſcarce containe more: the floore ſéemed of Tranſparant Emeraldes, which ſo amaſed their woondring ſences, that they ſtood a good while gazing on it: till Don Bellianis turning to the Lady that held him by the hand, ſaide. Although (fayre Ladie) the entrance of this Caue ſéemed ſo timorous in ſight, yet the varietie of theſe raryties which it within containes, preſents more ſhewes to the outward fight, thē the whole world beſides, & without reaſon, was it not made with ſuch extreames, as to be inhabited with ſo excellent beauty within, and guarded with ſo great feare without, to forbid the enterāce to all attempters. The Lady cōceiuing great pleaſure at the Princes words, anſwered, I could not chooſe but bluſh

(moſt gracious Prince) at your words (though ſo honored by them) knew I not your great courteſie, that farre ſurpaſſeth all others of this time, which cauſeth mée to prize my ſelfe more then I ſhould, or my merits deſerue (though I ſhould not vnder your protection do it) becauſe all honoured prayſes and deſerued merits reſt in your ſelfe. But ouerpaſſing this which is ſo well knowne of euerie one, let my intreaties now ſo preuaile with you, that my maidens may cure your wounds. I haue no wound (replied the prince, that ſo much needeth cure, ſaue my deſire to know the ende of this aduenture, and alſo who ſhée is that ſo honoureth me. Uerie quickly ſhall you know it (faire Lord) (ſaith the Princeſſe) but firſt muſt your woundes be cured, leaſt you incurre ſome greater danger, and after ſhall you know the cauſe of your comming hither, whom I am, and what elſe you will, all being doone by her will that keepes me heere. Thereupon the Prince was vnclothed by thoſe Ladies, and one of them cured him moſt ſkilfully, hauing great knowledge in that art, and layde on a ſumptuous bed, they left him to his reſt. The Prince Arſileo remained in talke with the d
                     •
                  mſell of many things, ſpecially of the aduenture of that day, greatly admiring what Don Bellianis his coſin had atchieued, beeing ſo yong of yeares. Do not ſo wonder (moſt noble Prince (ſayd the Ladie, for in compariſon of that this Prince ſhall do, this is the leaſt. Much maruailed Arſileo to be knowne in that place, not remembring that he euer ſaw any of thoſe Ladies, and ſo continued in pleaſing 
                     •
                  hat till ſupper time, when the tables being couered, they ſate them downe. And héere leaue wee them, to ſhew what b
                     •
                  fell the Emperour Don Bellaneo, and what he did.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  
                     How the Emperour departed to ſeeke out his ſonne.
                  
               
               
                  AT the many outcries the Empreſſe gaue Don Bellianis her ſonneto returne from the Beares purſuite, diuers of thoſe knights that were ahunting, haſtned after, following the ſignes of the bloud, till they came to the place where hee did ſitte, and there found ſo much bloud, that they reſted wonderous diſinaide, yet ſaw they not the caues mouth, by reaſon that the entrie therof was there ſtopt, and made on the further ſide. But not ſtaying there, they beganne to ſéeke the Prince among the thicke groues, with all ſpéedie diligence, yet could finde neither footing nor ſigne of him, whereat they were ſo amazed, ſéeing euerie where ſuch quantitie of bloud, as they imagined he could not be farre from thence, yet durſt not without him returne to the Empreſſe. The like happened the Emperour, whome a certaine knight tolde how a horrible Beare dragged the Prince Arſileo, as is before mentioned, who vnderſtanding it, made no long ſtay, but accompanied with many knights began to ſeeke that way hee had heard they were gone, and after long toyles ſeeing himſelfe in that thicke wood, and doubting ſome miſchance might be
                     •
                  all him, called for his armour (whereof he neuer went vnprouided, as one delighting more in millitarie ſucceſſe, then in hunting, and was with all ſpeede armed, & mounting on his horſe, put himſelfe through the forreſt with 
                     〈…〉
                   ſole Squire, commanding the reſt of his traine, to ſeeke the Prince on the other ſide (nought preuailing with him their intreatie to go with him) but hée commanded the Prince Don Bryanell to take his launce, caſt his ſheeld at his backe, and leauing his companie, verie ſorrowfull departed, fully determined not to

returne to Conſtantinople, vntill he heard eyther of the princes liues or deaths, for whom he ſo greatly gréeued, that the more hee thought to diſſemble it, the more his ſorrow increaſed Thus in his iourney leauing him, we will declare what his Knights did, which a little after met with all the reſt ſtanding by the caues mouth, who knowing of the cruell chaunce that befell the Prince Don Bellianis, began greatly to lament him, but ſeeing it little preuailed, ſought him anew in many places, till the darkeſome night ouertooke them, which forced them to returne vnto their tents, where they left the Empreſſe that imaged with greefe, would haue commanded their heads to be ſtroken off, that conſented to the Emperour to depart, not ſo much eſteeming the Princes loſſe, as his ſodaine going through thoſe dangerous woods, where certainely ſhe thought he would be deuoured by ſauage beaſts, inhabiting that forreſt: wherefore ſtraight recommanded that with many lights and torches they ſhould againe bee looked for ouer all the mountaines: but not finding them worthily they deſerued to bee excuſed, and ſeeing neither of them could be found, greatly gréeued, they all returned to the Cittie with bitter execrations, curſing the houre they firſt determined to come to that place, cauſer of the Empreſſes inraged greefe, that none durſt ſpeake vnto her.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                     The ſtrange and dangerous aduenture that befell the Emperour in the diſcouered Caſtle, ſeeking the Prince Don Bellianis his ſonne.
                  
               
               
                  THe Emperor putting himſelf through that wilde groue, taking his way diuerſly, hauing no certaintie of any thing, ſo trauailed til it was night, & with great gréefe, ſeeing he could effect nothing to his intent by reaſon of the nights obſcurity, alighted: ſo did Brianell, who vnbridled their horſes,

that they might féede on the gréene graſſe, which with ouermuch labour were ſo tyred, that they could hardly any longer beare their Maiſters. But the Emperour being in great trouble and anguiſh of minde for the loſſe of both the Princes, yet more ſorrowed for the Empreſſes gréefe (which was not little) that hée ſuppoſed ſhe would conceiue, ſéeing neither of them returne, then for ought elſe. For he certainely thought that if they were deuoured by wilde beaſts, ſome ſigne thereof would bée founde, ſo that perſwading himſelfe the contrarie, he parted aſide to reſt, but hee had not ſlept ſcarſe two houres, when ſuddainly he awaked at the loude cryes he heard, that all the vallies ecchoed with the noyſe, which with more vehemence ſtill ſeemed to increaſe, as if they procéeded from ſome in great neceſſitie ſuſtaining outrage: whereat the good Emperour was ſo amazed, with trouble on all ſides, chéefely at that time, yet as one ſearching ſuch daungers, commanded Don Bryanell to bridle his horſe, while he laced on his helme, and caſting his ſhéeld at his back, mounted on his horſe, not ſetting foote in ſtirrop, and taking his launce, thruſt himſelfe through the groue, following the voyce he heard, imagining ſome of the Princes might be there: but féeling himſelfe wearie with much trauel, yet ſuppoſing he approached euerie foote nigher to the lamentable crie, ſpied hard by him a high Caſtle, well fortified with Towers, though by the darkeneſſe of the night he could little diſcerne it. But comming to the gate, perceiued the voyce procéeded thence, and with great deſire to know the cauſe, knocked at the ſame, yet none anſwered him: which more vrged him to learne the force and violence within vſed, ſo that he went round about the Caſtle, but could find no enterance: whereat fyred with delay, and the lamentable voyce increaſing, ſpied a rope, wherewith from the top of the Caſtle, they drewe vppe ſtones, with a certaine deuiſe they had within. So the Emperour finding no other entrie, bade Don Bryanell vnarme him, who ſayde, what meane you to doo my good Lord? will you by force haue your enterance through theſe ſtonie walles?

I intend nothing elſe (replied the Emperour) and therefore alight and vnarme me: which done, binde my Armour to this coard, that therewith, if I haue tune, I may Arme my ſelfe aloft. I thinke it a méere madneſſe (ſaide the Prince) to hazard your perſon in ſo imminent a danger: for beſides that, the cō
                  ming forth ſéemes ſo difficult, I beléeue you hardly wil be ſuffered to ſee what kind of people doth inhabit it, and ſo haue ſcarce time to vſe your Armour. I can do no otherwiſe (anſwered the Emperour) for it would be imputed to my euerlaſting ſhame, if I ſhould ſuffer this wrong to paſſe vnpuniſhed, or not vſing that which my ſtate bindes me to. So diſmounting, hee was diſarmed, and getting holde of the rope, taking with him his ſword and ſheelde, he clymed thereby to the Caſtle top, as eaſily as if he had gone vp a paire of ſtayres, and calling for his Armour, Don Brianell began to tye it to the corde. But it otherwiſe fell out then he imagined: for through the Caſtle gallerie, he ſawe aboue ten Knights, purſued by two moſt fearefull giants, and ten other knights that laid on them great and mightie blowes: which the Emperour ſéeing, and wanting time to arme himſelfe, imbraced his ſtrong ſhéeld, and oppoſed himſelfe againſt the Giants, calling aloud vnto the Knights, they ſhuld turne, and not cowardly flie for feare. They being aſtonied with their ſhame, ſéeing a knight without Armour haue the corage to attēpt ſuch an enterpriſe, returned againſt the furious Gyant, who with fretting yre, to ſée that one onelie man ſhuld reſiſt their furie, ſet vppon him with great battel-axes in theyr ſtrong hands. But hee whoſe heart neuer feared their deedes, with an vndanted mind ſtayed for them, and making one looſe his blowe, receiued the others on his ſhéelde, which was ſuch, that parted in two, it fell to the ground, hardly ſauing his hand from following it, yet was it a little wounded. Whereat full of rage, he ſtrooke one of them on the head, that the ſword being of a good temper, and gouerned by ſo puiſſant an arme, it cleft it downe to the eyes, wherewith he fell with ſuch violence, as when a tower is ouerturned by the furie of a ſuddaine earthquake,

hereupon the other ourreached him with his axe, that had he not warded it with his ſword, it had bin the laſt he ſhuld receiue, for it deſcended with ſuch rigour, that his ſword was cut in two, and he wounded pitiouſly on the head: who then ſéeing himſelfe in ſuch danger, cloſed ſtraight with the Giant, that not able to ſhunne him, they both tooke holde of one anothers armes, demeaning themſelues ſo valiantly, that the Emperour with the ſurpaſſing ſtrength he vſed, loſt much bloud by his wounds, which at length made him (being furiouſly moued) hoyſt his enemie in the aire, and threw him to the ground, euen in the place where he came vp, and quickly puſhing him with his hands, tumbled him headlong ouer the Tower, that with the fall he died: yet leaſt he might reuiue, looking out of a window, he called to Don Brianell to kill him afore he aroſe, who ſtraight cutte off his head. By this time the cleareneſſe of the morning beganne to ſhewe it ſelfe, when the Emperour looking towardes the flying Knights, perceiued them to bee put to the worſt, by reaſon of one whoſe valour excelled the reſt, ſeeming to bee of high deſcent, and theyr commaunder, which the Emperour ſéeing, tooke one of the dead Giants ſhéeldes, meaning to reſcue them, whereat the knight turning to him to ſee where he hadde left the Giants, for beeing buſie in fight with the knights, little thought they ſhould haue ſuch fortune, and ſeeing that horrible Giant dead, and howe the Knight made againſt him, reſted amazed, yet with great furie taking his ſword with both handes, made towards the Emperour, which rayſing aloft, gaue him ſuch a blow on the ſheeld, that it made him bowe to the ground, and doubling with another on the other ſide thereof, ſtrooke cleane from his arme, ſorely wounding him on the thigh, which the Emperour thought he had loſt, that with mortall furie gaue ſuch another on the right arme, that the greateſt part thereof he cutte, forcing the knight to take his ſword in his left hande, who with it would wounde him, but the Emperour that had learned to omitte no occaſion, ſuſtaining himſelfe on his thigh, as well

as he could ſtrooke at him ſo fierce a blow, which lighting on his hard tempered helme, it felde him almoſt dead to the grounde: yet greatly prayſing him for that hee hadde ſéene him doo (though he much had endaungered him) would not any otherwiſe hurt him, but going to ſuccour the knights of the Caſtle, ſawe they hadde valiantly reſiſted their aduerſaries, and ſo ſéeing euerie thing accompliſhed to his deſire, knéeled and rendered God great thankes for his deliuerie from ſo great daunger, béeing the greateſt hee euer had béene in, finding himſelfe vnarmed. But going to riſe, was not able to ſtande on his legges, though hee greatly ſtirred to doo it, by reaſon of his wounde, which by that time was colde. And turning to them of the Caſtle, that alreadie had ſlaine their enemies, who extreamely greeuing ſo to ſée him, would vncloath him to cure his woundes. But hee would not, till firſt they called his Page that remained without, which they did, wonderfully amazed at the haughtie courage of the knight, that ſo admirable and vnheard of déedes had done, comming to ſuch a place vnarmed, which they iudged to be the greateſt acte that euer was ſpoken of. And calling Don Bryanell, they tolde him what the Knight would haue, who verie ioyfull becauſe they tolde him hée was in no daunger of death, ſtraight mounted vppe the Caſtle ſtayres, where the Emperour was, greatly doubting his life, by reaſon he enterpriſed that aduenture without armour, and went to the place where they vncloathed him, & there dreſſed his woundes: which done, hée kneeled downe, demaunding his royall hands to kiſſe them. The Emperor imbraced him, and made him riſe: to whom Don Bryanell ſayd. Great was the feare that I was in for you my moſt excellent Lord, in that I was barred from bringing you your armor, ſeeing you run into ſo certaine perill, yet thinke I more eaſily you tumbled downe the Giant, then you did your ſelf mount vp vnto the top, giuing him no leiſure to vſe the rope for his eaſier deſcent. The Emperour much delighted in his pleaſant ſpéech, and commanded them to

leaue him alone to reſt his tyred bodie, which the knight did, taking Don Bryanell with them, and deſired him they might knowe who his maiſter was, and his name, aſſuring themſelues, the whole earths circuit coulde not affoord his like for valour, and what chaunce had at ſuch time brought him thither.
               To whom Don Brianell anſwered, hee was called the vnknowne knight: and though he had a long time accompanied him, he knew no other name he had, and that trauailing ouer theſe mountaines, he heard the great cries within the Caſtle, with what elſe happened. So leauing their diſcourſe, and thinking it time, went to ſerue the Emperour meate, whome they found more quiet (the paine of his woundes beeing mittigated) and after he had eaten, demanded the occaſion that thoſe Gyants ſo vſed them. We know not good ſir (anſwered they) ſaue how a knight that came with them, knocked the laſt night at the Caſtle gate, intreating vs to let him in, requiring a lodging for that night, which we yéelding to, opened the gate, miſtruſting nothing leſſe, then that which befell: but in the opening, he ſet vpon vs with thoſe pittileſſe Gyants, whom you ſlew. And when we ſawe ſo many inconueniences, ſent forth thoſe cryes, togither with many women that were within. This (good ſir) is all that we know of this aduenture: ſo that if you had not come when you did, we had all ſuffered a moſt cruell death.
               Tell me, ſaid the Emperour, what is become of a knight cloathed in an azure Armor? he is priſoner in a Tower (replied they) vntill we know your farther reſolution what ſhall be don with him, woorthilie deſeruing to bee tormented with a cruell death for his trecherie: but do not ſo (ſaid the Emperour) for he is a very good Knight, and deſerueth no euill vſage, and therfore haue care he want nothing he ſhall néede, for I would not for any thing he ſhould miſcarrie: of him ſhall wee knowe the cauſe of 
                     ••
                  e
                     ••
                   trayterous deſigne, which ſéeme is not without ſpeciall occaſion. Hereupon the knight went ſtraight and

dreſſed his wounds, who though hee had loſt much bloud, ſéemed couragious, as if he were at libertie. And after they had dreſſed him, he was conuaied to a faire Chamber, prouiding him with all neceſſaries, as the Emperour had commaunded. Who in this order remained tenne dayes in the cure of his wounds: when remembring the taſke hee had vndertooke, determining to depart thence, went firſt to viſite the wounded Knight, whom he found greatly amended of his woundes: and approching to his bedde ſide, aſked him howe he felt himſelfe. Well enough (aunſwered hee) though with no little greefe for my badde ſucceſſe: yet am I not ſorie to bée ouercome, ſéeing it was by him, whoſe courage and valour, the ſtrength of mightie Giants could not abate. But one thing I intreate of you (ſir Knight) by the courteſie you haue ſhewen mee, you woulde vouchſafe to tell mée your name, that in thoſe places where I ſhall come, I may publiſh your hautie deedes. It pleaſeth mée (replyed the Emperour) conditionally, you alſo let me knowe yours, with the cauſe of your comming hither, with the truth thereof, whereto ſuch a Knight as you is bound.
               I am deſirous to know you (ſaid the Knight) that though it be agaynſt the promiſe I haue made, and you promiſing mée to kéepe it ſecrete, I will not denie it. Thereto I giue you my falth (aunſwered the Emperour) and firſt knowe, I am Don Bellaneo, Emperour of Gréece, that by certaine aduenture, not farre from hence, I parted from my traine, the reſt hauing happened, as you haue ſéene. Ho immortall Gods (ſaide the Knight) fetching a great ſigh: are you he, whoſe name is ſo feared among all the Pagan nations? and he that neuer refuſed to aſſault ſo terrible and fierce Giants? And in bréefe, he whoſe inuincible minde ſheweth howe true the euerlaſting fame of your perpetuall deeds is? and through the world of you is ſpred? Ho great Soldan, now by this dayes ſucceſſe, thy determined purpoſe is vtterly made voide, hauing ſo ſtrong an aduerſarie left thee in the world. It therfore behoues thée no more to think

of peace? And turning to the Emperour (who greatly amazed at his words, ſtood gazing on him) and diſſembling his conceiued griefe. Suppoſing (renowmed Prince) the matter I ſhall diſcloſe, to be of leſſe conſequence then it is, I wil in few words vnfold the truth thereof, though in the doing of it, to my ſelfe more then to any reſulteth greateſt loſſe. I know that your name (ſo fearefull among all Gentiles) beeing publiſhed in the Soldan of Siconias court, with the great deſtruction by you made of his people, and in all Paganiſme, moued him by promiſe to bind himſelfe to giue the one halfe of his dominions with the mariage of his daughter, to that knight, by whoſe valour your head were brought him. Alſo promiſing, that if in the enterpriſe he died, the halfe of his ſaid dominions ſhould notwithſtanding be granted to his ſucceſſiue heires, So I vnderſtanding the great promiſe the Soldan had made, and greatlie louing his daughter, reſolutely reſolued, I departed to the kingdome of Antioch, whereof I am Lord, and with my ſelfe hauing determined what I ought to do, I left my court, accompanied with 500. knights, and 30. giants, purpoſing at your comming out of your palace, either to kill or impriſon you: ſo ſhipping our ſelues, and landed not farre from hence, left our ſhips at anchor, thither to returne with your conqueſt. And that this we might better compaſſe, vnknowne, and vnſéene, we agréed to take this Caſtell. and here remaine till occaſion were offred vs to effect this pretence, being informed of the ſtate of all things by a man whom on the coaſt we tooke, whereby wee hither came, as you haue heard, and eaſily thought to haue taken it, being minded to let none ſuruiue to carry the newes abroad: but your incomparable valour hath fruſtrated our intent. Thus haue I declared vnto you all that in this caſe I can, whereto your great bountie, & magnanimous clemencie forced me: for notwithſtanding I had ſo maſſacred your ſubiects, you cauſed me thus to be cured. My name is Don Gallaneo of Antioch, if you euer heard of me before: and ſo he made an ende to his ſpéech. The Emperour reſted wonderfull amazed,

ſéeing with what audacity don Gallaneo had diſcouered him a déed of ſuch waight, for which he might greatly fear his deſerued puniſhment: but iudged him of hauty courage, conſidering how cōfidently he had put himſelf in his hands, hauing againſt him committed ſo high treacherie: and ſhewing no maner of alteration, made him this anſwer. Truly Prince Don Gallaneo, you haue plainly expreſſed the valiancie of your minde, in ſo openly bewraying that, which by any other meanes I could not haue knowne, whereby you haue doubled the cauſe of my imaginarie thoughts, ſéeing in ſuch a knight ſo little ſhame, that without further conſideration. ſhould by treaſon ſéeke to ſpill my innocent blood, which in ſo great a Prince as you, ſéemeth more odious then in any other, being by order of knighthoode, bound to be vertuous, and abhore all ſuch deteſtable actions, and to be an exāple to your ſubiects, leaſt againſt your ſelfe they might commit the like. Yet would I not for all my ſtate, you ſhoulde haue had ſuch confidence in mee, ſo to diſcouer my ſelfe, that I might (not knowing it) let your owne ſelfe, ſée your ſelfe confounded in your own imaginations. But ſéeing it is done, here you ſhall remaine in this Caſtel, till I further determin of your being. Yet for all this (ſaid Don Gallaneo) aſſure your perſon, for not farre hence is the remainder of my power, and eaſilie may you incurre ſome greater daunger, though your perſon be ſuch as I haue tried: yet among them are ſo fierce and mightie Giants, that will not thinke much to cleaue your bodie armed in two, with one blow. I haue thought (ſaid the Emperor) what in this caſe ſhall be done: and thereupon commanded his horſe and Don Brianels, to be ſadled. And Don Brianell foreſéeing the perill that might enſue, beſéeched the Emperour on his knées to giue him the order of Knighthood, to ſerue him in that enterpriſe: which the Emperour denied, promiſing to do it an other day. But here we leaue them, and returne to the Prince Don Bellianis, and Arfileo, whom we left with the Ladie in the Caue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  
                     Howe Don Bellianis with the Ladie departed from the Caue, and by what ſtrange aduenture he and Arſileo were knighted.
                  
               
               
                  IT is recorded by Friſton, that the Prince Don Bellianis, with his Cooſen Arſileo, remained ten dayes in the Damzels caue, till the Prince was able to trauaile, who gréeuing much for the ſorrowe the Emperour and Empreſſe would ſuſtaine, and acknowledging how much bound he was to that Ladie, determined to depart, yet greatly deſired to know the end of that aduenture. Wherefore the prince Arſileo, a day before their departure, intreated her to declare vnto them the whole occaſion of her being in the Caue, and what ſhe would require them to do in her ſeruice: although they néeded not make many offers, being as they were ſo boūd to her for ſo many fauors, that at her cōmand without intreaty, they ought to do, euen with the hazard of their liues. The damzell with a ſorowfull countenance, as one that remembred her forepaſſed miſfortunes, could not withhold her teares, but with watry chéeks, & eies like flowing ſprings with rūning ſtreams, at laſt thus began. I cannot (excellent Princes) ſo intirely expreſſe vnto you the cauſe of my griefe, as I could deſire, for the great ſorrow my gréeued heart ſuſtaines, ſuddenly ſuppreſſing me, & breaking into a ſalt ſhower of briniſh teares, will not giue place vnto the exact vtterance of my wordes, yet as I may I will do it. I was (moſt noble Princes) daughter vnto Pompeiano, (not long ſince king of Antioch) and am called Aurora, that being at the Soldan of Babylons court, accompanying his daughter, the moſt beautifull Florisbella, whoſe perfected beauty, & abſolute vertues, ſo far ſurpaſſeth al other of her time, as doth ye ſun al leſſer ſtars, To this court came a knight whoſe

name for a long time was not knowne, ſauing by certaine Images in his ſhéeld, was called the knight of the thrée images, who ſhewed himſelfe ſo valiant, that there was no ten knights in the whole Court ſo ſtrong and hardie, as durſt maintaine the field againſt him. This Knight throughout the Soldanes Empire, performed ſuch déedes of haughtie proweſſe, that in generall, among all men he was accounted a ſecond Mars, and the Soldane did no leſſe eſteeme of him, alwayes hauing him in his companie, whereby he thought himſelfe worthie of greater dignities, and ſo became amorous of the diuine Florisbella, for whoſe loue a long time he ſuffered great gréefe and much ſolitude, not daring to manifeſt it to any: at length ſeeing nothing preuaile to expell that deſire, when one day the Soldane with all his Court was gone a hunting, he remained alone in the Pallace, and after ſome pleaſant diſcourſes, diſcouered vnto me the ſecrets of his loue, intreating me that in his name I would intreate the princeſſe to accept him for her knight, wherwith ſhée finding her ſelfe agreeued, aunſwered that by no meanes ſhe would do it, commanding him no more to imagine any ſuch madneſſe, leaſt the Soldane her father ſhould by chaunce heare thereof, which if he did, it might coſt him little leſſe then his life. But he nothing weighing this her anſwere, found meanes that the Princeſſe might know the extreame anguiſh of his perplexed heart, inthralled by her beautie, ſo that I thinking that ſome harme might thereby inſue, declared it to the Soldane, who thereupon commaunded him to depart his Empire, but he not knowing the occaſion, very heauily before his departure, told him that what he did was againſt reaſon, in commanding him to leaue his Dominions, for he was a prince able to ſhew him, that ſuch as he ought not to be ſo vſed. And departing the Court towards the Soldane of Siconia, called the great Sophi of Perſia, where ſuſpecting I was cauſe of his exile, beganne with fire and ſword to enter the king my fathers territories, in ſuch ſort waſting and ſpoyling them, that ſlaying the king, he tooke poſſeſſion of the whole Kingdome, giuing it

to the knight of the kindred called the Prince Don Galaneo, reputed a man of great vallor. In which time (not knowing of his ſucceſſe) I went from the Soldanes Court home to my fathers, & fearing to fall in their hands, by counſell of a wiſe woman called Bellona, entred in a boate with theſe Damſels you here ſée, togither with the ſayde woman, and by hir direction arriued in this countrey, and was by her conducted to this caue, where ſhe bad me remain, for I ſhould quickly be deliuered by the Prince of Greece, and his coſin of Hungarie, foretelling me euery thing that hitherto hath happened, and moreouer ſhe bad me giue you armor and horſes, (which here ſhe left) wherwith you ſhall be knighted by a ſtrange aduenture, but what it it was ſhe would not tell. Thus haue I declared the occaſion of my being here: and the fearefull Beare the wiſe woman here left, was hither to bring the Prince Arfileo as you ſawe, and the mightie Giant which you ſlew, remayned keeper of the caue, who might not be ſlaine with any weapon but the ſword which you drewe out of the Piller that hee guarded. So that (great Lord) the remedie of my miſfortune reſteth in your handes, and our departure may be when and ſo ſoone as you ſhall think good. I am content (anſwered he) wonderous amazed at the Damſels diſcourſe) but I would willingly take with me an hoaſt of men, that you may more eaſily recouer your kingdome. I attend here no other hope but yours (ſayd ſhe) and as for any other I was informed we ſhall not néede. Whereat the Prince (ſéeing that was her will) commanded ſtraight prouiſion to be made for his departure: ſo al neceſſaries being ready, they mounted a horſback, & the damſels on their palfraies, accompanied with the two anciēt knights that carried yt armor that the princeſſe Auro
                     •
                  a had ſpoken of, which they ſéeing, tooke it forth of ye caſes, which were as appertained to nouel knights. The prince Don Belianis armor was of colour Orange-tawny, with a ſea waue ſo big, that it ſéemed to ouerwhelme a ſhip there figured. In his ſheeld was pourtraide the picture of a moſt beautifull Lady, with a knight knéeling before her, as if he craued mercie at her hands, from whom ſhe turned her face

in anger, with an inſcription to this effect.
               
                  Let him die for ſo departing
                  At our firſt and ſudden meeting:
                  Leauing thereby my deare ſight dim
                  Of his, when I deſired to ſee him.
               
               Which was written in Arabian letters, that the Prince well vnderſtood. The prince Arfileos wer murry, in ye midſt wherof was fighting a griffon with a moſt terible dragon, which were parted by a damſel that made peace betwéen them, which when they ſaw ſo faire, became deſirous to put them on, & cauſing the princeſſe and damſel to ſtay, were armed with them, which ſo wel fitted them, as if of purpoſe they had béene forged for them, wherwith being armed, ſet forwards on their iourny, & hauing gone not far from the caue, ſpied before thē a faire Caſtle, which til then they had not ſéene, nor yet when they entred the caue. The princeſſe & the Ladies maſked themſelues, becauſe ye heate of the ſun was great, & the reſt were diſguiſed, that they might not be knowne, & approaching the Caſtle they ſaw two knights come forth therof, the one in a white armor like a nouell knight, the other that was bigger of perſonage, & ſéemed of great valor, was clad in the richeſt armor that might be ſéene, of an azure colour, with many imperial crownes. In ye middle of his ſhéeld was figured the image of Mars, as the Pagans vſe to picture him. Theſe knights of the caſile led with them a man on horſebacke vnbooted & vnſpurde, and his head muſled like a priſoner which made the prince deſirous to know what they were. As God ſhal help me (ſaid Arfileo) if I were knighted, I wold procure to know thoſe knights, & why they leade yt knight priſoner. Do not therfore trouble your ſelf (good coſin) ſaid Don Bellianis, for eaſily may it be done, & ſo let it be my charge, for I wiſh God may neuer helpe me if ſtraight we know it not, ſo going forward, they met a Squire that came to them, and ſayd. Sir knights, my maiſter that is he in the white armor, deſireth you by me, yt becauſe hee receiued this day his order of knighthood, you would be content to breake a launce with him, for you ſeeming no leſſe valiant then courteous, he deſireth to trie if your

déedes do agrée with your outward appearance. Tell him (replyed Don Bellianis) wee would willingly accompliſh his deſire, were we but knighted, and would gladly receiue ſuch order at the Grecian Emperours handes, for this and no other cauſe letteth vs from fulfilling his minde. And you may alſo tel him (ſayd Arſileo) that were it not for that, it ſhould be commanded him to yeeld vs account of that knight what he is, and why they lead him priſoner. The Page returned to his maiſter and tolde him that anſwere, which he reputed too great arrogancie in them, but ſéeing they expected his anſwere, he went to them, and ſomewhat cholericke he ſaide. Which of you is the knight that gaue my page ſo proude an anſwere? You ſhould not neede to aſke it (ſaid Arſileo) were we knighted, deſiring nothing more then to ſatiſfie your requeſt, but ſeeing ſayd the knight) you go to require that order at the Emperour Bellaneos hands, to ſaue you that labour, I aſſure you he is not at Conſtantinople, nor of him is there any newes, and therefore know that yonder knight is ſuch a Prince, both in poſſeſſions and valour, as the Emperour little ſurpaſſeth him, wherefore that our Combat may be effected, you may receiue the order you ſeeke of him, although it were to no other end then to chaſtiſe the madneſſe that poſſeſſeth you (replyed Don Bellianis) we wil now receiue that ſacred order, & calling one of the damſels, ſent hir in their names to the knight in the azure armour, who going where hee was, thus ſayde. The knights you ſee with yon Ladyes (noble Sir) intreat you, ſéeing they expected the order of armes at the hands of the Emperour of Greece, whom your companion ſaith is abſent from Conſtantinople, and they ſuppoſing you no leſſe noble then valiant in outward ſhew, to grace them with the ſayde order, that they might ſatiſfie your companion with the breaking of ſome few launces, certifying you that without ſcruple you may do it, for they bee both of royall bloud, I am right gladde to do it (anſwered hee) though it were better they receiued it by the Emperour, with thoſe ceremonious rights as ſuch honour requireth, but ſeeing

they are thus content it ſhall be, and ſo méeting each other with ſuch kind gréetings and ſalutations, as if they knew the conſanguinitie betwéene them, and the Princes requeſted the knight again to accompliſh their requeſt, they all alighted, and he taking their oathes, were knighted, & the princeſſe Aurora girded Don Beliani: with his ſword, whilſt the nouell knight did the like to Arſileo: which done, they reſted ſo content, as they were created the greateſt Lords of the world, and the knight imbracing them, ſayde. I pray God faire knights that in all things you may attaine no leſſe honour then the royall ſtate of your deſcent doth require: to whom they rendered great thanks, for this his kind benediction, and mounted againe on horſebacke.
            
            
               CHAP VI.
               
                  
                     The braue and dangerous fight betweene the two Princes and the knights of the Caſtle.
                  
               
               
                  AFter the knights were all on horſebacke mounted, hee in the white armor inraged with kindled wrath of deſired reuenge againſt Arſileo, for the arrogant words he had ſent him, that with animated courage procéeded from a valiant hart, ſaid to him. Sir knight, if with weapons you dare defend your proude anſwere ſent me by my page, now haue you time to do it. Arſileo hearing this, & beeing no leſſe furious thē he, anſwered neuer a word, but turned his horſe, and taking ſo much field as would ſuffice for his carryer, couched his launce againſt his aduerſary, who with no leſſe furie met him in the middle of their courſe, incountering ſo rigorouſly, that their launces flew in ſmall peeces, and meeting with their bodies, the knight of the Caſtle fel downe ouer his horſe crupper: the like happened to Arſileo, but that he fell on his féet, with the ſaddle betwéene his legs, for by the ſtrong incounter his girls broke, ſo that both aſtoniſhed at this chance,

layde hands to their well cutting ſwordes, and ioyning one to the other, ſtroke ſo ſtrong and mightie blows on their wel tempered helmes, that it cauſed great feare in their companies, each doubting the loſſe of their friend, for they wounded one another with admirable ſtrength, extreamly dangering their fleſh, cutting their armor, brnſing thēſelues, ſpilling their blood in great abundance, yet the knight of the Caſtell was worſe wounded by reaſon of the good armor Arfileo wore, and being the valia
                     •
                  teſt knight (next don Bellianis) in thoſe daies. But the knight of the caſtel, with the deſire he had to ouercome his aduerſarie, nothing regarded his wounds: wherfore he in the azure armor, being ſkilfuller in ſuch matters, plainly perceiued, yt if he gaue not ouer, he either woulde remaine vanquiſhed, or ſlaine, yet knew he not how to remedy it, norhew to forbid it, which made him ſtorme like a Lion, ſéeing no means to preuent the danger like to befall his friend. On the other ſide, Don Bellianis viewing the cruell fight, and though he ſaw Arfileo more couragiouſly double his blowes, yet greatly feared the euent therof, ſéeing with what nimbleneſſe the other fought. And conſidering how he might preuent his feare, ſtepped to the Princeſſe Aurora, and craued of her leaue to proue himſelfe with the knight in the azure armor, that he might thereby aide the prince Arfileo, if he ſhuld be put to any diſaduātage. The princeſſe though vnwilling, cōdiſcended, ſéeing the neceſſitie of the caſe required. Wherupon he went to the knight in blew, & ſaid. Although valiant ſir, it may ſéem diſcourteſie (hauing no occaſion to prouoke vs to fight) yet the neceſſitie of our companions moues vs vnto it, & brgeth me now to craue the breaking of a launce with you, whiles the combat dureth, if you pleaſe. It doth pleaſe me (replied the knight of the Caſtell) with this promiſe, that either of vs may helpe his fellow in his néed. The Prince that nothing elſe wiſhed, was excéedingly content thereof. And ſo both tooke that part of the field that they thought méet for their incoūters, ran one againſt the other, their launces couched in their reſks, and met ſo furiouſly, that the ſhiuers of their ſpeares flew vp

into the aire out of ſight, yet mooued one another no more then had they run againſt a tower: which greatly amazed the knight of the Caſtel, hauing hitherto ouerthrowne to the earth all that euer he iouſted with. And ſo with raging furie returned vpon Don Bellianis, yt alſo made towards him, who before he could defend himſelfe with his ſhéeld, receiued ſo ſtrong a blow, that it made him leane his head on his horſes necke, leauing him ſo aſtonied, that whē the Princeſſe ſaw it, ſhe was ſurpriſed with a colde ſweat ouer all her bodie, and doubling another on him, the Prince lifted vp his ſhéeld, which was throwne quite to the ground, but in two, that the fine tiper wherwith the wiſe Bellona did forge it, nothing preuailed againſt the neuer cōquered arm of that moſt valiant knight. But hereat don Bellianis féeling himſelfe ſo handled, ſtroke the knight on his helme, that he ſuppoſed the whole waight of ſome tower had fallē theron, and the blow lighted with ſuch mightie ſtrength, that it had almoſt throwne him down, yet the horſe by ye force thereof, was forced to ſet his knées on the ground, & his helm with his armed headpéece vnder it, were both cut, & the ſurious ſword which reſting there, deſcended downwards on the horſe, yt al his capparizons made of hardeſt ſtéel were cut. The impriſoned knight ſéeing ſo great a blow, cried out & ſaid. I cānot beléeue that valiant Hector, terror to ye 
                  Greeks, with al his admirable forces could haue giuen the like blow, and now yon knight hath found his match. But they amazed at each others ſtrength, hauing againe met, beſtowed on thēſelues ſuch terrible ſtrokes, that their armor being rent in many places, were grieuouſly woūded, & the knight of the caſtel turning towards his follow, ſaw he was to weake, through the much blood he had loſt, yt greatly pitying him, with new courage redoubled his blowes on his aduerſarie, yet al his toile litle auailed him, for Don Bellianis ſéeing this was the firſt battell that euer he fought, & gréeuing that the other knight ſhould ſo long withſtand him, hauing indured 3. houres fight, and loſt his ſhéeld, and feeling himſelf woūded in many places, tooke his ſword with both handes, ſtretching himſelfe on his ſ
                     ••
                  rrops, thinking to end the battell with that ſole blow: but the

Knight of the Caſtell, being verie circumſpect in ſuch matters, made ſhew to await him, couering himſelfe verie well with his ſhéeld, and ſéeing the blow came right downward on his head, cloſed betweene his armes, that he coulde not ſtrike him, ſaue only with his ſword hilts, which was ſo mightily, that he could not for a while féele himſelfe: and with the ſtrength thereof the ſword fel out of his hands, hanging at his arme by a litle chain. The knight in the cloſing wounded him on the arme with a thruſt (which reſiſted by the armour, ran betwéene the harneſſe and his elbow, making him no little wound. And Don Bellianis ſéeing him ſo nigh tooke him betweene his armes, and ſpurring his horſe, hoyſted him verie lightly from his ſaddle: the Knight likewiſe getting holde of him, ſo long ſtrugled together, that both came to the ground, almoſt hanging one foote in the ſtirrop, & brauely holding togither, ſtriued to ouerthrow each other not daring to looſe their holde, ſo greatly they feared the ouermatched ſtrength of one another. While they were thus in this ſtrife, from out the thickeſt of the wood, they eſpied the number of thirtie knights, and foure Giants, who ſéeing the knight in the Azure armour in ſuch danger, all ſpurred agaynſt Don Bellianis, not regarding the outcries of the impriſoned knight, that ſaid they ſhould not hurt him. But he had bin ſlaine if they had not feared to harme the Knight in the Azure armor: who looſing the other, and ſéeing his horſe nigh him (though hee were greatly wounded) mounted thereon, with ſetting his foote on the ſtirrop, with ſuch agilitie, that he made them all maruell, and as one that had done nothing all that day, with a valiaunt courage, he ruſhed in among thoſe knights, and at thrée blows he ſiue three. The Prince Arſileo, at this time, hauing withdrawne himſelfe to breath, ſéeing his companion in ſuch daunger, not looking to his aduerſarie, leapt on his horſe: ſo did the two olde Knights that with the Princeſſe came, but all of them might little preuaile againſt the furious multitude, with the knights of the Caſtell alſo, that prepared themſelues to ayde them. Here declareth Friſton, that the two firſt knights of Theſſalie,
                  
the Caſtell were, the Emperor Don Bellaneo, that had knighted Don Brianell, which was he that fought with Arfileo, hauing armed himſelf with Don Gallaneos armor, & ſetting him on horſback (as you haue heard) meaning to conuey himſelfe to Conſtantinople, the better to paſſe vnknowne through his knights, that were they that aſſailed the princes, imagining the Emperor to be Don Gallaneo, and therfore ſo furiouſly aſſaulted them as is expreſſed. But the Emperor fearing that Don Gallaneo (hauing that oportunitie to effect his determination) would diſcouer himſelf to his knights, called to him one of thoſe men that came from the Caſtell, and commanded him with all ſpéed poſſible, to haſte him to Conſtantinople, and tell the king of Hungarie, in what neceſſitie hee left him, telling him his name, which till that time he had not diſcouered to any of the Caſtell. And putting off his Gantlet, gaue him his royall ſeale at Armes, which the King verie well knewe, commaunding him he ſhould with all ſpéede returne. The man greatlie amazed, tooke the Signet, and haſted him to Conſtantinople, ſtaying nothing by the way, and in ſhort time arriued in the Cittie, which was ſome fiue leagues diſtant from the Caſtell, and demaunded for the King of Hungaries Pallace. It was tolde him that hee was in the Empereurs Court, whither hee ſtraight wayes went, and finding him, knéeled before him halfe ſpeechleſie, and diſmayed, tolde him in what neceſſitie hee had left the Emperour, whereat the King greatlie amazed, tooke the King, and ſaying nothing to the Empreſſe, commaunded the guarde which continuallie was in the Pallace, béeing aboue two thouſand knighte, to beginne to march towardes the Caſtell, commaunding alſo the whole Cittie to arme it ſelfe, and follow him, which fearing ſome ſuddaine treaſon to bee at hande, rayſed ſo great tumult of armour through all the ſame, that the inhabitants bred into an vprore, as if with enemies it had béene beſieged. And ſo though the common people kn
                     •
                  we the preſent neceſſitie required ſpéedie haſte, were ſomewhat long or

they ſet foorth. And in their way we leaue them, till we haue ſhewen what in the meane ſeaſon befell the Emperour, and the Princes.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  
                     The ende of the fight betweene the Emperour and Princes, againſt Don Gallaneo and his men.
                  
               
               
                  AS ſoone as the Emperour had diſpatched the Meſſenger to Conſtantinople, he determined to ayde the Knights, that maintained a terrible battell with the Giants, and their troupes, beeing moſt cruellie wounded, by reſon of the remorceleſie forces of thoſe pitileſſe flends, the Prince Don Bellaneo, ſéeing his Knightes were deceyued, with great outcries vncouering his face, called to them, who when they heard his voice, & ſaw his face, ſtraight knew him, greatly amazed at ſuch a chaunce, and leauing their fight againſt the Princes ranne to imbrace him, not knowing the cauſe why that Knight ſhould be then armed with his arrnour. And though the Emperour ſée him go towardes them, yet could he not ſtay him. And Don Gallaneo ſéeing that oportunitie which Fortune offered him, and not minding to ſpende his time in ſpéeches with his men, ſayde. Nowe is it requiſite (oh Knights) that you reuenge mee on him that weareth my armour. For knowe, if you take him, or ſlay him, our enterprice therewith is ended, for he is the Emperour of Conſtantinople, whom we came from far Countries to ſeeke, béeing hée that hath ſlaine my Knights, and tooke mee priſoner, vſing me as you haue ſéene. The Knights that aymed at no other marke, togither in a troupe ſet vpon the Emperour, and Don Brianell of Macedon, that was with him. But when Don Bellianis, and Arfileo heald that he was the

Emperour his Father, greatly grieued, for what with him befell them, and with eager furie they ſet vpon thoſe traiterous Knights. But thoſe damned Giants that came before the reſt oppoſed themſelues againſt them, ſtriking ſtrong and mightie blowes. And one of them rayſing aloft a huge iron mace betwéene his handes, ſtrooke the Emperour therewith, that if hee had not warded it on his ſhéelde, it had ſhiuered his head in péeces: yet it reſted not there, but deſcenced on his horſes necke, felling him deade to the ground, with his matſter on his backe. The Emperour for all this, ſtrooke him on both his armes, that he threwe them to the earth, with the mace betwéene them
               Nowe heere was the Emperour in great. daunger of his life. For when his horſe fell, he tooke one of his legges vnder him, and don Gallaneo, that had alreadie put on one of the dead Knightes armour, comming thither at that time with two other Giants, all the thrée alighted from theyr Horſes, intending there to ſtrike off his head. The Prince don Bellianis that ſawe his father in that extremitie, diſmounting in all haſte, went to ſuccour him, but ere hee came, don Gallaneo (as hee whome his death woulde highlie aduauntage) wounded him on the head, and the two Giants with their Maces raiſed aloft, with mightie ſtrength woulde diſcharge them on his heade: ſo that he for that time not able to drawe him from vnder his horſe, with one blow ouerth
                     ••
                  we don Gallaneo, cutting aſunder his ſhéeld and helme, and gréeuouſly wounded him on the head. And being about to auoyde thoſe Giants blowes, could by no meanes ſhunne them, but both diſcharging their helliſh furie on his heade, made him bowe to the earth, and ſo ſtaggard him that hee coulde ſcarce ſtande. And though the ſpacious worlde contained not his like for admirable ſtrength, yet with ſéeing his Father in that caſe, and himſelfe ſo handled by ſuch infernall Monſters, glorying in nothing but in bloudie crueltie, abhorring all good and decent order of equall Martiall diſcipline, ſo

doubled his vndaunted courage in himſelfe, ſtroke at one of the Giants heades, who thinking to defende it by croſſing his Mace ouer his Helme, had it cutte cleane in two, hard by the handle, and the furious Sword lighted on the horſe gyrts that lay on the Emperour, that cutting them of on both ſides, hee gaue his Father libertie to drawe his legge away, puſhing the Horſe from him quickelie, aroſe yet verie wearie. And ſeeing howe Don Bellianis with one ſide, howe hee reached one of the deformed Giants with great ſtrength vpon his ſhigh, he felled him to the ground, and howe with an other hee maintained a hote fight. And hee alſo ſawe that Don Brianell and Arſileo, with eight Knights that came out of the Caſtell to ſuccour them, were in a fierce battell with the other Giant and Knights. And that Arfileo beeing buſied with the Giant, the other Knightes béeing in number greatlie inferiour to their enemies, were by them put to the woorſe: wherefore the Emperour went to ayde them: but ere he arriued, the Giant and Arſileo, hauing cloſed, diſmounted each other, that the Giant leauing his feete in the ſtirrop, Arfileo ſpurred his Horſe backewarde, making him runne away, and dragge his maſter after him, who within a while breathed his laſt. And ſo he turned with the Emperour couragiouſly to helpe their companions, and arriued when their aduerſaries were little able to make them longer reſiſtaunce, ſpecially becauſe don Bellianis had ſlaine the other Giant: At which inſtant arriuing where he was, ſcarce tenne of them remained with life, which to ſaue themſelues fledde into the wooddes. Whereupon they alighted (not minding to purſue them) to binde their woundes. But ſcant had the Emperour time to render due thankes for their great helpe, much admiring theyr exceeding valour, when the reſt of don Gallineos Knightes iſſued from the thickeſt of the Groue, who being aduertiſed of the ſucceſſe of their enterpriſe, and not of their loſſe, came in great haſte to participate of the glorie they ſhould obtaine by the Emperours death.
               
                  Before them came thoſe ſterne and vgly Giants, with their lannces, ſeeming huge pine trees, with ſuch tempe
                     ••
                  ous furie, that they had not leyſure to bind their déepe wounds. Great was the ſorrow the Emperour hereby ſuſtained, ſéeing the ſtay of the King of Hungarie. But as neither hee nor the other Knights could by death-ſeeming terror be daunted, with a couragious heart thus he ſaide. Now is the time (braue knights) that you muſt ſhew ye magnanimitie of your inuincible minds, ſince in your firſt aduenture fortune hath ſo directed you, that the glorie of the forepaſſed worthies by the victorie of this one battell ſhall be ertinguiſhed, though herein we yéeld the tribute of our liues to al-conquering death, which being naturall to all men, ſhould leaſt be feared. But in the omnipotent powers of him that this circled vniuerſe did frame, do I truſt he will not permit the valour of ſuch Knights in ſuch ſhort time to periſh, but ſo ſtregthen them, that the perpetuall fame of their royall acts may remaine eternized to all ſucceeding ages. Little néede we to be incouraged to ſuffer the fearefull ſtrooke of death (replied Arfileo) for where the perſon of ſo victorious an emperor is indangered, ours can be but the leaſt of all moſt little loſſes. I thought no leſſe (anſwered the Emperour, but I will ſpeake it, that my ſelfe imitating your valour might incourage my decaying courage by your diſcréete replie, by which ſince I perceiue you reſted vndaunted, and animated againſt inſuing daungers, it behooued vs, leaſt we be ſuddainely aſſaulted and ouerthrowne with their horſes, which greatly might hazard vs, that wee take before vs yon knight that lyeth vppon the grounde (meaning Don Galaneo, that verie ſorely wounded lay without his helme) for theſe that towards vs come bee his men, and fearing to hurt him, wil not moleſt vs with their horſes. This will be very good (ſayde Don Bellianis) as alſo that one of theſe Knights ſpéedily conduct theſe Ladies into the caſtle, for I do more regard their ſafetie, then I eſtéeme my owne life. So effecting all things, they on foote expected the comming of the Giants and Knights, which were aboue 500. in number,

who approaching, were greatly amazed to ſée that ſlaughter of knights and Giants, which if their knights that fled had not told them of, they would not haue beléeued it. Hereupon two of the formoſt Giants with a coſin of Don Gallaneo called Don Galfeo the vnknown, thinking to ouerrun them with their horſes, perceiued they defended themſelues with don Gallanco: wherfore they commanded all their knights to alight on foote, which they would by no means do, becauſe they ſaw comming from the citie a great troupe of knights, which ſo ſoone arriued, as had they alighted, with little trouble they had al bin ſlain, yet notwithſtanding ſome ten of them diſmounted together, making account to end ye fight with the emperors death, while the reſt went againſt the knights yt from the citie marched: for being in a ſtrange land, they reputed euerie one their enemie. But the King of Hungary that was he which came with ye knights in ſuch extreame, foreſéeing the danger like to inſue, cōmanded his men to whéele about to the further ſide, compaſſing ſo much field, that with ſafetie they might arriue where the Emperour and the other Knights were combatting, fearing that if they ſhould encounter with theyr enemies, the Emperour might in the meane time bee ſlaine, and theyr haſte and ayde come in vaine: the Knights béeing all choſen and valiaunt, ſuch as continually guarded the Emperours perſon, and ſufficient euerie one to be a cōmander of many, took their compaſſe in ſuch maner, that without turning their backs, or on their aduerſaries breaking their lances, fel on the ſudden where the emperor and Princes were, whō they found fighting like angered lions, for that Don Bryanell was pitiouſly wounded by two giants, and by them beaten to the ground, ſo that the Emperor & Don Belianis to defend him, beſtirred themſelues ſo brauely againſt them, eſtéeming them but as two common knights. On the other ſide the Prince Arfileo kneeled with his knée on the ground, for one of the Giants had thruſt him quite through the thigh. But when the King of Hungarie arriued with his men, hee alighted with ſome twentie knights, leauing

the reſt in fight with their aduerſaries, whereof ſome béeing rounde begirt with Grecians, the others ſette themſelues againſt don Bellianis, ſéeing hée was the ſole cauſer of their vtter ruine, and notwithſtanding his mighty blowes two of thoſe Giants cloſed with him: but hee not diſmaide therewith, layde hand on his dagger, which at his backe continually hee wore, and ſtabbed it in the Gyants backe that held him betwixt his armes: which done with mighty ſtrength it ran through his body to the hilts. Which was not ſo ſpeedily performed, but the other wounded him gréeuouſlie, that his armour being in thrée places rent, and his fleſh in many bruſed and cutte, and ſéeing himſelfe in ſuch notorious perill, tooke the heauy boyſtrous Giant in his armes, & with his puiſſant forces hoyſted him aloft, and with a mightie fall tumbled him to the earth, where preſently he chopt off his head: which done, turning to the emperor, he ſaw him cloſe with another Giant, and fearing ſome ſiniſter hap might befall him through the much bloud iſſuing from his wounds, whereat the Prince greatlic wondered how he could ſtand on foote, ſtrooke the Gyant ſuch a blow on the legge, that hée ſundered it quite from the body. All which notwithſtanding, ſeeing the number of the knights ſtill increaſe vpon them, and that the trampling of the horſes might greatly indanger them, & doubting that the emperor becauſe he had loſt much bloud, would not be able to mount a horſback, tooke him in his armes, & ſet him on the giants horſe he laſt ſ
                     •
                  ue. The like did hee to the Prince Arfileo, that through the wounde on his thigh could not do
                     •
                   it himſelfe: and greatly eſteeming Don Bryanell for that hee hadde ſeene him that day doo, and becauſe hee came in his Fathers companye, hee tooke him from the ground, and commanded a knight to conuay him to the Caſtle, there to applie him ſuch remedies as that hee might recouer his loſt ſenſes. And nowe at the laſt, when hee would get a horſe for himſelfe, could not ſo eaſily compaſſe it, for all the reſt of the knights hadde turned themſelues with a helliſh furie vpon him, where

he was like to be ſlaine outright, for Don Galfeo hauing vanquiſhed the Emperours men, ſette on him, wounding him with cruell and remorſeleſſe blowes. But finding himſelfe incompaſſed with death, began to ſtrike on euery ſide, that vnhappie was hee on whom any lighted, for ſo fearefull and deadly they were, that with ſixe blowes he ſtrooke down thrée knights and two Giants, & ſeeing Don Galfeo was hee that moſt moleſted him, ſtrooke at his leg with ſuch ſtrength, that had the ſword fallen with the edge downeright, it had cutte it cleane off, yet it raſed away all his armour there, and ſéeing him within his reach, plucked his ſhéelde out of his hande, and with it beate him to the grounde from himſelfe and ſo none daring moleſt him, without ſetting foote on ſtirrop, hee mounted on Don Galfeos horſe. At this time hither came the Emperour, that ſéeing him ſo nimbly mounted, beeing ſo ſorely wounded, was ſo amazed, that he hardly beleeued what his eyes behelde, and that which he moſt admired, was to ſée him ſo fierce and couragious in this firſt aduenture that euer happened him. And emulating his valiant deedes, hée followed him as if he were his teacher, and hee his pupill, to whom Don Beliani, being nigh him, ſayde. Me thinks Syr knight our men begin to looſe the field: ſo think I, anſwered the Emperour, and calling Arfileo, ioyned all three together with the King of Hungarie, that was in the vauntguard, animating his fainting knights, that with freſh courage ſo gallantly returned to the fight, as if at that preſent they began, giuing and receiuing moſt terrible blowes of thoſe helburned Giants. But Don Belianis ſeeing the wonders the Emperour his Father had performed, imagining his owne actes none in compatiſon of his, with ſuch vehement rigour hee aſſaulted his foes, that his men regained their loſt aduantage. About this time Don Galfeo aroſe from his traunce, and ſéeing his knights retyred backe, and that the moſt parte of the Giants were ſlaine, and that great troupes of armed knights, not farre from whence they were fighting,

came with ſpéedie haſte towards them, which he iudged to bee aboue two thouſand, and ſéeing his intent coulde not for that time take effect, turned to Don Gallaneo, that daye by him, and taking one of thoſe horſes that looſe came about, called one of his Knights, commaunding him to ſet the Prince his Coozin before him, very ſecretly, vnknowne to the Emperour, and the reſt, he put himſelfe through the groue, and learning of a man whom he met, the next way to the ſea coaſte, went thither, where finding his ſhips, and fearing he might be purſued, ſtripped himſelfe and Don Galleneo, commanding the marriners to hoyſe the ſayles, and put vnto the Sea: which they ſtraight did, laying his Coozin on a bed in his Cabbin, and applyed him many remedies, to recouer his ſences, that the better they might dreſſe his woundes: where we leaue them, returning to declare the ende, and ſucceſſe of the battell.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  
                     How the battell beeing ended, Don Bellianis, with his companye departed, not diſcouering whome they were, And what happened to him and his Coozin, with the Ladies, in the daungerous groue.
                  
               
               
                  THe battell reſting in the manner as is before recyted, very cruell and bloodye on all parts, the like whereof to that day was neuer ſéene of ſo fewe Knights, the one ſide reſolued to effect theyr enterpriſe, which by the victorie of that battell they hoped would be by the Emperours death: drewe ſtrength whence none was, iudging better in that fight to dye well, reuenging their owne deathes, then to abide the mercye of the Emperour, of whom

they none expected. On the other ſide, the Emperours knights being of ſuch valour as is expreſſed, and guided by ſuch Captaines, fought ſo couragiouſly with their aduerſaries, that forring them to retire, moſt of them left their liues in the field. About this time appeared, along the way from the Cittie, ſo manie ſquadrons of Knights that they couered all thoſe fieldes, kéeping no order in their march, gallopping ſo faſt that quickely they arriued where that vnequall battell was fighting: who being by the Pagans ſéene, ſtraight put themſelues to flight, thinking to ſaue themſelues in the Thickets of thoſe wooddes. But the Emperours Knights then arriuing, ſo brauely aſſaulted them, that hauing no time to execute their purpoſe, they were all put to the Sworde, none ſuruiuing to beare newes home of their ouerthrowe. The Emperours and Princes remained ſo wounded, that although the ioy of their great victorie eaſed the paine of their woundes, yet thought they coulde not ſcape with life, for the quantitie of bloud iſſued from them, was ſo great, that their Horſes were altogither beſmeared therewith. But the Emperour ſéeing howe much bound hee was to thoſe Knightes, with great gladneſſe ranne to embrace Don Bellianis, whom he ſo much prized for his hautie chiualrie, that he iudged all others in compariſon of his but a dreame. The Prince Don Bellianis did the like: and going to diſmounte on foote, to ſhewe his humble dutie, the Emperour woulde not permit it, but holding him in his armes ſaid.
               If (moſt excellent Knight) you regarde what you haue done for mee, and from what great daunger you and your Companions haue this day redéemed me, more reaſon were it I ſhould kiſſe your hande, in ſigne of acknowledging the great benefite by your magnanimitie that I haue receyued, which no leſſe then with my life I ſhoulde remunerate: in ſatiſfaction whereof, I pray the Almightie Lord that hath deliuered vs from ſo great daunger and perill, to guerdon you for it: for if I ſhould inueſt your Lord of all my Emperic,

you could not reſt ſatiſfied for the leaſt part of your deſerued merits this day obtained. Wherefore, hencefoorth I will holde this Monarchie, not as abſoiute commaunder thereof, but as giuen me by your hands, and as your deputie to kéep it, acknowledging my lawfull homage for the ſame, at al times when you ſhall commaund.
               The Prince Arfileo comming thither at that inſtant, not letting don Bellianis aunſwere the Emperour, leaſt thereby he might be knowne, beeing loath to diſcouer themſelues, by reaſon of theyr promiſe made to the Damzels, thus replied. What to day this Knight hath in your ſeruice done, (moſt mightie Emperour) deſerueth no recompence, nor yet wordes of ceremonious thankes, for more then this, euerie one (knowing the royaltie of your perſon) is bound vnto, and nowe we reſting more then ſatiſfied, with the good will wherewith you ſéeme to accept this our ſmall ſeruice, and hauing no more néede of vs at this preſent, wée inſtantly beſéech you, to graunt vs leaue, that ſending for our Damzels, wée may hence depart, for our abiding here may be verie daungerous vnto vs.
               In verie déede (victorious Knight) I tell you (replied the Emperour) there is now a greater battell repreſented me, then the laſt: For I cannot beléeue in Knightes ſo magnimious in heroycall déeds, there ſhould be ſuch diſcourteſie, as to depart, leauing on me the burthen of ingratitude, in making me ſuffer you to go ſo grieuouſly wounded, when you deſerts merit no ſatiſfaction, and that which moſt tormenteth me, is, you ſhould deſire to depart, not reuealing vnto me your names, that at leaſt I might know to whom my thankes are due. And you moſt excellent knight (turning to don Bellianis) do I intreat to do it, which if you alſo denie mee, I here proteſt to ſollew you about the worlde, till I learne it, and ioyning if to the enterpriſe, I haue vndertaken in demaund of my ſenne don Bellianis, and of his Cooſin Arfileo, I will not returne to Conſtantinople, till I alſo know this I now requeſt of you.

Don Bellianis fearing to be knowne, altered his ſpéech, and anſwered: I cannot but confeſſe the high diſcourteſie that we commit (moſt glorious Emperour) in diſobeying the ſupreme command of ſo great a Monarch, whoſe immortal fame deſerueth the whole earths, (and chieflly our obedience.) But men being ſubiect, voluntarily to promiſe, and tyed by neceſſitie to obſeruance, forceth vs by diſobeying you, to obſerue our forepaſſed worde to one of the Ladies that bee within the Caſtle, which was not to diſcouer our ſelues to any, vntill we were out of your Empire, leaſt thereby we ſhoulde bee deteyned. And as for the demaund you vndertake of the Princes your ſonne and Coozin, you may account it ended, for they be liuing and not long agoe were before this Caſtle, whome I and this my companion haue ſéene togither: and this we aſſure you to be true, becauſe we know them very wel, and alſo they told vs, how being on hunting, they were by a certain aduenture, parted from you and your traine in the daungerous groue, which is far from hence. Wherfore, in lieu of this promiſe and newes we intreat you any longer not to ſtaye vs, nor further to enquire of our affaires, nor names, ſéeing it lyeth not in our powers to declare.
               The Emperour being about to reply, the king of Hungary came to them that returned from purſuing his enemies, to whom the Emperorſaid: it behoueth you king of Hungary to conſtraine theſe knights to abide with vs, for I cannot intreat it: They will not doo ſo I am ſure (anſwered the king) eſpecially at your requeſt. I ſay I cannot obtaine it, ſaid the Emperour, yet haue they tolde mee newes of my ſonne, and yours, and that it is not long ſince they departed away from them, and for all this will they not tell me theyr names. They are altogither ſo vnwoorthy to be knowne ſayd, Arfileo, that it is vnneceſſarie to require them. But if it may pleaſe your Maieſtie, we would gladly knowe the cauſe wherefore theſe Knights would haue ſlaine you, though in the beginning, me thought they ment it by vs.
               
                  The Emperour thereupon told them the whole occaſion, as is alreadie mentioned, at which inſtant the Princeſſe Aurora comming thither with her Ladyes, and hearing the Emperor name Don Galaneo, ſaid to Don Belianis. The greateſt part of our enterpriſe (Sir knight were finiſhed, if that traitor were taken. Whereupon they commaunded him to be ſought for about all the field, but could not finde him, yet in the ſearch they met the man that directed Don Galfeo to the ſea coaſt: of whome by the ſignes and tokens of their armor, they learned that they had fled from the battell, whereof the Emperour was excéedingly ſorie, to whom Don Belianis thus ſpake. Afflict not your ſelfe (dread Lord) about him, for it is the enterpriſe I vndergo by this Ladies commaund, and if I liue, I proteſt and promiſe you, that the firſt time he falles into my hands (though he be before the Soldane his Lorde) to giue him his death. I would not haue you take ſuch paines (ſayde the Emperor) but ouerpaſſing that, lette mee againe intreate you to ſtay the curing of your woundes in this Caſtle. Wée may héere abidr no longer (replyed Don Belianis, and ſo taking their leaues, (the Prince ſending for his ſhéeld, which was brought him in two peeces) they ſtraight departed, ſo ſorely wounded as may be imagined, for he that had leaſt of them both, hadde aboue twentie verie dangerous wounds, chéefely that which Arfileo had on his thigh, and the thruſt that Don Belianis had, which ſéemed to penetrate his entrals. In this maner going on their way the ſpace of three miles, aſcended a high mountaine, to find ſome place to dreſſe their woundes, and hauing cut and gathered a great number of branches and boughes, the damſels made ſome arbours for the knights, hauing left behind the two olde men, with many others: for ſeeing them fall from their horſes, ſuppoſed them ſlaine in the fight, and with their gownes, towels, and ſcarfes, couered them, and after they had vnarmed them, with ſuch things as they had dreſſed theyr woundes, which were ſo déepe and dangerous, that they greatly lamented, certainely thinking they could not ſcape death.

And leauing them alone to repoſe their wearied bodies, fold it their Lady, who bitterlie wept for their peril, as if ſhe had ſéene them dead, ſo much ſhee credited her Damſels words, knowing their ſkill in that miſterie to be ſingular. But being thus in their laments, they ſawe a chariot comming through the ayre, which ſéemed to be made of white tranſparant Chriſtall of the mount: it was drawne with ſix mightie vgly Griffons that put the Princeſſe and her Ladies in great feare: which chariot alighted in the place where the knights lay. From it deſcended two very little dwarffes that were going to the Prince Don Bellianis with a chéerefull voice, & ſaid. We are meſſengers ſēt from the wiſe Bellona, who for the great loue ſhe beareth you and the Prince your Coozin, knowing in what daunger your liues be in, and how nigh death approacheth, to craue his tributary dutie, by reaſon of your great wounds, (for although theſe Ladies be very ſkilfull in this art, yet you cannot without great daunger be cured, vnleſſe that it bee by her, & alſo becauſe the Emperours men are ſéeking for you, and will not be long ere they come hither, ſhe hath ſent you this carre: in which ſhe requires you, that without longer delay, both you with the Princeſſe and her ladies, mount ſpéedily thereon, for that the Emperour hath ſtraight neede of the ſelfeſame remedie, and in dalliance he may incurre much perill of his life. Whereuppon they ſéeing that more then the preſent danger could not happen vnto them, that agréede thereto, and taking the Princeſſe & her Ladies, they all mounted on the charyot, though the Ladies with ſome fear did it. But ere we more ſpeak of them, we muſt remember what befell the Emperour after ſhe battell was ended.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  
                     What the Emperour did after the Princes departure: and how he knew who they were.
                  
               
               
                  SOone after the Emperor ſaw the aduenture ended to his high honor, he rēred inmortall thanks to the almightie for his deliuerie, and with the newes he had of his déere ſon 
                     •
                   Coozin, nothing regarded his woundes. Whereupon the king of Hungaria ſaid: haue a care dread Souereigne to cure your wounds, if you will inioy the victory you haue atchieued, for it wil be no ſmall thing to eſcape with life, being ſo piteouſly wounded. My ioy is ſo great, aunſwered the Emperor, that were it not moderated with ſéeing theſe Knights go with ſuch daungerous woundes, in my defence and deliuerie from this daies perill, that onely were a ſufficient remedie to heale me without further cure. But beléeue me: if (as I hope) I doo eſcape this daunger, recouering my almoſt loſt life, I will not deſiſt till by ſome meanes I know who and whence they be, that ſo well reuenged me: and commaunding all the wounded to be conuaide to the Cittie, he returned to the Caſtle, leauing the king of Hungaria to make prouiſion of all neceſſaries, and himſelfe was laid in his bed: where his woundes being dreſſed, his ſurgions thought impoſſible he ſhould without great hazard of his life eſcape them.
               Whereat the people ſorely gréeued, cheefely ſéeing that a while after he was dreſſed, through the intollerable paine of the woūd on his head, he ſpake many things without reaſon, as a man diſtract of ſence, and halfe lunatick, which was iudged as tokens of his death, ſo that none dared to cary any ſuch tidings to Cōſtantinople. But thus fearing his vntimely end, there came a damſel to the king of Hungary, that hauing cauſed the woū
                  ded knights to be conducted to be cured, reſted greatly diſcontent for the Emperors daunger, and with a merrie ſemblance ſaid to him. Doo not gréeue (moſt noble King) for the howre is not come, that ſo royall and moſt glorious a Prince

ſhould thus ſuddenly leaue the world, therfore lead me ſtraight vnto his preſence, and you ſhall ſee wonders by me wrought. The amazed King replying neuer a worde, tooke her by the hand, and brought her to the Caſtell, and ſet her in the Chamber where the Emperour lay in the ſtate afore recited, more like a dead then a liuing creature. The Damzell in the entring drew forth of a little boxe certaine Oyntments that ſhe brought with her, wherewith ſhe Emperour lying in a traunce, receyued his vitall ſenſes, and with a faint voyce ſaid. Ho mightie ſauiour of the worlde, I do beſéech thée, if ſo it may pleaſe thy high omnipotencie, not to take this tranſitorie life from mee, before I haue ſéene my deare, deare ſonne, that in the end of my pilgrimage, I may with comfort die. You ſhall not yet die (ſaid the Damzell) therefore ſtrengthen your ſelfe, for you muſt ere you die ſuffer manie perils, ordained by the diuine power of the higheſt Lord. And if your heart will ſerue to drinke this potion I bring, you ſhall preſently bee reſtored 
                     •
                  o your former health: and feare not to drinke it, for I come from thoſe knights that ayded you. So drawing forth a litle Glaſſe, wherin was a certaine compoſition ſo odoriferous, that the Emperour and all that were preſent, were greatly comforted with the ſmell, the Emperour taking it in his hand, feareleſſe drunke it off. And at that inſtant hee felt himſelfe ſo well, as hee had neuer béene wounded, or ill at all. And riſing to thanke her, ſhee went the way ſhe came, and commaunded the King of Hungarie to kill her, who aſtoniſhed at the Emperours ſuddaine recouerie, knewe not whether he ſlept or waked: but following her, ſhée ſtayed him, and ſayde. Tire not your ſelfe (renowmed King of Hungarie) in ſéeking me, for all the worlde is not ſufficient to finde me. But know thou, the Emperour was ayded by the néereſt kinſman he and you haue, wherewith ſhée flang away ſo ſwiftly, that ſhe ſéemed to outſtrip the winde, and ſuddenlie vaniſhed out of ſight.
               And here the Hiſtorie declareth, this was the ſage Bellona, who greatly tendering the loue of Don Bellianis, did for

his ſake ſo cure the Emperour, for otherwiſe his death had bin ſorer then his life. The king of Hungary amazed with theſe thinge
                     •
                  , as alſo (knowing in what danger the Emperour had beene in) to ſee him now come foorth of his chamber, demanded him what was become of the Lady. To whom he told all that had paſſed, & what ſhe ſaid. I cānot thinke▪ (thē replyed the Emperour) whome thoſe ſo vailant Knights may bee; hauing my ſelfe knighted them. Truſt me not (anſwered the king) if they were not cur loſte Sonnes, for wee haue no nigher kinſmen, and your knighting them, aſſureth it to bee true, as alſo the newes themſelues told you. Who can beleeue (ſaid the Emperour) that if they were them, they would ſo departe from me,? wherefore I will haue all theſe men ſeperate themſelues, to ſeeke them about the forreſt, for being wounded, they cannot be farre gone, and ſomewhere they may be alighted to binde their woundes. So commaunding all the Knights to doe it, they went to viſit the Prince don Brianell, hauing heard hee was in no leſſe danger then the Emperour: and going into his chamber, they neither found him nor any ſigne of him, but vpon his Beds head they found a letter, written in Gréeke, to this effect.
               
                  
                     
                        This is meant by the Prophecie in the 2. booke, & 7. Chap.
                        In the time to come that the braue Lyon of the houſe of Grecia ſhall bee put in greater danger, by the vnknowne Lyon defendor of his royall blood, ſhall alſo by the Orientall ha
                              ••
                           s, through the meanes of their vniuſt Prince, be put in greater perill then the laſt, whereof by him hee was deliuered, wherein all the power of my knowledge ſhall bee tryed, the moſt parte of them beeing abſent. And thou great Emperour that this readeſt, deſiſte from the demand, of thy ſonne and Knights, and by no meanes put thy ſelfe in their queſt, for thy Emperie will greatly need thee (though not ſo ſoone. This I write thee, that thou

mayſt knowe, the fame of thy glorious deedes will bee extinguiſhed by the light of the new knight, to thy greater eternitie. Therefore doe no otherwiſe then this my letter requireth thee, for I wiſh all thine affaires may ſucceede according to thy owne deſires, which goodwill the preſent remedie thou didſt receiue by my damzell well doth approoue.
                     
                  
               
               The Emperour hauing read the letter, reſted greatly confuſed therewith, and turning to the King, ſaid. What thinke you we may doe, concerning this letters commande. I thinke (anſwered the king) ſince you know the writers wiſedeme & zeale towardes you, you ought to erecnte the ſame. Let vs awaight the returae of our knights, replyed the Emperour, and then wee will departe, for I greatly deſire to haue the Empreſſe knowe theſe newes: and looking out of a window of the Caſtle, they ſaw comming from the Cittie great multitudes of knights, ſecming aboue 30000. What ſhall wee doe, ſaid the Emperour, if wee ſhould haue a greater conflict then that which is paſ
                     •
                  ? I thinke thoſe bee your enſignes (replyed the knight) and looking more earneſtly to thē, percciued plainclye they were the ſame. For when it was bruted about the Cittie, (not knowing the number of the aſſaileants that had beſet the Emperour) all the knights there, with Eittizens, Souldiours and their Leaders, armed themſelues and came to reſcue their Emperour. With them came the olde Prince of Macedon then arriued in the Cittie, and alſo the Empreſſe Clarinda, that would by no meanes ſtaye, though by the way ſhe vnderſtood the whole ſucceſſe of the fight, but would goe to viſit the Emperour, who then deſcended to receiue them: to whom the Leaders, and the reſt humbled themſelues, with vnſpeakeable ioy to ſee him ſafe. And when he knew the Empreſſe was there, without further ſtay went to her, where ſhe was, to recounte their glad gréetings. What hath become of you my moſt deare Lord (ſaid the Empreſſe) for I perceiue you haue not beene at no great paſſetime, ſo many ſluggarde knights lying

in field, for all I ſee your perſon woundleſſe? and tel me where is the Prince Don Bryanell. Things haue befallen me (anſwered he) that requireth long time to dylate. Therefore alight and weele enter the Caſtle, where I will tell you all. So while they were at ſupper, the Knights Jouſted and tilted about the field one with another, for ioy of the Emperours ſafetie: and the tables being taken vp, after ſome diſcourſes, the Empreſſe vnderſtanding their ſucceſſe with the Damſels, and how they thought that thoſe knights were Don Bellianis and Arſileo, ſhe ſcarce could containe her ſelfe with ioy, though ſomewhat moderated it with feare of their great and daungerous wounds. Day it not by ſome meanes be known (ſaid ſhe) if they were them? We know no more (replyed the king of Hū
                     gary) then what is ſaid. But the Emperor remembring the two olde knights, that with them came, and ſeeing at their departure they went not with them, ſaid to the King: ſawe you not when you remained to ſee the wounded cured, amōg them two olde knights? They be in this other lodging, ſaid the king, and becauſe they were ſo greeuouſly wounded, I durſt not ſend them to Conſtantinople. Let vs go viſit them (ſaid the Empreſſe and ſo went to their Chambers, whome they found in great p
                     •
                  aine by reaſon of their wounds: to whom the Empreſſe thus ſpake: how feele you yourſelues? good knights feare not, for you be in place, where you ſhall well be looked to, and ſhall want nothing needefull for your health. They in their paine, thinking her to be their Lady (anſwered) we are not ſo ſorie for our wounds, as that we thinke Don Bellianis ſlaine, and you and we impriſoned, for of the battell with his father he had, he and his Coozin with the other knight reſted woondrouſly woū
                  ded, and after ſo many aſſaulting them, wee cannot chooſe but iudge them dead: yet ſince wee ſée you at libertie, wée beſéech you tell vs the ſucceſſe of the ſame fight, and howe the Priaceſſe remained, it béeing ended. The Empreſſe with great ioye perceiuing by thoſe wordes, that the Knightes

which ſo 
                     〈…〉
                  d 
                     〈…〉
                  lues in the battel, were the Pr
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  nd C
                     〈…〉
                   And turning to the Emperour ſaid. What 
                     ••
                  y you now 
                     •
                  r? is not the King of Hungaries ſuſpicion well verified? The Emperour with woonderfull gladneſſe ſtraight went to the field, where his Knights were with many Dukes, and great Lords, and méeting with the Duke of Trebento, deliuered vnto him thoſe good newes: whereupon it was preſently ſpread among all the people, how the Knight that had performed ſuch deeds of Chiualrie in the battel, was their Prince, and his companion was the Prince Arfileo his Coozin: whoſe vnſpeakable ioye for theſe newes, cannot ſufficiently be erpreſſed, greatly prayſing God that had ſo magnanimious a Prince to gouerne them after his Father. The Empreſſe that remained with the old Knights, deſirous to know more of them, diſcouered herſelfe though againſt her will, and ſaid. I am net ſhe good knights, whom peradnenture you take me for, and therefore I pray you tell me what fortune conducted you hither? The knights then recouering their ſences, were very ſorie ſhe was not theyr Princeſſe, with whome they had ſpoken, and ſéeming not to mark her, made no anſwer but began to groane as through paine of their woundes. The Empreſſe leauing them, went out of the Chamber, and commaunded them to be againe dreſſed continuing there with the Emperor ſir daies, in which time: the two knights were greatly amended of their woundes, of whome they knew the whole truth of the aduenture which Don Bellianis had vndertaken: of which the Emperor was cxcéeding glad, determining to aide them with men ſufficient for ſuch an enterpriſe. So he and all the reſt departed to Conſtantinople, where many and diuers tryumphes, and games were ordained, in which the Emperor knighted two of the Duke of Trebento his ſons, that in thoſe games, w
                     ••
                  n great honor, the one called don Caſtidell of the Roaſe, the other don Sabian of Trebento, whoſe notable daedes ſhalbe at large declared: and another, the ſonne of the Duke of Ponto named don Perſiano the courteous, and alſo

the King of Argos ſonne, by name don Bryamore, with many more, all which departed to ſeeke don Bellianis, thinking 
                     ••
                   finde him at Antioch, changing their vpper Gamnents, and Armor according to the Moriſcoes: in which iourney we leaue them and the Emperour, that minded to ſend thither a great hoaſt of men, and goe himſelfe in perſon. And now muſt wee turne our courſe to Don Bellianis, chéefe ſubiect of our labors, whome with his company we left in the Chriſtalyne carres, drawne through the ayre by the inchaunted Griffons, as haretofore is mentioned.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  
                     What happened to the Prince drawne in the Griffons Charret. How they were cured of theyr woundes by the ſage Bellona: and after, how they all departed towards Antioch.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis and Arfileo, hauing mounted the Charret, guided by the Dwatffes, with the Princeſſe and her Damſels, as before is recyted, not knowing whether they might be conducted, were ſo 
                     •
                  wiftlye drawn by the Griffons that in very ſhort time they were within the kingdome of Perſia, not far from the great citie of Perſepolis, and on the deſolateſt mountaines of all that l
                     •
                  nd the Griffons deſcended, hard by the mouth of a darke and ebſcure Caue, from whence came forth an old woman aboue two hundreth yeares of age, who comming before the wearie and faint Princes, knéeled to them, deſiring that ſhee might 
                     ••••
                   their hands. But when ſhee woulde riſe, ſhee was ſtraight knowne of the Princeſſe, who greatlye ioying with h
                     ••
                  
                  
hir ſight, imbracing hir, accounting hir no leſſe then if ſhe were her own mother: and turning her ſelf to Don Bellianis ſayde. Now will our affaires (moſt excellent prince) happily procéede, for I tell you this is the ſage Bellona, that hath brought vs hither by theſe meanes, ſo that nowe I haue vtterly exiled the feare I conceiued of your woundes. The Princes ſeeing her ſo nigh him, verie louingly imbraced her: the like did Don Arfileo, to whome the olde woman ſpake. Lette mee intreate you my good Lorde to alight, that with diligence your woundes may bee cured, together with the other knight your champion, whom I haue within this caue, that with no leſſe neceſſitie then your ſelues I haue hither brought. The Prince recording the Dwarfes words when he mounted the Chariot, demaunded whether it were the Emperour his Father. No my good lord (ſaid ſhe) for there in no reaſon that in ſo perilous a time he ſhould leaue his Empire, your ſelfe being thence abſent: but it is the Prince Don Bryanell of Macedon. Then tell me, ſaid Don Bellianis, howe remained the Emperour my Father. Well, luſtie, and merie (replyed ſhee) for hee hath learned whom you were that in the battel aided him. But how came hee to know it, demaunded Arfileo: whereupon ſhee tolde them how. I am ſorie for it (ſayde don Bellianis) for they wil condemne vs of diſcourteſie. That is no matter (replyed ſhee) beſides they will not take it in ill parte, knowing you did it to obſerue your woorde. I pray you (ſayde hee) how was my Father ſo ſoone healed, for vnleſſe I bee deceiued, hee was gréeuouſly wounded. Straight ſhall you knowe it (ſayde ſhee) and leading them through the Caue, ſhe brought them to a Pallace, which they iudged to bee the ſtatelieſt that they euer ſawe, where with helpe of many of the ſages ſeruants, they diſmounted, with whoſe diligent ſeruice they reſted much contented, and beeing layde on rich beddes, the graue. Matron ſayd to them, hauing ſearched their wounds, I could at once cure your wounds, as I did the Emperours and don Bryanels, but doo it not becauſe I will

kéepe you heere a few dayes: and aſſure your ſolues you ſhal be ſtraight out of all danger. And then ſhee applyed ſuch oyntments, wherewith they felt themſelues greatly comforted and eaſed, as if they had no paine at all. Don Bellianis intreated her that they might ſee the Prince Don Biyanell. You ſhall (ſayde ſhe) but firſt reſt a while, for you haue thereof great néede: and commaunding the windowes to be ſhut, tooke the Princeſſe by the hande, and leauing the knights, led her through a long gallerie, not farre from thence, that reached to another lodging of the ſame making that don Bellianis was in, ſo curiouſly wrought, and of ſo rare woorkmanſhippe, that the Ladyes greatly admired it: and entering in another roome, they founde the Prince Don Bryanell walking alone, alreadie healed of his woundes, yet hauing loſt much bloud, hee looked verie pale and wanne: for the ſage Matron greatly commiſerating his daunger, prouiuided, as heretofore is ſpecified. For when ſhee went to cure the Emperour, ſhee made one of her Damſels to enter another way vnſéeue, and fetching him thence, brought him thither in a traunce, and for all he was healed with the drinke that Bellona gaue him, yet knewe hee not in what place, nor in whoſe power hee was, neither knewe hee whether he was in priſon or at libertie, nor in what ſtate the battell remained, in which hee loſt the Emperour: and ſéeing his woundes whole, was in ſuch a wonder, that almoſt hee perſwaded himſelfe, waking out of a dreame, and ſéeing no bodye with whome hee might ſpeake, walked vp and downe the Chamber, ſéeking and deuiſing howe by ſome meanes he might reſolue his confuſed thoughts: and when he ſawe the Princeſſe Aurora and her Damſels, with the olde woman leading her by the hande, hee ſtraight knewe her garments, for as is ſayde, hee ſawe her before hee and Arfileo hadde begunne theyr Combatte: with whoſe ſight hee thought that hee and the Emperour were impriſoned by the knights with whom they had commenced their battell, and

yet knew he not how that might be, hauing after ſéene them ayded by the Emperour againſt Don Gallaneos knights: but ſeeing them ſo nigh him, thought that though hee were in the priſon (as he imagined) yet ought he vſe that behauiour that his ſtate required, and ſéeing they were Ladyes, approached with that courteſie which might beſéeme one accompanied with ſuch knights. And ſhe hauing learned of the olde woman who he was, humbled hir ſelfe at his féete: which he vnable to diſturbe, did the like, deſiring her to graunt him her faire handes that he might kiſſe them: but they ſo long ſtriued to ſurpaſſe each other in courteſie, that Bellona commanded them to riſe, for their ſtate forbad ſuch ceremonies betwéene them: which they did, though not ſo frée as at firſt, for they reſted greatly affectionate either of other, and don Bryanell at laſt thus brake ſilence. I do ſo wonder at the maruellous things yt ſince yeſterday haue happened me, that I know not if any ſuch haue bin or no, for being with the Emperour my ſoueraigne in battell, wherein I remained ſore wounded, and not knowing the ende thereof, I find my ſelfe at this preſent well and ſtrong, and in this rich and ſumptuous chamber, with whoſe like the whole world cannot cōpare, nor yet knew whether I be at libertie or captiue, though vnder ye power of ſuch kéepers I ſhuld imagine ſuch reſtraint a greater comfort to my greefe then any I can deſire. Wherefore excellent Ladie, I intreate you if you bee in the ſame caſe my ſelfe am in, as one that I ſuppoſe was preſent at all that befell you would declare it me, and that I may alſo with your fauour knowe the true ſucceſſe of the battell, and what is become of thoſe moſt haughtie knights that accompanied you, whoſe mighty ſtrength I am ſure the whole earth cannot equall, and for what cauſe am I here kept, whether with or without your will? Whilſt he vttered theſe words the Princeſſe earneſtly viewed him, and remained ſo greatly ſatiſfied with his good diſpoſition, (being a verie gallant knight) and ſéeing reaſon willed her to anſwere all his demaunds, thus replyed. Not without cauſe may you be confounded in your own

imaginations (excellent Prince) for I aſſure you, if now you enioy your life, it is by your being héere: and though the battell was fought nigh Conſtantinople, at this inſtant you are not ſo neare it, as to the Ryphean mountaines, ioyning vppon the great Cittie of Perſepolis, for all which you may thanke this graue Matron that here is with me, ſeeing by her great knowledge you hither were conducted. The knights with whom you in the beginning combatted and came in my companie, are the Prince Arfileo, that with you fought, the other, whoſe battell was with the Emperour, is his ſonne Don Bellianis. Is it poſſible? oh God, ſayd Don Bryanell, that den Bellianis ſhould with ſuch glorie principate his haughtie deeds of Chiualrie. Account theſe the leaſt (ſayde Bellona) for I tell you neither the Emperour his father, nor any knight this day liuing, may with him compare. Certainely I thinke no leſſe (replied don Bryanell) and more then you ſay dare I beleeue of that couragious Prince, hauing ſéene him performe ſuch ſurpaſſing wonders in that one fight. But I beſéech you let me know the ende thereof, and how the Emperour and hee do? The Emperour is well (ſayd ſhe) and the Princes both be in this houſe where you are, though ſore wounded. Now I aſſure you, anſwered don Bryanell, I account my ſelfe moſt happie that after ſo many troubles I heare the moſt contentedſt newes that my perplexed ſoule could wiſh, after the tempeſtous paſſage of a boyſterous ſtorme, with the calme approach of the al-comforting ſunne. Wherfore lette vs without longer ſtay go viſit them, and there may I knowe what elſe happened in this aduenture. Euen when you pleaſe (ſayde Bellona) for I know they will no leſſe ioy with your ſight, then you with theirs. So taking him betweene them, they returned the way they came to the chamber, where they left the Princes, and entering it, they found them talking togither of their laſt aduenture. But when the Princes ſaw don Bryanell, they would riſe to reuerence him, but hee running to don Bellianis beds ſide, bended his knee to the grounde, crauing he might kiſſe his hands. The Prince tooke

him vp, and imbracing, ſo held him a while and ſaid. I do greatly reioyce, renowmed Prince, to ſée you ſo well, though according to your great déedes, in the battell whereby you got many dangerous wounds, I thought we ſhould not ſo ſoone ſée you: For which let vs thanke this Lady that with you comes, ſeeing ſhe tooke ſuch care of our ſafetie, which with all our ſtates we cannot ſufficiently recompence, hauing (next vnto God) by her meanes recouered our loſt times. Therefore I thinke it reaſon (ſaid Don Bryanell) ſéeing ſhe is the inſtrumentall cauſe wee repoſeſſe them, we in her ſeruice to the death vſe them, that at leaſt thereby we may ſeeme to ſatiſfie ſome part of her many deſerts, and ſo do intreat her to commaund them as her owne. Whereunto ſhe thus anſwered. It ſufficeth me great Lords, to haue done ſome ſeruice to ſuch Princes, which doth ſurpaſſe all ſatiſfaction whatſoeuer I may of you receiue: how much the more, that will not be ſo little which you muſt vndertake, in behalfe of this diſinherited Princeſſe my Coozin, wherewith this reſteth fully recompenced, which they againe replied with great courteſie: and then Don Bryanell went to Arfileo and imbracing him ſaid.
               We now haue time noble Prince to know the cauſe that mooued you without my leaue to enter within this place. I am not ſo wearie of the laſt demaunde (replied hee) but that I may ſatiſfie you now in this, though your ſelfe be well, and ſéeing that the laſt aduenture coſt ſo deare, it were no reaſon to leaue you in this, vnſatiſfied.
               In theſe and ſuch like ſpéeches continued they till ſupper time: which come, they all did eate togither, becauſe of the wounded Princes. Héere they ſtayed fiftéene dayes, till the Princes were well able to trauaile: in which time and daye Bellona taking don Bellianis a part, ſhe ſaid vnto him walking through thoſe roomes. I doo well knowe moſt excellent Prince, and ſo iudge my ſelfe altogither vnwoorthy, and it not neceſſarye to giue you counſaile concerning your moſt great

actions: Yet becauſe you are a ſtranger in an vnknowne countrey, and in a place where euerie one would wiſh your downfall with extreameſt death, and ſo many néedſome aduertiſements I preſume to tell you, that though faithfully in heart and with good reaſon you obſerue, and vnfainedly keepe the lawe and religion of your profeſſion, yet muſt you conceale it, and by no meanes manifeſt it, for if in the leaſt reſpect you doo, it may coſt you your deareſt life. And moreouer, after that by the vertue of your inuincible arme you haue ſafely eſtabliſhed the Princeſſe Aurora in her vſurped royaltyes, you muſt procure and endeuour to arriue at the Soldane of Babilons Court, where you muſt ſuſtaine your neuer fainting heart, with your accuſtomed courage: for you ſhall there ſee your ſelfe in ſo many great perils, that you ſhall a thouſand times wiſh for death, as a remedie for them. But heereof take no thought, for they are things ordained by the ſupremeſt powers, yet alwayes beare on your ſheeld the ſame deuiſe that you nowe haue, though for her ſake you ſhall be putte in great, and ſuffer many and tedious paſſions, yet ſhall you bee thereby knowne, and your immortall fame blazed ouer the whole earths continent, which you ſhall ſtill weare, till I aduertiſe you to the contrarie: Wherewith ſhe ended, and the Prince thus replyed. I will not render to you ſuch thanks as this care and great courteſies deſerue, for euerie thing I poſſeſſe beeing at your commaund, it is reaſon you guard and protect them as your owne. Herewith they returned to theyr companie, and don Brianell hauing ſéene them both together, ſaid. I would not haue you be ſo long together, neither that you ſhould learn any thing wherby you might further excell vs in fight, which if it be ſo, it were no reaſon that I whoſe merites bee ſo inferiour to yours, ſhould learne them. You may well doo it (replied don Bellianis) hauing in the laſt conflict reaped the profite, feareleſſe of any thing that might haue happened vnto vs. In all things you will ſeeme to yeelde vnto mee the vantage,

anſwered Don Bryanell, though there be nothing in me that may any way pleaſe you or the Prince Arfileo, ſince as you ſhewe, you would haue mée hadde that carefull feare of you, as well not knowing as knowing you, yet doo not I knowe why I ſhould feare you, beeing accompanied with the diuine beautie of this moſt fayre and excellent Princeſſe. You doo well to ieſt with vs all (replyed ſhee) yet is it no matter, ſince your words expreſſe what ſmall parte I haue thereof, hauing beene vnable to expell the doubt you had of the Princes being here.
               
                  Don Bryanell beeing of nature pleaſant and courteous, kept them in pleaſing chat the reſt of the time of theyr beeing there, which was ſome eight dayes: which expired, they béeing deſirous to depart thence, hadde an armour preſented to each of them by Bellona, the richeſt and fayreſt that euer was ſeene. That which Don Bellianis had, was of a tawny colour, with ſuch naturall workes, imboſſed with pearles ſo bright, that they yeelded as much light as tenne burning Torches in any darke place, but cheefely the ſhéelde, hauing the verie ſelfe ſame image it hadde before, which was drawne with ſuch perfection and curioſitie of arte, that if they had euer ſéene the ſubſtance, they woulde haue iudged it the counterfeit or portrature of Florisbella, the Soldane of Babilons Daughter: which although the Princeſſe Aurora knewe, yet ſayde nothing, imagining the wiſe woman had not without ſpeciall cauſe ſet it there. About it was written the aforeſaide Motto, ſo perfectly made with great Orient pearle, that it forced admiration in each beholder. Hee had alſo a ſcabbard giuen him for his ſword, made of maſſie gold, with letters drawne thereon, declaring the manner of the winning thereof. Arfileos were like them hee hadde in the caue, and Don Brianels were of diuers colours, whoſe workmanſhip was woorth a great treaſurie. Did not I ſay I ſhould in all things haue the aduantage, that for a white armor of no value, which I did weare in the battell, haue giuen mee

now ſo rich and faire? It is not giuen you as a gift for your olde ſaide Arfileo) but that you ſhould pay for them. Uſe not the office of a Marchant (replied Don Brianell) for who hath giuen me my armour, vſeth not to ſell any. If it be ſo ſayd Arfile,) how payed you that which you weare. Striue not about ſo ſmall matter (ſaide Don Bellianis) for I will pay for all, hauing greateſt cauſe for it. Then ſtraight were they with them armed: and taking leaue of the ſage Matrone, ſhe ſayd. You will by the way néed Pages to attend on you, therefore will I giue you thrée of mine, and ſo preſented them thrée dwarffes, ſo little that they greatly delighted to ſée their ſmalneſſe, ſpecially that of Don Bellianis, whoſe ſhortneſſe reached not to the others middle, though they were wonderfull lowe. Where inhabite, and are ingendred ſuch gentle people as theſe? ſayd Don Brianell, I ſhould long remaine among them, if I ſhould ſtay there, to be accounted nothing as euerie one of them is elſe where. You ſhall not bée accounted nothing (ſaide Don Bellianis dwarffe called Ordino) for they would al ſo perſecute you that ſéeing your bigneſſe to theirs, they would (wanting ground) tread on you in ſteade of it. That were woorſe then the other (replied Don Brianell. But leaſt we further procéede in talke, it were good we ſet forwarde in our iourney. Wherewith, with moſt kinde courteſie taking their farewell of the Ladie of the Caue, ſet forth of the ſame. And béeing without, hée ſeeing the Princeſſe and Ladies all cloathed in moſt rich cloath of Golde, ſayd with great laughter: Let vs (ſirs) make more haſte, for the deſtruction that theſe Damzels haue made, will cauſe ſome vnſéene wanderer demaund it at our handes. But all that is left, is yours (ſaid the Princeſſe) therefore feare not. If it bée ſo (replied he) I haue no leſſe right to that which you carrie: therefore were it not amiſſe you giue it mee. The Prince Don Bellianis will not not ſuffer it (anſwered ſhée) hée being my guardian. For ſo much as concerneth me (ſayd the Prince) I will defende you agaynſt all the worlde. Thats not materiall (quoth Don Brianell) for on my ſide I haue the

Prince Arfileo, that will ſuffer none wronged in his preſence. I cannot helpe you in this demaund (ſaid hee) leaſt I ſhould incurre ſuch puniſhment, as to my ill ſatiſfaction, and leſſe reaſon I ſhould defend.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  
                     What hapned Don Bellianis, and his companions with duke Alfyron the courteous, and how they proued the aduenture of the vnhappie bridge.
                  
               
               
                  IN this order trauelled theſe Princes with as much pleaſure as their young yéeres could require, fearing nothing that might anoy them, taking their ſtraight way towards a Caſtell, ſome three miles diſtant from Antioch, for the Princeſſe told them it was a ſtrong fortreſſe, and neuer woon by any forraine foes: and that ſhe and her Damzels would there remaine, where alſo they might determine of their affayres. For which cauſe they had a man to guide them thither, whom they receiued of Bellona. Which way they had not far gone, but by the ſame they ſaw towardes them come the number of twentie thouſand knights, whereof the greateſt part were verie ſumptuouſly apparelled, and manie clad with rich and bright armor, inſomuch that the Prince and his cōpanions tooke great delight in ſéeing thē, & Don Bellianis ſtepping to one of the formoſt, that greatly admired him being ſo brauely armed, and on ſo mightie a courſer mounted, and demanded thus. I pray you in courteſie tell me, ſir knight, to whom belongeth this faire companie of Knights? he ſhould be of no ſmall account that ſuch a traine maintaines. They belong (ſir knight) anſwered he, vnto Duke A firon the Courteous, that now goeth to the Citie of Perſepolis, becauſe the great Sophy hath ordained great triumphes and iouſts, whervnto

he hath inuited all the nobilitie of his Empire. Why prepares he ſo great feaſts? demaunded the Prince. Marie ſir (replied the other) not long ſince hee promiſed to giue one onelie daughter that he hath, to what Knight ſoeuer ſhould ſlay the Emperour of Greece, or take him priſoner: which enterpriſe the Prince Don Gallaneo of Antioch vndertooke, accompanied with manie Knights: who is now returned with one cooſen of his, by whom, and others that with them came, the Sophie is certified, how they left the Emperour ſo wounded, that he could by no meanes ſcape. For which cauſe he hath determined to giue him his daughter in marriage, and therefore in theſe triumphes dooth he feaſt all his Nobles. But demaunded Don Bellianis) why doth the Sophy ſo, béeing vncertaine of the truth? He thinkes this ſufficient (aunſwered the Knight) that if it ſhoulde otherwiſe bée, it is thought vnpoſſible euer to effect it, for the Emperour béeing thereof forewarned, will with greater regarde looke to himſelfe: and beſides, his Daughter will not bee euill matched, hée béeing one of the beſt Knights in this lande. Though (to tell you trulie) wée bée not well contented with this marriage, for that the Duke our Maiſter was firſt greatly fauoured of the Princeſſe Perſiana (for ſo is the Sophies Daughter called) and ſeeing nowe hée will marrie her to Don Gallaneo, he goeth verie paſſionate.
               I commit you to God ſaid don Bellianis) for you haue much pleaſed me with your diſcourſiue newes: and turning to the Prince and his companions, tolde them all his talke with the knight, and demaunded of them, if they thought good to ſée thoſe iouſts at Perſepolis, ere they paſſed forwarder. It wil be well done (ſaid don Brianell) yet how ſhall we do, being vnprouided of a Tent? What need you care for that aunſwered Arfileo) for it may be ſome will intertaine vs: if not, we muſt lie in the fields. And thus vnreſolued, ſtoode ſtill till that troupe paſt along. At which time ſome of them went to the Duke, (that at that time was verie penſiuely imagining on the Princeſſe

                  Perfiana) and ſaid to him. Sée you not (ſir) yonder thrée knights armed with the richeſt armour you haue this day ſéene, whoſe gallant diſpoſition cannot but content you, and ſtande in the n
                     •
                  ddeſt of the way, ſéeming to demaunde the breaking of ſome Lances, and do alſo conduct with them about twelue Damzels, as it ſéemes no leſſe adorned with beautie, then they with valour. The Duke being deſirous to ſée them, ſtepped forth, being armed in a tawnie armour like Don Bellianis, and ouer the ſame he had a coate of cloath of golde, moſt richly embrodered with Pearles, whoſe brightneſſe being ouercaſt with beames of the ſhining Sunne, dazeled the beholders ſight. On his ſhéeld was pictured the God of Loue, of whom a Knight begged mercie, he rigorouſly denied it. And thus went he ſtraight to the Princes while they gazed on him) going like a valorous and well diſpoſed Knight. The Duke no leſſe wondering to ſée their gallant demeanour, and riches of armour, ſpecially Don Bellianis, whoſe ſight ſurprized him with ſudden admiration: and béeing nigh them, he kindly ſaluted them (being of nature milde, gentle, and affable, for which he had obtained the name of courteous) and thus ſaid. I am ſo aſtoniſhed (braue and valiant knights) in ſéeing the braue diſpoſition of your perſons, and ſtrange maner of trauelling, that I haue receiued ſuch content, as the like I ſhall neuer obtaine, chiefly at this time, beeing ſubiect to a grieuous melancholie gréefe. And becauſe I ſuppoſe ye are going to the triumph at Perſepolis, I intreate you to employ me in this iourney, for that you ſéeme ſtraungers of ſome remote Countrey. And although the valour of our owne perſons may merite farre greater ſeruice, yet I pray you denie me not this requeſt: for I hope herein to diminiſh part of my boyſterous and troubleſome ſorrowe, with your gentle conuerſation. The Princes intreating one another to anſwer, Don Bellianis at laſt replied. The offers (moſt noble Duke) which by your liberall bountie we receiue, are ſo great, (as wee beeing no other then errant knights) can no way deſerue. And though wee had not

determined to bee at thoſe triumphes: yet to accompliſh your requeſt willingly doe condiſcend thereto, yeelding the accompteleſſe thankes of duetifull ſeruitors at your commaund. For which the Duke very ioyfully intertained thē, with the Ladies in his owne company, and ſo made to Perſepolis, diſcourſing by the way of pleaſant matters, till they came within a myle of the Cittie, harde by a great riuer, ouer which they muſt of neceſſitie paſſe by a bridge that there was. Which the Duke ſeeing, ſaid: Confounded in our owne diſcourſes (Sirs knights) wee haue loſt our way. Don Bellianis ſeing the Cittie, and not knowing to what ende the Duke ſpake it, replyed. If that bee the cittie, I thinke this is the right way. Tis, anſwered the Duke. But we may not paſſe this bridge, for it will bée mightily defended. Who bée they, (demanded hee) that will defend it againſt ſuch Knightes as bee with vs? They that doe it, will defend it againſt the whole worlde (anſwered the Duke) For in this kingdome are fower Knightes, the valianteſt that on the earth doe breath, all brothers. Which in one battell that the Souldan had againſt the Souldan of Babylon, performed in it ſuch haughtie deedes, that by their proper valour, the victorie was obtained, which got them ſuch honour, that till this day, they are reputed the ſtrōgeſt knights that may be found. Wheruppon the Sophy, to honour them, bad them demand what they would, and hée would graunt it. (They anſwered) they would haue nothing but this Caſtle & the Bridge, that no Knights might go that way, vnleſſe hée ſhould leaue his armour and horſe, or ouercomming them all in fight, paſſe by. The Sophy granted it, with a great liuing be ſides to mantaine their ſtates. So they béeing come to this bridge, haue brought with them two mightie and ſtrong Gyants, whoſe fierceneſſe no hundreth Knights dare abide in combate together. And haue aboue thrée yeares defended this paſſage, and not any knight hithertoo hath vanquiſhed them. For though they bee ſtrong and valiant, yet in their combate doe not procéede like good knights; For if it happeneth that any

knight vnhorſeth any of them, hee muſt Jouſt with the others, till hee ouerthrowe them all: but if hee bee by any blowe himſelfe ouerturned, he ſtraight looſeth his armes. Or if hee ſhould vnhorſe them all, hee muſt after combate with all ſix together, beeing the vnreaſonableſt thing that euer was heard of. And this is the cauſe why this bridge and way is no more vſed, by reaſon of the miſhappes that there befalls to wandring knights: and therefore is called the Vnhappie bridge. The Princes greatly wondred at this aduenture, yet hauing greate deſire to prooue it (don Bellianis thus ſaid.) Truely, moſt honoured Lord, wee neuer heard of the like aduenture: but if ſo it pleaſe you, we will trye the fauours of blinde Fortune therin. So will it bee rather iudged madneſſe, then valour (replyed the Duke.) For it lyeth not within the compaſſe of one mans ſtrength, to vanquiſh them: For the leaſt of them is able to withſtand the famous Emperour of Conſtantinople, that is the knight moſt feared in theſe partes: whoſe ſole name makes the Souldan himſelfe tremble when hee heares it: and alſo dares oppoſe, and confronte the ſtrength of our Prince, that is no leſſe famouſed then hee. Wherefore if you thinke good, let vs leaue this way: for I perceiue ſome of our company doe ſée it will bee a perpetuall blotte to our names (replyed Don Bellianis) if through feare wee ſhould not aduenture our perſons héerein. Therefore commaunde them to ſtay: for I will not hence leauing this vnattempted. While they were thus talking, they ſaw on the other ſide of the bridge, a greate number of Knights & Ladies, cloathed in triumphant robes, that were comming thither to ſporte themſelues. What faire aſſembly is yonder? (demaunded Don Bellianis.) It may bee (ſaid the Duke) it is the Sophy, and his daughter the Princeſſe Perſiana, that come to ſée if there arriue any aduenturer to the bridge. Although our falles were but to make them ſporte (ſaid Don Bellianis) wee will trye our fortunes. Doe as you will (ſaid the Duke) though more willinglye I would take another way. Thereuppon they ſtraight went towardes

the bridge: commandi
                     •
                  g all their knights to doe the like, while they prooued the aduenture of the Caſtle: which they did, yet not with any good will. The Prince Arfileo intreated don Bellianis to graunt him the firſt battell. I will in no wiſe doe it (ſaid hée:) but becauſe Don Gallaneo is yonder, put on an vpper coate ouer your armour, leſte you bee knowne. I will, (replyed hee:) but you muſt graunt mee this firſt combate. In reaſon it longes to mée (anſwered Don Bellianis) ſéeing in this iourney I am the Conducter of theſe Ladies. Wee haue (ſaid Arfileo) as long accompanied them: therefore ſhall you not ſo excuſe your ſelfe. Then, let the battell bée his (ſaid don Brianell) whom the Princeſſe ſhall command. Striue not ſo about it (ſaid the Duke) for you ſhall haue all ynough to doe. Now I iudge (ſaide the Princeſſe) ſéeing Don Brianell by my ſentence demaundeth the iouſte, that the firſt bée his, and next your: and the laſt bée his that would bé firſt, being reaſon that his ſtrength bee beſt tryed when the others faile. Don Brianell gréeued much becauſe hee ſhould be laſte: but ſeeing it could no otherwiſe bée, diſſembled it, and ſtepping to the Duke ſaid. I beleeue we ſhall haue the bridge freer then I thought. The Duke ſmilde (as one that ſuppoſed their labour ſhould be but in vaine.) And at length arriuing at the bridge, don Brianell began to be foremoſte, ſéeing on the other ſide all the cō
                  panye come alſo thither. And ſtepping thereon, a Knight armed in an armour of diuers colours, mounted on a mightye horſe, approaching nigh him, ſaid.
               What madneſſe hath poſſeſte this Knight, to ſecke a paſſage ouer this bridge by me defended? With mightier force was Hell defended (aunſwered hee) yet the vniuerſall Sauiour of the world did ouercome it: In whoſe name I comming, it will bee no greate matter for mee to abate thy ſwelling pride.
               By thy ſpeech (replyed the Knight) thou ſéeme
                     •
                  t a Chriſtian. That auayles not to our purpoſe (ſaide Don Brianell) therefore prepare thy ſelfe. The Knight with great angerf

thinking hee had him in little accompt, turned his horſe, and tooke ſo much of the bridge as would ſuffice for his courſe, while Don Brianell did the like. All the men that came with the Duke, and the people come from the cittie, approached to ſee the battel, and many ſaid, euery faire Horſe and Armour ſhall the Knight giue vnto him of the bridge.
               At which time the knights hauing turned their horſes, ranne one againſt the other, and met ſo furiouſly, that the Launces flewe in peeces, & the knight of the bridge went to the ground, ſorely bruzed, & Don Brianell ſo much bowed with his horſe, that hee had almoſt done the like, but ſeeing what companye beheld him, raiſed himſelfe with great courage, conſidering, it was the firſt thing that ye Princeſſe had commanded him. A great murmure aroſe among the beholders, for they neuer had ſeene any of the Brethren leaue the ſaddle before. Whereuppon the other three Knights & the two Gyants beeing armed, yſſued all mounted on great and luſtie horſes: who when they ſawe their brother on the ground, one of them made towardes Don Brianell, that alreadie had tooke a Launce from his Dwarffe. The Princeſſe Perſiana, that was ſhe on the other ſide of the bridge, and Don Gallaneo, already called her Spouſe, with ye 
                  Sophy his father in law, ſaid to don Gallaneo. I haue not ſéene gallanter knights then thoſe on the further ſide, eſpecially you foure (poynting to the two Princes, the Duke, and hée that Jouſted on the bridge) and greatly doe deſire to knowe who they bee. It is no other then the Duke Alfiron (replyed don Gallaneo) for I heard he ſlept not farre hence this laſt night. The Princeſſe Perſiana hearing the Duke named, fetched a deepe ſigh, as one that loued him with in the ſecrete of her heart, but for feare to diſpleaſe her father, durſt ſay nothing, yet thought ſhe by the riches of his armour, it ſhould bee hée, ſtood and viewed him very attentiuely, and ſéeing how the enraged knights with puiſant force incountred each other, in ſuch ſort that their Launces brake in a thouſand ſh
                     •
                  uers, and méeting with their horſes, ſhieldes, and helmes,

both fell to the ground: but if Don Brianells horſe had beene ſo good as his aduerſaries, hee had paſſed without a fall, which hée had ſeant done whē the men of the Caſtle cloſed to vnarme him. But the Prince Arfileo deſirous to auoyde it, with great choller entred the bridge: ſo did another of the aduerſe parte, with ſuch ſwiftnes as doth an arrow ſhotte from a bowe flye through the Ayre, or a thunderbolt breaking from ſome ſwelling cloude: & with ſuch mightynes incountred on the bridge, that the knight of the Caſtle was ouerthrowne, with a peece of ye launce ſticking in his body. If it procéedes as it begins ſaid the Duke) wée ſhall fréely paſſe. So ſhall it bée (anſwered don Bellianis) for with your auſpicious fauour, they may bee brought to our wiſhed ende. The Sophy was aſtoniſhed to ſée the ſtrong incounters of the knights, and ſpeaking to Don Gallaneo, ſaid. I neuer thought there could bée better knights then thoſe of the bridge, but now I ſée what aduantage theſe haue ouer them. Wonder not thereat (ſaid don Gallaneo) for in the battell wée had with the Emperour, there was in his ayde one nouell knight, whom hée there knighted, that performed ſuch haughtie deedes in armes, that neither Hector, nor Achilles euer did the like. For beleeue me, hée no more eſtéemed to bée aſſaulted by foure, or by two Gyants, then with one knight, and with his owne handes in the battell hée ſlewe aboue 12. Gyants, and 50, knights of mine. But as for the Emperour, I haue told you what happened mée with him in the Caſtle, he béeing vnarmed: ſo that you neede not wonder what theſe doe, though any of them doe end this aduenture, which I cannot beleeue: and if they doe, I will acknowledge it the greateſt acte that euer I heard of, by reaſon their ſwordfighting will bée ſo vnequall. Which hauing ſaid, the eldeſt & the greateſt of the brethren, came againſt Arfileo, intending to reuenge his Brothers death, whoſe incounters were ſo furious, that their launces were made in little peeces: and in ſuch ſorte met with their bodyes, that the knight of the Caſtle was ouerthrowne with a great wound on his ſide. And Arfilleos
                  
horſe with the ſtrong ſtroke recoyled backe thrée or four paces, that at laſte vnable to ſtay him, with admirable lightneſſe hée leapt from his backe, beeing a little wounded on the breaſt. The ſeruants of the caſtle went to him, to doe as they would haue don with don Bryanell: but the firſt that arryued, for his boldnes loſt his head: For Arfileo thinking hee ſhould not bee iudged ouerthrowne, layd hand on his ſword to defend himſelfe: wherewith hee would haue made them knowe his valour, extended farther then thitherto hee had ſhowen. But the two brothers that Don Bryanell had vnhorſed, arryued with their drawne ſwords: the like did the Gyants. And on the otherſide Don Bellianis and the Duke did ſo, that in ſhort time among them all there began a terryble and fearefull battell: For all the Dukes knights would paſſe ouer the Bridge, But the Sophy, the Princeſſe Perſiana, and Don Gallaneo went and parted them, and demaunded the cauſe why they were ſo mingled togither, & did not proceede with their combate as they had begun: which eyther they ſhould doe, or let them paſſe? Wee are content to doe eyther (ſaid Don Bellianis:) but this knight fell not, ſeeing by anothers ſtrength hee left not the ſaddle, and therefore ought not to looſe his horſe vntill the iouſtes bee ended. He may no more mount (ſaid they.) Who ſhall iudge it (demaunded Don Bellianis.) Wee neede no iudge (ſaid they) for it is our cuſtome: but if any muſt be, let it bee the Souldan (our Lord) heere preſent. Be it ſo, (ſaid the Duke.) Then (ſaid the Sophy) I awarde, that ſince the knight was not by another vnhorſed, hee looſe not his horſe nor armour, but that hee bee vanquiſhed, ſéeing hee forſooke his horſe: ſo that hee may iouſt no more.
               Great profite doe they get by this ſentence (ſayd a proude knight) that on the Souldan attended, and was a neere Alley to the Gyants that defended the Bridge. It is well indged (ſaid Don Bellianis:) and beleeue me, had not the Souldan done it, no leſſe wrong receiued wee, then they.
               But what art thou that ſhouldſt not a little count thy ſelfe,

beeing more prouder then vallyant, to ſpeake againſt the Souldan thy Lords iudgement.
               The knight inraged with deſire to reuenge thoſe words, anſwered. Let vs ſet aſide the Souldans iudgement as a matter impertinent to vs: But if thou wilt, vppon whither of the knightes be ouercome accept this my gage, I giue it thee.
               I accept it (aunſwered don Bellianis) on condition wee may not paſſe the bridge, vnleſſe by force wee doe it. You deferre it too long (ſaid the knight) and our fight will be voide if you meane to winne the bridge by ſtrength: for theſe knights earneſtly deſire your armour, beeing ſo rich. But I giue thee leaue to helpe them (aunſwered don Bellianis) whereby thou ſhalt ſee howe little I account what thou ſo much eſteemeſt.
               All the beholders admired him, to ſee with what courage hee ſpake: but chiefly the Princeſſe Perſiana, that going to the Duke Alfiron (whom ſhee did not know) beeing among the knights and not knowing what end that enterprize would haue, did not diſcouer himſelfe, and ſaid. I pray thee (good knight) tell mee who bee theſe knightes, for I greatly deſire to knowe it. The Duke ſoftly, that none might heare, anſwered.
               No maruell (moſt beautious Princeſſe) and Lady of my heart, you at this time knowe me not, hauing imployed my ſeruice in your behalfe to ſo little regarde: But if (deare Lady) you had determined I ſhould by your crueltie dye, why did you not commaund mee to bee my owne executioner, and not permit my eyes to ſee the ſight of my liuing death. The Princeſſe by his ſpeech ſtraight knewe him, whereuppon for very greefe her eyes flowed with pearled teares: but diſſembling leaſt it ſhould bee diſcerned, replyed.
               The Gods knowe (great Duke) my gréefe, for this marryage my Father intendes, is no leſſe than yours, and therefore muſt wee perforce haue patience.
               
                  The Duke would haue anſwered her, but that he perceiued don Bellianis had ended the accepting of the battell againſt the proude knight. & that they of the bridge had graunted them the combate therin, condicionally, that if don Bellianis were ouercome, his horſe and armour ſhould be theirs: who greatly gréeued for their brothers death: and more that they could not bée reuenged on him that had ſlaine him.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  
                     What happened Don Bellianis in the battell with the Knights of the Bridge.
                  
               
               
                  DON Bellianis inflamed with anger againſt the Knight, withdrewe himſelfe, to whom the Princeſſe Aurora thus ſaide. As much as other knights doe ſhunne the moſt dangerous fightes, euen ſo much, & more doe you ſéeke them. I can doe no leſſe (replyed hée.) At this time arriued the Duke, hauing left the Princeſſe, and ſaid to him. It were good you encorage your ſelfe ſir knight, for you haue a very mighty aduerſarie. All his ſtrength will ſcant ſuffice him (ſaid the Princeſſe Aurora) though hée be neuer ſo valiant. Which worde the Duke did ſo little ſet by as the firſt, ſéeing the Knights ſo well confirmed them by their haughty ex ployts
               
                  Don Bellianis with the enraged choller hée had conceiued, oppoſed himſelfe againſt the knight, that alſo came towardes him: who very ſtrongly
                     •
                   in the middle of his ſhield made his incounter, yet not hurting him at all, brake his launce, not mouing him in his ſaddle, for the inpenetrable vertue of the ſhield retorted backe the furious Yron.

                  Don Bellianis with the great deſire he had to hit him, miſt his encounter, ſo that their horſes paſſed on their courſe with admirable furie. The great ire the Prince hereat conceiued by miſſing his incounter, is not deſcribed for want of ſkill, but verie furiouſly turned vpon the Knight, that did the like, and iudging it cowardize, hauing miſt his encounter, and loſt his launce, to draw his ſworde againſt ſo vile and inſolent a man, went towards him, receiuing a moſt heauie blowe vppon his helmet, and with incredible ſwiftneſſe running at him, ſnatcht him twixt his ſtrong armes, and as he were a litle child, pluckt him from his ſaddle, and impatiently gouerned by his preſent fury ſtept to the bridge ſide, and ouer it tumbled him downe into the riuer, where through the waight of his armour, he was straight ouerwhelmed, leauing the beholders ſo amazed at the déed, that the Soldan cried out. Oh immortall Gods, what mightie ſtrength is this in one knight? It is wonderfull great, (ſaid Don Gallaneo) that was ſomething moued ſéeing him, and more circumſpectly looking on him, thought that was the deuiſe of the nouell knight at Conſtantinople: yet he doubted it, being ſo farre diſtant thence, imagining he would come thither, by reaſon of the difference of religion. Yet ſéeing thoſe Ladies there, did greatly ſuſpect it. And againe turning his eyes towards him, he ſaw one of the knights of the Bridge pricked forwards againſt him. Don Bellianis that alſo went to méete him without launce, although the Duke called to him to take his, ſaid. I haue no néed thereof, hauing imployed mine owne ſo ill: but méeting the knight in the middle of the bridge, was forced to loſe his ſtirrop by the incounter, and méeting with horſes, ſhéelds, and bodies, the kinght fell downe bruſed, with his head all battered. Don Bellianis horſe with the ſheck reſted immouable, till with his ſpurres he made him like a whirlewind flie, euen to the place where the Soldan and his companie were, that firmly had their gazing eies fixed on him. The Sophie ſéeing one of the Giants comming againſt him, ſayd. Take a launce (ſir knight) for you will greatly néede it in this

iouſt preparing for you. It is my Countries cuſtome (moſt excellent Lord) that the Knight which in iouſting before a King or Emperour, looſeth his incounter, through the little valour of his woorth may not vntill he haue ended the battel take another, which makes me now againſt my neceſſitie, ryde without it: and ſo prauncing, and with great courage managing his Horſe, he ſpurd againſt the Gyant, who not minding to leaue his Launce, though he ſawe the Prince without any, prickt againſt him: but he drawing his ſword before they met, cut it in two, and ſtepping aſide with his Horſe, let him paſſe in ſuch an amazement, that miſſing whereon to hitte and ſtaie himſelfe, ranne headlong forwards, and at laſt Horſe and all tumbled downe, the Gyant reſting ſore battered with the terrible fall: and the Prince ſéeing it, ſet himſelfe in his place, expecting the reſt of his aduerſaries: againſt whom came the knight that firſt iouſted with Don Brianel, and ſtaying for him, at the inſtant he would encounter him with his Launce, leapt aſide with his Horſe, making him looſe his ſtroake, and with great furie turning vpon him, ſnacht his launce out of his hands, and therewith with one blowe feld him to the earth, and returning to his place, brandiſhed it with great ioy. The lookers on, had almoſt perſwaded themſelues to dreame with the ſight of ſuch admirable exployts. The Duke was ſo rauiſhed with gladneſſe, that he knew not what to ſay, to whom the Princeſſe Aurora ſpake. What thinke you (Sir) of the knight in the Tawnye armour? What may I thinke or ſay? (ſaid he) but yt in no time nor age of men, were neuer like herroike actions performed: & if he can ſo well vſe his ſword, as he can his launce mounted on his courſer, I doubt not but without impediment wee ſhal paſſe ye bridge. Straight ſhal you be aſſured thereof (ſaid ſhe.) And ſo brake of their talke: for don Bel. with the ſpeare he had takē frō the knight, oppoſed himſelfe againſt y• mighty gyant, that blaſpheming old Mahomet, came againſt him with ſuch fierceneſſe, that ſoming like a Boare, and guided with a helliſh rage, moſt thicke ſmoke iſſued from the Uyſor of his helme, and in the middle of the ſpacious Bridge incountred that the

gyant brake his launce on don Bellianis ſhield: which ſlyding on it made him a great wound, whence iſſued much blood. The Prince ſtrucke in ſuch manner, that piercing his ſhielde and armour, mightily wounded him on the breaſt: and both méeting with their horſes, the Gyant meaſured his length on the earth, and the Prince horſe ſet both knees on the ground, wherewith hee reſted ſo amazed, that hee had not ye remembrance to ſpurre him. Whereat the Prince Arſileo that ſawe him in ſuch a traunce, & thinking him wounded to the death, would haue helped him, if the Duke had not bid him ſtand ſtill, to ſee what the knights would doe: who greatly abaſht at their vnhappie ſucceſſe, did together go all againſt him: but before they arryued, the Prince had recouered himſelfe, and very cholericke through that accident, ſtraight diſmounted, & imbracing his ſhield, drewe his ſword with ſuch furye, and little feare, as if hee had to doe but with one knight. The knight is not in his wites (ſaid the Sophy) to leaue his horſe in ſuch a time, hauing to doe with ſo hardye knights, who in compaſſing him, did beſtowe ſuch mighty blowes, as might diſſolue the limping Gods blacke ſteeled forge. The Gyants beeing ſomewhat ſlow in arryuing, by reaſon of their boyſterouſneſſe, hoyſ
                     •
                  ed vp their ſlyeing battell axes, thinking to end the battell with their firſt blowes: but the diſcrete Prince knowing how gréeuous thoſe ſtrokes were to ſuffer, ſtept aſide, that both alighted in vaine, and hee reached one of them ſuch a blowe on the legge, that hee cut it quite a ſunder: who not able to ſuſtaine himſelfe thereon, fell downe: yet was hee ſtrucke in ſuch manner, that hee was wounded in two places, while hee layd the other Gyant on the head, that the blood ran downe his eyes, and defending himſelfe with his ſhield frō ye knights blowes, ſtruck him on the arme, hee held the axe that both fell togither for company, & the gyant going to take that with his other hand, could not through the exceſſiue paine of the fall by the incounter: & againe he was ſo mightily wounded on ye head, that he tūbled at his feete: & becauſe he had put him in ſuch trouble, ſoght al means to cut of his head, but ye knights

laid on him as did the Cyclops, when at Venus requeſt by Vulcans cōmand, they forged Aeneas armor in the euer burning Aetna mount, which forced him to ſuſtain himſelfe on the groūd with his hand: but he redubling his forces, with inraged valiancie, ſéeing the Giants troubled him no more, turned vpō the thrée brethren, & wounded one of them (which moſt vexed him) on the head, that he cleaued it in two: the others imbraced him, thinking to ouerturne him, but they might as well tell the ſtars of heauen or with caſting water fill the wide vaſt Ocean ſea. For the prince beeing the ſtrongeſt knight of forces in the world, that few or no Giants could equall him therin, ſo brauely held one betwéene his armes, that he thruſt the péeces of his armor into his fleſh, that the crimſon blood guſht frō his veines excéeding faſt. And ſéeing that himſelfe alſo loſt no ſmall quantitie, procured to ſhorten the fight, leaſt he might therein faint▪ and ſo made them think (drawing them both to the bridge ſide) that he would throw them into the riuer: which they perceyuing, and the extreame ſtate they were brought to, demaunded of him mercie for their loſt liues. At which inſtant arriued the Sophy, and ſaid: Séeing they can no longer defend themſelues ſir knight) be ſatiſfied with that you haue done. For which our victorious name ſhall euer bee eterniſed throughout the ſpacious cōtinent of this earthly bal, hauing to end the greateſt aduenture, yt euer knight attempted. I am content to obey your command (moſt excellent Lord) anſwered the Prince, on this condition, that they no more maintaine this cuſtome. That can not they do (replied the Sophy) for it was their owne agréement. Then the Prince leauing the knights, gaue God thanks, that ſo deliuered him from that great danger which they thought he did to their Gods. The Princes Arfileo and don Brianell, whoſe armor was taken away (with hope to do the like by them all with the Duke Alfiron, and the princeſſe, went and imbraced him with ſuch loue, as if he had reuiued from death to life. And the Duke was ſomwhat abaſhed of the little confidence he had ſhewen of them.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  
                     How the Knights were receiued of the Soldane of Perſia: and their conference with the Princeſſe Perſiana.
                  
               
               
                  THe Princeſſe Perſiana and Don Gallaneo, beeing deſirous to ſpeake with the duke Alfyron, hauing vnderſtood by ſome of the knights, that he was there, were going to him: but he alighting from his horſe, went to kiſſe the Sophies handes, and humbled himſelfe before him, whō the Sophie but then ſéeing, imbraced, and raiſing him from the ground, ſaid. I am glad Duke, to ſée you come to honour our tryumphes, chéefely bringing to our Court ſuch knights as theſe, ſpecially hee in the tawny armour, whom I would haue you tell me what they be, aſſuring you the world cannot affoord his like, and I reſt ſo amazed, that I knowe not if any humane ſtrength be able to accompliſh what he hath. Al the reſt of his cōpany affirmed it, ſcarſe beléeuing what their owne eyes had ſéene: and the Duke thus anſwered. It was you (my gracious lord) whom I would intreate to demand it of them, for though they came in my company, it is but verie little ſince I met them, and if they do not declare it to you, I doubt they will not doo it to any other. Speakto the Princeſſe, duke, ſayde the Sophy, while I talke with the knights: and going a little further, ſayd to Don Bellianis that was mounting on the giants horſe, with whom he firſt iuſted, whoſe like for bigneſſe, ſtrength, & wel made body the whole Perſian Empire did not then containe: but perceiuing the Sophy came towardes him, would not mount, but as he was on foote, humbl
                     •
                  d himſelfe to kiſſe his royal hands. The Sophie holding him with one hand becauſe he ſhould not knéele, with the other 
                     〈…〉
                  ed, and imbracing him with great affection, ſayde. Th
                     〈…〉
                   reaſon

Sir knight, why you ſhould kneele to any, deſeruing for your valour and incomparable bountie the ſame dutie of euery one. But for one onely thing muſt I needs now intreate you, which I am ſure you will not denie mee, iudging your courteſie no leſſe then your haughtie courage, of which all ſuch knights as you ſhould as much priſe themſelues, as of their proper valor, which thing before I expreſſe it, I will thereto binde you by your promiſe. Tell me (moſt mightie Lord) anſwered Don Bellianis what you will commaund me, for barbarous and vnciuill were he that ſhould denie ſo great a Lord any thing, in the higheſt degrée appertaining to your royall ſeruice, although a knight of ſuch ſmall conſequence as I, leſſe then your beheſt ſhould ſatiſfie. Hereupon the Duke, Don Gallaneo, and Princeſſe Perſiana, after their gréetings, came thither to knowe the conference betwéene him and the knight: ſo did the Princeſſe Aurora and the reſt of her companie, who were entertained with ſuch courteſie, as if they were knowne to be the greateſt péeres of the world. At length the princeſſe Perſiana thus ſaid to the Princeſſe Aurora. I do intreate you (faire Ladie) leaſt wée ſhould derogate from the honour by your exteriour ſhew and the valour of your attendant knights you ſéeme to deſerue, you would manifeſt the ſtate and royaltie of your deſcent: for although you deſire to conceale it, yet your worthineſſe wil ſhine from the dignitie of your birth. She humbling her ſelf, replied: I rather deſire (moſt excellent Princeſſe) you ſhould ſtill conceiue that opinion of mee (though vndeſerued) for after you ſhould know me, my ſmall deſerts will then looſe the fauours you nowe ſhewe me: for the meanneſſe of my ſtate is ſuch, that it doth not merite the fruition of theſe fauours. Séeing you will haue it ſo, I will no longer importune you (replyed the beautious Perſiana) ſo euidently telling mee we merite not to know you, ſaue onely by your outward ſignes. But ſetting aſide the worthines of your perſon, that well deſerueth we ſhuld all obey you, let me then receiue the fauour, that you would vouchſafe to lodge within the Soldane my fathers Pallace.

We may ſay nor do any thing herein, (ſaid Arſileo) more then the knight in the tawnie armour will commaund, to whom all obedience is due. Nay then (ſayde the Soldane) if we liſt to know it, we ſhall eaſily knowe it by force of armes, but ſeeing he hath promiſed me a boon, this ſhall be it (ſayde hee turning to don Bellianis) that you all take off your helmes, and that we may knowe your names. Don Belliani, ſtood ſomewhat penſiue, not knowing what to anſwere, yet thinking that the longer he kept ſilence, they wold the more ſuſpect, he at laſt thus replyed. Truly excellent Lord, you haue demanded me a thing that by my wil I neuer would diſcouer, but ſéeing I can do no leſſe, there is no reaſon I ſhuld deny it, & therfore wil declare it with licenſe of this my cōpanie. We wil allow whatſoeuer you ſhal do, ſayd they. The princeſſe Aurora was at this time in great feare leaſt they ſhuld be knowne, thinking yt 
                  don Gallaneo had ſéen them in the caſtle when don Brianell was caried thither, but they deceiued themſelues, for he had not ſéen thē but armed, when he was there taken. Don Bellianis replying, the Soldane ſaid. You ſhall know (my good Lorde) I am called the knight of the golden Image, becauſe I beare it on my ſheeld, and I aſſure you at this preſent I haue no other name, neither may I haue it, till I be commanded the contrarie. This my companion, poynting to don Brianell, is nominated the venturous knight, and this other is the Prince Arfileo, if euer you heard him named before, Prince and ſole heire of the kingdom of Raſia. This Ladie whome wee accompanie, is the King of Carcaſias Daughter, with whome through a certaine aduenture, we were al going to the king her fathers Court. This is almoſt noble Lord, what in this caſe I can declare, proteſting by the fayth of a Knight, I may not more diſcouer, for I my ſelfe doo not knowe it. You haue doone with me (replyed the Soldane) although I deſired larger information: and ſéeing there remaines no more to doo, I pray you vnlace your h
                     •
                  lmes, that my deſire may further bee ſatiſfied. Arfileo and Don Bryanell ſtraight way obeyed, being verie glad to heare

how well don Bellianis had anſwered: which done, they all highly commended thē for their braue diſpoſition. The Princeſſe Aurora till that time being ſorowfull, not knowing what replie don Bellianis would make, with great ioy ſtepped vnto him, vnlaced his helme: whoſe fayre complection, with the gallant conſtitution of his well knit members, and ſtrength of body, was highly admired, hauing his haire like thréed of maſſie gold, diſheueled hanging on his ſhoulders. The ſight of this his rare fauor, with his haughtie exployts in armes, made them amazedly think him the ofſpring of the mighty god of war, iudging it impoſſible that any mortall creature ſhould poſſeſſe two ſuch extreams, wherin he ſurpaſſed al within ye compaſſe of the earth. He was of ſtature higher thē any knight in that time, his hands long and finowy, betokening his exceſſiue ſtrength, his ſhoulders big and large, whoſe breadth might mainely beare the puiſſant burthen of olde Atlas forces. His face whiter then the pureſt Alabaſter, commixt with the Roſeate colour of a naturall red. Therein was placed his eagle-penetrating inſtruments of ſight, as bright as the reſplendant rayes of the meridiall ſunne: and to conclude, there was none afflicted with blacke heart oppreſſing melancholie, but in examining his perfections, would on a ſodaine baniſh that enemie to quiet pleaſure. He had moreouer a certaine maner of milde grauitie, that with it he drew vnto him the loue of the admirers: for it being with anger moued, there could be no countenance more ſterne then his, yet he ſo refrained himſelf by forcing it from him, that ſtraight he would expell it. He was a great maintainer and louer of iuſtice, that if any did committe a fault or erred, he himſelfe would ſée him puniſhed. None in his time could equall him in forces. His ſpéech was rare but wiſe, and neuer ſpake but premeditated vpon occaſion. When ye Soldane ſawe ſuch accompliſhed perfections & compleate vallor in one knight, hee again imbraced him, conceiuing ſo great pleaſure, yt had not the marriage of his daughter bin ſo forward, he would willingly without further knowledge what he was, giuen hir him for his

wife, & at laſt he brake their ſilēce with theſe words: Moſt glorious knight, I impute it no fault in you in being ſo vnwilling to diſcouer vnto vs your rare parts, which only to ye high immortall gods, as things altogither proper and appertaining to thē
                  ſelues, doo belong: to whom I render recountleſſe thanks, that in my time they haue vouchſafed to ſend ſo great a wonder among vs, in this our age. At the time that Don Bellianis wold haue kiſſed his hands, which he not conſented, arriued the Princeſſe Perſiana with Don Gallaneo, leading with them the Princeſſe Aurora. Whereupon the Souldane and the Knight mounted on theyr horſes, and the Ladies on theyr Palfrayes, and don Bellianis hauing his woundes firſt dreſſed by the Damſels, who alſo did the like to the knights of the bridge, they tooke their way towards Perſepolis. The Dukes traine was excéeding merrie, to haue in their company ſo famous knights, for thoſe tryumphes: don Bryanell, that was called the aduenturous Knight, ſtepped to the beautious Perſiana, and as one that in courtly courteſie, and pleaſant diſcourſes was inferiour to none, ſaid vnto her. Séeing faire Princeſſe, my name is not oppoſite againſt any fauour I may receiue, I beſéech you make me thereby aſſured firme againſt all changes of al reuoluing chance: in ſigne whereof, grace me by your graunt, with the leading of your palfray by the raynes, whereby I may with the fruition of your diuine companie, inioy all that I may deſire, which is to reſt ſole yours for euer, ſince yonder knight (meaning don Gallaneo) hath taken on him my office with the Princeſſe my Lady. This he ſaid becauſe don Gallaneo did lead the Princeſſe Auroraes palfraye, which though ſhe ſuffered, was to diſſemble that ſhe knew him not, rather deſiring his death, then at his hands any ſuch fauour. The like wiſh wiſhed the Duke Alfyron. The Princeſſe Perſiana, no leſſe gallant in talke, then rareneſſe of beautie, replyed.
               I would not ſir Knight, that about your ſeruice, the Princeſſe your Lady and I ſhould 
                     •
                  arre: but ſéeing ſhe doth accept a

ſtranger for her ſeruitor, ſhe ſhall receiue the guerdon of her change: and therewith ſhe gaue him the raines, which he gladly tooke: to whome the Princeſſe Aurora ſaide. I know not ſir aduenturous knight, wherein I haue ſo much diſcontented you, that you ſhould ſo ſoone drowne mee in obliuion: but if it were in commaunding you to prooue the aduenture of the bridge: henceforth will I be more conſiderate, and ſo you ſhall be leſſe greeued, yet notwithſtanding all thinges haue ſo well befallen you, that you haue no cauſe of gréeuance. True, ſaid he, if the Prince Arfileo had not got more by that proofe then I. What haue I obtained more? demanded Arfileo. The commaundement of my Lady the Princeſſe (ſaide he) beſides the horſe you haue vnder you. So haue you got your armor which you had loſt (anſwered Arfileo) for which you are beholding to the knight of the golden Image. I haue no reaſon to thank him for it replyed hee) for he did it more to keepe his owne that are ſo excellent, then becauſe I ſhould not looſe mine. Then were it good (ſaid don Bellianis) ſince you wil not thanke me for them, that you reſtore them backe to me. We ſhall not ſo ſoone ende this quarrell as you did the other (replied Don Bryanell) for the knights looking for yours, would to haue them willingly let me haue mine. Let this paſſe (ſaide Don Gallaneo) for had you loſt theſe your gallant diſpoſitions, you would haue gotten others. In this manner at length they arriued at the Cittie, euen at the dayes departing, giuing place vnto the mighty gliſtering ſtars, twinckling in the firmament, where they founde the people attending for their comming with lights and torches, who in troupes filled vp the ſtréetes, that they had no way to paſſe: for the newes being ſpread, that one knight had vanquiſhed the keepers of the vnhappie Bridge, they all flocked to ſée him, as a wonder, demaunding one of another which was hée, neuer inough ſatiſfied with his ſight, that all this while talked with Don Gallaneo, till they all came to the pallace gate, where they alighted. The beatious Perſiana was diſmoūted by don Bellianis, that ſaid to don Brianell: I haue at

this time (Sir aduenturous knight) deceiued you of the reward of your labour, hauing on foote obtayned more, thē you in all this iourney. You are all againſt me (replyed hee) but I may haue a time to crye quittance with you for it. Don Gallaneo taking the Princeſſe Aurora in his armes, they all entred the royall Hall: whence all their companye departed, The Souldan importuned the three knights to ſtay within the pallace, which hee could not obtaine. For they anſwered they would in no wiſe leaue the Duke, till the triumphes were ended: ſo ſaid the Princeſſe Aurora that neuer woulde diſaſſociate her knights: & ſo with leaue of the Souldan and his daughter, they alſo departed.
               Well did don Bellianis note when they were taking their leaue, how the Duke Alfiron ſhewed no good will towardes Gallaneo, wherefore hee was deſirous to bee certified therof: and beeing come to the Dukes Pallace, that was one of the beſt and greateſt in the citie, Don Bellianis would not ſtay for ſupper: but finding himſelfe weake through the much bloode hee had loſt, caſt himſelfe on a bed that was made for him, where his damzels did againe dreſſe his woundes, whyle the Duke and the reſt ſatte to ſupper: where they were ſo well ſerued as they had beene in Conſtantinople, and after went to viſit Don Bellianis: whence departing, they went to repoſe their wearied bodies.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  
                     The conference betweene the Princeſſe Perſiana, and the Duke Alfyron, with the knight of the golden image.
                  
               
               
                  THe next morning, ſcarce had the ſonne mounted on his fierie wayne, to make his orbed courſe about the world, but the Duke Alfyron went to viſit the Knight of the Golden image, for by no other name would hee bee knowne to them, vnleſſe it were to the Princeſſe and ladies, and entring his chamber, he found him riſing, though his wounds were great. The Duke with a kinde congye gaue him the goodmorrow, and ſaid. Trouble not your ſelf to ryſe ſir knight, for your wounds may put you in great pain. Thinking you went to the tourney (aunſwered the Prince) I would make me readie. What ſhall wee doo there to daye? (replyed the Duke) but I beléeue if the Souldane knewe you were ſo weake, he would come to viſit you. Then were it not amiſſe (ſayde the Prince) that I did riſe to ſaue him that labour.
               With this entred the Ladies alſo to viſit him, bidding him in no caſe riſe, till they further aduiſed him: wherewith hée lay ſtill, and ſo the Ladies left him with the Duke. But he hauing great deſire to be auenged on don Gallaneo, by reaſon of the promiſe he had made his father, and perceiuing the Duke had like intent, and deſiring to knowe it, ſaid to him. Tell me ſir which of all thoſe knightes was the Prince don Gallaneo of Antioch? That was he (replyed the Duke) that led the Princeſſe Aurora by the raynes of her palfray, borne to rob mee of my earthly ioyes. What is the cauſe thereof, demaunded he, for ſo great a Lorde as you ſhoulde eaſily bee reuenged on any

perſon whatſoeuer, being mooued therto. That is not the thing that may remedie my gréefe (ſaid the Duke) yet I pray you let me know it (ſayde Don Belliani
                        •
                     .) Then thus beganne the duke. I was a long time captiuated in the loue of the beatious Princeſſe Perſiana, and of her ſo highly fauoured, that with little labour I might haue obtained her for my wife, if my reuoluing fates had not oppoſed themſelues againſt my happineſſe
                     •
                   and ſo declared to him the whole proceſſe of his loue, with ſuch ſorrow, that Don Bellianis could not reſtraine his teares, taking great compaſſion of him, though glad in that this might be a meanes to effect his owne intent, and thus anſwered. De not thinke your matter ſo happeleſſe, but imagine you may by ſome meanes attaine the Princeſſe Perſiana to your wife. I cannot perſwade my ſelfe (replied the Duke) there may bée any remedie for my gréefe. For to morrow after dinner the iouſts beginnes, and the ſame morning the Princeſſe is married to Don Gallaneo, wherby I ſée no hope but death, for anchorage and end of all my paines, or to depriue my life of my vitall ſenſes, before my eies do view it. Do not ſo afflict your ſoule (ſayd Don Bellianis) for I haue thought vpon a meane, which if you agrée thereto, is, that to morrow we all méet at the Tourney, where, if Don Gallaneo, thinking himſelfe the beſt Knight within this Court) doth enter, there alſo I meane to bee in an vnknowne armour, and méeting with him will diſappoint him of his new betrothed loue. For I haue no leſſe deſire then you, to ſende him out of the world. And to the end with more ſecrecie wee may do it, you ſhall giue out, I am ſo ſore wounded, that I reſt vnable to riſe, and ſo Don Gallaneo ſhall not ſcape my handes, and your intent ſhalbe at full accompliſhed. If this faile, you haue ſuch knights, that with thē maugre all the court, I will conduct her where you will. The duke hearing this, knew not where he was, with ioy, & imbraſing him ſaid. Not without great cauſe (renowmed knight of the golden image) did I from the firſt houre I ſaw you, comprize ſuch loue of you, & was ſo ſuddenly affected, as the man in whom might

conſiſted the remedie of my torments, although we know not fully howe wee ſhall accompliſh it, by reaſon at this preſent there is aboue fiftie thouſand knights in the court, that I doubt we ſhall not ſo eaſily ſcape with our liues, for all I little regard my owne. Thinke not ſo much on the end (replied Don Bellianis) if you ſée the matter happily begunne: for there is nothing ſo ſurely grounded, but the beginning will require great labour, eſpecially ſuch enterpriſes as theſe. Wherefore my opinion is, ſeeing our time is ſo ſhort, that you ſend halfe of your men to attend our comming in the way we muſt take, ſome ten miles hence, taking with them double horſing, that when we arriue with ours tired, & being ther forced to fight, we may find freſh horſes. And this done, 1000. choſen men wil ſerue to fetch her hence, ſo that they perfectly kaow the way. The duke liked well of this counſel: where they broke of, being aduertiſed how the Soldan, & the princeſſe Perſiana, with all the chief nobilitie (except don Gallaneo, that remained about another matter, which ſtraight ſhalbe declared) came to viſit him: wherfore the duke hearing it, wēt to méet him, yet for al his haſt he found him comming vp the ſtaires talking with the princes Arfileo, don Brianell, & Aurora, that went forth to receiue them: who when they ſaw the duke go towards thē) the princeſſe Perſiana ſaid. I feare (great duke) you are alreadie aſſured of the victorie of the iouſts, being in companie of ſuch valiant knights, which makes you thus kéepe your Chamber at this time a day, notwithſtanding I can tell you, you haue many aduerſaries: therefore aduiſe your ſelfe, and looke well what you haue to do, and muſt in your own defence performe. The duke knéeling before her, demanded her beautious hands to kiſſe them, for that fauor ſhe did him by her good counſel, & that none might heare replied if your diuine fauor, moſt excellent Lady, doth not forſake me, I may ſecurely reſt fearleſſe of all dangers: but I doubt I ſhall with your abſence remaine altogither vnable thereto, hauing loſt the fruition of your diuine fauor, poſſeſſed by a ſtranger in my ſight. The princeſſe made him riſe, and that ſhe might more

at her pleaſure talke with him, tooke him by the hand, and that euery one might heare, ſaid. Séeing you haue thus long bin idle I meane now to taſk you for your labor: for you ſhalbe this day my gardian, for that the aduenturous knight may not be both the princeſſes and mine, & therfore wil I renounce him, hauing ſo ſoone forgotten me. Then belike my ſelfe being deſirous (ſaid don Brianell) to obtaine both your fauors, muſt now feare to looſe all: yet am I content, that my Lord the duke may haue the inheritāce of my place. Thus chatting they arriued at don Bellianis lodging, who wold haue riſen to receiue thē, but the Soldan wold not ſuffer it. And going to his beds ſide, demaunded how he felt himſelfe: wherunto he replied. I cannot but be well (moſt dread Lord) reſting ſo bound to your imperiall maieſtie, that I know not how I may acknowledge ſatiſfaction for ye Leſt of theſe your royall fauors, which forceth in me no leſſe paine, then the grief of my late receiued wounds. While they were all earneſtly talking, the Princeſſe Perſiana ſaide to the Duke. What pretend you to do againſt to morrows turnamēt, or will you not be there? I will do no more (anſwered he) then you will cōmand me: for I came with no other intent. Then ſhe ſaid: ſéeing you leaue it to my diſpoſe, I think, becauſe the knight of the golden image, by reaſon of his woūds cannot be there, that you faile not, for you ſhall reap greater fauor at my hands then don Galleano: in tokē wherof I preſent you this flag, & ſet it on the top of your creaſt, which with my hands I wrought, vnknowē to any: which that none did ſee, ſhe tooke it out of her pocket, and gaue it him. The duke receiued it with wonderful content, and kiſ
                     •
                   her hand, reſting the ioyfulleſt man aliue. Think not much of that I do, for my father doth force it, & I would put my ſelf in danger to auoid it: and I haue greatly reioiced that you haue brought with you ſuch valiant warriers, as at the vnhappie bridge I ſaw. For if the knight of the golden image were not as he is, I would haue intreated him to procure to diſſolue this match, done contrarie to my hearts intent. He and I haue cō
                  ferred about this matter (ſaide the Duke) yet ſpeake you with him about it, that he may knowe this to be with your conſent.

whereupon ſhe then went to his beds ſide, while the Souldane talked apart with Arfileo, whom he highly eſtéemed, knowing him to be ſo great a Prince as Don Bellianis had ſayde. The princeſſe Perſiana ſéeing ſo good occaſion, demaunding how he felt himſelf with his great wounds, as much gréeuing for them, as though he were the Prince her brother, and the more, being in time wherein ſhe ſo much néeded the helpe of his vnconquered ſtrength, to the ſubuerting of her enemies: whereto he anſwered: I do féele my ſelfe (moſt excellent Princeſſe) verie wel, eſpecially to accompliſh any thing appertaining to your high ſeruice, wherefore aſſuredly commaund and imploy mee anie way wherein my worthineſſe may preuaile for your behoofe. It is no ſmall promiſe (replied ſhe) you offer me, for as I do greatly neede it, ſo ſhall I haue cauſe to employ the greateſt part of your valour. And therfore (moſt glorious knight) know, as you alreadie haue vnderſtood of the Duke, that the Soldane my father hath determined to marrie me to the Prince Don Gallaneo: which doth ſo torment my paſſion-broken heart, that I here vow, if al other meanes of my deſired remedie do faile me, my proper hand ſhall finiſh the tragicke ſcene of my afflicted life, ere I will conſent to this vnfortunate wedding: & though many nobles haue ſolicited my father to the contrarie, yet will he not be ſatiſfied, anſwering them woordes vnbeſéeming both his maieſtie and their eſtates. Wherefore if I haue cauſe ſo to complaine of my ſoule-conſuming greefes (if euer you felt the like) you may eaſily iudge. And to conclude, I haue determined to marrie none but the Duke Alfyron the Courteous. For when I ſawe your high admired déedes in the battell, I then aſſured my ſelf of help. But now through your gréeuous wounds it hath ſince ſo increaſed, that had I not diſcouered my diſcontent vnto you, I had to morrow wedded me to death, rather then to him I ſo abhorre. Therefore this onely I intreate you, that commiſerating the ſtate of me the moſt vnhappieſt Princeſſe liuing, you would procure ſome redreſſe to terminate my woes, that I may not fall in his hands whom mortally I hate:

I meane Don Gallaneo, wherein you ſhall commit no error againſt my father, whoſe decaying honour with his life, will be augmented by his death. For Don Gallaneo is not the man that merits his Daughter, being a knight of the leaſt faith at this time liuing. And I cannot be perſwaded, that ſo famous and glorious a Prince as the Emperour of Greece, could by him be aſſaulted, vnleſſe it were with treaſon and ſuch like. And the greateſt coraſiue to my hart is, I cannot in ſome night ſteal out of the Pallace, and ſo depart with the Duke, whereſoeuer he would conuey me: which my father ſuſpecting, kéepeth mee with a great gard. Thus haue I (ſir knight) diſcloſed the tenor of my gréefes, beſéeching you that if any hope of remedie hang in the angry ſkies for my releaſe, you would let me know it, aſſuring your ſelfe, I will refuſe no daunger, and will vndergo al perils, accounting them as greateſt pleaſures, ſo therby I may fruſtrate this deteſted match. Don Bellianis all this while reſted much amazed, to ſée how paſſionately the Princeſſe greeued, and with what confidence ſhe had manifeſted vnto him her minde: and without longer deliberating on the matter, as if he had reſolued thereon with conſent of his Companion, replied. Great is the pleaſure I haue receyued (moſt excellent Princeſſe) with the knowledge of this your reſolue, hauing thereon ere this conferred with the Duke, and ſo I only expected this your high commaund, and alſo hoping you would bind me to your perpetuall obſeruation, by your viſitation I remained thus in bed, by which occaſion I more conueniently might know the reſolution of your minde, which now being aſſured of you, ſhall néed no more, then commit the execution of all vnto my charge, your ſelfe ſéeming to know nothing: for I proteſt and promiſe you neuer more after to put on armour, if this marriage be effected with Don Gallaneo, And doubt not but with the helpe of the immortall Gods, it ſhall be as I ſay: But leaſt we ſhould force ſuſpition by our long diſcourſe, I will not any longer ſtay you. With which concluſion ſhe reſted the contentedſt Ladie in the worlde, ſéeing howe well thoſe af
                     •••
                  res

would procéed according to her deſire, onely for that the knight of the golden Image had ſo cōfidently vndertaken ſo waightie a charge. And ſo after ſome ceremonics betwéene them, ſhée fell in diſcourſe with the other Knights and Ladies, while the Soldan was taking his leaue of don Bellianis, and the Princeſſe Aurora: and the like did his Daughter. Which done, and both parties reſting content, they departed towards the Pallace, and with them the Princeſſe Arſileo, and Don Brianell with the Duke, who leauing them there, returned to their lodgings to order the determined purpoſes: whereupon they ſtraight commaunded that two thouſand Knights ſhould that night depart, and attend their comming at Dianas groue. And themſelues prepared howe and in what manner they would méete in the tourney the inſuing day, and ſo expecting the next morrow with hope to execute their determination.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  
                     What conference paſſed betweene the Prince Don Gallaneo, and his coſen Don Galfeo the vnknown: and how they reſolued to kill the knight of the golden Image, and his Companions.
                  
               
               
                  MAny and great were the thoughts that troubled Don Gallaneo, ſéeing that the Knight of the Golden Image had ended the aduenture of the Bridge, which made him imagin he ſhould know him by comparing the haughtie déedes hee then had done in that battell, to equall thoſe he ſaw him do in the conflict of Conſtantinople where he ayded the Emperour Don Bellaneo: wherefore taking a part his Cooſen don Galfeo the vnknowen, brake into theſe ſpéeches. I cannot tell (good Cooſe
                     •
                  ) whether you haue marked what I haue, and knowne that which gréeues

me to the heart: yet notwithſtanding, know for certaintie, and I am ſo perſwaded that the Knight of the golden Image is he that ſought againſt vs at Conſtantinople, in the battle of the Emperour don Bellaneo: whom if he be, then commes he only to procure our vtter ouerthrow, with vntimely death. For though the Emperour ſhould be liuing, yet I ſo feare them, that vntill I haue the Princeſſe in my power, I ſhall not reſt, through extremitie of paſſions, of thoſe diſturbing thoughts which haue ſo bereft me of my ſenſes, that I know not what courſe to take. Don Galfeo hereat amazed, did replie. Either I haue beene blinde, or not in my ſelfe, in not 
                     ••
                  ting thoſe Knights, as you haue: yet aſſure your ſelfe (for ſo do I) that the Emperour is himſelfe come diſguiſed with them. For in the conflict with him, there was but two, and now there are thrée which doth confirme it, elſe could no knight in the worlde performe ſuch admirable déedes againſt the Knights of the bridge, but the Emperour. Therefore determine what you will haue done with them, ſince wee haue them at our pleaſure in the Dukes Pallace. None of them is the Emperour, for I knowe him verie well (ſaid don Gallaneo.) But know (I thinke it beſt) that to morrowe when the iouſts begins, the Duke béeing Generall of all the aduenturers, and I of the Courtiers, you ſhall take fiue hundred choſen Knights, and with them march to the Dukes lodging, which you ſhall finde without my gard. There go vp to the Chamber the Knight lieth in ſore wounded, where you may eaſily depriue him of his life, and the like will I do by his companions in the field. All this approoued don Galfeo, being as falſe a traitour as his cooſen, and that night they prepared thoſe men they thought méete for that enterpriſe, determining to put the princes to death before their malice were knowne.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  
                     Howe the iourney began: and in what anger the aduenturous knight, and Arfileo were put by Don Gallaneos Knights.
                  
               
               
                  NO ſooner had the reſplendent Sunne, expelling the obſcure darkeneſſe from the gloomie ſkies, clearing the morne with his bright light, on that in euerie place ſo celebrated day of S. Iohn, but with vnſpeakable, and long hoped ioyes there began in the Citie of Perſepolis, ſuch ecchoing noiſe of military inſtruments, as if it had béene like to be ſubuerted by furie of ſome terrible aſſault, of forraine foes. Through the ſtréetes were nothing ſéene but moſt ſumptuous and rich furnitures, and manie and diuerſe rare inuentions, for all maner of new deuiſed paſtimes. All the people prepared themſelues as appertained to the celebration of ſo mightie a Princeſſe nuptials. The knights on the other ſide, though they apparelled themſelues with rich triumphant roabs, yet had they ſpeciall care of their armor and horſe, which in the afternoone they ſhould vſe. The Prince Don Gallaneo (after he had agréed with his cooſen that towards the euening he ſhould be in readineſſe to execute their appointment) did ſuperbiouſly adorne himſelfe, and accompanied with manie Knights & Lords in nūber 2000. he went to the pallace, where by the way he met the kings of Arminea, and Teſſifanty, with many other ſtrangers, amongſt whom were aboue 30. dukes and Earles, and with the ſound of innumerable trumpets, and al other ſort of harmonious inſtruments, whoſe far reſounding noiſe made all the vallies there adioining eccho with the ſound till they arriued at the pallace, where they attended their returne, while the excellent and fayre Princeſſe Perſiana iſſued

forth with ſuch admiring beautie, that it more increaſed the Duke Alfirons greefe. Her gowne was of white Saten, cut vpon cloath of golde, tackt with ſilke, and golden twiſt, and drawne foorth in Roſes. In the middle of euerie one was ſet an orient Pearle of great bigneſſe, that it made the gowne of ſuch exceſſiue valour, that euery one eſtéemed it worth no leſſe then the whole Citie of Perſepolis: her Amber haire like the thréeds of fineſt golde, was in treſſes in a net of the ſame ſtuffe knit togither, whereon was placed a Coronet, ſet w
                     •
                  th great and faire Saphires, in the middeſt whereof ſtoode a ſtone grauen with the Image of the God of Loue, with his bowe and arrowes, whoſe ſparkling brightneſſe would haue darkened the light of a great Torch. The Duke Alfiron when he ſaw her in this maner, remained altogither without féeling: which Arfileo (that was nigh him) ſéeing, ſayd vnto him verie ſoftlie. Looke to your ſelfe (moſt noble Duke) leaſt you diſcouer what hitherto hath béene vnknowne. Whereat the Duke recouered himſelfe, greatly abaſhed at the accident: but euery one was ſo occupied in eying the Princeſſe, that they little regarded anie other. Whereupon the Prince Arfileo, and Don Brianell, tooke her by the handes, and ledde her to the Pallace ſtayres, where they all mounted on ſuch horſes and palfrayes as appertained to their high ſtate: in which equipage they went to their chiefe Temple, where by the high Prieſt they were marryed, according to the Pagan rytes: which done they returned to dinner, dyning togither drowned in all earthly ioyes, wanting nothing that anie mortall heart could by wiſhing comprehend, though at the banquet the thoughts of manie were diuerſe: For the Duke Alfiron thought howe hee might take the Princeſſe from Don Gallaneo, and inioy her after the taking. Don Brianell, and Arfileo, how they might ſpoile him of his life: and he of theirs, with the Knights of the golden Image: but the Princeſſe Perſiana had all her imagination buſied more on the promiſe of the Knight of the golden Image, then on the diuerſitie of diſhes before her.
               
                  And dinner being ended, al the knights went to arme them, to be ready at the appointed houre, with their captaine in fielde. The Jouſts were ordained to be made with out the Cittie, in a ſpacious & large field, for that purpoſe appointed. Don Bellianis, though ſore wounded, roſe and armed him in gréene armor, interlaced with manie ſtrokes of gold, which the Duke had giuen him, who commanded all the knights to march away, leauing him alone, that he might more ſecretly go himſelfe. The Duke went accōpanied with Arfileo & don Brianell, ordering his men as one little eſtéeming his enemies, hauing ſo great defence in thoſe two valiant warriours, & his hope in the knight of the goldē Image. With him ioyned the kings of Armenia and Theſſifanty, hauing on their ſide aboue 25. thouſand choſen knights, which in compariſon of the courtiers were but a hādful, for Don Gallaneo trebled that number: who by this appeared on the other ſide with al his troups, wel ordered, & with gallant demonſtration. Then on an imperiall theater mounted the Soldane, the two princeſſes Perſiana and Aurora, that till that time had not gone abroad: who ſo ſoone as they were all ſetled, the Soldane cōmanded the ſignal to be giuen by the trumpets, wherat Don Brianell that had the leading of the firſt ſquadron, ſet forwards with it againſt a valiant knight, a kinſman of don Gallaneos, whom he vnhorſt with foure more before hee brake his launce. The ſquadrons breaking through each other, made ſuch tumult with incounter of ſpeares, ſwords, & diuers other weapons, that the beholders thought al the ſtrength of ye world had bin there met: who ſo cloſed togither, that hauing no roome to handy blowes, wold by wraſtling ouerthrow each other, that horſmen tumbled to the ground; and he that once fell, did more ſtriue to get out of the preaſe, then to returne to the fight. But Don Bryanell ſéeing his enemies to double his men in number, thruſt himſelfe within the moſt furie of the battell, where hard by the Soldanes theater, méeting with a knight of ſtature like a giant called Fydaſto the cruell, raiſed both their ſwords, and together at one time diſcharged on each other ſuch blowes,

that Fydaſto was ouerthrowne and wounded on the head, and don Bryanell bowed to the pummel of his ſaddle, with greate courage ſtaying himſelf. This was one of the knights that don Gallaneo had charged to kill don Bryanell and Arfileo: who ſéeing himſelf downe, with a diueliſh rage roſe, & with a hoarſe voyce cried, Downe with the knight, that againſt the order and law of tourney, beareth an edged ſword: whereof he had no cauſe to complaine, for hee and the other two knights that had the like charge, did weare the like. Straight was the venturous knight incompaſſed with aboue 1000. Knights, that leauing their tilt, onely procured his death. But he ſo demeaned himſelf among them, that in a triſe he beate to the ground aboue twentie ſore wounded: and yet his men could not come to help him, by reaſon of the multitude that had incloſed him. Then Arfileo ſéeing this, moſt valiantly prickt foorth with his troupe, and don Gallaneo, that nought imagined but their deaths, brandeſhing his trunchion, made againſt him with all his battell, that don Bryanell might not bee ſuccoured: the like did the Duke Alfyron with the remnant of his men, and in the midſt of the field they met with ſuch force, that moſt of them wiſhed themſelues farre thence at that time. The Duke & the two knights ſtraight entered among their aduerſaries, performing it verie brauely. But Arfileo that had no other intent then to helpe don Bryanell, paſſed through the thickeſt of the ſquadron, that none durſt withſtand him, and entred within their ring, where they ſlew their horſes, procuring the like by them. But they beganne to make ſuch deſtruction of them, that they had laid at their féete aboue a humdred knights, ſome ſlaine outright, and ſome gréeuouſly wounded: and al that beheld the fight, thought it ill done that ſo many knights ſhould onely ſet vpon two, inſomuch that the Soldane was about to deſcend and part them. Where we leaue them, for we muſt a while diſcourſe what befell Don Bellianis in his lodging.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  
                     What happened Don Bellianis in the Dukes Pallace, with Galfeo the vnknowne and his Knights: his death, with the end of the Tourney.
                  
               
               
                  AS ſoone as Don Gallaneo was departed to the Tourney, his coſin Galfeo the vnknowne took the fiftie knights, & wēt to the Duks lodging, hauing vnderſtood by his ſpies how he was thence going, and that the knight of the golden Image remained there alone, where being arriued, hée commaunded his men to follow him vp: but then Don Bellianis hauing put on the Dukes armour, was readie to go to the tilt, thinking it time to be gone. But hearing a noyſe at the gate, looked out at a window falling vppon the ſtayres, and ſéeing ſo many knights there, was amazed, and with a loude voyce ſaide: what ſéeke you here knights, at ſuch time when all are gone to the tourney. Don Galfeo looked vp, and ſéeing him in that armour, knew him not, and diſſembling his intent, ſayd. Good knight, I pray you ſhew vs him of the golden Image, for we muſt needes ſpeake with him. You may not enter here (ſayde hee) for the Duke my maiſter hath ſo commanded. And hauing ſo ſayde, went towards the ſtaires in great haſt, wher hefoūd don Galfeo entering the gallerie, and drawing foorth his Sword, ſayd. It is in vaine knight, whatſoeuer thou art, to paſſe further here, thou or anie elſe, without the Duke my Maiſters leaue. Don Galfeo hereat conceiued ſuch ire by theſe wordes, that alſo drawing foorth his Sword ſayde. Downe with the treacher that will denie vs the entrie. But Don Bellianis with his ſword put himſelf among, them, that in little ſpace with great furie and force he ſlew aboue thirtie of them: which ſo amazed the reſt, that they began

to retire backe as farre as the ſtaires. But with the furie that poſſeſſed Don Bellianis hee ſo handled them, that in an euill houre they came to ſéeke him: & ſéeing don Galfeo aboue the reſt troubled him, ſtrooke him ſuch a blow on the ſword arme, that cut in two it fel on the earth: & after he gaue him another on ſhe head, that he cleft it down to his eies. Neuer was there ſéene a knight behaue himſelfe better among ſo many. But they preaſed on him in ſuch ſort, that he had like to haue bin greatly indā
                  gered: yet he driuing them all before him down ſtaires, made ſuch diſtraction of them, that for verie haſt they tumbled one vpon another: & he ſéeing them giue backe, followed them out of the pallace, & in their deſpight did beate them into a broade yarde, thinking better to defend himſelfe there then in ſo cloſe a roome: where he ſo vſed the ſtrength of his mighty armes, that he got a horſe, of many that ran looſe, wherwith he renewed his maſſacring of them. There was alreadie gathered much people of the Citie with their weapons, not knowing ye cauſe why ſo many were aſſembled in the dukes pallace, & when they ſaw them all vppon one knight, they helped him. Don Gallaneos knights, with more thē the third part of their fellowes dead, and ſéeing Don Gaifeo ſlaine, and how their treaſon for that time could not be effected, by the extreame valour of that knight, fled away. Don Bellianis not willing to follow them, turned towards the Dukes pallace, where taking one of them, he ſet his ſword to his throate, & threatned to kil him if he denied ye cauſe of their comming in that maner to ſéeke the knight of the goldē image, & in preſence of many of the city he confeſſed, how, commanded by their Lord Don Gallaneo, they came to murther him. What meant your Lord by doing ſo? (ſaid don Bellianis) I know no more then I haue ſaid (replied the man.) God 
                     •
                  ée praiſed (ſaid don Bellianis) that your Lords trecherie hath not taken effect. Then mounting his horſe, he rid 
                     •
                  o the tilt-yard, where he looked on euerie ſide, & ſawe how the dukes men retired back &: ſéeking for the Princes Arfileo and Don Bryanel, and not ſéeing them, he tooke a big launce, & put himſelf againſt

                  don Gallaneos knights, & the firſt he met he ouerthrew to the ground, doing the like by aboue thirtie before he brake it, and incouraging the Dukes fayling troupes, renewed their fight ſo fiercely vpon the Courtiers, that they feared to looſe what they had before woonne. And like a man diſtract, not ſeeing his companions, ſo wounded his aduerſaries, that happie was hee that furtheſt could get from him, wherby euerie one made him ample paſſage to go by, for neuer a blow he gaue either with ſword or lance, but he ouerthrow a knight. Which the Sophie ſéeing, cryed out: Oh mightie Mahomet, what admirable ſtrength is this of your knight. But all this while Don Gallaneo and his knights had ſo roundly beſet Don Brianell and Arfileo, that it was impoſſible they ſhould eſcape aliue, though moſt valiantly they defended themſelues. When there arriued a knight to Don Gallaneo, and in his eare told him all that befell his coſin Don Galfeo with Don Bellianis, who being not far off from them, he poynted to him and ſayd. This is the knight that ſo hath maſſacred your men. Don Gallaneo turning to ſée him, ſawe how with an incredible furie hee aſſayled his knights that had incompaſſed the Princes, and that with foure blowes hee ſtrooke downe foure knights, and making little account of the reſt, alighted, and ſeeing they woulde not ſuffer the Princes to mount a horſebacke, ſayde, that euerie one might heare: Gette vppon this my horſe Prince Arſileo, for ſince with ſo great trecherous cowardize you are vſed, make it knowne euen on theyr deareſt liues. They knowing his voyce, conceiued ſuch ioy, that almoſt they knewe not what they did: who 
                     •
                  oing about to take a freſh horſe, ſo manie knights layde on them, that they could not doo it. Which Don Bellianis ſeeing, and howe it wared late to be reuenged on Don Gallaneo, taking Don Brianell in his armes, in deſpight of all the knights ſette him on his horſe: and beeing on his owne, with rage and thirſtie furie of long deſired reuen
                     •
                  e, beganne ſuch deſtruction on them, that hee made wide paſſage for himſelfe and his companions. And ſéeing

two Gyants come againſt him, of foure which Don Gallaneo hadde brought to the Jouſtes for the purpoſe aforeſayde, hee prspared for them, and receiuing one of theyr blowes on his ſheeld, that was ſo cruell that it cutte it in péeces, hée ſo wounded the other with like ſtrength, that falling on his fingers it cutte them off cleane with the mace hee helde: but the other did ſecond ſo huge a ſtroke, that hee was forced to holde by his horſe necke. There was neuer Tiger ſéene more fierce, nor Lion more furious, then Don Bellianis ſéemed, who rayſing himſelfe on the ſtirrops, and holding his ſword with both hands, gaue him ſuch a terrible blow on his thigh, that it entered as far as the bone, wherewith he ſhortly after died. What knight ſo valiant may this be (replied the Soldane yt doth ſuch wonders, I would willingly haue had the knight of the golden Image here, yt he might trie his force with this. That knights deeds be not comparable to theſe (ſaid the princeſſe Perſiana to her father the more to couer her intent of any thing that might after happen: for wel ſhe knew that Don Bellianis would be in that battell, & ſo iudged that was he. But he following in ſearch of Don Gallaneo, founde him at laſt not farre from the Soldanes ſcaffolde, where likewiſe the Princeſſe was, and as a ſwift hounde that hath his game on foote, fearing to looſe it, ſo did he againſt Don Gallaneo, wh
                     •
                   alſo made towards him, and méeting, ſtrooke each other ſuch puiſſant blowes, that the ſparkles of fire flewe from their armour. But don Gallaneo tumbled to the grounde ſore wounded. When don Bellianis ſo ſawe him, hee ſuddainely alighted from his horſe: ſo did many of don Gallaneos Knights, to helpe theyr maiſter. Then arriued the Duke Alfiron with foure thouſand knights, and ſette ſo furiouſly vppon them, that maugre their force, hee made them retyre back. In which time Don Bellianis wounded him againe, wherewith the ſword fell out of his hand. And the duke ſéeing him on foot, & that to be the time for his reuenge, ranne againſt his horſe, and ouerturned him flatte on the ground, & trampled twiſe or thriſe on him with his horſes féete,

making him breath his laſt. Which the Souldane ſéeing, cryed out, commanding him he ſhuld not hurt him: but the Duke made as though he heard him not. Whereupon the Souldane ſéeing the little account was made of him, like to burſt with extreame gréefe, deſcended, ſtill more and more renewing his laments for Don Gallaneos death: crying kill kill the traytors, that ſo villainouſly in my preſence murthered my ſonne. All the people at the Souldanes commaund, ſet on the Duke and don Belliani: whence the Jou
                     ••
                  s beganne, for tryumphe and pleaſure were turned to death and diſtruction, that the fieldes flowed with bloud.
               The kings of Armenia and Perſia that ſawe the battell ſo hot and cruell, went to the Souldane and ſaid to him. (Suffer not dread Souereign) all this company to periſh, ſéeing you know the Duke hath as much power to defend, as you to offend him. Therefore commaund the fight to ceaſe: for if the Duke be guiltie of Don Gallaneos death, you may by lawe conuict him. The Souldane knowing it to be ſo, and that before the Duke dyed by that meanes, none would remaine with life, tooke this counſaile, and commaunding the battell there to end, ſaid thus to the Duke. Get you out of my Perſepolis, (Duke) vnleſſe you will heere dye, vnhearde, and vnexcuſed.
               The Prince Don Bellianis beeing with him, bad him obey the Souldanes commaunde, aſſuring himſelfe their purpoſe could not but haue a good end. The Duke taking his counſaile, very ioyfully commaunded the retrayt to be ſounded: whereat the knights as well of the one as of the other partie, left their fight, returning euery one to their Captaine, attending his commaund. Who were here able to expreſſe what great gladneſſe the Princeſſe Perſiana conceiued with Don Gallaneos death? which leaſt, it might be diſcerned, called out vpon all the knights of her gar
                     •
                  , to impriſon, and bring before her ye Duke, and the Knight that committed that trecherie. The guarde replyed they might not, becauſe the Souldane was there: who

returned extreame ſorrowfull, and ſo furious with rage, that very fire ſéemed to ſparkle from his eyes, that all which behold were aſtonied at his ſterne lookes. And although the Kings of Teſſiffanty intreated him to returne to his pallace, yet hee could like no counſaile, ſaue what ſauoured of reuenge. But turning to the dead bodye, ſawe his Daughter bewayle his vntimely death, and knowing ſhe alwaies refuſed willingly to marry him, and now ſeeing her gréeuous laments, for his deceaſe, ſuſpected it was done by her appointment, and not regarding his Fathers loue, but gouerned with rage, tooke her from the ground and ſaid.
               It bootes thée not nowe Princeſſe to diſſemble, for I am ſure don Gallaneo was ſlaine with your conſent, and ſince you would not obeye mee when I would, I will now puniſh you as you deſerue.
               Whereuppon hee commaunded her to bee ſhut vppe in a Tower and ſurelye guarded, not hearing her ſpeak. And going thence, commaunded all the people of the Cittie to arme them, intending to impriſon the Duke in his houſe, imagining don Gallaneos death had bin with his conſent: & greatly gréeued becauſe hee coulde not knowe that Knight that ſo indaungered him in the battell, not thinking on don Bellianis, hauing left him ſore wouuded.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  
                     What happened to don Bellianis without Perſepolis. How he deliuered two damſels from certain knights & whēce they were: and how he ſlew the dragon of the Riphean wood.
                  
               
               
                  THe Duke ſéeing his purpoſe thitherto ſort as he wiſhed, with don Gallaneos death, reſolued altogither to follow the counſaile of the knight of the golden image. Wherupon he returned to his pallace: and the night hauing darkened the world, don Bellianis left him in the plaine fielde, faining to goe out of the Citie, though all the knights there indured to ſtay him, deſiring to know him ere he went. But getting from them all, eſcaped out of the Citie, the better in that obſcuritie to returne vnknowne to his lodging: and he had not gone far, but his wounds began extreamely to gréeue him, inſomuch he could not ſtay himſelfe on horſebacke. for with their new bléeding, they opened, making him ſéeme a fountain with ſo many ſprings: & ſeeing himſelf ſo ill, he thought he ſhuld not be able to return to Perſepolis, vnleſſe his woūds were bound vp. And ſo alighting from his horſe, hee ſawe two damſels come towards him, ryding in ſuch haſte as he thought they did rather fly then on their palfrayes ſwiftly runne. Don Bellianis putting himſelfe afore them, ſaid. What is the cauſe (fayre Ladies) that maketh you ryde ſo faſt? Oh for Gods ſake ſtaye vs not, but if you will ſaue your life followe vs, and by the waye wee will declare the whole circumſtance vnto you. Heere will it be better (ſaid he) and among theſe trées you may hide your ſelues. So they taking his counſaile, followed his aduice, & beginning to diſcouer their aduēture: loe they perceiued through thoſe trees a terrible Dragon, ſo fearfull in ſight, that it ſtruck amazement in the beholders, and although the night

were very dark, yet ſuch light iſſued frō him, through the great abundance of fire procéeding from his iawes, that it ſeemed h
                     •
                  ls mouth opened to ſwallow them at that inſtant. The Ladies being ouercome with feare, betooke thēſelues about the knight of the golden Image, hauing loſt the power of their pretended flight. But he ſéeing it was no time to be idle, roſe frō the groūd with his ſword in hand, and made againſt that helliſh monſter, at that time wiſhing rather to haue his armor giuē him by Bellona buckled about his body, thē be inueſted Emperor of a larger Empyre then his fathers. At this inſtant the dragō with an infernal fury, flying againſt him, ouerthr
                     •
                  w him with his breſt, & returning to catch him with his talēts, to pluck him in péeces. He whō feare neuer could blind, lept aſide, but with great difficulty: for being ouerreached, the cruel beaſt wt one of his pawes drew him to him, & pearſt both armor and fleſh, euen to ye bones with his deadly claws: but the knight forsaking his ſword ſtabd his dagger 4. or 5. times into his heart vnder his wings. The fearful beaſt through extremitie of pain left him, ſtretching himſelfe, & labouring in the pangs of death. He was of ſuch a wonderful greatnes, that he was aboue 25. foot lōg, in bignes biger then a great bull, whoſe like was neuer ſéene by any. After the knight of the golden image had finiſhed this hautie déed, & moſt vnequall fight, he fell on his knées, rendring thanks to his heauenly protector, that had deliuered him from ſo great danger, though with feare to ſcape the perill of his mortall wounds, wondring how he had blood left in his veines, hauing loſt ſuch great quantitie therof. And going to the damzels that with feare were not able to flie, he ſaid. Feare now no more (faire Ladies) for the cauſer of your timorous traunce, ſhall put you in no further perill. They recouering their be
                     ••
                  mmed ſenſes, ſcarce knowing what to ſay, the one lifting vp her voice replied. We cannot (ſir knight) expreſſe the many thanks due by vs, for this ſo great good worke, whoſe greatnes our merits can neuer deſerue, vnleſſe by memorating through the earth your high proweſſes, that the perpetuall remembrance of this ample act may

neuer be drowned in the blacke center of obliuion. And ſéeing (as it ſhould ſéeme) you were before wounded, we beſéech you to withdraw your ſelfe within this forreſt, that being vnſéen of paſſengers, we may dreſſe them. I will obey any thing you ſhal commaud (ſaid he) and ſo ſléeping among thoſe trées, they diſarmed him, and began to ſearch his wounds (being very ſkilful in that miſterie) and greatly meruailed how it had bin poſſible he eſcaped death: yet though diſpairing of his ſafetie, performed their dutie with all diligence, and hauing dreſſed his woundes, they demanded what he determined to doo. To whome he anſwered. We will preſently to the Citie, that I may there haue my wounds cured? But how came you hither? ſaid they, béeing thus wounded: whereto he anſwered Doubting I ſhould be bloodleſſe through the great quantitie that thereof I had loſt, and through faintneſſe, being able to goe no further, heere I ſtayed to binde them. Shall we (ſaid they) take your Armour with vs to the citie? No, leaue it here replyed he) I little néede it reſpecting the occaſion of my going thyther. And ſo mounting on horſebacke (but with much paine) and the Damſels on their palfraies, he by the way thus ſpake. Tell me I pray you the occaſion of your flight, when I firſt met you? To whome they anſwered. You ſhall know (Sir Knight) we do belong to the moſt excellent peereleſſe and aboue all the moſt fayre, the fayreſt Princeſſe Floreſbella, that hauing ſent vs to a wiſe woman, whoſe havitacion is farre hence, on a moſt craggy and barren Mountaine (and Bellona is her name) to knowe the fortunes of a beautious Princeſſe conducted by her (called Aurora, of whom ſince that time 
                     ••
                   newes hath béene heard, through the death of King Pompeiano her father, trayterouſlye ſlaine by Don Gallaneo, and his Kingdome woonne by a ſonne of this Sophye, called the knight of the images: And we hauing heard that the ſaid Sophy now marryeth his Daughter, to the ſaide don Gallaneo, diſguiſedly we came to ſée the ſaid feſtiuals: and cōming not far hence, we were ſodainly ſurpriſed by a moſt fearefull gyant accompanied with ſome

twenty knights almoſt in bigneſſe like himſelfe: who hauing taken vs, (in the knights approach) ſpying a farre of ſome 20. knights. wee crying to them for helpe, yeelded to our requeſt. But the Gyant and his knights at the firſt incounters vnhorſt aboue the halfe of them. And ſo wee foreſéeing the ill ſucceſſe like to inſue, betooke our ſelues to the ſwift courſes of our palfrayes, till wee met you. And now, (Sir knight) for all wee diſcourſt the ſucceſſe of our fortunes, yet ſtill feare the ouertaking of thoſe vnciuill knights: becauſe through our weakenes wee are like to ſuffer the cruell ſtroke of none ſparing death. So approaching neere the cittie, they deſcryed three men clad all in armour, who hauing them within viewe, kn
                     •
                  we the Damzells: whereat they ſaide. Our trauell is now at an ende, for wee haue found what wee ſought.
               The Ladies perceiuing them to bee Gyants knights, were like to fall from their palfrayes: to whome the knight ſaid. Yee now ſhall not ſcape vs, but ſhall go to our Lord and Maiſter the Gyant Filliſtore, that ſends for you. Don Bellianis became exceeding wrath, ſeeing himſelfe both ſore wounded and without armour: yet he thus ſaide to them. In courteſie (braue knights) I pray you opooſe not your vyolent handes againſt poore diſtreſſed Ladies, that with mee are going. We thought (replyed they) you would content your ſelfe with your owne liberty, medling not with theirs: but ſince you wold not know when you were well, you ſhall alſo goe with vs: wherewith they would haue bound him. He perceiuing yt his courteous wordes preuailde not, ſtepped to one and ſnatched his launce out of his hand in diſpight of him and his fellowes, tumbling him headlong to the ground. The others would haue ſtricken him with their ſpeares: but he warily ſcaped their blowes, and fiercely running at one, he thruſt the launce through his body, that lifeleſſe hée meaſured his length on the earth. The third ſtrake at him ſo mightily, that had hee not lightlye ſtept aſide (beeing as hee went vnarmed) hee had made his launce appeare at his backe: yet neuertheleſſe he ranne his ſpeare

through his thigh: ſo he féeing himſelfe fore wounded, drewe his neuer failing ſword, and gaue him ſo cruell a blow on his ſhoulders, that hee cut him downe right, that his parted bodie fell on each ſide of his horſe. Don Bellianis going to diſmount, to diſpatch him that firſt fell, felt his thigh pind to his Saddle with a trunchion of the Speare: but ſéeing the Knight did not ſturre, left him. All this while the Damzell ſtoode amazed with wonder, ſéeing ſuch deſtruction in ſo ſhort time, and with extreame ioy they thus ſayde. Wee can neuer ende (ſir Knight) the celebrating of your moſt high and more then humane chiualries, though thereby we be not credited, which for all our ſelues haue ſéene them, yet their admiration ſo aſconiſheth vs. that we ſcarce dare acknowledge them for true. Hee hearing himſelfe thus commended replied. Ouerpaſſing theſe vnworthy prayſes, let vs (faire Ladies) enter the citie, for my great woūds require ſpéedy remedy: and know yt your trauel is now ended: for I do belong vnto the Princeſſe Aurora: whō when you ſée before any, diſſemble her knowledge, for her preſent occaſions ſo require it. They ioyful of ſuch newes, anſwered they would. And ſo kéeping on their pace, they came to the Dukes pallace, where they found al the knights in armor. Don Bellianis diſcouering himſelf to a knight intreated to lead him to his lodging, if he could, vnknowne to the duke til the next morning. Who replied, he might not, for the duke ſaid for him with the reſt of the knights, not minding to ſléepe vntil his cōming. Thē helpe me off my horſe (ſaid don Bellianis.) The knight going to do it, ſpied the ſpears trunchion, which he had not taken away, fearing to bléed himſelf to death. And the knight ſaid: you are ſo ſore wounded, that it were beſt I cal the duke. Unhorſe me firſt (ſaid don Bellianis) & take out this trunchion. The knight did ſo, which was ſo imbrued in his blood, wherwith it ſtuck ſo faſt in his fleſh, that the drawing thereof ſo extreamly increaſed his pain, that after he was not able to ſtand, but was caried in two knights arms, into the hal, wher they foūd ye duke, with many other Lords: alſo accompanied with the princes don Brianell,
                  
and Arfileo, who though they were greatly wounded, were determined preſently to ride in demaund of the knight of the golden Image, if they heard not of him. But ſéeing him come into the hall in that maner, waxed pale, thinking him wounded to death, and ran to him. And the princeſſe Aurora that firſt ſpied him, was firſt that approached, who with teares in great aboundance trickling downe her iuory-roſed chéekes, to ſee him in ſuch danger: without impeach of any, and reſpect of none, fell on her knees before him, kiſſing his hands, both with ioy and gréefe, inſomuch that in her good will towardes him it may be beléeued ſhe paſſed his cooſen Arfileo. The prince don Bellianis raiſing hir from the ground, and moſt kindly imbraſing hir, ſaid. Uſe not ſo much vndeſerued courteſie (moſt ſoueraigne ladie) to ſo meane a knight, of ſuch ſmall fame as my ſelfe, whoſe litle ſeruices will neuer merit any of theſe fauors, except in coū
                  ting mee as one of your meaneſt ſeruitors. Then were theſe gréetings interrupted by Don Brianell, and the reſt, that receiued him with no leſſe courteſies & imbracings, thē if he were their generall cōmander, eſpecially the duke, who néeds would welcome him on his knées, though he knewe not his high diſcent, ſaue that he acknowledged he had by his means repoſſeſt his whole eſtate, & life, and with infinit gladnes he thus began. I greatly wonder moſt renowmed knight of the golden image) how you were able to be at the tourney, after I here ſawe the great proweſſe by you done. To whom he replied, I haue moſt excellent Duke) done no act worthie your memorie. So wil ſaid he) none of Don Galfeos Knights affirme. For at our returne we found aboue two hundred of them with their maſters ſlain. And we intreat you to dilate vnto vs the cauſe of their cōming to our Pallace, and what after happened to you ſince your departure, hauing ſtaid ſo long, returning thus cruelly wounded. Then thus (replied hee) they purpoſed treacherouſly 
                     •
                  o murther me, though by the helpe of the immortall Gods, their intent was fruſtrated. The reſt I am not able to diſcourſe, for my wounds will not permit mee: but of theſe Ladies ſhall you knowe the euent of all things, wheſe good intertainment I

requeſt euen as to my Lady and Miſtreſſe the Princeſſe héere preſent.
               Whereuppon Don Bellianis was carryed to his lodging, and layde in his bed, where by the Damzells hee was againe dreſſed, who greatly wondred at his many and dangerous woundes: and hauing done, they left him alone, quietlye to take his reſt: for his extreame paine, chiefly of the wound of his thigh, made him rore like a bul bayted with many dogs. The Ladies beeing come foorth, were moſt curteouſly entertained of the Lordes, greatly admyring the haughty deedes they heard of that valorous knight. Straight were the tables couered (good order béeing giuen for the Pallaces ſafety) and they all ſat downe to ſupper, where the Damzells diſcourſed the acts of the knight of the goulden image, in their preſence done, ſaying. Scarce dare wee report his admirable Cheualries, leaſt our wordes bee not credited: yet haue wee beene eye witneſſes of his deedes. Then were they intreated by the knights to vnfold them, ſaying that if they had ſéene what him before happened▪ they would little eſtéeme thoſe they ſeared to rehearſe.
               There can none bee comparable to t h
                     •
                  ſe (
                     〈…〉
                   Damzels:) and therefore will wée ſatiſfie you: & ſo recounted all that him befell after they met with him, with words of high renowne, to the enterniſing of his glorie. Whoſoeuer ſhal heare (ſayde the Duke) the admyring wonders of this knight, may hardly beleeue them: And ſure I am no knight will euer performe what hee hath done in ſo ſhort time: and ſo reiterating al his exploytes (as heereafore are ſ
                     •
                  t downe.) Oh what Peſterity will beleeue in future ages theſe no leſſe great then admirable proweſſes, of this not onely victorious, but happy and neuer ſufficient praiſed knight. Theſe and ſuch like matters did theſe Princes 
                     •••
                  a
                     •
                  e of at table concerning Don Belliani. Th
                     •
                   Princeſſe had by 
                     〈…〉
                   knowne the Damzels: and they h
                     •
                  r, yet eyther thought the contrary by their ſilence. But the 
                     〈…〉
                   imagining the cauſe was, that they were ſo

forewarned by don Bellianis, ſaid ſhe would withdrawe herſelfe to reſt, and take thoſe Damzells with her, and was conducted to their chamber. The knights after her departure ſetled themſelues to the ordering of all their neceſſaries, touching their manaced perill: for they had intelligeuce how the Sophy hauing vnderſtood of don Galfeos death, at his departing from the turney, by ſome of the ſcaped knights: yet not informed of the trueth, but that going to the Dukes Pallace to accompany him to the turney, hee was there flai
                     •
                  e. Whereupon willed al in the Citty ſhould arme themſelues. But the Duke and his faction little feared him: hauing within the ſaid Cittie aboue fifteene thouſand knights his friendes all in armes, in readynes well appointed at commaund. The Princeſſe beeing in her chamber, made faſt the doore, before whom the damzels humbled themſelues, crauing to kiſſe her handes: But the not ſuffering it, imbraced thē with great ioy, to whom they thus ſpake.
               What hath become of your royall perſon? Oh moſt excellent Madame, whoſe loſſe wee could not but imagine, hauing béene ſo toſte and ſubiect to miſfortunes, and calamities? Wee cannot (great Princeſſe declare the ſufficiencie of our ioy conceiued with your preſence. And no leſſe will the Princeſſe Floriſbella receiue: who onely for this cauſe ſent vs to our Aunt the ſage Bellona: Wherefore wee beſeech you, tell vs who theſe knights bee, whoſe perſonages, compoſitions, and excellent conditions deſerue admiration, eſpeciallye him that brought vs to the inioying of your company. I (replyed ſhe) knowe no other, but that I met them in a moſt ſtrange place, and I thanke the immortall Gods, vnconſtrained they condiſcended to the promiſe of their aydes, & already my fathers moſt vnfortunate death hath partly beene reuenged, for this knight hath ſlaine Don Gallaneo. And thus continued their chat without ſleeping, till the better twoo partes of the night were paſte.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  
                     What the Sophy did after the battell: and how the greene armour of Don Bellianis was brought him to the citty,
                  
               
               
                  THere is no tongue able to expreſſe the greate gréefe that the Sophy did conceiue by Don Gallaneo, and his Coſins death, whome he dearely loued: and ſéeing that the Duke kept within his Pallace, hée ſent earlye the next morning aboue a thouſand knightes to ſeeke him in the greene armour: for hee determined by all meanes to knowe who hee was, hauing vnderſtood hee was not gone home with the Duke.
               The knightes obeying his commaund, came to the place where the vgly monſtrous beaſt laye ſlaine, the ſight wherof ſo feared their horſes, that not able to ſtaye them, in diſpight of their ryders, they ranne away with them. The like timorouſnes ſurpryſed the knights, beholding the monſtrouſſie of the dragon, that they durſt not approach to diſcerne what he was: yet ſeeing hee ſturred not, one of them taking Hart▪ agrace, eſteeming himſelfe leſſe fearefull then the reſt, alighted on foote, and trembling went where the dead beaſt lay, and ſéeing him not mooue, with the huge quantity of blood wherein he wallowed, called his companions, bidding them not feare, for it was not aliue: who well viewing it, were greatly aſtoniſhed to ſée ſo deformed a thing, and ſearching where hee had beene ſtrucken, they ſawe his woundes aboue the legges and winges, whereby they iudged the knight that had ſlaine him, could not but bee ſorely hurt, by beeing ſo nigh, that ye wounds ſhewed they had beene beene made with a dagger. And one following the ſignes of the bloode, found the Damzels mantells, that they had left, with the knights armour, which preſently they knewe, and aſſured themſelues hee ſl
                     •
                  we that moſt

vgly beaſt: in reſpect whereof they nothing eſteemed what hee had performed to their coſtes in the turney, with the ſight of y•  prodigious and infernall monſter ſlaine by his handes. And ſo they tooke great compaſſion on him for the much blood hee there had ſhed: & ſo finding no ſigne nor tracing of his, to finde him, and ſeeing him armourleſſe, reſolued to returne vnto the Sophy, and tell him what they had ſeene, preſenting him the knights armour, and the damzells mantells: Wherewith going out of the wood, lighted on the two knightes ſlaine, and turning them ouer, much muſed at the horrible blowe which the one had, whoſe like they neuer had ſéene before: and going away, they met with foure knights, that knowing the Damzells mantells, ſaid: Wee beſeech you (gentle knights) tell vs where wee may finde the Ladies, owners of thoſe mantells. Wee know not (ſayde they- but why doe you demaunde it? To know what became of a knight that accompanieth them. Why ſeeke yee him? (demaunded they) for wee alſo would imploy the vtmoſt of our power to finde and carrye him to our Lord the Soldane. Then know (ſaid the foure) that the Gyant Filliſtone (wel knowne of you) commaunded vs to finde him, to giue him his due chaſtiſement: Though truely yeſter night hee performed ſuch an attempt, that wee beleeue there breatheth not in the vniuerie any able to doe the like: for three knights of our company going to ſeeke thoſe damzells (which from vs fledde, and about to take them againſt his wil▪ wounded theſe two as you ſee, leauing the other on the earth little better th
                     •
                  m dead. And ſince wee vnderſtood they be all within the Citty.
               Then go along with vs: for if they be there, they cannot be hid. And beſides theſe things hee hath done others of greater admiration. So in ſuch talke they continued their way to the Citty, till they arryued at the Souldanes Pallace, who ſeing the Knights armour, thought they alſo brought him: which greatly gladded him, deſcending halfe way to meete them, demaunded for the knight: to whom they anſwered. We bring

him not (right mighty Soueraigne) but come to tell you the greateſt wonder ye euer you heard of, for hee alone hath put to death the mighty Dragon of the Ryphean woodes, your whole kingedomes deſtruction. Oh mightye Ioue (ſaide the Soldane) who may beleeue, but with great difficulty ſuch a thing, except his eyes ſhould ſee it. Surely (dread Lord) it is ſo (replyed they) and wee iudge by the great aboundance of of blood in that place ſhed, that he cannot but be almoſt deade. Moreouer hee hath done another acte of no leſſe wonder: for coming vnarmed with our two Damzells, hee combated with three knights, and vanquiſht them, cleauing one downe right in the middle, and it is alſo ſaid that hee came vnto the cittie. The Soldane ſtood muſing with himſelfe whither the knight of the golden Image might bee he, diſguiſedly entring the tourney for the Dukes ſake. Yet thought hee this vnlikely, knowing hee remained ſore wounded at the combate had with the knights of the vnhappy bridge. But ſtill perſwaded himſelfe it ſhould be hee, imagining no knight in all the citie ſo hardy, as for to attempt the like. And ſeeing the Knight could not be found, he commanded all the people of the cittie to armes, and came to his Pallace, for he determined to aſſault the Duke: who fearing the ſame, had all his men in readines. Great was the hurlyburly through the cittie among the popularity inquiring one of another what they ſhould doe, foreſéeing ſome cruell battell to be impendent ouer their heades.
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  
                     How the kings of Armenia and Teſsifanty conferred with the Sophe of the order taken betweene them, about the Duke: and how he preſented himſelfe before the Sophy.
                  
               
               THe doubtful ſtate of theſe tumultious cares on eyther ſide, hanging on ye vncertaine arbitrating ſentence of fortune: the rumour of the comunalty of the Citty ſeemed no leſſe then if the vtter ruine therof were euidently knowne. Wherby the Sold an ſuppoſing many inclyning to the dukes fa
                     •
                  tion, proclaymed by ſound of trumpet, that none ſhuld aide

nor fauor him on paine of death, and take him for a taitor, for he onely purpoſed to do according to law and iuſtice, if hee were found guiltie. The beauteous Princeſſe Perſiana well heard of theſe procéedings, whoſe woes for them penetrated her tender heart, though it was thought ſhe ſore lamented, becauſe her father had impriſoned her. But ſhee ſending for the Kinges of Arminea and Teſſifantie, they preſently went to her, who being alone, admitted them to her preſence, whom ſhe with manie teares intreated to become mediators betwixt the Soldan and the duke, & that they would not conſent to the terminating of thoſe affaires to be by the euent of warre, ſeeing in the ende ſhe only ſhould be the only looſer, her honor being toſſed too and fro on ſuch vndeſent trials. They with great willingnes promiſed to do the vttermoſt of their poſſibilitie: and ſéeing the matter ſuffered no delay, and that they like wiſe ventured ſome part of their owne, in that they were the dukes neare allies, did then take leaue of the princeſſe, and departed towards the Soldan, whom they found with all his men readie to march. So approching to him, he greatly reioyced with their preſence, thereby thinking they wold ioine with him, ſuppoſing at firſt they were gone to the duke. Whereupon he courteouſly made out to méet them: who (their cuſtomed honor performed) humbled themſelues to kiſſe his hands: but he would not by any means conſent thereto: whereat they thus began. Alas (dread Lord what pretends theſe your troupes, whoſe ſudden armes cannot but threaten death, & vtter deſolatiō to this citie: but moſt of al what meanes your ſelfe to be in perſon in ſo dāgerous an enterpriſe, hauing ſo many hardy knights able to attempt any important action at your cōmand? I haue neuer (replied the Sophy) whoſe dutious ſeruice & loyaltie to me hath deſerued ſuch cōfidence as theſe affaires require, ſpecially ſince the abſence of the prince my ſon. And well may you ſée the treaſon done againſt mee by the duke▪ for I am ſure it was both by his conſent, 
                     •
                   my daughters cōmand done, & am certain that he which all theſe harmes hath wrought, is the knight of the golden image, & ſo diſcourſed

what he had vnderſtood of the knights, and how he was ſo ſore wounded, that his life was in ſuſpence, and alſo that he was the ſame that ſlue Don Galfeo. All which was true: for the diſtreſſed knight was in ſuch caſe, that all his companions greatly doubted his recouerie: for which their ſorrow was ſo great, that they wiſhed to diſburden themſelues therof▪ they might be euen in their enemies chiefeſt troops. For in readineſſe & willingneſſe of mind, they wanted nought but the beginning of the conflict. The two kings not a litle maruailed at the Soldans diſcourſe. Whereupon the King of Armenia, tooke occaſion to ſpeake as followeth. The knight of the golden Image, is not in that greatneſſe of fault as you iudge him in (moſt mighty Lord:) for if you would but in the equall ballance of right reaſon, weigh the cauſe you may plainly ſée how greatly Don Gallaneo laboured to kill the aduenterous knight, and the Prince Arfileo, againſt all the lawes and rights of Turney, nought regarding your awfull clamours to the contrarie: but then more procured their deaths: whereat no maruell if the Knight of the golden Image, and the Duke, in thir owne defence did ſlay him. And we know, that the knight in the gréene armour was he of the golden Image, for we learned it of ſome of them that fled when don Galfeo died▪ that he which ſlue him, and vanquiſhed them, was the ſame that returned victor of the Turney, So that you may well thinke he determined to do by them, what they did to him, and his. Of all which things you ſhould better informe yourſelfe, before you come to theſe extreames. But if notwithſtanding, you will perſeuer in theſe rigorous determinations, conſider the many thouſand deaths thereby like to enſue: for the Duke will indure no wrong. Remember alſo (great Lord) the knight of the golden Image is he (though the chiefeſt cauſe of Don Gallaneos death) that fréed you from two great, inconueniences, one from the aduenture of the vnhappie Bridge, the other by the death of the Rypliean dragon, and that hereof conſiſteth your owne honour in your daughters innocencie, and that the Duke may plead his cauſe, and we our ſelues will go

with him, and procure this matter to be tried by combat, or by any other means by you thought fitter, which if you grant, you ſhall eternally bind vs to your allegiance. If you cauſe the duke (replied the Sophy) to come and ſubmit himſelfe, I promiſe you there ſhall be no wrong proffered him, nor any thing contrarie to the right of law & iuſtice, which I onely do, that if any of Don Gallaneos kindred ſhould expect any reuenge at my hands for his death, they may know what I haue done herein▪ And hereupon I pawne my kingly faith, and royall word vnto you. Then ſaid they, vppon this order you may diſmiſſe your men vnto their ſeuerall homes: for we will performe what we haue promiſed. Whereupon the Soldane commanded euerie man to retyre to his quarter, he himſelfe going to his Court, to expect the kings returne, who ſtraight repayred to the Dukes Pallace, where they greatly reioyced to ſee the good order, and care by them kept: inſomuch that the Soldan was not there able to enter by force of armes, though he brought all his forces redoubled. They being their demaunded for the Duke, and vnderſtanding that he was in don Bellianis Chamber, thither went to ſpeake with him: where they ſaw how the knight of the golden Image had his wounds by thoſe Dumzels dreſſed. The duke receiued them according to their ſtate, & would haue led them into another roome, but they would not, looking on the kings wounds, which they iudged the greateſt yt euer they had ſéene, wherat they much ſorowed, ſuppoſing he wold not ſcape them, though they were greatly ſatiſfied to ſée with what nimblenes thoſe ladies dreſſed him. And hauing don, they thus ſaid: with ſuch ſurgeons (ſir knight) you ought to féele halfe the paine inforced by your wounds: wherto he anſwered. It is ſo great lords) for though I ſhould féele neuer ſo much, this is double cō
                  fort vnto me, for elſe I ſhould not be made happie with the fruition of your royall preſence, ioyntly with the dutie you bind me to, in vouchſafing the remembrance of ſo meane a knight, being thus pitiouſly wounded, & not able to leaue my bed to imploy my ſelf in theſe troubleſom affaires of my lord ye duke. Take no

care for them. Sir knight, ſaid the king of Teſſifantie, for we come to none other effect, and hope we ſhall haue no great deniall about them, and though we ſhould find any contradiction, yet the duke ſhal be ſo fauored, as he ſhal reaſonably doubt nothing that may to him happē. And they declared ye maner of the appointment made with the Soldane, ſo that the dukes iuſtice ſhould be euidently ſéene, and be at libertie to anſwere all obiections, or elſe preſent his champion to trie it in the battell, againſt whoſoeuer ſhould at his hands demaund the death of Don Gallaneo, and that in meane ſpace, the duke would yéeld himſelfe to priſon or we for him: all which was betwéene him and vs ſo agréed. And know (Sir knight) it is certainely bruted abroad, that he which vanquiſhed the Tourney and was cauſe of Don Gallaneos death, with his coſins Don Galfeo, and that ſlew the Riphian Dragon, and the Giants Filiſtones thrée knights, is your ſelf. Don Bellianis ſomwhat altered his countenance hearing this, yet ſéeing the Sophie and others knewe all his doings, faintly made this replie. Firſt mightie Lordes) haue a care in what they demaund of the Duke, and after wée ſhall haue time (if I eſcape theſe woūds) to prouide for al things elſe. And moreouer, on my faith, the Soldan deales vnaduiſedly and vniuſtly in his demaunds againſt the Duke, and ſhould not make account of two ſuch traitors as Don Gallaneo and Galfeo, whom if in caſe I did ſtay, I did verie well, conſidering with what trecherie the one would haue murthered me in my bed, and the other my companions in the Tourney: and had I bin in that ſtate at more eaſe, I had better with my déeds ſhewen, what I cannot ſo well now expreſſe in words. They were all amazed to ſée with what paſſion Don Bellianis pronounced theſe ſpéeches, and they perceiuing hee had reaſon, would procéed no further in that talke, but turning to the duke, prayed him to reſolue with himſelfe to do what they required. I will do (replied he) neither more nor leſſe in any thing, then what the knight of the golden Image ſhall commaund me. I humbly kiſſe your hand (ſayde he) for this your high fauour,

though in all things elſe it is well knowne that my dutie binds me to obey you. But to our matter: I am of opinion, ſauing better iudgement, and repo
                     •
                  ing our confidence on the royall words of theſe great kings, you may feareleſſe preſent your ſelfe before the Soldane: for I truſt you ſhall haue no iniurie offered you. Thereof be aſſured (ſaid the kings) for ſo the Soldane hath vowed. The damſels that came with don Bellianis, after he killed the dragon, ſtepping to him ſayde. Wee haue heard (Sir knight) the Princeſſe Perſiana is in a ſtrong tower impriſoned, by the commandement of the Soldane her father▪ wherefore conſider what beſt in this caſe may be done, talking as little as you may, becauſe of indangering your wounds and your ſelfe. When the duke was departing, don Bellianis called to him Don Bryanell and Arfileo, and prayed them to accompanie the duke, and anſwere for the Princeſſe Perſiana and himſelfe, as occaſion ſhould be offered. They being all readſe, ſtraight tooke their way to the Soldanes Pallace, leauing the knight of the golden Image in talke with the Princeſſe Aurora, and Florisbellas damſels, which were both beautifull and wittie, greatly admiring his courage and magnanimitie, frō whoſe preſence they were not parted day nor night, but had placed their beds a little from his, the better to watch and help him at his néede, who (excepting the diuine powers of the omnipotent God) were cauſe of his health, beeing in that ſcience both ſingular and excellent.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               
                  
                     What happened to the Duke with the Soldane. Howe the Knight of the golden Image and the Princeſſe Perſiana were challenged for the deaths of don Gallaneo and Galfeo, by the fearefull Feliſtone and his brethren: and howe the challenge was accepted.
                  
               
               SO ſoone as the duke was arriued at the Soldanes pallace, with the companie mentioned in the precedent Chapter,

and thinking it vnméet to aduertiſe him therof, they al diſmounted, and on foot entred the great hall where the Sophy ſat: who, when he ſaw him come with his blood changed in his face, as being the man that mortally hated the duke, which now being nigh him▪ humbled himſelf on his knées, requeſting the kiſſing of his royall hands. You néed them not Duke (ſaid the Sophy) ſince you account your deſerts ſo meritorious, and of your ſelf ſo highly, that I ſending for you to appeare before me, vtterly denied it, and with all your power reſiſted my commandes. The Gods forbid I ſhould haue committed any ſuch offence (replied the Duke.) And well do you know (dread ſoueraigue) that I neuer eſtéemed in any your affaires, to hazard both life, and my whole eſtate in your ſeruice. But doubting (your highneſſe being full of ire) wold not hear me, according to the iuſtice of my cauſe, I rather choſe to withdraw my ſelfe vnto my lodging, where to this inſtant I remained: from whence I was now called bytheſe noble knights, to appeare before your mightineſſe. So being in this conference, there entred the hall thrée giants, the greateſt, vglieſt & fierceſt that any humane nature could produce: they were al armed ſauing ye heads, whoſe helms and ſhéelds were borne by their ſquires: on them attended 30. knights, not much inferior to thē in bigneſſe: all their outward garments were of mourning cloth, who went directly to the ſoldan, that throughly viewing them, greatly wōdred at their mō
                  ſtrous fierceneſſe. Loe one that was moſt deformed, and ſéemed to command the reſt, without dutie to the Soldan, began thus with a voice, whoſe hollow roring made all the hall reſounde. High & mightie lord we beléeue that ſmall is the notice come to your eares of vs, hauing but little traced thy dominiōs, althogh we haue endeuored with all our power, & the vtmoſt of our deſire, the aduācing of your houſe by our ſeruice, wherof your ſon the prince Perianeo is a ſufficient witneſſe, as the man in the wars of Antioch being tearmed the knight of the Image, we ayded, of him may you know I am king of Cyprus, otherwiſe called Felleſtone the fierce, brother to theſe knigts here preſent

that knowing you married the Princeſſe Perſiana to our coſin don Gallaneo of Antioch, we came to honor his nuptials: and arriuing néere this citie, two of my knights whō I ſent to ſeeke two damzels of my companie, were ſlaine, by one which I vnderſtood is called the knight of the golden Image, of whō there are alſo many tales bruted of their valour. Moreouer we were certified, that he and the duke Alfiron, ſlue in the turney moſt trecherouſly, the prince don Gallaneo, and his coſin don Galfeo. And thogh we are aſſured you wil execute on them the puniſhment that ſo vile treaſon requires (for wee haue vnderſtood the impriſonment of your daughter the princeſſe Perſiana, conſenter to their deaths.) Notwithſtanding, we being perſons to whō this aforeſaid matter concernes, do accuſe as wel the duke as the knight of the golden Image, with the princeſſe Perſiana your daughter, as authors, & actors of their deaths, and therfore traitors and malefactors. And I vow to approue it againſt thē both togither, or with what knight ſoeuer the princeſſe ſhall appoint in her defence: for I will not be coūted a giant nor king of the land where any of vs is knowne, if I make thē not preſently cōfeſſe this their treaſon, that you may chaſtiſe it as you ſhall better iudge: and herewith ended his ſpéech. The great rage conceiued by the knights, hearing themſelues called traitors, cannot be ſufficiently expreſt. The Soldan vnderſtanding of the Giant what he was, roſe from his ſeate to intertain him, as his ſtate required, intreating him to ſit downe. It bootes not (ſaid he) but only that ye ſend for theſe traitors, to anſwere my obiections: for I haue ſworne not to put off my armor, till I be ſatiſfied with my reuenge. The Duke ſtepping euen where the Giant was talking whō when he better ſaw his deformitie and bigneſſe (for though himſelfe were of a good ſtature, yet reached not to his middle) ſomewhat feared him: but remembring by what valiant knights he was backt, reſolutely made this anſwer to the giants former ſpéeches. If we had not heretofore heard, & now by experience ſeen thy great pride (king of Ciprus) we had reaſō to think no humane creature could haue procreated

a thing ſo monſtrous, and to her ſelfe ſo contrarie, though ſuch as thou art are alwayes ſéene, from the ofſpring of ſo vilde a kinde, whereby thou ſéemeſt to colour thy euill grounded reaſons, and arrogant pride, in ioyning kindred with the Soldan (our dread Soueraigne.) And if in caſe thou bee ſuch a one, as thy ſpéech declares, thou more obſcureſt with thy euill deedes his his royall progenie, then euer with wordes thou mayeſt amplifie it. Moreouer, know I am the Duke Alfyron, whom thou commeſt to accuſe: and whereas thou ſayeſt, I and the Knight of the golden Image haue trecherouſlie ſlaine Don Gallaneo, I replie, thou moſt falſely lyeſt, which my ſelfe am readie to approue in battell, or preſent my Champion for the ſame. The Prince Arfileo all this while readie to choake with extreame rage, yet moderately ſayde thus. Since thou art altogether ouerwhelmed in the treaſons thou ſpeakeſt off (Cyprus King) know that touching the knight of the golden Image, thou haſt moſt falſely lied in thy throate, and therefore bring with thée in field one of thy brothers, or whom elſe thou wilt. For if thou wilt not ſtay vntill his wounds bée whole, my ſelfe in his place will approoue the vtmoſt of thy ſpéeches, to be méerelie falſe: for he is not a Prince nor knight that would haue procured Don Gallaneos death, except forced thereunto, through his great treaſons and demerits, yet his Cooſen, like a vilde traitour died treacherouſly, going to murther him in his bed. Don Brianell diſſembling his anger, with a ſcoffing laughter, not ſuffring the King of Cyprus to roplie, ſaid to him. I thinke, King, Knight, or Giant, or what thou wilt, thou thoughteſt thy challenge would returne vnaccepted, becauſe no knight might be here able in bigneſſe and deforme, to anſwere thée. And yet in my opinion, thy pride is farre greater then thy bodie. But paſſing this, knowe, that in the Princeſſe Perſianaes name, I will make the thirde in Combatte agaynſt thy brothers or thy ſelfe, to prooue (with the helpe of the immortall Gods) that in the great vntroth breathed forth by thée, thou moſt treacherouſly lieſt.
               
                  And ſeeing we are all prepared to fight, be it preſently whiles the paſſion of thy furiouſnes is hot, leaſt after thou doe excuſe thy ſelfe by the weight of thy armour euerlong worne. The fearefull Gyant ſéeing with what courage and audacitie of ſpeech thoſe knights ſpake to him, was diuers times about to lay handes vppon his boyſterous are, thereby to puniſh the lauiſh of their tongues, no more eſteeming the combatte with a hundred of them, then doth the furious Bull a troupe of little whelpes, & béeing ready to burſt with fury, vttered theſe words to the Soldane.
               By the high powers of the Gods (dread Lord) if theſe ſillye mad-men were not before thy ſacred preſence, I would haue inflicted ſuch heauie puniſhment on them, that they ſhould bee examples to all others as ſhould preſume to ſpeake in ſuch maner to any of my degree. But I will this once reſtraine my ſelfe, and expect the combate till the Knight of the golden image bée brought well of his woundes, that my reuenge may bee the greater: For I meane to wage the fight with all foure. Nor would I haue you repute my wordes vaine, for I haue diuers other times done the like againſt a hundred better then the beſt of them. Whereunto Don Brianell made this anſwere.
               Doeſt thou confirme my former ſpeeches in ſo long prolonging this fight, daring ſay thou wilt doe it againſt them all: knowing vs to be ſuch knights that will not ſuffer one another to enter the fight with any ſuch aduantage. Th
                     •
                  n the Seldan commaunded them all ſilence, ſaying: that the king of Cyprus accuſing thrée knights, the like number muſt bee againſt him: to wit, the king and his two brothren, that ſhall agrée thereto. Bée it as you ſhall command (ſaid the King) and my two brothers ſhal accompany mée, though more willing I would haue had this combate my ſelfe, againſt thrée, or foure, or more, that they might thereby ſée how little I eſteeme of them. Then the Soldane againe commaunded ſilence to bée kept, & called the two Lords of Armenia, & Teſsifantie, with other Lordes, to

councell, touching the confirmation of the challenge, which béeing ended, they returned, and commanding the knightes and Gyants to attend, he ſaid: Hauing conſulted concerning the accuſation made by the king of Cyprus, againſt the Duke Alfiron, the knight of the golden Image, and my daughter, wée haue found hee may lawfully doe it, béeing as hee is, the mightieſt of kindred that Don Gallaneo hath. And moreouer, becauſe the Duke himſelfe is accuſed, he may not in perſon enter the combatte: and ſo much for the knight of the golden Image.
               Therefore it behooues you (Duke) to finde a Champion to vndertake this battell for you, ſéeing the Prince Arfileo doth it for the knight of the golden Image, and his companion, for my daughter, and it muſt bee foorthwith.
               Now though the Duke ſéemed outwardly diſpleaſed, being forbidden the combatte in perſon, yet was it not ſo, for hee greatly feared the Gyants forces: Neuertheleſſe, he anſwered the Soldan in this manner. Séeing I muſt ſéeke a Champion to defend my right, grant me ſome time (dread ſoueraigne) to doe it. I giue you (ſaid the Soldan) twelue dayes, wherein looke to it, & conſider on all thinges you ſhall néede, that after you complaine not, I haue done you iniuſtice. Then was the Princeſſe Perſiana ſent for, that ſhe would agrée that the ſame knight ſhould bée her defender. On this meſſage went the Kinges of Armenia & Teſsifontie, and alſo to bring her, who acquainted her with all they had therein laboured, according to her requeſt, and how the king of Cyprus being come to the Courte, had not accuſed her alone, but alſo the knight of the golden Image, and that the Soldan had ſent for her, to knowe if ſhe would alowe the aduenturous knight for her Champion. Whereuppon béeing conducted to her fathers preſence, ſhe proſtrated her ſelfe before him, but hée ſternely looking on her, ſaid: Conſider Princeſſe on the anſwere you muſt make to the king of Cyprus. Shee anſwered ſhee knewe not his demaunde: then had ſhe it reiterated. Whereunto ſhe replied:

I knowe not what I ſhould anſwere to ſuch a falſe and vniuſt requeſt, and moſt vntrue ſuggeſtion: But ſince you alſo ioyne with me the knight of the golden Image, let him anſwere both for himſelfe and me, to whom I commit my life, honor, right, and iuſtice. We ſent not for you to this end (ſaid the Sophy) for the knight of the golden image muſt not combat himſelfe, but ſée if you will haue the venturous knight defend your cauſe or no. I care not if he doe (replyed ſhe) and yet I thinke hée would willingly accept it, hauing all right and iuſtice on his behalf, defending the innocencie of a diſtreſſed Princeſſe: And I beſéech the immortall Gods, I may liue to acknowledge and gratifie this his great courteſie.
               To this replyed Don Bryanell, your ſelfe (diuine Ladie) hauing ſo great iuſtice to defence your innocencie, maketh mée the debter for this high fauour, whoſe grace hath decréede to lay the confidence of ſo great a charge, on ſo meane and vndeſeruing a knight, whoſe ſeruice for this honor, is in perpetuall bond to your gracious Highneſſe. Vpon the end of which ſpéeches, the gages were on eyther ſide accepted, and the day of battell aſſigned to bée twelue dayes after.
               The Soldan commaunded both the Duke and Princeſſe to bée ſurely guarded in ſeuerall ſtrong Towers: and turning to the king of Cyprus, inſtantly requeſted him to lodge in his pallace vntill the battell were paſte. The King eaſily condiſcended thereto, hauing already purpoſed, that if he remayned victor of the fight, to require the Soldan to pardon his daughter, and giue her him, with the kingdome of Antioche, as his right, being next Heire to Don Gallaneo: for which cauſe hée remained there, where the Soldan greatly honored him.
               The Prince Arfileo, Don Bryanell, with the Kinges, Dukes, and Earles, returned to the Dukes Pallace, to tell Don Bellianis the order taken: and entring where hee was, they founde him nowe ſomewhat better then they before had left him, to whome they then declared all that had paſſed betwéene them and the Soldon, and how the day of

battell was aſſigned, and that the Duke had in Champion for himſelfe, and how they had accepted the combatte▪ no his and the Princeſſe Perſianis name, expreſſing alſo the great fiercenes of the Gyants, particularly deſcrybing ye deformed miſhapen features of the King of Cyprus, proteſting they had neuer ſeene the like. Don Belhanis conceiued an extreame rage, hearing that diſcourſe, & how the Soldane would not permit him to the combate at ſuch time wherein hee was reputed a traytor, wherewith beeing almoſte beſides himſelfe, with vnreſtrained fary ſaide. What, thinkes the Soldane this ſhall be ſuffered that hee hath ordayned, and that with ſo greate maliciouſn
                     •
                  s againſt the law of armes: his deſire ſhall bée fulfilled? No▪ the powers diuine will not permit it. And therewithall hee roſe and ſat vppon his bedde, and in all haſte called for his cloathes. The Damſels ſéeing him thus determined, intreated him not to doe it, which hee would not, but in all haſte made himſelfe ready, reſiſting al their requeſtes, & alſo the Princeſſe Auroras, and commanding, that none ſhould accompany him, ſaue the Princes there preſent, that led him by the armes leaſt hée ſhould fall. But a little, after, the Princeſſe Florisbellas Damzells followed him, in which manner they went through the Cittie, vntill they came vnto the Soldanes Pallace, who béeing ſéene and knowne by the common people, ſaid one to another, viewing him ſo fainte and weake. Beholde heere the knight which ouercame the knights of the vnhappybridge, and that tooke the Dukes parte in the laſt turney. Many followed him, to knowe the cauſe of his ſo going in ſuch ill diſpoſition: who being at the Pallace gate, ſent the Soldane word hee was come to ſpeake with him. Whē it was ſo told the Sophy▪ he was at table accompanyed with the King of Cyprus & his brothers, who vnderſtanding hée was there, commaunded hee ſhould bee admitted to his preſence. Is this the Knight of the golden Image (demaunded the King) whom I come both to accuſe and challenge, for the treachery he committed by the deathes of my deare Coſins: This is he (replyed the Soldan)

and doe aſſure you, that his peere the ſunne ſhines not on, to equall him in ſtrength and valour. That may bee (ſaide the King) mong ſuch as himſelfe: and it were a blotte to my honour to make any account of 100. ſuch as hee. You wrong your ſelfe to thinke ſo (anſwered the Soldan) for if hee ſhould enter in the fight, I would not for the world aſſure you of the victorie: and therefore I ordered what I did. Now you haue told me ſo (ſaid the Gyant) it behoues me in any wiſe to craue the combatte againſt him, for if I ſhould not doe it, I am for euer diſhonoured. I wil haue no more wordes héereon (ſayde the Sophy) for in dooing otherwiſe, I ſhould not bee reuenged on him and the Duke as I deſire. The king diſdainfully laughed at his wordes, and ſaid. If the others that in this battell ſhallenter, were as you make him, yet ſhould my will be accompliwed: But ſince you wil haue it otherwiſe, I yéelde vnto you. Thereon (ſayde the Soldane) giue mee your hand and word, not to accept at this time any battell againſt him. I promiſed you ſo to doe (ſaid ye Gyant) though it bée to my laſting blame.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               
                  
                     What ſpeeches paſſed betweene the Knight of the golden Image and the Soldan: and how hee was ſtayed in the Pallace till the end of the battell.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DON Bellianis beeing before the Sophies preſence, ſhewing no kinde of dutie, thinking that one of his ſtate, and pretending ſuch a challenge, ſhuld rather ſeeme ſterne and fierce, thē humble and milde, though his weakenes through the gréenouſnes of his wounds, was ſo great, that no Knight vnder the cope of heauen, was able with ſuch patience to endure half the paine yt he perforce ſuſtained:

which notwithſtanding, with a cleare voice, that he might bee heard of all the aſſembly, diſſembling his ſorrowe as much as he could, ſaid.
               I am (moſt mightie Lord) forced to come to your preſence in this manner that you ſée, by hearing certaine things that here haue bin debated in preiudice of my honor and reputation: which moſt excéedingly haue augmented the pain and grief of my great ſickneſſe: for which cauſe I feare I ſhall not be able to vtter the imaginations of my penſiue hart, with ſo great decoram and reuerēce, as appertaineth to ſo high a perſonage. And I proteſt I had not hither come, but preſuming on ye equalneſſe of thy iuſtice. The Soldan ſéeing him in ſuch diſtreſſe, cō
                  manded him ere he further procéeded, to ſit downe (a chaire being brought him) he humbling himſelfe for the courteſie, ſat him downe, being in ſuch caſe, that he had like a thouſand times to haue ſounded as he ſtood, through ye great debilitie of his bodie. But drawing ſtrength from his neuer fainting courage (ſéeing Filiſtone that fierce gazed on him, reſting aſtoniſhed at his great monſtruoſitie) turned to the Souldane with theſe words. If according to the iuſtice of my cauſe (moſt mightie lord) committed to the adminiſtration of thoſe men to that ende, placed by the immortall gods, on this terreſtriall ball, promiſing ſuch large guerdons, in their future life of euerlaſting happineſſe, if with equitie and right, they execute the function of ſo high commanding powers: whereunto the ſpacious territories of your vaſte Empery bindes you, you looke into this whole matter, ſearching ye true ground therof, not ſuffering the vnbridled paſſion, of baſe parcialitie, to blinde the eyes of your admiring iudgement, which moſt often is woont to obſcure, and vtterly with ignominy, beſmeares the magnanimitie of the Nobleſt mindes.
               Then I cannot but greatlye meruaile for what reaſons you haue ſo farre procéeded in my affaires: ſéeing my ſelfe indeuoured with the vtmoſt of my ſtrength, to ſhewe my proſtrate ſeruice to your highneſſe: whoſe gentle regarde might

haue bene the cauſe that the leaſt reaſon procéeding from your royall ſelfe, ſhould haue contentedly ſatiſfied mee at your command.
               And I vow by the high immortal gods, no reproach ſhuld haue ſcandalizde your mightineſſe, nor any iniurious infamy ſtained the honour of your eſtate, if my ſelfe had béene firſt heard, and my conſent graunted to the aſſigned Combatte. For in my iudgement, it is againſt all naturall reaſon, that I béeing willing to defend the truth (whereof my owne heart onelye can beare witneſſe) another altogither ignorant thereof, ſhoulde in my cauſe indaunger his ſwéete life. Touching which: I cannot ſée, nor yet conceiue, on what foundation you ſhoulde builde your raſh decrée, to ſuffer the accuſation of the Duke, and the Princeſſe your Daughter, who in no reſpect could bee partakers, nor councellours in what is paſt. For if I ſlewe Don Galfeo, I did it becauſe hee treacherouſly woulde haue doone the like by mée, that was then altogither ſuſpicionleſſe, of any ſuch treaſon, which fact, made mee after verifie my ſuſpicion, ſéeing in what perill of theyr liues, Don Galfeo indaungered my companions in the Turney, that forced mee to ſhedde his bloud as hee woulde haue doone theyrs. Of which action, I ſhould then rather haue hoped for a more larger guerdon for this good déede, then nowe to procure newe Combattes. For it were high diſhonour to your high name, that ſuch as hee inuried to treaſons, treacheries, and villanies, ſhoulde be accounted the ſonne of ſo great a Monarch. Hauing not only vſed ſuch as loue practiſes againſt ſtrangers, as the Emperour Don Bellaneo, but alſo againſt his owne fréends.
               Wherefore you maye moſt certainlye beléeue, my ſelfe béeing nowe informed of the truth, I haue vnderſtoode that hee le
                     •
                  t all his Knights in the ſame fight: whereby they were all 
                     •
                  laine, whileſt hee moſt cowardlye fledde with his Coozin Don Galfeo. And moreouer, hee was a Traytour againſt your ſelfe and dignitie, in thus perſwading you

that the Emperour was dead, or by him mortally wounded, that hee coulde by no meanes eſcape death: whom at this preſent, both liueth, and is in perfect health: whereof fearing to be accuſed by me and my companions, that were hereof aſſured by a certaine aduenture, he procured our deathes: mine in the Dukes Pallace by Don Galfeo: while he ſo did of my companions in the Turnyes: where if he receiued his condigne deſerts, through ſo pittileſſe death, his be the loſſe: wherefore ſince there is none can better bear teſtimonie of this troath then my ſelfe, not onely againſt the Knights heere preſent, accuſing me, but alſo againſt all thoſe which ſhall challenge me hereof. I will tenne daies hence anſwere it them in fielde, and approoue it on their ſteele plumed burgonet
                     •
                  es: neyther will I héereupon (whatſoeuer may befall me) denie them the Combat: wherein I will make them knowe the great trecheries which they would haue vſed againſt me. And when you ſhuld refuſe to doo me this iuſtice, aſſure your ſelfe, I am a man able more ſtricktly to require it at your hands: For the eternall powers of the heauenly and earthly orbes, haue not infuſed ſo litle courage in my vncoloured heart, that any feare but theirs ſhould daunt my minde: where he ended his ſpéech, not able to procéede any further.
               The Souldane all this while ſtoode gazing on him with great admiratiō, in his doubtful breſt, reuoluing many things, ſaying to himſelfe, that his like for courage, he neuer heard of, and greatly woondred who he ſhuld be that in ſuch open terms durſt preſume to defie him to his face, and in his owne land. But as a man not able to reſtraine the reignes of his paſſion, wanting the chéefeſt thing well and iuſtly to iudge of matters, ſhaped him this vnbeſéeming anſwere, holding the King of Cyrus by the hande, that willingly woulde haue firſt replyed.
               Thinke not Knight of the golden Image, that in what is done, you haue receiued any diſhonour: For it is not lawfull you ſhould enter Combat in your proper cauſe. For were it

good or bad, you would (howſoeuer it might happen) procure the good ſucceſſe of your pretencion: for I am perſwaded you fight by inchantment, ſéeing the knights of the vnhappy bridge were not able to indaunger you. And therefore is it reaſon none be admitted in battell againſt you: and concerning the reſt of your threats, you ſhal doo what you may, if the time wil permit you. For in vaine the Gods haue made me Arch-ruler ouer ſo many territories, if I ſhould not accompliſh the vtmoſt of my will. In which ſeaſon I will haue you remaine in my Pallace▪ vntill the good or bad ſucceſſe of the Combat be by triall knowne, that according thereunto my pleaſure may be fulfilled to the full.
               But the King of Cyprus being very big ſwolen with ſuch extreame pride▪ that he was readie to burſt, ſaid to Don Bellianis with ſo hideous voice, as he would ſwallowe him downe aliue. Great is thy deſperate madneſſe, Knight of the Golden Image, that I know not where thou ſhouldeſt be borne: For with my onely ſight I was woont to terrifie others, both mightier, and in courage hardier then thou. And now thinkeſt thou to eſcape vnpuniſhed? I aſſure thée, that if the end of the battel conſiſted in nought elſe, but with the firſt encounter of my Launce, to bring thée to ſuch extremitie, that thou neuer ſhouldeſt be more able to enter any other fight: whereby alſo wee ſhould after eſchew the Souldanes iudgement in this caſe, thou ſhouldeſt thereunto be admitted. But becauſe thou being conuicted with the treaſons thou haſt committed, hée determineth otherwiſe to chaſtice thy inſolencie, and ſo hath ſuſpended thée from the battell.
               I haue no great néede to attempt it (replied Don Bellianis) for I am ſure thou ſhalt hau
                     •
                   to doo with ſuch Knights, that when the Combatte is ended, it ſhall b
                     •
                  e publicklye ſeene that I am not of condition lyke thy treacherous Cozins.
               But I deſired with my owne perſon, to rid thée of the great

doubt that thou art in. And after to require account of the outrage, thou offeredſt to two damzels of my companie, vppon whom thou dideſt ſhewe part of thy Conſanguinitie with the Traytor Don Gallaneo.
               
               All this Don Bellianis vttered, the more to inrage the inraged Gyant, to make him accept the combatte with him, though hee néeded not to ſpurre a forwarde horſe: For hée was impatient to ſée himſelfe vpbrayded with ſuch opprobrious tauntes, in preſence of that royall aſſembly: but hee had, as is afore mentioned, promiſed the Soldan to the contrarie, who fearing they ſhould attempt more then wordes, ſaid to Don Bellianis.
               
               Héereon (knight) talke no more, for what is decreed ſhalbe executed. Bée it as you haue ſaid (anſwered hée) but by the way, remember the greate iniuſtice you offer mée. The furious Soldan would not anſwere him, but by his commaundement hée was committed to a ſtrange Tower, and moſt ſurely guarded, leauing with him the Damzels of the Princeſſe Florisbella to cure his woundes.
               
                  Arfileo & Don Bryanell, fearing by their ſpéeches to adde fewell to the kindled fyer, ſaid nothing, but deſiring the day of combatte were come, returned to their lodgings, ſending ſtraight wayes for the knights they before had ſent to the wood, whoſe helpe did afterwardes greatly auayle them. The Soldan remained in his pallace very glad, thinking to execute both the Duke, and the knight of the golden Image, and likewiſe quieted the king of Cyprus, that much importuned him to ſuffer Don Bellianis to enter in the combatte, alleaging hee might better to his content bee reuenged that way for all his treacheries.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIII.
               
                  
                     How Don Bellianis diſguiſed, iſſued out of the Tower. What happened him with Don Contumeliano of Phaenicia, and how hee returned vnknowne into the Cittie.
                  
               
               
                  ALl neceſſarie preparations béeing ordered againſt the day of the famous battell, tenne dayes were paſte of the appointed time, and yet the Duke had not, nor could finde any, that would in his behalfe vndertake that combatte, which extreamely gréeued him, yet the magnanimitie of his coragious heart, permitted no outward ſhewe thereof. No leſſe was the ſorrowe of thē beauteous Perſiana ſuſtained, continually beſeeching her Gods, not to ſuffer her honors wracke, nor the downefall of her maidens fame, through want of a Champion to maintaine the iuſtice of her cauſe
               On the otherſide, the greate anguiſh of minde, that Don Bellianis conceiued, cannot be expreſt, which was ſo gréeuous, that his Damſels could by no meanes diminiſh, nor himſelfe could finde no comforte for his troubled fantaſies: but at length hée ſo recouered his weake ſtrength, that hee was able to walke about his chamber, féeling himſelfe in diſpoſition to buckle on his armour: And certainly had hée but it and his ſword, hée had broke foorth among the ſtrongeſt watch that guarded him, which in the day time were aboue 30. men, and in the night that number was doubled. In the meane time, he vſed to ſend one of the Damſels to know if the duke had got any to ſight in his quarrell, & whē he heard of 
                     ••
                  ne, 
                     •
                  n whom he durſt truſt 
                     •
                  o weighty a charge, (though he had many good & valiant knights) by reaſon of the fierceneſſe of the king of Cyprus, and his brothers, his gréeuous paſſions were redoubled. One of his damſels yt accompanied him, by name Floriana, daughter to the duke of Turſia, being Lord of many countries, vnder the Soldan of Babylon, which was the chiefeſt, and beſt beloued of the Princeſſe Florisbella.
               
               
                  The other was daughter to the Earle of Cellanea, named Perſiana. But the firſt ſaid to Don Bellianis, the ſorrowe of my greeued hart is ſuch (renowmed ſir) to ſée the courſe of theſe things, that I cannot in words ſhew it, as alſo ſeeing you cannot vſe your valour to remedie them, wheren your life & honor doth depēd. Wherfore reuoluing many things in my troubled thoughts, haue in ye end, affying on the rare courage of your admirable ſtrēgth, thogh now made weak by trecherous deſines, and ſiniſter occaſions, deuiſed this as the laſt refuge, to redreſſe theſe wrongs: and this it is. You know that we oftentimes go forth vnſuſpected, or miſtruſted of the guard: Now may you diſguiſed and attired in the apparell of one of vs, hauing no haire on your face, get abroad, where you may eaſily procure horſe and Armor, & do what you elſe think beſt, returning vnknown vnto the pallace, & there vndertake the Combat, and in meane time I will remaine in bed, faining to be you, ſuffering none to ſpeak with me, ſaying I am extreame ſick. Don Bellianis was ſo ioyfull with this vnlooked and vnthought remedie, as hardly it may be expreſſed, hoping therby not onely to aſſure his owne life, but alſo his companions, in that manifeſt danger, though he nothing doubted their valour, & imbracing the damſel ſayd. Pray vnto the gods (my good fréend Floriana) that theſe troubles may haue their deſired end, and then I promiſe you this great care ſhall be fully gratefied to your content. There is no reaſon (replied ſhe) why you ſhould binde your ſelfe to any ſuch gratificatiō, without deſert, ſéeing my dutie bindeth me to your perpetual ſeruice, and ſo thinke not much of this I coūſeld you. And I intreat you to gouerne your ſelfe well abroad, for being yet weak, you might fall in ſome other greater danger. Wherupon ſéeing the night approched, he put on Florianas apparel, wherwith he became ſo faire, that the damzels not a little wondred to ſée him ſo beautifull, that Perſiana cryed out. Is it poſſible oh gods? ſuch beautie ſhould be on earth, you had bin better reſerued it to glorifie your imperial thrones, vnleſſe heere you will inhabit to manifeſt your great powers among vs.
               
                  And truely (Sir knight) ſuch beauty was neuer ſéene but in the Princeſſe Florisbella our Lady Miſtreſſe: And well is it for all knights, you are not of our ſexe, elſe ſo many would by you periſh, as by the Princeſſe our Miſtreſſe, whoſe onely ſight killeth (though not outright, yet with liuing death) like the murthering eyes of a ſlaying baſe iſke. Is her beautie ſo admirable, to cauſe ſuch alterations in men? (demanded hee) you cannot beleeue, nor wee ſet downe (ſaide Floriana) the greatneſſe therof. And becauſe you may know I beare with me ſo greate a beauty as yours, I will ſhewe it you, which I continually carry with mee.
               And ſo ſhee drewe it out of her pocket, and gaue it him, which hee ſtraight knewe to bee the ſame that was portrayed on his ſhield, though his was more liuely, and for all hee viewed it continually, did neuer aſke whoſe it was, imagining no ſuch perfection could bée on the earth, and that Bellona had onely ſet it there for a ſhewe: Then ſuddenly was hée wounded to the heart, with the vnreſiſted darte of all conquering Loue, and not able to withſtand it, was inflamed with the fyre that laſted all the dayes of his life, ſurpryſed with ſo great deſire to ſée the ſubſtance of that ſhaddowe, that ſtraight hee would departe thither, leauing al thinges hée then had in hand vnfiniſhed.
               In this newe accident was hée a good whyle, not knowing how to reſolue himſelfe, ſaue in fixing his longing eyes on that dainty picture, hauing no more colour then in a dead man, which the Damzels ſéeing, and thinking his ryſing had cauſed that alteration, held him by the armes leaſt hée ſhould fall, hee recouering and feeling himſelfe touched, through ſhamefaceſtnes dyed his face with ſuch a vermilion bluſh, yt hee redoubled his faireneſſe, to whom they ſayd. What extraordinary paſſion did you feele? Which made vs feare ſome newe perill had befallen you in that ſtrange chance? Whereto hee replyed. A ſuddaine gréefe ſurpryſed me on my left ſide, ſo ſtrongly, that it almoſt benumbd my vaines, and reaſt mée of my vitall ſences.

If any wound be the cauſe therof (ſaid they) vncloath your ſelf, and we will ſee it.
               It ſhall not néede (anſwered Don Bellianis) for I ſhall ſtay too long. But I pray you giue me this picture, that ſo much reſembles another I haue. It is at your command (replyed the Ladies) but take heede you looſe it not: for if you doo, it ſhall coſt you yours.
               Then he taking his leaue of them, leauing Floriana a bed in his ſtead, went out of the Chamber, to deſcend the Tower, and by the way he met the Kings of Armenia and Teſſifanty, that came to viſit the Knight of the golden Image: whom he knowing, ſaid in preſence of moſt of the guard: Your Maieſties may not enter: for the Knight of the golden Image is a ſléepe, and ſo ſicke, that I feare he will hardly eſcape the danger of theſe wounds: and I come to tell theſe knights, that for a fewe daies, they ſhould ſuffer none to viſit him, for it woulde be very troubleſome to him, and now I will go to know what the Duke determineth about his cauſe.
               The Kings hearing this, would goe no further, but charging the guarde to let none enter his Chamber, returned back, leading Don Bellianis with them, whom they knewe not through the obſcuritie of the night, and had it not béene, his penſiue & ſullen melancholie, they could not but haue knowne him by the tallneſſe of his body, although he ſtooped as much as he could, and being all without the pallace, the Kings would accompanie him to the Dukes Tower, but he thanking them for that courteſie, would not ſuffer them, and ſo parted going alone, and being nigh the Dukes Pallace, hee eſpied his companions talking with many knights, and becauſe hee would not be knowne, he tooke an other by way, which led him without the Cittie gate, through which hee went, till hee came to a fayre groue of trees, ſomewhat out of the high waye, where vnder a ſpreading beech, hee lay till the Moone began with her light to ſhewe her ſelfe, there washe ſurpriſed with the remembraunce of the beautie of the moſt honourable Princeſſe

                  Florisbella, which he ſo contemplated that hee was caryed away with the déepe imaginations of her diuine perſections, that hee knewe not whether hee was in Heauen or in earth, and drawing foorth the picture that the Damzells hadde giuen him, with heart-breaking ſighes, he vttered theſe words, procéeding from the bottome of his loue ſicke ſoule. Oh diuine, and moſt Angelicall beautie of the abſoluteſt Princeſſe liuing on this moſſey orbe, vnhappie was the houre wherein I heard thée named, and more vnfortunate, when my eyes were captiuated in the admyred ſight of thy pictured beautie, for ſéeing the ſole ſhaddawe of thy nominated rareneſſe hath the power to drowne mee in heauie ſoule-tormented paſſions, what then will the ſubſtance of thy immortall deitie doo, when the fruition of that ſight ſhall robbe mee of my ioying ſences. Then muſt I onely call and continually crie for death, as chéefeſt anchorage and remedie of my wound, and with my life to end theſe my extreame, and intollerable ſorrewes. But foole that I am, where may I obtaine more glorie then to noriſh ſuch conceits, or what happie fortune then poſſeſſing this ſight burthening torment, if I do not altogither diſpaire of y• curing ſalue, for my mortall wound. Oh (wiſe Bellona) not without cauſe didſt thou bid me come to the Soldanes Court, and remember me, I ſhould not there, in my greateſt affections, looſe the reignes of my high courage. But who is he, that is able to do ſo, hauing no ſtrength to counterpoyz
                     •
                   my greefes, nor cure for my oppreſſed heart, being ſo far remooued from the cauſer of my torments, whoſe ſupreme thoughts cannot deigne to bēd their fauors on ſo mean a knight? & if they did, how ſhuld I merit, & deſerue them by conioyning both deſires in one, when the large continents of the ſpacious world, doth not containe two greater enemies then hers, and my father, or where is there a greater difference of lawes, and religion, then betwixt them, whereby I maye not onely diſpayre of remedie, but liue perpetually the diſgraceſt Knight that in this age ſuruiueth. Oh Floriana, when, or wherein, did I ſo much iniurie thee,

that thou ſhouldeſt on mee ſo cruelly be reuenged: and herewith fixing his eees on his imaginary ſorrowes, and vnable to reſiſt the violence of the ſuddain paſion, fell in a trance. Wherin he continued, till a knight arriued there, which trauailed that way by the light of the then ſhyning Moone, who ſéeing that Lady, lye with the picture in manner rehearſed, alighted, and tyed his horſe to a trée, and going to her, tooke her in his armes, vſing thoſe remedies that he knewe to recouer her, if ſhe were not dead, which he feared, ſéeing her ſtur neither hand nor foote.
               
                  Don Bellianis with what was done vnto him returned to himſelfe, greatly amazed to ſee that Knight there, thinking he had heard his complaint. But the Knight reſted no leſſe aſtoniſhed, to ſee his excellent beantie, that he could not vtter one word, yet with a trembling voice cauſed by the ſuddaine fyēt of loue that burnt his heart ſaid. What great miſfortune hath befallen you (moſt fayre Ladye) that in this ſollitarie place ſhould put you in ſuch extreame: And I ſweare by the order of knighthood, I receiued that with the vttermoſt of my power, euen with my death, to procure your preſent remedie. Therefore I beſeech you courteous damſel to tell it me, for I ſhall account my ſelfe more happie to be imployed in your ſeruice, then to bee created Emperour of Conſtantinople, ſéeing your rare beautie bindes all the world to your ſeruice, no more being therein to deſire, then to liue and dye at your command.
               The Prince Don Bellianis hearde his ſpéech to the end, and ſmiled in himſelfe to ſée the Knights deceit, although thoſe words added a greater flame to his burning fier, with remembrance of his miſtreſſe. And he determined to anſwere him according to his opinion, (that his owne purpoſe might not bee diſcouered) though he ſhould thereby more torment the knight, greatly delighting with ſuch diſcourſes, hoping himſelfe to vſe them, if at any time he ſaw the Princeſſe Floriſbella, and therfore replyed thus.
               
                  Truly (ſir knight) although my miſfortune were not for no other cauſe then now to ioy your preſence, I ſhould haue taken it for my greateſt conſolation. And I think my ſelf moſt happie, that the Gods haue permitted me to arriue in this place, to inioy the promiſe which you of your méere bountie and courteſie haue ſo liberallie made. For my chaunce is the ſtrangeſt that euer you heard: and therefore it behooues me, that you graunt me a boone, nothing diſaduantaging your ſelfe thereby. The Knight ioying more thereat then at any thing in all his life, anſwered. Command me what you will (faire Ladie) for you néede not demaund any thing by intreatie. Then before wée procéede any thing further (ſaid Don Bellianis) vnclaſpe your helme, and after you ſhall know what I require. The knight ſtraight did it, and ſitting down (hauing thitherto ſtood) diſcourſed togiter of diuerſe things, chiefly touching amourous matters. Don Bellianis was greatly pleaſed with his talke, and the more to eaſe his owne gréefe. It is néedleſſe to deſcribe the features of the Knight, béeing of a gallant diſpoſition, and yong, not aboue fiue and twentie yeares of age: of whom don Bellianis demaunded his name: whereto he ſaid, he would do it, if ſhe would accept him for hers. Don Bellianis ſaid, I will if that will pleaſe you, and ſo forwarde with your diſcourſe. Then (my deare Ladie) know my name is Don Contumeliano, of Phenicia, ſonne and heyre vnto the King of that countrey: and by another name am called the ſolitarie Knight, becauſe I poſſeſſe nothing that better agrées with my conditions, then to wander through ſolitarie and vnknowne places, ſhunning the habitation of populated Cities, and townes, thinking therby that the blind God of Loue ſhould haue no power ouer me, and therefore would I not this night lie in Perſepolis: but he hath at his pleaſure reuenged himſelfe on me, with your gracious ſight, whoſe ſpeedie remedie if I want, will leaue me altogither breathleſſe. The hearing of your ſtate (moſt noble Prince) hath highly contented mee (ſaide Don Be
                     〈…〉
                   I diſcontent, ſuffring the like torments

that you through ſuch a paſſion, for procuring to auoyde the cauſe of ſuch effect, haue béen this night ſo plagued with Loues all conquering power, that now I féele the force of his tributarie paines. In this chat they ſpent the better two parts of the night: which don Bellianis ſéeing, reſolued to demaunde of the Prince, what he wanted for the combat, deſiring that by no meanes his Companions ſhould know his intent, for he durſt not truſt them with a battell of ſuch import, hoping alſo to obtain his requeſt, ſaid. I do deſire you (moſt honored prince) that you will performe the promiſe you made me, which is this. I left not farre hence, a Knight in an extreame daungerous aduenture, deſtitute of an armour, weapons, and horſe, to performe a moſt notable combat, and were it not (ſir knight) that I alſo promiſed to procure it him, I would not now preſume ſo much to iniurie you as to requeſt them. But beléeue me, if I liue, I will to your content gratifie this good turne. For at this time can I not do otherwiſe, béeing requeſted by that knight to get him them. And ſéeing it hath béene my happe to méete with you, I do beſéech you, to make me ſo happie by your gracious graunt, promiſing if I reuiue to morrow at this time, to returne them, and this is my boone, and your promiſe. The knight was verie ioyfull to haue occaſion to pleaſure his miſtreſſe, eſpecially expecting ſo great a benefite as ſhe promiſed, cared not whether he neuer ſhould haue them, although they were the richeſt in the world (ſauing don Bellianis.) They were of colour yellow, rarely ingrauen with curious workes, and ſet with rich Orient Pearles, whoſe ineſtimable woorth cannot be vallued. In his ſhéeld was pictured a mightie mountaine, with a knight lying vnder an Oke, with his hand vnder his chéeke, leaning vpon the ſheeld, ſtaring and gazing on the cruell god of Loue, ſitting on the top with his bow & arrowes, drawne ſo naturally, that euery looker on might eaſily beléeue it to be aliue. And he ſaid to don Bellianis. Faire miſtreſſe, ſéeing all my heart is yours, what néed you more? ſaue command all I elſe poſſeſſe as your owne: for my a
                     •
                  mor and 
                     〈◊〉
                   reſt Tr
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
at your deſpoſing: more deſiring to vndertake that combat vnder your ſeruice, then with my armor to pleaſure you. But ſéeing you will haue it ſo, ſtay while I call my page, that is not farre hence, knowing I would not go into the Citie this night: whereupon he ſounded a horne, whoſe value was more then might be thought. The force of which blaſt, was heard through all the citie, wherewith he made a certaine ſigne, at which the page ſtraight came, who ſéeing his maiſter accompanied with that lady, greatly maruelled, knowing it to be againſt his condition: and alighting off his palfray, ſaid. What wonder is this (ſir) to ſée you in ſuch a place with ſo faire a Goddeſſe in your companie? I feare ſhe hath of purpoſe deſcended the heauens, to penetrate the flintie wars of your adamant heart, ſéeing on earth there is none that could do it. It greatly pleaſed the knight to heare his page praiſe his miſtreſſe ſo highly, and commanded him, ſaying: Giue me my other apparell (Bruneo) for this Goddeſſe thou ſpeakeſt off ſtaieth for me. Whereupon the page drew forth of a male, the richeſt ſuite of apparell that euer Don Bellianis ſawe. It was all of a Rubie colour, imbrodered with many of thoſe ſtones, and other of vnualued price: and vnbuckling his armour, gaue them him, and put on thoſe garments. Don Bellianis admired, and highly commended the knights gallant liberalitie, and the more, that deceitfull loue ſhould make him ſo kind, & deſirous to requite his bountie ſaid. Moſt noble and renowmed Prince, I do accept the gift of your lent armor, & for the ſame do promiſe ere 20. dayes do paſſe, to remedie your gréefe to your great profit, & ſo require no more of me. For this promiſe the prince knéeled to kiſſe his hands. Don Bellianis wold not ſuffer it, taking him vp in his arms, & embraced him kindly, which excéedingly gladded his hart. And therwith did help him to moūt on his horſe, ſaying. You may (ſwéet miſtreſſe) ſit without feare: for though my horſe ſéemeth as hee doth, yet is he ſo gentle and tractable, as may be deſired. I beléeue no leſſe (my good lord, replied don Bellianis) and taking his armor bound in a cloath) before him, & don Contumelianos ſword in his hand (who tooke his pages) ſaide: I intreate you

to enter the Citie to day, where you ſhall ſée your armour vſed, and after follow the Knight, for you ſhall find me in this place: and ſo taking leaue, departed through the thicke Groaue, leauing him as a man that firmely gazeth on ſome woonder: and rapt with admiring contemplation thereof, ſuddainlie looſeth the ſight of his delightfull obiect. So reſted Don Contumeliano, who not knowing what to doo, lay him downe to ſleepe, till it ſhoulde bée time to enter the Cittie, which hée did, mounted on his Pages Horſe, in which Cittie hée neuer had béene, where taking his Inne, expected the houre to go to Court: where we leaue him, to returne to Don Bellianis, trauailing through the wood, as aforeſaid.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               
                  
                     What happened to Don Bellianis in the Court, armed in Don Contumelias armour. How he accepted the battell. His talke with the Princeſſe Perſiana before the fight, and what befell him in the ſame.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis going through the wood, (as is ſaid) came at laſt to a Caue, where in Winter the Shepheardes vſed to withdrawe themſelues, which hée ſeeing to fitte his turne, alighted more eaſier then Don Contumeliano, did mount him a horſebacke, and ſo went in, and ſtraight put off Florianaes garments, and armed him as well as hee might, hauing no helpe, which done, hee hid his female Robes, couering them with ſome bowes, which he cut with his ſword, that none that there ſhould arriue might thinke them otherwiſe: and ſo tooke his way towards Perſepolis, at ſuch time as the giuer of all light began with his reſplendent rayes to cleare the duſkie 
                     •••
                  e, and chaſe the darkened cloudes from the ayrie Region, when the chirping

birdes with their melodious harmonie ſaluted the mornings vpriſe, whoſe varying notes, and pleaſing muſick, ſtrook ſuch thoughts into the paſſionate Prince, of his contemplatiue miſtreſſe, that he regarded not his way, nor knew not where he was, till he found himſelfe at the citie gate: which entring, he came to the lodging that Don Contumeliano had taken, who being at the doore, preſently knew each other, yet ſpake neuer a worde: whereupon he tooke another horſe, and followed Don Bellianis to the Pallace, to know the ende of that aduenture: and by the way, were greatly admyred of all men, the one for the richneſſe of his armour, and the other for the ſumptuouſneſſe of his apparell (as afore is mentioned.) Don Bellianis lighted at the Court gate, and hauing none to hold his horſe, Don Contumeliano ſaid, giue your horſe to my Page, who ſhall looke vnto him: For though you know me not, yet am I bound to do you any ſeruice. Don Bellianis requiting his courteſie, did as he requeſted, and ſayde. Such fauours (ſir Knight) cannot but preſage a happie ſucceſſe to my enterpriſe. And taking him by the hand, paſſed into a long Gallery, where they ſent the Soldane word of their comming, crauing acceſſe to his preſence: which graunted, they entred, and found him talking with the King of Cyprus, who then with his brothers began to arme themſelues for the fight, highly reioycing, imagining their enterprize ended, aſſuring themſelues that fiue hū
                  dred good knights were not able to withſtande them in field. And when they ſawe thoſe Knights enter in ſo royall armour and apparell, with ſuch gallant diſpoſition, they much prayſed them. They being before the Soldan, knéeled on the ground, demaunding his princely hands to kiſſe them, who courteouſly tooke them vp, and imbraced them, and ſaide they might vtter what they would, and what they came for: whereto don Bellianis replied. Commaund (dread Lord) the duke Alfiron to be ſent for, and then you ſhall know what we require. The Soldan ſent for him ſtraight, who came garded with a thouſand armed men. And not knowing the cauſe of his ſending for, was

verie ſorrowfull, ſéeing that day to bee the laſt of his prefixed time, for the tryall of his cauſe, and that he had got no Champion to defend his right by fight. Don Bellianis ſéeing him, with an audible voice that al might heare him, ſaid. Moſt mightie Sophy of Syconia, and imperious Soldane of this great Perſian Monarchie, know, I am called the Solitarie knight, if my name haue euer penetrated your eares, ſonne vnto the king of Phenicia, who wandring about the worlde in ſearch of ſtrange aduentures, haue by chance arriued in this your kingdome, where I heard the occaſion that the King of Cyprus, otherwiſe named the Giant Filiſtone the fierce, hath made agaynſt duke Alfiron the courteous, and other Knights of his company, as alſo againſt thy daughter the beautious Perſiana, touching the death of the prince of Antioch, who he ſaith they trech
                     •
                  rouſly 
                     ••
                  ue. I do well know the duke Alfiron, (although his memorie doth not comprehend any remembrance of his fauors towards me) & am aſſured he wold do nothing againſt the lawes and duties of a good knight. But to be briefe, I am reſolued to vndertake, & fight the cōbat for him, if he hath none to do it, & I intreat him to grant it me. For though I deſerue not he ſhould truſt me with ſo great a charge, yet my indeuor, and his iuſtice herein, ſhall ſupply my want. The whole aſſembly much admired him, iudging he was of no little valor, that durſt cōbat with ſo terrible and deformed Giants, though they mightilie doubted his victorie. The Soldan was ſore gréeued, thinking eue
                     •••
                   ſmall let to be great, according to his deſire to ſée y• matter ended, as he wold, & willingly wold he giue that citie to be fully reuenged of the duke. Yet diſſembling his inward thoughts, ſaid. You may trie (ſir knight) whether the duke will grant you the fight, & then do what you therin beſt may. Notwithſtanding I know not why you ſhuld procure this cōbat, getting nothing but the loſing of your life. Al ſhalbe as pleaſeth the gods (replied don Bellianis.) The duke hearing theſe ſpéeches, ſaid: I cannot hitherto call to mind (moſt excellent prince) wherein my deſerts ſhould ſo bind you to ſuccor me in this my greateſt néed. But I

do aſſuredly beléeue the immortall gods hath ſent you, becauſe they will not ſuffer ſo great villanie procéede further. And with this, as an auſpicious tokē (aſſuring me of your victory through your incomparable counteſie, and more valor) I grant you the fight, and perſwade your ſelfe, that all right and iuſtice you this day defend. I am ſo perſwaded (anſwered don Bellianis) and therefore ſay no more. But who is your accuſer? The king of Cyprus ſtepped forth, ſaying: I am he. Wherfore, ſée if ſtill thou be ſo reſolued. More aſſuredly will I now maintaine it, then at firſt (ſaid don Bellianis) for thy preſence ſheweth there can bee no reaſou nor iuſtice in any thing thou attempteſt. The Giant inraged with theſe words, & ſéeming through choller to ſpit fire, in treated the Soldan to command the priſoner to be brought into the field: for being all armed they had nothing to ſtay for▪ Hereat don Bellianis was ſomwhat moued, thinking it would be knowē he was not in ye tower. Many of thoſe knights went for the priſoners, & entring don Bellianis lodging, they 
                     •
                  ound Floriana a bed in his place: but her felow was vp, & had cloſed the curtains ſo cloſe, that none could ſée who was a bed. Who when ſhe ſaw the gard come in, ſaid very ſoftly to them. Go no further (good knights) for the knight of the golded Image lyeth in the extream paine of his life. The Sophy ſaid they) hath ſent vs for him, to cary him to the field. See (ſaid ſhe) where he lieth, but I beſéech you ſtir him not, & I will go with you to the Soldan, and ſée what he will command. Wherupon they went to the Sophy with her, who declared vnto him in what caſe don Bellianis was. The Soldan cōmanded he ſhould not be moleſted, and that ſhe ſhould ſée him want nothing. He now néedeth nothing but this (ſaid ſhe) and ſéeing the knight yt had vndertaken the cōbat, ſhe knew him to be don Bellianis, by his gallant demeanor, and the talneſſe of his body, and wondred to ſée him f
                     •
                  rniſhed with ſo rich armor: and returning to the tower, told it. Floriana, who with her greatly r
                     •
                  ioyced, aſſuring themſelues, that don Bellianis would obtaine the victorie: reaſoning together, that he ſéemed to be yoked in the amorous bonds of their Ladie, by that which be
                     •
                  ell him when they named her.
               
                  At this time was the Princeſſe and the Duke conducted to the field, ſéeming verie pleaſant. The Princes don Brianel, and Arfileo, were aduertiſed how the duke had gotten a champion. They were glad therof, becauſe the impriſoned knights might reſt more contented and ſecure of their good ſucc
                     •
                  ſſe, and ſo they mounted on their horſes. The King of Arminia did beare Don Brianels ſhéeld, and Arfileos was borne by the king of Teſſifantie. The Duke Gariano did beare one helme, and the Prince of Brandalia the other: and in this maner they were accompanied to the field, with the ſound of many militarie inſtruments, where at that time they met the knight of the golden Image, whoſe launce and ſhéeld was borne by Don Contumeliano, whoſe gallant diſpoſition euerie one admired, thinking he ſhould be whom in effect he was: and al they ioining togither, moſt louingly ſaluted each other, and entred the liſts, where they alighted, within a Pauilion (prepared for them) till the Soldans comming, where Don Bellianis had the buckles of his armor cloſer guirt. There then alſo entred aboue tenne thouſand armed men, and in the middeſt of them they brought the Princeſſe Perſiana, and the Duke. The Princeſſe was mounted vpon a ſcaffold richly appointed for her, but the Duke remained among the gard, who ſpred themſelues round about the yard, for the better aſſurance both of the priſoners, and combattants. When ſuddenly the earth ſéemed to tremble and quake with the noyſe and ſound of drums and trumpets, that the knights could not heare one another. The knights came forth of their Pauilion (which was heard by the Princeſſe) and mounted a horſebacke, to e
                     •
                  pect the comming of the Giants, who then appeared in 
                     •
                  ight. But Don Bellianis ſéeing ſo many eyes fixed on him, deſirous to do n
                     •
                   leſſe then he was woont, ſet one hand on the pummell of his Saddle, and lept therein, not ſetting foote in the ſtirrop, and with the force hee put ther
                     •••
                  , the blood iſſued out of his armour, from the wounds that were not yet whole, which ſéene of many, they counſelled him to leaue the the combat, being 
                     •
                  o ſore wounded. The Princeſſe

                  Perſiana ſent him word that hee ſhould come to her, for ſhée ſhould ſpeake with him, which he did, where ſhe intreated him to mount aloft. The guard ſeing him goe alone, did not let him: Which was at ſuch time that the Princeſſe Aurora arryued, well accompanied, who was conducted to that ſcaffold. Theſe two Ladies intertained each other with ſuch court
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  e, as belonged to their high ſtates. And the Princeſſe Aurora ſéeing that knight there, demaunded why hee was called. To whome the Princeſſe Perſiana replyed: ſhee ſhould ſtraight know why, and ſo ſoftly, that ne
                     •
                  e but they three might heare, ſaid to him. By the life of that thing which you muſt loue in this world moſt noble knight) & ſo the immortall Gods may bl
                     •
                  ſſe you, with the euerliuing glorie of a famous victorie at this preſent, and moſt happy ſu
                     •••
                  ſ
                     •
                  e to all enterpryſes and aduentures you ſhall vndertake, I d
                     •
                  e intreate you to declare your name, for either I am new 
                     ••
                  inde, or I doe certainely knowe you, hauing dreamed this 
                     •
                  ight, that I was deliuered by the handes of a knight I greatly affected, and ſo would I knowe it (though I thinke it impoſſible you ſhould bee hée) which you may aſſuredly doe, knowing how it behooues 
                     〈◊〉
                   to kéepe it ſecrete.
               And héere the Hiſtorie ſaith, that ſhee in déede did dreame that night, ſhee was deliuered by Don Belliani
                        •
                     : who made this anſwere. I cannot conceiue (faire Princeſſe wherefore you ſhould deſire my name, hauing nothing leſſe therein, but to increaſe your ſorr
                     •
                  w: yet knowe, I am your k
                     ••
                  ght of the golden Image, and ſo pardon me, for you ſhall kn
                     •
                  w the reſt heereafter. Wherewith hee deſcended, leaſte he were ſuſpected, though euery one thought the Princeſſe did but incourage him, with the iuſtice of her cauſe, who was aduertiſed by don Bellianis, ſhee ſhould not diſcloſe that ſecrete by no 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ neither to his 
                     •
                  ellowes, nor to any other liuing, and mounting a horſebacke, the Gyants entred the li
                     •
                  tes, with their 
                     〈◊〉
                   an: whereat the Ladies were much aſ
                     •
                  oniſhed in ſeeing 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
                  
and in knowing him to be the knight of the goldē image, ſomething feared his life, becauſe of the blood that iſſued from his old 
                     〈◊〉
                  , yet reſted aſſured of the victorie, maruelling howe hee ſhould get out of priſon, and 
                     •
                  e furniſhed with ſo rich armour, and turning to the knights, hee ſaw the Soldan marſh
                     •
                  lling the 
                     ••
                  eld (being himſelfe iudge of the fight, and placing the knights one againſt the other, and comming to the knight of the golden Image, he ſaid, ſéeing him bloody through his armor. How wil you enter in fight (
                     •
                  i
                     •
                   knight) being thus wounded: It is no matter (ſaid hée) for this onely am I knighted.
               The Soldan vrged it no more, but withdrawing himſelfe, commaunded the ſignall of the fight to be giuen by the Trumpets, at whoſe ſound, the knightes with armed fury, in ſuch 
                     •
                  orte made againſt each other, that they rather ſeemed ſo many ſuddain flaſhes of lightnings, renting through the Ayri
                     •
                   paſſage of the heauens, then men, and met in the middeſt of the field, with ſo mighty incounters, as if ſo many péeces of Ordinance had béene diſcharged.
               
                  Arfileo and Don Bryanell incountred the king of Cyprus two brothers, that all foure meaſured their lengthes on the earth, ſore wounded. Don Bryanell hauing one foote hanging in the ſtirrope, that hee could by no meanes ryſe. Don Belliani
                        •
                     
                   and the fearefull Feliſton, ſo cruelly met, that Don Bellianis ſhield was pierced, together with his arme, and the furious launce not reſting there, penetrated both armour and coate of male, where his arme was nayled with a péece of the ſpeare, to his breaſt, making there a wyde woūd, from whence iſſued infinit blood.
               But Don Bellianis incountred the Gyant in the middle of his ſtéeled ſhield, which alſo was pearced, with his breaſt plate, and the ſhocke was ſo ſtrong, that the launce guided by ſo braue an arme, and the fury of ſo good a horſe, that therewith the king of Cyprus loſte his ſtirropes, and méeting body with body, and breaſt with breaſt, the diuel
                     •
                  iſh Gyant hauing nothing

to ſtay his féete, fell to the ground: Don Bellianis had done the like, if hee had not gotten hold by his horſe necke. Who is able to expreſſe the amazed wonder of the beholders, at that braue incounter, hauing neuer ſéene the like, that they rayſed a murmurre among themſelues, with high praiſe honoring the extreame valour of that knight, who ſéeing that it beh
                     ••
                  ued him to looſe no time, was alighting off his horſe, when the king made towards him, more inraged then a fierce baited 
                     •
                  ul. But firſt looking to his companions, perceiued the vēturous knight to haue one leg ſtill in his ſtirr
                     •
                  pe, and in great danger, becauſe his aduerſarie was going vppon him, intending to end his life, which eaſilie without diſturbance he might haue done, wherefore ſéeing his friendes ſure peri
                     •
                  l, ſet aparte his woonted courteſie, and ranne with his horſe againſt the Gyant, that hee returned to the ground, and himſelfe lepping from his ſaddle, went to helpe Don Bryanell, which purpoſe was leted by the kings cōming, that thereby he was faine to ſtay, to repaire himſelfe from the Gyants ſudden blowe, who rayſing his battell▪a
                     •
                  e, would haue diſcharged it on his head.
               But the knight of the golden Image, ſéeing hee could not helpe himſelfe with 
                     •
                  is left arme, by reaſon of the péece of lance that was in it, ſtepped aſide, that the axe ſtrooke on the earth, and therein ranne aboue a yarde: and going vppon the King, was vnawars ſurpryſed by his brother that hee ouerthr
                     •
                  we, who gaue him ſo cruell a bl
                     •
                  we on his H
                     •
                  lme, that it made him to bowe to the grounde, which made the rage to kindle in the Knightes breaſt, that very 
                     •
                  yer ſparkled from his eyes, and like a hotte chafed Boare, or hungrye Lyan bent to his praye, wounded the Gyant that had ſtrooke him, with ſo puiſſant a b
                     ••
                  we on the H
                     •
                  lme, that hee cut it in two, as if it had beene of paper, ſorely wounding his head, that hee was like to fall, yet with the force of the blowe, his ſemitor fell out of his handes, reſting ſo aſtoniſhed, that hee knewe not whether he were aliue or dead.
               
                  But the knights ſword flewe in two péeces, that onely the hiltes remained in his handes, to defend himſelfe in ſuch extreame danger, and of ſo puiſant enemies as thoſe. Who at that time had beheld the two Princeſſe, Perſiana and Aurora, with the good Duke Alfiron, and the towre
                     •
                   D
                     •
                  mz
                     •
                  ls of the beauteous Princeſſe Flori
                        •
                     bell
                        •
                     , that thence beheld the fight, had no néede to ſeeke elſe where, the proall colour of timerous death. For in their f
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  s was it ſo perfect to be ſeene, that no Painter euer did better drawe it in varity of colours, which ſight did ſo terrifie the dolorous Ladies, that they deſired no longer life, then it might bee guarded by the knight of the golden Images ſafetie.
               But the good Prince of Phaenicia, was there like to dye, for very ſorrow and anguiſh of minde, ſeeing all that euill had happened through the weakneſſe of his defectiue ſworde, and curſing of himſelfe, thought his Miſtreſſe would for euer abhorre him for that cauſe, which would bee the loſſe of the beſt knight that euer put on armour. Yet hitherto Don Bryanell could by no meanes get his foote looſe, but with the ſtrength that he ſet, drewe his horſe vppon all his legge, that the very paine thereof had almoſt killed him, onely the Soldan reioyced at this diſſaſtrous accident, thinking hereby to effect his deſire. The Cyprus king was ſo highly glad, that hoyſting his axe alo
                     •
                  te, cryed aloude, this blowe ſhall execute my will. The Prince Arfileo that in ſuch ſtate ſawe his companions, would haue gone to helpe them, but his aduerſarie perceiuing it, let fall his ſemitor, and ſlung himſelfe vppon him, whereat vnable to ſhunne it, did the like, ſtryuing with their exceſſiue ſtrength to ouerthrowe one another.
               
                  Don Bellianis though hée ſaw himſelfe without ſworde, and not able to helpe him with one arme, was not therefore daunted with the fearefull ſight of preſent death, that hee before him ſawe, but ſéeing the moſt fierce Gyant come towardes him, flung with all his ſtrength the péece of ſword remaining in his hande, that lighting on his helme, the force

thereof threwe him backwardes to the grounde, and before his brother could remedie it (with admirable quickneſſe which the preſent danger did augment) he tooke vp the ſemitor that he let fall, as is already ſaid, & leauing the fight at that ſtay, ſt
                     •
                  pped to Don Brianell, and cutting the horſe girts, ſet him on his féete.
               The 
                     •
                  ierce 
                     •
                  ing that then came vpon him gaue him a blow on the head, which if it had not bin giuen him vnaduiſedly, it had clouen it in the middle, but not ſtaying there, it deſcended on the ſheeld, cutting it all ouerthwart, & falling on his thigh, parting all the Armour, 
                     ••
                   opened his fleſh moſt 
                     •
                  it
                     •
                  ouſly. Don Belliani
                        •
                     
                   féeling his wound, ſtrooke the King ſideling with the heauie ſemitor, yt if he had not warded y• blow with his ſheeld, it had cleane cut of his leg, yet it threw the ſheeld in two peeces to the ground, togither with his hand, and being cloſe one to another, the King would haue caſt his armes vppon him▪ but the Knight leapt aſide, vnwilling to wraſtle: whereupon they wounded themſelues moſt greeuouſly, that with their mighti
                     •
                   ſtroakes, they ſometime bowed their heades to theyr breaſt▪ ſometime they bended theyr knées, and ſette their ha
                     •
                  ds to the ground, and the King wanting his left arme, it made him to rore like a chaſed Bull, that hee ſcantly felt any of the knights blowes.
               
                  Don Brianell ſéeing himſelfe rid from his horſe, drew his ſworde, making againſt the king, but he was ſtayed by his br
                     •
                  
                  ther, wh
                     •
                   met him with a heauie Mace, which he had on his ſaddle pummel, vſing it in ſtead of his looſe ſemitor, and ſo piteouſly wounded one another, that the vnterous knight was fain to helpe himſelf with his 
                     •
                  imbleneſſe, to auoide the gyants intollerable blowes, hauing wounded him in many places. The like did 
                     •
                  he Prince Arfileo, who hauing let looſe his aduerſarie, layde cloſe to it with their ſharpe ſwordes, with ſuch admiration of the beholders, as if the vniuerſall iudgement conſiſted in the victorie of that battell, and none durſt vtter one word, but with amazed gaze ſtared in one anothers faces, to

to ſée thoſe knights eſcaped that great danger, (who a little before, they accounted dead) by the meere courage and valour of the knight of the golden Image, might not compare for haughty déeds of honoured Chiualrie, and whome they ſo much eſtéemed. And returning to the gréeued Princeſſe, they kn
                     •
                  w not what to ſay, through conceiued gladneſſe, and had much to do to diſſemble it in time of ſorrow: no leſſe glad were the Ladies of the Princeſſe Florisbella, who for ioy embraced each other, eſpecially Floriana, that with teares in her eyes, ſaid. Oh (moſt vnhappie maiden that I am) for I neuer gaue woorſe counſaile in all my life to any, then I did to this knight if hee héere had dyed. But his death ſhould not haue béene without company: For in the inſtant my eyes had ſeene ſuch a thing, I would headlong haue tumbled my ſelfe from of this Tower, that it might be knowne, with what ſinceritie and faithfulneſſe I counpelled him. Peace ſaid the other, for we ſhall ſée him ſtraight victoriouſly tryumphe ouer his enemies, and therefore lette vs procure all neceſſaries, for to cure his wounds.
               At this time all the knights and Gyants were beſmeared in their owne blood, that where they ſette their féete, they left theyr ſignes printed with the ſame, and ſo tyred with wearineſſe, hauing fought almoſt fiue houres, that they could
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  arce hold their ſwordes in their hands The feareful Fil
                        •
                     ſton, almoſt with ſweatie furie choaked, and tyred, withdr
                     •
                  we himſelfe a part to breathe, which gréeued not Don Bellianis: who dooing ſo, drew forth the péece of ſpeare from his arme, that embrued in his blood, it ſtucke ſo faſt that it put him in extream paine: and walking vppe and downe becauſe their woundes ſhould coole, they looked on their fellowes, and ſawe the venterous knight reduoble his ſtrength, throgh anger of the pauſe, wherewith he had brought the Gyant, with whom he fought, (hauing a mortall wounde giuen him before, by the Solitarie Knight) to ſuch paſſe, that hee coulde not long defend himſelfe.

Which when the king of Cyprus did ſée, he woulde with his Cour
                     •
                  lea
                     •
                  e wound the knight, that then he might incurre great daunger, being taken vnawares, but at that inſtant, the watchfull Prince Don Belliani
                        •
                     
                   perceiuing it, being not farre from the King, diſturbed that his purpoſe, puſhing him on his breaſt ſo ſtrongly that he recoyled backe thrée or foure ſteppes, wherby they renewed their fight more fiercely and braue, then in the whole day before.
               But Don Bellianis perceiuing, that if the Combatte long continued, he was like to faint, through the infinit bl
                     ••
                  d he had loſt, aduentured himſelfe, to receiue a blowe of the Gyant. Which when he ſawe deſcended on him, commending himſelfe from the bottome of his heart, vnto the Almightie, to deliuer him from that daunger, and thruſt at the Giant ſo brauely vnder his arme, that being there vnarmed, and with ſuch exceſſiue force performed, that the ſworde ranne into his fleſh vp to the hilts, piercing his heart in the middle, wherewith he fell downe dead. But he was by the Gyant cruelly wounded on the head, that he alſo fell downe in a trance, which greeued euery one, chiefly the Princeſſe Aurora, that was forced to cry out. Oh immortall Gods why haue you ſuffered ſo great an euill: for without doubt, the beſt knight that euer gyrded ſword is ſ
                     •
                  aine. But her ſorrowe was turned to a generall gladneſſe, ſeeing him amazedly riſe, and was going to aide his companions, if he had not ſéeue Arfileo at one blowe cut off one of the Gyants legges, and with an other his head. The like did Don Brianell, not regarding the Souldanes cryes, requiring him that hee woulde not do it, for he yéelded him vanquiſhed. Which done, they in theyr hearts rendred immortall thankes vnto the Almightie, for their victorious deliuerie, from ſo vnſpeakeable perill, and with great loue imbraced the Knight in the yelowe Armour, whome they imagined to bee Don Contumeliano, yéelding to him all the honor of the victorie.
               
                  Whereupon, (not expecting the Soldans commaund) the generall aſſembly ſhouted out for ioy, ſounding a number numberleſſe of all manner of military inſtruments, running about the field for gladneſſe, which cut the Soldane to the heart, hauing no patience to endure it.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               
                  
                     What the Knight of the Golden Image did after the battell ended: And how the Soldan commanded the duke to be borne to priſon.
                  
               
               
                  SO ſoone as the Princeſſe Perſiana did ſee the battell ended, with ſuch ioy as euery one may iudge, deſcended the ſcaffold, and going to the knights that yet were talking togither, ſhee woulde haue knéeled before don Bellianis, but he preuented it by dooing ſo himſelfe, very courteouſly, ſaying. You haue no cauſe (moſt excellent Lady, to thanke me, being bound to doo more then this for the Duke Alfiron. But if you will, then (royall Princeſſe) gratifie theſe knights, whoſe valour hath ſo wel defended your right, and i
                     •
                  
                  ſtice: for my ſeruice is of no woorth, but while it bee ſhadowed vnder their haughtie déedes. I will not (famous knight) ſaide the Princeſſe, extoll the honour you haue woon in this battel, with ſuch déere loſſe of your blood, (beſides the ouerthr
                     •
                  we of ſuch great treacherie as was ordained againſt vs) being more then any hundred knights might attaine. And ſince you will not haue me reſt your debtor, for this vncomparable fauour, ſpeake to him for whom you vndertooke the Combat, who is no leſſe bound to you then I So leauing him with the Duke, and the princeſſe Aurora, ſhe imbraced the other knight, vſing betwixt them words of great kindneſſe, according to their high eſtate.

                  Don Bellianis leauing the Duke, whent to the Sophy, (that was returning to the Pallace, hauing commanded his daughter and the duke to be returned to priſon) and being nigh h
                     ••
                  , and followed by many knights, ſaid vnto him. 
                     ••
                  ince mightie Lord the truth cannot be more cleare and manifeſt, I beſeec
                     •
                  e your highneſſe, cōmand that the Princeſſe Perſiana, the knight of the golden image, and the Duke Alf
                        ••
                     on may beſet at lib
                     ••
                  
                  tie, their innocencie being ſaued and confirmed, by the happie ſucceſſe of this battell, which intreat to be forthwith, reſp
                     ••
                  ting the great neceſſitie we haue of 
                     •
                  are for our moſt daungerous wounds.
               The Sophy that minded no ſuch thing, replied. I do beléeue you know (Sir knight) I am not bound to what you ſaid: for if they be cleared of Don Gallaneos death, as you wil haue it, the Duke notwithſtanding is not freed of his treſpaſſe committed againſt mee, hauing reſiſted my wil, with hoſtile arms, which being ſo plaine, I had no cauſe to put it in trial of battel, but reſerue vnto my ſelf the puniſhmēt of that fault, according as it deſerues: therefore talke to me no more thereof, for I will doo nothing, more then I haue ſaid. Whereto Don Bellianis anſwered.
               We expected no ſuch vſage at the hands of ſo great a lord, I vndertooke the fight for all matters concerning the Duke, and if hee be cleare of Don Galleanos death, it followes then, that he is fr
                     •
                  e of all other things whatſoeuer. Replie no more (ſaid the Souldan) for I will haue it ſo: Whereuppon he commanded the Duke to be returned to priſon, who ſtraight was there conducted himſelf going to his Pallace, and would heare none ſpeak: wherat Don Bellianis was like to burſt, through rage. Don Br
                        •
                     anell and Ar
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     o diſguiſed him to go with thē to their lodging, to be cured: to whom he aunſwered. I haue no néede of cure, ſince the Duke remaineth impriſoned, and ſo I humbly take my l
                     ••
                  ue, for I will departe 
                     •
                  ut of the Cit
                     •
                  ie.
               Wherewith he l
                     ••
                  t them 
                     〈◊〉
                  , taking his way to the

wood, onely followed by don Contumeliano. The knights and the Princeſſe Aurora returned to their lodging, reaſoning on nothing but on the Sollitarie knight, whome they thought neuer enough prayſed, hauing by him receiued ſo great helpe in the battell. I ſhould not haue beléeued ſaid Arfileo, that the world contained ſuch a knight as the Prince of Phenicia. You did not ſée his déedes ſo well as I (replied don Brianell) becauſe you were buſie in Combat, and beléeue me, he no more feared (being without ſword) then if he had béene confronted with no foes, which if it had not broken, he néeded none of our helpe.
               Thus talking togither, they laide themſelues in their ſeuerall beds, where they were cured, hauing many and dangerous wounds. The Princeſſe Aurora leauing them, went well accompanied to the pallace, to ſée what was done in the Dukes libertie, where ſhee founde the Princeſſe Perſiana, that for the words ſpoken by the knight of the Golden Image, was ſette free, who receiued each other, as theyr great loue teſtified, and after ſent to ſée what the Souldane did, who brought them word, he commaunded the Dukes guarde to bée doubled, and that alſo he hadde ſent the aduenterous knight word, commaunding him, that ſince he would not at his intreaties ſpare the King of Cyprus brothers life, he ſhould forthwith depart his Land, or elſe his life ſhould pay the forfit of his ſtaye.
               The Ladies greatly gréeued, hearing this, demaunded his aunſwere: which was, that hee was contented to obey him within thrée daies, but he ſhould regarde, that hee did it againſt lawe and iuſtice, which béeing ſo, hee would reuiſit him againſt his will, ſince hee would not obſerue them the conditions of the Combatte, and therefore hee ſhoulde prepare to entertaine him, which indeede was ſo: for they determined to bee reuenged at full vppon the Souldane, who was guarded in his Pallace with more then tenne thouſand

Armed men, to preuent all occaſions of conſpyracies againſt him.
               The Kings of Armenia and Teſſifinty, ſpake with him, and intreating him not to breake his promiſe, which they in his behalfe had made vnto the Duke. But he would not heare them. Whereuppon they went to the Dukes Pallace to viſit the wounded knights, where among them, they layde the plot and manner, howe to frée the Duke (as hereafter ſhall be ſhowen) which coſt many liues, with loſſe of infinit blood.
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               
                  
                     What befell the Knight of the Golden Image, and Don Contumeliano, who beeing at the poynt of death, was ſuccoure with the aduenture of the Deſperation of loue.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis hauing left his companions in field, tooke the next way to the place 
                     •
                  om whence that morning he came, going out of the Cittie gate, at ſuch time, that the darkeneſſe (through abſence of the cleare light, and daye-reſplending ſunne) ouerſpread the face of the earth, giuing place vnto the watery brightneſſe of Dianaes beames, whoſe pale riflect increaſed the paine of Don Bellianis déepe ſtarres, as alſo with one memorating the excellencye, and diuine beautie of his (al
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   all others fayre miſtreſſe, the princeſſe Florisbella. whoſe remembrance made him forget Don Cōtumeliano that followed him a litle after, and béeing come to the wood, and ſeeing him come towards him, ſtayed to talke togither.
               
                  The Prince don Contumeliano comming to him ſaid. Whither doo you meane to go (Sir Knight ſo ſore wounded, leauing the Cittie where you might be cured. I haue no neede (anſwered the knight) of any other thing but your ſight (moſt excellent Prince) to heale me. The Prince woondred at theſe words, and thought by this, and by what he ſaw him do in the pallace, calling himſelfe by his name, that he ſo was counſelled to do by his Lady the Damzell, to whome he lent his armour, but very courteouſly thanking him for his kinde ſpeeches, thus ſaid.
               I cannot expreſſe the great deſire I haue, to know whom you are, therby to ſee the end of the aduenture which happened to me, ſince yeſterday at this time: which (by the immortall gods I proteſt) I cannot comprehend. And tell me what is become of a moſt fayre Lady, to whom the laſt night, I deliuered thoſe Armes, whnſe moſt déere ſight, I onely wiſh nowe to ſee Followe mee (moſt excellent Lorde, replied Don Bellianis) and I will conduct you where you deſire: and ſo they went through thoſe trées, till they came to the Caue, where Don Bellianis had left the Garments, and there both alighting on foote, hee went thereto (amazing Don Contumeliano) what ſhould be the ende of it, and finding the robes, ſhewing them to him, ſaid.
               Knowe you Syr theſe? He looking on them, aunſwered he did, (hauing ingrauen in his heart, all the tokens of his miſtreſſe) and that ſhee did weare them, that deſerued the rule of all the world: and therefore tell me the reſt, for the more I looke on them, the more I meruaile.
               Take of my Helme (ſaide don Bellianis) while the Damzell comes. The Prince Don Contumeliano did ſo, and gazing on his face, was ſtraight ſtrooken into ſuch a traunce, and reſted ſo amazed, that hee knewe not what to faye: and hadde not Don Bellianis caſt his Armes about his necke, hee hadde preſentlye fallen downe to the grounde:

notwithſtanding hee was in ſuch caſe, that the Prince was faine to ſit downe, and take the knightes head on his knees, whyle ye Page went to ſeeke for water, out of a ſpring or fountaine, to caſt in his face. But before he returned, Don Contumeliano, a little recouered his loſte ſences, and with a dé
                     •
                  re ſigh, ſéeming to ſend his ſoule after, complayned in this manner. Ay m
                     •
                  e, vnfortunate, and diſgraced Don Contumelian, vnhappy was the day thou determinedſt to ſee Perſepolis, ſeeing ſuch great diſaſters lay hidden in theſe hearbes, to inſnare thee. Oh deceite to driue mée from deceite, how haſte thou manifeſtly ſhewed me the ſmall intereſt I haue in the large dominions of ſole conquering Loue, beeing intangled in the deceitfull ſnares of a Ladies garment. Ay m
                     •
                  e, how many yéeres haue I ſhunned habitable citties, now to come and dye in this deſarte wood? Oh renowned knight, the beſt that euer buckled armour, how litle do I now eſtéeme your immortall victories, ſince you had the hart to captiuate me with ſo cunning a ſlight, hauing committed no fault nor cauſe, nor giuen any occaſion to mooue you thereto, vnleſſe my ſtarre-
                     •
                  roſt hap procures my vntunely fatall end. For if you néeded my armour, why ſhould you ſeeke ſuch meanes, to require that of me, which I neuer could deny any, being thereunto bound by the order I maintaine, vnleſſe you deſired the deſolation of my vnluckie life. Which hee no ſooner ended, but ſounded againe, in ſuch manner, that no remedie that Don Bellianis vſed, could recouer him, nor yet his Page that was returned, which traunce was ſo vehement, that they iudged him dead, which in deede he was not farre from, being oppreſſed with ſo extreame an euill, that hee lay hopeleſſe, his heart panting with in his body, with his vytall ſpirits ſtopt, that he could neither ſpeake, nor breath, that with the intollerable paine, and agony thereof, hee laye groning, and tumbling, expecting the laſt minute, as thoſe that for want of their naturall heate and moyſture, without other diſeaſe dye. Which ſo gréeued the greeued Prince Don Bellianis, that the teares ranne downe the eyes of y• herroicke

knight like ſtreames of flowing waters, in ſuch aboundance as if his owne deare Ladie were in that caſe: and truly there could bee no danger ſo great, which that Prince would not attempt, then for the ſafety of that good knight Don Contumelian, rather then to ſée him ſo languiſh in that extremitie. Thus lay they a good whyle, iudging him altogether dead, and Don Bellianis through gréefe and loſſe of infinit blood, ſo faint, that hee could not almoſt ſturre. Where there comming towards them, from among thoſe trées, a beaſte, the vglyeſt and deformedſt that euer they ſaw, or in the world might be found. This beaſt was ſo horrible in ſight, caſting fyer out of her mouth, that for feare of her Gontumelianos Page, fell downe almoſt dead. Don Bellianis as well as he could, roſe from the ground (which hee could ſcant doe taking the Curtleaxe in his hand, which hee got of the King of Cyprus his brother, and awayted her comming: whoſe furious paſſage making againſt him, was ſo vehement, that ſhe tumbled downe all the trées in her way, and being nigh him, ſtraight vaniſhed, leauing in her place a huge white Piller, with a letter theron, incompaſſed about with much fire. Don Bellianis amazed at what hee ſawe, ſtepped to the Piller and tooke the letter, which opening, hee read to this effect.
               
                  
                     
                        To thee Supreme and excellent Prince of Greece: The ſage Bellona thy greate friend ſaluteth thee:
                     
                     
                        Knowing by my Arte and skill, which I continually vſe for thy fake, the great and mortall duanger, which through thy meanes ſhould befall the (Solitary knight) & alſo thy ſorrow and languiſhment, therefore mooued me, to make thee know the manner of his recouerie: Wherefore I ſend this letter by a meſſenger of mine, that the Piller of wonders might be manifeſted to thee. Within this Piller thou ſeeſt, ſhalt thou finde his remedy, and therefore leaue it not vntried. Alwaies remembring what I told thee in my lodging, as briefly as I could, for therein all thy labour is aſſured thee. I ſay no more, but ſo reſt thine, as thy ſelfe mayſt teſtifiing
                     
                  
               
               
               
                  Don Bellianis hauing read the letter, reioyced to ſee there was yet remedy for the diſtreſſed Prince, and ſo reſolutely was caſting himſelfe into the huge fyre, to ſée what therein he could finde. But before he could effect his purpoſe, there came towards him foure valiant knights, againſt whom preparing himſelfe, there alſo at that time aſſaultes him foure Lyons, big and fierce, who with their wyde mouthes (as though they caſt fire) imbraced him, maugre all his ſtrength, and drew him into the ſame. Hee ſéeing himſelfe in ſuch perill, letting fall his axe, would haue drawne his dagger, which at his backe he had, but his arme was held ſo faſte, that hee could not ſturre it, and turning to ſée what did it, ſaw it was a moſt beauteous Lady: whereupon the Lyons and knightes vanſhed. Oh God (ſaid Don Bellianis) is this poſſible I ſée? Maruell not knight at what you ſee (replyed the Ladie) letting go his arme, for this is called the Piller of wonders, though it be a long time ſince any thing hath beene ſeene, wherein many haue founde remedy for their diſpairing loue, yet neuer ending the aduenture. Wherefore with more reaſon it might bee named the diſpaire of Loue. And ſo was it true, as in the end of the ſecond parte of this Hiſtorie ſhall bée ſeene: for whoſe cauſe many dyed not tormented with that deadly wounde. And ſéeing for your companyons remedy, you heere haue entred, though it could not bee ſéene but by a third perſon with you, you notwithſtanding enioy the ſecrete thereof: and taking him by the hand, went where Contumeliano lay at the laſte poynt of life: the Lady carryed a kindled cole of the ſame fyre of the Piller, which ſhe caſt vpon the breaſt of the Phenician Prince, wherwith hee ſtraight returned out of his trance, ſomewhat agaſte to ſée himſelfe in that caſe: and going to ryſe, Don Bellianis with much gladneſſe imbraced him, ſaying:
               What is the matter (excellent Prince) for your infirmitie hath greatly gréeued vs:
               My euill hath beene nothing, in refpect of the greate gladneſſe (replyed he) I conceiue in knowing you, and ſince I am

frée of the laſte deceit, I intreate you of your ſpeciall fauour, to manyfeſt it mée, not hyding any of your actes. I am content (anſwered Don Bellianis) to pleaſe you therein, but thanke this Ladie, for your liues libertie. Which hee going to doe, ſhe returned ſuddenly through that fier, leauing euery thing, as afore. What is this (my good Lord) demanded don Contumeliano? Whereuppon Don Bellianis diſcourſed that aduenture, and how hee being ready to breathe his laſt, it appeared, called the deſperation of Loue, and how he proued it, with what elſe happened: And procéeding, ſaid. I knowe not (ſoueraigne Prince) the occaſion of your extreame paſſion. Let vs talke no more hereof (replyed hee:) for I aſſure you, aſſoone as I felt the cole of fyre ſette vpon mee, I loſte all that vehement dolour and agony: yet not ſo, but that I ſhall alwayes remember the deceit done me, hard by the Cittie of Perſepolis. And ſo was it true, for ſtill after when hee ſawe the knight of the golden Image, his pulſes and ſpirits would beate, with alteration, like one ſtrooke with an vncoueth feare. And I pray you let me knowe your name, with the cauſes of your other aduenture. My name (replyed Don Bellianis) is the knight of the golden Image, which I am ſure you neuer heard, and ſo recounted the reſt, how hee came out of priſon in a Ladies garments, to vndertake that combatte, as is afore ſaide. Don Contumeliano greatly wondred, when he knew that was the knight of the golden Image, of whom paſſing through the vnhappy bridge, hee heard ſuch wonders of, and greatly reioycing to haue met with ſuch a knight, ſaid. I doe new ſir knight of the golden Image) altogether beléeue, and confirme the high déedes publiſhed of you, and dee render infinit thanks to our immortall Gods, that haue brought mee to enioy the fruition of your company, and ſo very leuingly imbraced together, knitting twixt them, the inuiolable knot of friendſhip, which all their life laſted, as the Hiſtorie mentioneth.
               
                  Don Bellionis was vnarmed by Contumelianos Page, and

his woundes by him dreſſed, and attired in Florianaes garments, which refreſhed the dying flames in the heart of the amourous Prince, and agréed togither, that don Contumeliano ſhould ſtay for it in a ſtrong citie, fortie miles from Perſepolis, belonging to the Duke Alfiron, called Bollera, appointing to be with him within thirtie dayes: wherefore embracing againe each other, and taking their leaues, they went to ſée the piller, to read the letters thereon, which by the light of the fire there, don Bellianis thus read.
               
                  
                     The Piller of the wonders, for remedie of the diſpairers in Loue, ſhalbe henceforth manifeſted, where euerie one ſhal be remedied according to their meede. And if in Loue he neuer haue erred, or in armes beene ouercome, by the gardians here placed by the ſage Medea: hee that ſo hath not beene, ſhall not proue himſelfe therein.
                  
               
               Well might I haue hoped for remedie (ſaid don Contumeliano) of the gard you here ſaw, if you had not béene here. But I deſire to ſée the end of ſo great an aduenture, and howe it may be brought thereto: for I thinke the letters do not ſhewe it. A little lower I thinke it doth expreſſe the maner how (anſwered Don Bellianis) by him that through diſpaire ſhall hither come. Then good cauſe haue I to proue it (replied don Contumeliano) for I neuer hope for remedie. Don Bellianis greatly laughed at what the Prince ſaid. And ſo taking leaue one of another, departed. Don Contumeliano putting on his owne armor, taking the Giants Curtelax inſtead of his ſword, tooke his next way to Bollen, where he found all the people verie ſorrowfull for the Duke their Lordes impriſonment, who was of them greatly loued. Hee recounted to them what had happened in the battell, and how the duke their Lord was alreadie at libertie, whereat they were much ioyed, and highlie honoured him, who remained there till don Bellianis came, as hereafter ſhall be expreſſed.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVII.
               
                  
                     How Don Bellianis returned to priſon, and what paſt betweene him and the Ladies of the Princeſſe Florisbella.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis, béeing departed from the Prince of Phenicia, arriued in the Citie, when two partes of the night was paſt, and went till hee came to the Soldanes Palace, not ſtaying any where, though hée greatly deſired to know of his Companions. And thinking to finde all the people quiet, hée founde them otherwiſe buſied, and the Pallace guarded with tenne thouſande men, with manie light Torches. But hée cloſely paſſing betwéene them, had nothing ſayde to him, thinking that hée was ſome of the Princeſſe Auroraes, or Perfianaes Gentlewomen: and going vp the Tower, required the watch to let him in to viſite the Knight of the golden Image: they thinking hée was a a woman, let him in, demaunding why ſhee had béene all daye abroade, the knight béeing ſo ſore wounded? I coulde doo no otherwiſe, (replied Don Bellianis) and thereupon entred his Chamber, where Floriana, and her fellowe ſtayed for him: who ſéeing him come, Perſiana ranne to embrace him: ſo did Floriana, who caſting a Mantie ouer her, did riſe out of the bed. Don Bellianis ſeeing it, ſayde. It behooues not (fayre Ladies) you ſhoulde beſtowe ſuch fauours on ſo meane a knight, ſpeciallie in ſo ſuſpicious a place. There is no place to be ſuſpected, where ſuch a knight is, deſeruing greater fauours then theſe, euen at th
                     •
                   hands of the fa
                     ••
                  eſt Princeſſe liuing.
               But leauing this, let vs cure you nowe, that you may tell vs all that befell you abroade: and ſo making him vnreadie, layde him in a bed, and by their handes dreſſed him. Which

done, they gaue him his Supper, who eate it with a good ſtomacke, hauing taſted no foode in a day and a halfe before: and when they woulde haue left him, hee woulde not let them go, becauſe hee coulde not ſléepe, and ſo tolde them all his aduenture from his departing. And when hee ſpake of Don Contumeliano, they coulde not ſtande for laughter.
               I am much glad of your ſucceſſe (ſayde Floriana) becauſe you ſhall not thinke vs fooles in what wée haue ſayde of your beautie, whereby you may imagine the greatneſſe of our. Ladie the Princeſſe Florisbella, and nowe you maye render to vs her counterfeite, for you no more néede it. Let mee yet kéepe it, (gracious Damozell) forthat I haue not coated it with that I haue in my Shéelde, to ſée which is more naturall: for the meaning I knowe is all one. And tell mée the reaſon why the Soldane did commaunde the Prince Perianeo, to depart his Dominions, which the Princeſſe Aurora was the other day telling mée, but ſhe was interrupted by a ſuddaine occaſion, and ſince I haue had no time to knowe it? Wee haue not effectually learned it, (ſayde ſhée) but it is thought the Souldane imagined that hée was in loue with the Princeſſe: and leaſt hée ſhoulde attempt anie thing agaynſt her honour, commaunded him to leaue his Kingdome, beeing the valianteſt knight then knowen in the whole vniuerſall world.
               What loſſe had there béene (ſayde Don Bellianis) if hée had béene married to her, béeing ſo good a knight, and ſo great a Prince. In faith none (replied ſhée) if for poſſeſſions, or anie thing elſe ſhée ſhoulde haue béene giuen to anie, he well deſerued her. But we thought, that according to her excellencie and beautie, ſome of our Gods would deſcende the heauens, to enioy her on earth. And if hee had demaunded her of the Soldane our Lorde, wée thinke hee woulde not haue denied her him, but he neuer woulde declare his name, which was knowen after the warres of Antioch,
               
               
                  This they tolde Don Bellianis, who was greatly diſcomforted to heare of the loue betwixt the Knight and the Princeſſe, as alſo to heare, that euerie where the wonders of the knight of the Images ſounded in his eares, béeing ſo highly eſtéemed in his Ladies Countrey, and ſo purpoſed neuer to reſt till hée met with him, ſuppoſing he ſhould neuer be fauoured of his Miſtreſſe, vnleſſe hee ſhould remooue that knight out of her ſight, and ſo ſaid to the Damzels. Hath there béene no newes of him ſince his departing, or did he ſo ſoone forget the Princeſſe? No (ſaid they) for it was ſaid, he euerie day came into the court with ſeuerall horſe and armour, and then writ diuerſe letters to her, beſeeching her to receiue him as her knight, letting her knowe he was Prince of this land. The letter was deliuered to vs, and we fearing ſome euill to inſue thereby, durſt not giue it her. But what anſwer made you (ſaid Don Bellianis) to him that gaue you the letter: None other (anſwered the Damzell) ſaue that the Princeſſe would not anſwere it. Yet might you haue giuen her it. There is none for their liues that durſt haue done ſo: for beſides that, ſhe doth iniurie herſelfe, being but ſeldome ſéene, and abhorring ſuch matters extreamly, ſhee hateth this Prince greatly, becauſe he was the cauſe that the Princeſſe Aurora loſt her kingdome, with her fathers life, which was Uncle to our Ladie Princeſſe, and brother to her mother. With that Don Bellianis reſted ſomewhat comforted, and to giue place to his thoughts, praied the Damzels to go to bed, becauſe he would ſléepe: which they did: and being withdrawne, they reaſoned, that the knight of the golden Image ſhould bée in loue with their Ladie. Beléeue not (ſaid Beriana) if ſince you named the Princeſſe Florisbella, he hath not béene captiuated with her prayſes, elſe why ſhould hee ſo particularly inquire for her. Will you know it certainly (ſaid Floriana?) Let vs riſe ſoftly and hearken what he ſayes, for it is not poſſible but hée ſhoulde vtter the aboundance of his heart, and ſo roſe in their ſmocks to heare him, who to himſelf complained, and now and then groned, and ſighed ſo bitterly, as if his heart would break.

But at laſt with a ſoft voyce he burſt into theſe paſſions. Ay mée vnfortunate Knight of the golden Image, and moſte vnhappie Prince, what accurſed Starres, voyde of all pitie, haue conducted thée to Perſepolis, to receiue ſo diſtaſtrous a death? Ah, wretch that I am, whome the power of hearts-penetrating loue, contenteth not with ſuch crueltie to torment thée, but telleth thée thou art not woorthie to ſerue whome thou deſyreſt. But thriſe happie art thou Knight of the Images: for if thou dooſt ſuffer anie paſſions, and heartes languiſhment for the diuined beautie of the excellenteſt Princeſſe that euer was borne: yet are thy thoughts made knowne to her, where thou mayeſt immortallize thy ſelfe, and call thée the onelie bleſſed of all mortall men. But aye me, more vnhappie farre, then thou art happie, that muſte heare the intollerable burthen of my greeuaunces, without comforte, without helpe, and without hope. For though my ſoules true paine were knowne, where are the merittes to reape the benefite of ſo large a guerdon? But let Fortune doo her woorſt, yet will not I leaue, till I ſee howe long my deſpiſed life will labour in the Laborinth of miſfortune. And if I do méete with the Knight of the Images, I doo proteſt by the ſacred order I haue receiued, to make it knowen vppon his ſtéeled Burgonet, that none but I deſerue the fruition of ſuch thoughtes, though hee more largely do poſſeſſe the fauour of time, ſmiling chance, which I will obtaine, vnleſſe my tributarie death denie me paſſage to effect my will, that hardly will bee maintained with theſe oppreſſing tormentors, where with manie grones and ſighes, drowned in a flood of teares, wetted all his bed.
               Oh God (ſayde Floriana) did you euer heare ſuch a complaint of a Knight in ſo ſhort a time, not hauiug ſéene her whome hée loues? And I beleeue, (vnleſſe hee bee remedied) hée will hardly ſcape with his life, béeing thus déepelie wounded.
               I knowe not what to ſay, (replied her fellow Periana) for

it is the ſtraungeſt thing I haue ſéene, that the loue of a Ladie ſhould ſo wound the heart of a Knight, agaynſt whome neither the furie of hell-bred beaſts, nor the ſtrength of mightie Giants can preuaile, and whome wee haue ſéene do ſuch déedes, that ſcarce our ſelues can beléeue: and this is the greateſt of all, that ſo ſtrong a Competitor in Loue, is offered at this preſent to the Perſian Prince. The Knight of the golden Image is not ſo great as you eſtéeme him (ſayde Floriana) for I well knowe the high déedes and great ſtate of the other, and though he be nowe diſgraced by the Soldan, he may be reconciled.
               All this knowe I (ſayde the other) yet is not hée like to this, if hée ſhould bée compared. And this Knight may bee ſome great Prince, ſince (knowing the other ſueth for her) hee determineth the like. And as for his beautie, you ſée the worlde cannot equall it: and alſo for his valour, we our ſelues are good witneſſes. And for my part, though I were ſure to die, I woulde procure all meanes to effect his deſire, ſeeing the daunger hée freed vs from, and the loue wée bare him, and hee vs, deſerueth all our endeuour in this caſe. In this they continued while they fell a ſléepe, till the next morning, that they againe dreſſed him. And trulie the great deſire he had to ſee himſelfe out of that Cittie, greatly helped his woundes, that the Damzels ſayde he would bee well within ten dayes, and able to trauell, which greatly ioyed him, hoping to be quickly in the great Citie of Babylon, there to poſſeſſe the ſight of his heauenly Princeſſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               
                  
                     Howe betweene the Princes Don Bryanell, and Arfileo, with the two kings, it was determined, in what maner the Duke Alfiron, and the Knight of the golden Image ſhould be ſet at libertic: And howe the Princeſſe Aurora ſpake with about it him: by whoſe counſell ſhe departed from the Soldans Court.
                  
               
               
                  THe prince Arfileo knowing how the Soldan gouerned himſelfe with a diſt
                     •
                  mpered paſſion of an vnbrideled rage, reſolued with the two kings his friends (whō this matter alſo concerned) becauſe the Sophi had with them broken promiſe, to procure the end of theſe affaires: and therevpon coucluded, that ſéeing the Soldan would not frée the Knight of the golden Image, and the Duke, by intreatiue meanes, to make it knowne vnto Don Bellianis, and to this ende, the Princeſſe Aurora ſhoulde viſite him in Priſon, and béeing there, found him conuerſing with the Damzelles about the Princeſſe Florisbella, who knowing his paſſion, alwayes deuiſed diſcorſiue matter vpon theyr Ladie, which ſome time both pleaſed, and diſpleaſed him, as the ſpéeches accorded with his humour, or delighted his waxe-mollified heart, apt for any impreſſion of that qualitie.
               Nowe when the Princeſſe entered, the Ladies roſe to receyue her, with that obeyſaunce that befitted her ſtate, and the Prince Don Bellianis, about to doo the lyke, was ſtayed by her, who ſo ſoone ſtepped to him, that hee could not doo it: to whome ſhée woulde haue knéeled, but hee not permitting it, embraced her betweene his armes with more affection then thitherto hée had, becauſe of his conceyued

loue of the Princeſſe Florisbella, that ſo dearely loued this Ladie, hoping by her meanes (through the helpe hée ſhoulde imploy in her ſeruice) to obtaine his Miſtreſſe fauour. The Princeſſe Aurora ſitting by him, demaunded how he felt himſelfe of his daungerous wounds. Well, (deare Ladie, replied he) that ſéeing I am in ſuch companie, there is no cauſe to demaund of me that, for if that fortune ſhould lend her force to my harme, her power is ſo weakened hereby that ſhe cannot. I gladly 
                     ••
                  y therein (anſwered ſhe) and yet you are not content to haue hitherto yéelded no ſatiſfaction for your cure, but that you will with words ieaſt at vs. Then were it good we require it (ſaid Perſiana) leaſt he thinke to pay vs with conceyts. I can not ſatiſfie you (replied the Prince) according to your merits, or the great fauour I haue receiued: for if I coulde, you ſhould not kéep me in priſon for it, as you do. What priſon, (ſaid they?) if the Soldan would ſet you at libertie, you ſhould not be ſtaied by vs. If I could ſo ſoone frée my ſelfe of that gaole, I meane, (replied Don Bellianis) as I can of this the Soldanes, the griefe I ſuſtaine ſhould not thus torment me. Let vs leaue this talke (ſaid the Princeſſe) for the time will come, that you ſhall be frée of all your priſons, and theſe Ladies alſo ſatiſfied to their content: wherein if you ſhall diſagrée, I as vmpere will moderate the ſtrife betwéene you, though I now it will not be requiſite. But to the purpoſe, I will tell you the effect of my comming. You alreadie know, how the Soldan (hauing béene intreated, and importuned about it) hath alwayes refuſed to graunt you libertie with the Duke Alfiron, denying it alſo to the Kings of Armenia and Teſſifantie, that greatly laboured your deliuerie. And the laſt anſwere he gaue them, was, they ſhould no more immortune him therein, for if they did, it ſhould not a little diſadauntage them, that if they became of your faction, he would alſo apprehend them, as traytors to his ſtate, and perſon. New they haue determined to end this matter one way or other forthwith, becauſe the venturous knight, may not ſtay within the Citie, beeing commaunded to the

contrarie by the Soldan, who knoweth no otherwiſe, but that hee is come, yet will not they conclude any thing without your aduiſe. What power haue they ſaid Don Bellianis:) They haue (replyed ſhée) eyght thouſand men well appointed, and heere they gaue me your ſword to bring you, which I did as ſecretely as I could, tying it vnder my gowne, and ſo gaue it him. Don Bellianis tooke it, and more reioyced therewith, then if hee had beene preſented with a kingdome. The Damzells greatly wondred to ſée the great riches therof, which was vnualuable.
               Tell thoſe knights (moſt excellent Princeſſe) that ſixe dayes hence, they prepare and haue then in readineſſe, al their men, and that in the euening they ſuddenly aſſault the Soldans pallace, & procuring nought elſe but the libertie of the Duke Alſiron: and in any caſe they take with them, the Princeſſe Perſiana, for it muſt néeds bee ſo, and you (deare Lady) ſhall take your leaue of the Soldan, ſaying you will departe hence, ſéeing hee will not let me go, and ſtay for vs in the firſt Uillage that wee muſt paſſe, beeing thither directed by ſome of the Dukes folkes, which otherwiſe would greatly let vs, and I will ſend theſe Ladies to accompany you, leaſt wee looſe them in this attempt, and ſo heerein let them not faile: and as for mee, let the Prince Arfileo, Don Bryanell, and the knights, take no care, for ſo ſoone as they ſhall aſſault the Pallace, I will be with them. You ſay well (replyed the Princeſſe) and if it pleaſe you, I will aduertyſe the Princeſſe Perſiana thereof, that againſt the time ſhée prepare her ſelfe, and not hyde her at the noyſe. It will not bee amiſſe (ſaid Don Bellianis where
                     •
                  ppon the Princeſſe Aurora, after ſhe had beene there a whyle, departed, leauing Don Bellianis in his that wiſh the Damzells, and ſhe her ſelfe went ſtraight to the Princeſſe Perſiana, to aduiſe her of that which had beene determined, which 
                     ••
                   w
                     •
                  s highly contented her, that ſhe thought ſhe was not able to diſtimble it: in which content, the Princeſſe Aurora left her, and w
                     •
                  nt to the Lords of the faction, with them partaking of the knight of

the golden Images determination, which greatly pleaſed them. The kings aduertiſed the Souldiers, how they would ſet the Duke Alfiron at libertie, ſéeing the Soldan refuſed to doe it, which they ought to doe, being his ſubiects, and true harted friendes. Whereunto they yéelded, making account, that as in that hurley-burley they ſhould ſacke the Soldans Pallace, ſo they might alſo vtterly ſubuert the Cittie, putting it to ſpoyle and pillage.
               Which made them thinke euery houre, a moneth, till they met with the Soldans power, to bee reuenged on him for all his iniueies done them, and for the breach of his word. Many in meane time ſolicited the Soldan to quietneſſe, but nothing would preuaile with him, determining to put the Duke to death, which if hee did not, was, for that hee expected the dayly comming of the Prince Perianeo his ſonne, with whoſe preſence, he feared not the whole power of the whole vnyted power vniuerſe, thinking then more ſafely to effect his will. Thus were fiue of the ſixe dayes paſte, that Don Bellianis had appointed, wherein hee was vppe, and walked about, and in a manner well, and able to beare armour, who ſéeing the determinate time approached, ſent the Damzels to accompany the Princeſſe Aurora, who ſéeing it to bee requiſit, did accordingly: telling the Sophy, that the knight of the golden Image was wel, and not néeded more their helpe. He requeſted them to remaine in ye Pallace, til they minded to depart. They thanked him: for that courteſie, anſwering they would go attend the pleaſure of the Princeſſe Aurora, whom they found with all her Ladies, in readineſſe to depart, and was comming to take her leaue of the Soldan, but ere they went, the Ladies were furniſhed with good palfrayes, who returned to the Soldan with the Princeſſe, that beeing before him, thus began. Great is the wrong (moſt mightie Lord) which in thy Land thou haſte offered mee, giuing me cauſe to complaine abroade of thy diſcourteous entertainment, hauing againſt all right and kingly iuſtice, impriſoned the knight of the golden Image,

that accompanied mee, and to banniſh from thy territories, ſo braue a man as the aduenturous knight, with what elſe thou knoweſt. Wherfore ſéeing within thy houſe, court, and Pallace, theſe iniuries I receiued, I haue determined to returne vnto the King my Father, though gréeued to the hart, through want of the beſt company that euer Lady had And I do wiſh, that with mildeneſſe you would cutte of the dangers that heereby may inſue, that I feare my heart denyeth: which if you will not do at my intreates, euery one wil repute it to procéede of your ſupreme vertues, ſaluing thereby all thinges paſte.
               And remember the blood ſpilt by the Prince of Phenicia, in the battel, which (through your ingratitude) wil elſe diſparage and ſcandaliſe your royall name: beeing heeretofore reputed for ſo mighty a king, now to defame and ſtaine thy ſpotleſſe ſtate, with the name oftyrannous crueltye, and bloody barbariſme. And ſo ended, expecting the Soldans anſwere, who a little ſtood in ſuſpence, whether hee ſhould ſet at libertie Don Bellianis or no: but being altogether blinded with a paſſionate rage, and ſelfe-wil, reſpecting no law, made this reply.
               I know not (faire Princeſſe) why you ſhuld thus cholerickly argue againſt me, for the thing, that if I did not, weuld ruinate the honour of my vaſte Emperie, and make mee little feared of my ſubiects: ſo that were it not for this, I would willingly giue you the knight of the golden Image. What committed or intended offence, can you impute to the Knight of the golden Image (ſaid Don Arfileo, that did come with her) being none of your ſubiects? or elſe doe you thinke there ſhall bee no other Judge of this matter, but you, which with your vniuſte, and blinde paſſion, wil but badly be determinated.
               Great is your pride Prince of Raſia, (replyed the Soldan) to preſume to giue me counſell, that néede it not. I command you to ſpeake no more heereof, and ſtraight get you out of my Empyre, doing me all the harme you can, for I nothing

eſtéeme you, nor the greatneſſe of your kingdomes, whereo you and your companions ſo much vaunt of.
               
                  Arfileo became ſo full of choller, that hee would haue replyed according to thoſe ſpéeches, but the Princeſſe ſtayed and required him notto do it, diſſembling his anger for that preſent, for hee ſhould haue time to be reuenged at full, making him repent euery thing hee had done: and ſo tooke their leaues of him, expecting the next morrowe for their reuenge, and for that time, ſet forwards on their iourney. The chiefeſt Nobilitie of the Cittie, with an infinit number of Knights, accompanyed the Princeſſe Aurora, till they brought her to a little Uillage ſixe myles from the Cittie, where leauing her, they all returned backe.
               
                  Arfileo ſéeming to go with the Princeſſe, returned alſo ſo ſoone as it was night, the better to paſſe vnknowne, where he ordered what ſhould be done the euening following, commaunding all their men, to go to the King of Armenias Pallace, from whence they might the better march. The Prince Don Bellianis not forgetting what hee had to doe, expected the appointed houre, very attentiuely, as one that ſhould paſſe through the Gates of death, wanting his good armour. The Soldan on the other ſide, was not without great feare, daring almoſt to truſt none, that he would in perſon viſit his watch and cintinells. Like a man that vnaduiſedly, and without ſound counſell, procureth with rage and vnlawfull meanes, to effect a vaine opinion, as at this preſent happened to the Soldan of Siconia, a King moſt puiſſant and mightie, of the Perſians, whom the ouermuch and arrogant pride of his large Gouernement, & Empyre, with ſo bolde and valiant a ſonne as the Prince Peri
                        •
                     eo, otherwiſe called the Knight of the Images, whoſe equall the world could hardly yeeld: did make him violate his royall word (a thing ſo odious in any Prince) which made him feare & doubt his ſafetie in his owne kingdome and Pallace, and among his ſubiects, and not be able to puniſh them.
               
                  And alſo his Daughter, that though at that preſent ſhee deſired not his death, yet ſought ſhe the ouerthrowe of his content, like a mortall and Capitall foe. This nowe was the ſtate of the Siconian Souldane, and great Emperour of the Perſian Monarchy, who to compaſſe and bring to paſſe, the fooliſh and madde opinion of a vaine intent, eſtéemed not the valour of ſuch great Princes, and hardie knights. Wherefore if he eſcaped with his life, in recompence of his ingratitudes, he may account it no little good. But leauing this, we will returne to our former purpoſe, as in the Chapter following ſhal be declared.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  
                     The braue and dangerous battell fought in Perſepolis, betweene the Princes and knights, with the Soldans power, about the libertie of the Duke Alfiron, with the whole ſucceſſe thereof.
                  
               
               
                  AS ſoone as the bright ſplendor of heauens, al
                     •
                  perſing eye had ended his diarnal courſe about the compaſſe of the orbed earth, ſome heart▪ impoueriſht Knightes through diſmaying feare, & pale timerous cowardiſe, diſpaired, (as in ſuch caſes, often hapneth) of their ſure ſucceſſe, whileſt the Princes Don Brianell and Arfileo, accompanied with the kings of Armenia and Teſſifanty, commaunded all their knights to mount on their horſes, expecting farther order. Don Brianell cauſed Don Bellianis Dwarffes to conuey his Armour, where the Princeſſe Aurora ſtaied. And charging all their troupes vpon their aſſault to cry alloude, Phenicia, Phenicia, they iſſued forth as cloſely as they could. And for that all the citie was vp in armes that day, there was no regard taken of them, thinking they went to gard the pallace, whither being

come, and finding the guard aforeſaid, they began crying, Phenicia, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   aſſa
                     •
                  lt them with ſuch furie, that they v
                     •
                  horſed aboue two thouſand at the firſt incounter. But they perceiuing the dece
                     ••
                  , gathered themſelues togither in ſuch ſort, that the 
                     •
                  ight on both parties, wa
                     •
                  ed moſt bloodie, with the death of an infinit nūber of men: though through the nights obſcurity it could not be diſc
                     •
                  rned, ye
                     •
                   by theſe cryes, knew they one an other: for the Souldanes men had their watchwords among them, whereby the battell ſtill continued very fiecce, defendi
                     ••
                   ſo couragiouſly the entry, that for all Don Brianell & Arfileo performed woonders, yet their men could win no aduantage: whereuppon they determined to alight on f
                     ••
                  te, to doo it more eaſily, when ſuddainly there was brought ſo many lights, that one might well know the other. The Prince Don Bellianis no ſooner heard the outcryes, but caſting his mantle about his arme, drew his ſword, and deſcended the ſtayres, but 
                     •
                  re he was at the foote of them, the guarde beſet him, eſpecially the Captaine, that would haue giuen him a daungerous blowe, on the head, to haue cl
                     •
                  aued it in twaine, had not he taken it vpon his ſword, wherewith he cut his legge in two, but 
                     •
                  re hee fell on the ground (Don Bellianis defending himſelfe of the other knights blowes) drew the Captaine to him by the ſhéelde, that he tooke it from him, and ſtepping backe, buckled it about his arme, and with them, he began ſo braue and ſo 
                     •
                  ruell a fight, as if as great a number were with him, but the place being ſomewhat narrow, hee tooke all their blowes vppon his ſworde and ſhéelde, his being ſo deadly, that in litle time he hadde throwne downe dead aboue thirtie knights: whoſe huge and monſtrous wounds woulde make any afraide to ſée them, and ſo oppreſt the others, that their clamour and out
                     •
                  ryes ſéemed to 
                     •
                  uerwhelme the Pallace.
               The Knights being with the feare of death diſmaid, and not able to abide the f
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                   of the knight of the Golden Image, turned their backs and fled.
               
                  Don Bellianis letting them goe, armed himſelfe with one

of the dead knights Armour, and not longer ſtaying, entred the pallace, wherein, in the great hall, hee eſpied the Souldane at the light of torches that were there, who with a troupe of choſen knights was going to ſuccour the pallace, which he heard was aſſaulted by the Prince of Phenicia, for ſo they thought by their aduerſaries clamours. Whome ſéeing, he conceiued ſuch rage againſt him, that aloude he ſaid. I haue thée now in time falſe Souldane of Perſia, violater of thy royall faith and word, that thou ſhalt ſee how little thou ſhalt get by my impriſonment, for knowe I am the knight of the Golden Image: who is able to ſet downe the extreame feare that ſurpriſed the Souldane at thoſe words, iudging himſelfe at that inſtant vtterly deſtroyed.
               The Knights put themſelues before the Souldane to defend him, which Don Bellianis ſéeing, redoubled his rage, and maugre their force, ſet ſo furiouſly vpon them, that as a wolfe among a troupe of ſhéepe, he beat them downe togither, who not able to reſiſt him, made him large way to paſſe by them, which he did to reuenge himſelfe at full on the S
                     •
                  uldane. Who ſéeing him ſo determinate come againſt him, retyred to a windowe, falling ouer a garden, through which for his beſt ſauegarde, he caſt himſelfe downe, that according to the fall, it was a great woonder, he beat not out his braines. Yet, it bruſed all his body, and diſ
                     •
                  oynted both armes and legges: the like befell to aboue thirtie Knights, following him, flying from the knight, as from the touche of a very death-ſtinging Baſiliſke.
               The Prince Don Bellianis woulde haue done ſo, ſuch was his hate againſt the Souldane, but determined firſt, to ende the battell, thinking afterward, to haue ſome time to execute his will, and ſo turning to the knights, ſawe them run headlong out of the Pallace, and thruſting himſelfe in among them, founde his companions, that hadde forced the Soldans mē to retyre back to the ſtayres, which they defended like them that expected the fearefull ſtroake of death: ſo that

                  Don Bellianis aſſayling them at their backs, made ſuch deſolation of them, that they thought ſo great a number behinde as before, which ſo bereft them of their ſences, that how to reſolue they knew, till the death gining wound, piearſt their daunted hearts, that moſt of them reſted wounded and dead. The Dukes ſouldiers ſéeing this, began to ſacke and robbe the pallace: the ranſaking of whoſe treaſurie, was their cheefeſt hope of gaines.
               
                  Don Bellianis and Arfileo in the meane time ruſht into the Princeſſe Perſianaes Chamber, who before her, ſeemed very gréeued, and being by the Prince ſéene, he aloude ſaide. It behooues thee Pri
                     •
                  ceſſe Perſiana, to goe with mee, in recompence of the wro
                     •
                  gs, and impriſonment your father put mee in, againſt law and iuſtice, and thereupon tooke her betwixt his armes, and ſome o
                     •
                  her knights did ſo, by two or three of her ladies: whoſe lamentable ſhrikes made the Pallace eccho with the noiſe. And ſo carrying them, were met by the aduenturous Knight, that was comming for her, hauing ſet at libertie the Duke that came with him, who with ſuch great admiration and excéeding ioye to ſée his Lady, had almoſt fowned to the ground.
               Thereupon Don Bellianis commaunded the Trumpets to ſound the retrait, to withdrawe the ſouldiers, and n
                     •
                  éeting with the Kings of Armenia and Fe
                        ••
                     ifanty led them to theyr owne quarters, which they could hardly do, beeing ſo giuen to the ſpoile. But being vnited togither, don Bellianis charged the Dukes Captaines to conduct their men to their maiſters Cittie, that was in the Kingdome of Perſia, which they did with great haſt, ſéeing their enterpriſe ſo happ
                     •
                  ly ſuccéeded, and alſo becauſe there was aboue 40. thouſand men armed there. And thēſelues hauing no guides, ſtaied within ye citie, til ye morrow, leaſt they ſhuld looſe thēſelues in the night. But the dukes men kept on their way ſo well, that at the appearing of the Sunne, they were hard by the place, where the daye be
                     •
                  ore they left the Princeſſe Aurora, whither alſo came the Princes,

and there they all alighted to reſt them, where the Princeſſe Aurora welcommed them with the duke Al
                        •
                     iron, whoſe gladneſſe was as great as his ſorrow had bene before, rendring togither with the other Princeſſe innumerable thankes vnto the two Kings for their aide, promiſing and confirming an euerla
                  
                     ••
                  ing in
                     •
                  iolable bond of amitie, 
                     •
                  that laſted all their liues, as the courſe of this great Hiſtorie amply dilat
                     •
                  th. And not ſtaying in this place, departed thence, where we leaue them, to ſet downe what the Soldane did.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                     What the Soldane did, hauing vnderſtood his daughters loſſe: And how Coroliano and Boraldo his brother, followed the Dukes power, with great troupes, with the ſucceſſe of a moſt cruell battell that paſſed betweene them.
                  
               
               
                  WHat tongue is able to expreſſe the many and loude laments, and lamentable cries made in the Pallace, by the popularitie and others, which alſo the Ladies and damoſelles with their great clamours augmented, for the loſſe of the Princeſſe Perſiana. Now the Knights that eſcaped the deadly fury of the loſt battell, ſéeing their aduerſaries gone, went to ſéeke the Soldan, whom they found in the Garden, as before is mentioned, they tooke him and did beare him thence to his Chamber, and laide him in his bedde, and hearing the pittious ſhréekes of the damoſels, enquired the cauſe, which was told him to be, for that their aduerſaries had taken with them the Princeſſe Perſiana his daughter, and had ſet at libertie the Duke Alfiron, and all that more he had not ſéene: which when he knew, the extreame anguiſh and ſorrow of theſe euils, almoſt bereft him of his liuing breath. But therevpon he called a couſin of his, a luſtie and couragious Knight called Coroliano, and commaunded him to follow the enemy

wi
                     •
                  h all the people in the Citie, to reſcue his ſtolen Daughter, and that he ſhould ſpare no mans life that fell into his hands: Which he vttered with ſuch 
                     ••
                  raged greet, that the 
                     •
                  eares tri
                     •
                  kled downe his face. Coroliano did all like the man accuſton
                     ••
                  d in ſuch dangers, aſſuring himſelfe 
                     •
                  o be au
                     •
                  nged on their foes, for all their loſſes: Wherefore at his command the citie ſtraight 
                     ••
                  cho
                     •
                  d with the ſound of all manner of millitarie inſtrumēts, and all that were able to beare armes, armed themſelues, and w
                     •
                  nt to the pallace, ſo that in litle time there were gathered aboue 40. th
                     •
                  uſand men, which in all haſte hee l
                     •
                  d 
                     •
                  ut of Per
                     
                        ••
                     p
                        •
                     lis, keeping no order i
                     •
                   their march▪ yt their enemies might not get far before them, who then were aboue 15. miles a
                     •
                  ore. In this maner they went till they came to a Cittie belonging to the Souldane, where they that night reſted, and vnderſtanding there howe the enemie determined to dyne the next morrow at Bolle
                     •
                  a, thought if hee ſtaied, hee ſhould not ouertake them as he would. Wherfore about mid-night he ſet forwards with all his men, making ſuch haſte, that by br
                     •
                  ake of day hee eſpied them, deſ
                     ••
                  n
                     •
                  ing a hill in good order, which much ioyed him, that he preſently commaunded his Tr
                     ••
                  pets to ſ
                     •••
                  de: which Don 
                        •
                     ellianis hearing, looked backe, and ſawe ſo 
                     ••
                  any men make towards them, that they couered the plaine: it ſ
                     •
                  mewhat troubled him, wanting meanes to guarde the Princeſſe▪ Yet with as much c
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ritie as the time af
                     •
                  oorded, hee whéeled his companies about, ſetting the Princeſſe at one ſide of the mountaine, guarded with fiue hundred knights: and ſéeing his men began to 
                     •
                  aint with the ſight of ſuch multitudes, he incouraged them, repraying and 
                     ••
                  treating them to, conſider that thoſe troupes were of little moment, and leſſe valo
                     •
                  r, comming halfe vanquiſhed, beeing onely ledde by the eager
                  
                     ••
                  ſſe of r
                     •••
                  nge, for the late ſlaughter was made of them, which like blinde men brought them to theyr vtt
                     •
                  r diſtruction. This ſai
                     ••
                  , hee tooke with him the adu
                     •
                  nterous Knight, the Prince Arfileo, the two knightes and the Duke, and placing themſelues before theyr men, expected theyr aduerſaries.
               
                  
                  Coroliano being deſcended on the plaine, deuided his Souldiers in two Squadrons, the one hee committed to his Brother Boraldo, and the other he ledde himſelfe, and imagining what they had done, he command
                     •
                  d two thouſand choſen knights, to aſſault the corner of the mounte, certainly ſuppoſing that the Princeſſe Perſiana was there, and ſo with great clamours they furiouſly ranne vppon the Dukes men, who with their valiaunt guides were to receiue th
                     •
                  m, and ſo terrible were their incounters on that plaine, that aboue foure thouſand of Corolianos knights were vnhorſed, by reaſon that their horſes were wearie and tyred, with the haſte they had made, that they could ſcant holde out thitherto. Don Bellianis, and his companions on their ſide, ouerthrewe aboue ſixtie to the grounde dead: and thruſting themſelues among their enemies, that they ſéemed ſo many furies ſent for theyr vtter deſolation. But the aduerſe numbers were ſo many, that the dead nothing diſcouraged the liuing, eſpecially for that Coroliano ſo animated them, that it may be be ſaide, hee onely vpheld the battell. Which Arfileo ſeeing, tooke a Launce from one of his companie, and made againſt him, Coroliano did the like, and met ſo furiouſly, that theyr ſhéeldes and Armour were pierſed, and themſelues reſted on horſebacke, ſorely wounded, then drawing theyr ſtrong ſwordes, forced each other at euery blowe to bow
                     •
                   theyr heads to the Saddle pummell.
               While they were thus in fight, Don Bellianis men through his ſtrength, (and their enemies hauing no other Captaine but the other) beganne to win ſome ground, with ſuch ſlaughter of both ſides, that neyther parte might well boaſt of the victorie in the ende. Which thing, when Boraldo perceiued, woulde no longer ſtaye nor expect any woorde from his Brother, but like an arrowe ſent from a ſtéeled bowe▪ maketh his ſwift way through their airie paſſage, ſo he with his freſh Battalion, ſette againſt his aduerſaries,

and looking on whom h
                     •
                   might with moſt honour breake his Launce, eſp
                     •••
                   the King of Armenia, that with diuelliſh rage 
                     ••
                  a
                     •
                  ſacred his me
                     •
                  , againſt whom reſting his ſpeare, ouerturned him there with, doing the like to the King of Teſſifantie▪ on whom he brake his ſpeare. Whereat with a loude voyce, he incouraged his fainting ſouldiers, commaunding them to ſpare none of their liues, that had committed ſuch rebellious treaſon. And ſo paſſing along he met the Duke Alfiron, who diſcharged vpon one another the fury of their cutting ſwords, that Boraldo receiued a litle wound on the head, and the Duke fell in a traunce, and had fallen had he not held by his Horſes necke. Boraldo not ſtaying there, paſſed forwards, proud of the blow that he gaue. At this time the Soldanes men recouered, and began to winne much ground, inſomuch that Don Bellianis, nor the aduenterous Knight, being not able with their valour to ſtay their men, they beganne to retire backe: which when the Knight of the golden Image ſawe, like a chaſed Lyon wanting his praie, he thruſt himſelfe among the thickeſt of his aduerſaries, that vnhappie was he whom his blewes reached: in ſuch maner beating and ouerthrowing Knights with their Horſes, that his Armour was all couered, and his ſword réeked with blood, which forced euery one to flie his fury, as doth the fearefull Partridge flie from the deadly purſuit of a towring Fawlkon. For there was no Knight that he met, how valiant ſoeuer, but with one blow he ſtrooke downe from his Horſe▪ And paſſing thus along where Arfileo and Coroliano were fiercely in 
                     •
                  ight t
                     •
                  gither, both which had ſuch piteous wounds, that it moued the Prince to compaſſion.
               Here then arriued Boraldo, and ſéeing his brother in ſuch caſe, and to haue the worſt, raiſed himſelfe in his 
                     ••
                  yrr
                     •
                  pes, and (vnable to be r
                     •
                  ſiſted by Don Bellianis, that in great haſt pri
                     •
                  
                  ked towards him) gaue him ſo mightie a blowe backwards on the head, that cutting his Helme, it made a gréeuous wounde, and had like to haue fallen, hauing altogither l
                     •
                  ſt his ſ
                     •
                  nces. Which ſo inraged the h
                     •
                  art of Don Bellianis, that very blood

ſéemed to runne downe his eyes, to ſée him ſo vſed in his preſence. And in this fury he ſtrooke at Coroliano (that was diſcharging another blowe on Arfileo) which fell with ſuch huge ſtrength, that lighting on his ſhield, it diuided it in two, and the ſ
                     ••
                  ord deſcending on the Horſes necke, it alſo cut it off, falling on the earth with Coroliano and his Horſe. But Boraldo at this inſtant wounded Don Bellianis on the one ſide, that pear
                  
                     •
                  ing his Armour, it pitteouſly opened his fleſh, and ſo ſwiftly redoubled another on his Helme, that it cut all his buckles, leauing his head diſarmed. Neuer was there any Baſiliſke more inuironed, nor Lyon more eager of his praie, then Don Bellianis was now burning in fury of reuenge. And turning vppon Boraldo, with one blowe tumbled his ſhielde in two, togither with himſelfe ſore wounded to the ground. Coroliano that by this had riſen, knowing him by his Armour to be the haughtie Knight of the golden Image, on whoſe ouerthr
                     •
                  w conſiſted the good ſucceſſe of his enterpriſe, thruſt his Horſe into the belly, that he fell dead with his maiſter on his backe. Which Don Bellianis ſéeing, leapt from him with great celeritie, which he had ſcant done, but he was aſ
                     •
                  aulted by aboue 2000. Knights that came to aide Coroliano, yet this helpe litle helped him, for Don Bellianis ſtrooke him out of his ſences, and looking 
                     •
                  or Arfilio, ſaw him in great danger, fighting with Boraldo, in whoſe behalfe, many there arriu
                     •
                  d, but he ioyning with his couſin (hauing laced his Helme) wounded ſo furiouſly on all ſides, that they had incompaſſed themſelues with carkaſſes of 
                     •
                  laughtred men. Yet for all this, they were ſo oppreſt with freſhe multitudes, that by no meanes they could mount on horſ
                     •
                  ack, which Don Bellianis perceiuing, doubling his anger, laid about him, that in▪ deſpight of them, he mounted on a Horſe, on which he ſomewhat eaſier laboured in the fight, till Arfilio had done th
                     •
                   like, where with they brake their paſſage through the thickeſt of them, who alſo mounted Boraldo, that was ſorely wounded, and carried Coroliano out of battell, which grew more cruell then all the▪ day before▪ 
                  Don Bellianis by meere forced valour,

making his way through the ſharpe printed ſpeares, and ſwordes, came where the kings of Armenia and Teſsifantie were on foote, and like to be taken priſoners, and had they béen knowne, they had there loſte their liues: who by his arryuall, got freſhlie mountings, and together renewed the fight more fiercer then at firſt. The battell béeing at this ſtay, the 2000. Knights that Coroliano had ſent, aſſaulted the corner of the hill, where the Princes were. But the 500. Knights, which were the valianteſt of the Dukes whole troupes, left not their charge, but in their places began ſo fierce a ſkirmidge, that many fell downe dead on both ſides. But the Soldans men beeing many more in number, brake through them, ſpoyling their order: whereat the two Ladies, the Princeſſe Perſiana and Aurora, ſeemed more dead then aliue. But at this time, from the other ſide of the valley, there appeared the number of 4000. Knights well appointed, which made towardes that place: from whence there was a knight ſent to know on whoſe behalf they came, who a farre of diſcerned him to be the couragious Prince Don Contumeliano of Phenicia, whoſe armor they very well knewe, (as is ſaid:) Which greatly gréeued the Soldans men, iudging, that of neceſſitie hee would bee againſt them, and on the contrarie, the Duke Alfirons troupes were very glad thereof, whoſe approach reuiued the ſorrowfull Ladies. And the Duke aloude cryed, courage, courage, braue Knights, and animate your fainting forces, againſt your feare-frighted aduerſaries, for the admired honor of time-wondering Chiualrie, commeth in your ayde. Which hee nothing miſſaide, for in the whole Campe, there was none that excelled him, except him that in diſguiſed habit, had ſubiugated his heart, with great courteſie and bountie, which is the true honour of all braue knights. Hée now béeing come to the dangerous ſkirmidge, brauelie ouerthrewe a Knight, and drawing him aparte, informed himſelfe by him, of all that hee deſired to knowe, and turning to his followers, that were all ſubicts vnto the Duke Alfiron, of whom at Don Contumeliano▪
                  
                  
commaund, a great multitude had before gone to Perſepolis, from Bollera, to ayde the Duke, if their helpe hée ſhould néed, who hauing héere met the 4000. aforeſaid, vnyted themſelues together, ſo brauelie aſſaulting them that in the corner of the Hill were fighting, that not daring longer to ſtay, turned their backes, and fled towards their other companie, where the furious battell ſtill continued, entring by that ſide where Don Bellianis, was killing his horſe vnder him, & he bruzed with the great fall, roſe vp in extreame danger of his life, for mē began to giue backe, which forced him with méere ſtrength and ſole labour of his valour, to withſtand the aduerſaries furie, laying on all ſides to get a horſe.
               But his enemies ſeeing him to be their onely diſtruction, ruſht in multitudes vpon him, no more fearing his death-giuing-ſword, then if hée had that day hurt none. Whereby though many dyed by him, yet was he ſorelie wounded, both with ſwords and launces, for though they were not great by reaſon of his good armour, yet through diuers places there iſſued infinit blood.
               But his aduerſaries eager of reuenge, procured nought but his death, in ſo much that they would often cloſe their eies and fall vppon him, becauſe they would not ſee his ſtrokes, and had not he leapt ſometimes héere, and ſometimes there, ſome one would haue got him faſte, which if they did, hée greatly hazarded his life.
               Yet could hee not ſo defend himſelfe, but that at laſt ſome 50. of them deſpiſing death, fel vpon him together, laying faſt holde on his armes, wherin it behooued him to vſe his ſtrength, onely to get from them, kicking and ſpurning with his féete, that in the ende hée fell downe with aboue halfe of them vppon him, and ſeeing himſelfe in ſuch daunger, hauing there receiued aboue tenne woundes, ſuddenly ſtept away, ryſing on his féete on the other ſide, beſtowing deablie woundes on all ſides, that heere aroſe ſuch greate and mightie clamours

and outcries, that the reſt of the battell was nothing to this fight, incouraging one another onely to kill that Knight, on whoſe death depended their victorie.
               In this ſeaſon arriued here the Prince of Phenicia, with his company that came in purſuit of thoſe that fledde, and hearing there that great noyſe, ſo brauely ſet vpon them, that they vnhorſed aboue 2000. Knights: with which fury, this Prince preſt through them, till he came where the Knight of the golden Image was, whom he knew (though he neuer ſawe him) by the deuiſe of his ſhield, and ſéeing him do ſuch wonders, ſaid to himſelfe, that not without cauſe he enioyed the name, and deſerued to be called the ſole-worthie of admyred Chiualrie: and being about to alight to giue his Horſe vnto Don Bellianis, the mightie Boraldo, came thither, to ſuccour his men that here loſt their gotten vantage, which they did not on the otherſide, becauſe he valiantly had withſtood the force of the Princes Don Brianell, and Arfileo. And eſpying that Knight, ſtraight know him by his Armour, thinking him to be he that had ſlaine the King of Cyprus, and fearing his force, durſt not like a good Knight confront him face to face, ſuppoſing that in a battell any thing was tollerable, raiſed himſelf on his ſtirropes, and with his hand behinde his backe, gaue his ſo huge a blow, that it made him bend his head lower then his Horſes eares. Which Don Bellianis perceiuing, hauing knowne ye Prince, and thinking he would haue fallen from his Horſe, ranne to helpe him. But the Prince Don Contumelian loſing no whit of his high valour, at ſuch blowes returned vpon him, with his ſword hoyſted aloft, determining at that blow to part his head in two. The other with like intent came alſo vpon him, and at one inſtant diſcharged their rage on each other, that Contumeliano was like to fall. But Boraldo loſt his ſences. The Prince ſeconded another, that therewith he tumbled from his Horſe, and alighting to cut off his head, vnlaced his Helme, and found it in ſuch caſe, that he iudging him dead, let him lye, though it had bene better for him, there to haue made him

ſure, then for his after harme to giue him his life, as this Hiſtorie diſcourſeth. And going to the Knight of the golden Image, with great courteſie thus ſaide. Mount vpon this my Horſe (moſt hautie Knight, vſurper of anothers heart) and follow the victorie ordeined by the Gods, to all your happie and glorious acts.
               The Knight of the golden Image replied. Leaue not your Horſe forme, (high and renowmed Prince) for though I in this battell doe miſcarry, there is nothing loſt in reſpect of your royall perſon, how much the more that this knights horſe whom you haue ſlaine, ſuffiſeth me. And ſo mounting on Beraldos horſe, the Phenician Prince did the like vpon his owne, togither ſo ouerturned the fury of the fight, that through want of an infinit number of the Soldans men, his Captains began to yeeld the field. Which their aduerſaries ſéeing, ſo hotely renewed their decaying forces, that their enemies were conſtrained to ſaue their liues, by giuing the rained libertie to their horſes, in which flight, being brauely purſued, there was an innumerable number ſlaine, that after the fight, it was found, ethat of the Souldans men were ſlaine aboue 25. thouſand. With not aboue two thouſand loſſe on the Dukes behalfe. Which good ſucceſſe, being by thoſe Kings and Princes woorthily attained, euery one with immortal praiſes thanked him: to whom their deuotion was moſt (being in that whole Campe, but onely thrée Chriſtian Knights.) This done, they went to meete the Princeſſes that were comming to them: Betwéene whome, their courteous gréetings and kinde ſalutes, were ſuch, as if they neuer before had ſeene one another.
               Euerie one greatly honoured the Princeſſe Contumeliano, ſome for his aide in that great daunger newly paſt, the others (that knew no otherwiſe) not only for the ſame thanked him, but alſo for the ouerthrow he had giuen the fearefull Feliſton, King of Cyprus.
               
               At which time arriued the Duke Alfiron, who ſéeing the Phenician Prince, would haue alighted, being ſorely wounded,

but he would by no meanes ſuffer it. Giue me your royall white handes (moſt excellent Prince) that I may kiſſe them (ſaid the Duke) in token that I twiſe haue receiued my deſpiſed life by your meanes. Don Contumelian ſéeing the Dukes error, would not longer ſéeme to robbe the glorie from the Uictor, by ioying in anothers honour, contenting himſelfe with that he had wonne in that battell, and the obtaining of ſuch friends, replied. I will not (Magnanimious Duke, and you heroike Knights) ſuffer your errour no farther to procéed, nor longer vſurpe the honour of ſo high a victorie, from him that vindeth all wandring Knightes in the orbed earth to his furie, and ſeeing there is now no daunger in diſcouering it, knowe (great Lords) that he which hath wonne the immortall glorie of the victory, is your friend, and Lord of vs all, the neuer inogh praiſed, the Knight of the golden Image, to whom by a ſtrange aduenture I lent my Armour, wherewith he vndertooke the fight, wherein befell all that you ſawe, and dylated the manner how he found him, and in what habit, concealing nothing but what hapned after the fight. Which heard of the Duke, Kings, Princes, and the Knights there preſent, they highly wondred at his diſcourſe: whereto the Duke thus ſaid. Now am I not (renowmed Prince) ſo much indebted as I thought, for hauing giuen all my ſelfe vnto the Knight of the golden Image, he doeth in taking care for my matters, buſie himſelfe in his owne, wherby my dutie can be no greater then it was before.
               You haue nothing ſo much cauſe (ſaide Don Brianell) to thanke him, for what he did in that battell, hauing therein as great a part as your ſelfe, or elſe had he not bene there preſent, very ill ſhould we haue defended his honour. Wherevppon they newly imbraced Don Bellianis, ſaying he had not done well in not diſcloſing himſelfe to them, that they mought with more confidence haue vſed their Armes in that battell.
               Speake no more of this (ſaid Don Bellianis) for it is euident, if any honour I haue, or any thing performed therein, it onely procéedes from you. Wherefore it is I that am onely

bound to you all.
               Marry if that were ſo (replied Don Brianell) I had there loſt my life, being vnable to defend it. The Prince Arfileo, and the Princeſſes, diſturbed this conference, comming to gréete Don Bellianis, where they renewed their thankes. Which done (their men hauing ranſackt their enemies campe) the two Kings, the Princeſſes, Don Bellianis, with the Prince Arfileo, the Phenician Prince, and the venterous Knight, directed their way towards Bollera, by the ſame diſcourſing of many things. Don Bellianis being of opinion they ſhould returne and ſacke Perſepolis, which they might eaſily haue don, being left without any Garriſon.
               But the Princeſſe Perſiana, with the other Princes, put himſelfe from it, alleadging their men to be weake, and weary of their laſt trauell. And ſo at laſt arriued in the Citie, where well ordering their troupes, and other buſineſſe, went to the Dukes Pallace to repoſe themſelues, where their woundes were dreſſed.
               The Prince Don Contumeliano, lodged with Don Bellianis, at his intreatie, who greatly ioyed with his company, being a Knight of pleaſant diſcourſe. Where we leaue them, till we haue ſet downe what the Souldans men did, after they were ouerthrowne and put to flight.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXI.
               
                  
                     What the Souldanes men did after the battell: And howe they carried newes of their diſcomfiture to the Souldan.
                  
               
               THe battel being ended in maner aforeſaid, part of the Soldans men I ſuruiued, tooke their way to Perſepolis, and hid themſelues in the woods, and ſome that were more hardie, cloſely mingled themſelues with their aduerſaries, hauing left behind them thoſe things that might diſcouer them, who heard Don Contume lianos diſcourſe, how the Knight of the golden Image was he that had ſlaine the fearefull King of Cyprus.
               
                  Theſe Knights hauing cloſely hid themſelues, expected the darke nights approach, and the cloſeſt that they might, departed thence, hauing not entred into the Citie, and by the pale reflect of the ſhining Moone, looking about the field for the bodies of Coroliano and Boraldo, to carry them to Perſepolis, did at laſt finde them. Coroliano being in perfect ſence, but Beraldo yet laie in his traunce, being piteouſly wounded, and extreame faint, with the loſſe of much more blood then his brother: and ſetting them on horſebacke, with two Knights behind to guide them, came the next day to Perſepolis, where incomparable was the lamentable griefe, generally of all, all participating of the preſent loſſe, and certainly according to their greeued clamours, and languiſhing cries, their aduerſaries (had they come vpon them) might eaſily haue taken and ſacked the Cittie, for being ouerwhelmed in bloodie teares breaking from their hearts, that they knew not one another.
               But aboue all the reſt, the diſtreſſed Souldane of Perſia, with madding rage renting his cloathes, tearing the auncient haires off his graue beard, and blaſpheming and defying his Goddes, with hideous ſhrikes cryed out. Oh vnhappie Souldane of Perſia, Is it poſſible the Goddes ſhould honour thée with ſo large an Empire, to diſgrace thy glorie with this ſhame, and that thou ar
                     •
                   not able to reuenge thée on thy rebellious ſubiect, that hath ſlaine thy ſonne in lawe, and in deſpight of thée ſtolne thy onely daughter.
               But thriſe happie are you Coroliano and Boraldo, that haue in defence of your deare Prince and Countrey, wraſtled with all conquering death, leauing your liues for an immortall trophy of your true loyaltie. And vnhappie am I, that is not able to die, when and where my fame and glorie is drowned in the laſting Center of blacke obliuion. But let Fortune doo her worſt, as ſhe alreadie hath in times paſt. For I vowe by the immortall Gods, neuer to ceaſe till I haue put to vtter deſolation he and his accomplices, that hath bene cauſe of al theſe my euils.
               
                  Thus as hee was moſt bitterly raging and er
                     •
                  layming againſt his cruell hate, there entred the hall gate the horſes, that as (it is ſaid) brought his Couſens, who (though piteouſly wounded as may be beléeued) ſpake vnto the Souldane, that ſomewhat comforted himſelfe, to ſée them not altogither dead, and commaunded them to be laid in a bed, in his owne Chamber, where they were cured. And the other knight beginning to diſcrye their ouerthrowe, ſaid: that hauing almoſt vtterly defeated their enemies, there arriued the Prince Contumeliano of Phenicia with foure thouſand men, with whome after a bloody conflict, we reſted thus vanquiſhed, and defeated, Oh me, diſgraced that I am (ſaid the Souldane) and was that diuelliſh Knight there, that ſlue the mightie King of Cyptus? I doo not now thinke much of your defeature, ſeeing he and the knight of the Golden Image were againſt you, yet I aſſure you I reioyce to knowe they are both there, that our reuenge may be greater. We haue béene greatly deceiued herein, dread ſouereigne (ſaid the knights for that Knight that depriued the King of Cyprus of his life, is not the Prince of Phenicia, b
                     •
                  t is the inuincible Knight of the Golden Image, that onely for the ſame effect came forth of priſon, diſguiſed in habit of one of his Damzels, and repeated all Contumeliano
                        •
                     
                   report. Is it poſſible (Oh immortall Gods) that ſuch a thing ſhould bee, which I yet dare not beléeue, and ſurely there was not in the world a man blynder to knowe him then I. For ſéeing him ſo wounded, and bléeding through his armour, ſhuld haue imagined, it could be none but he. But tell me what is Don Contumeliano? Which ſhould be no bad knight, ſeeing the knight of the Golden Image tooke his name and Armes? One of the valianteſt knights in that whole Campe, is that Prince (ſayde they) for at two blowes did hee bring your Couſin Boraldo to this paſſe you ſée, with many other worthy déedes that in the battell he performed.
               Theſe newes much diſcomforted the Souldane, in which ſtate he continued eight daies, till he was altogither well of his

fall, in which time, he heard by report of many Knights, of the aduenture that was not farre from the Citie. Who greatly deſiring to ſee, went thither, accompanied with many Knights. Where being come, and reading the Letters of the Piller, diuers would proue it, but in a little ſpace, as many as did, were ouercome, and yet could ſée no bodie.
               I haue many yeares ago heard of this aduenture (ſaid the Souldan) and how it was here, and I know that in the Souldan my graund-fathers time, many auncient Knights proued it. And ſo from that time it was publiſhed abroad, that many wandring knights from diuers places, came to prooue themſelues in it.
               The Souldane after this returned to the Citie, and cauſed his commaund to be proclaimed throughout his large Empire, that euery one able to beare Armes, ſhould within two moneths be at Perſepolis. Whereby he beganne to order the mightieſt and ſtrongeſt Army by lande, that vntill that time was euer ſéene in thoſe parts. For within one moneth, there were arrided in that Cittie aboue thrée hundreth thouſand valiant horſmen, and well appointed. The Souldane ſent to many places, as well abroad as at home, to ſeeke for his ſonne, the Prince Perianeo, to leade thoſe troupes againſt his aduerſaries: with whoſe comming, he ſo aſſured himſelfe to be reuenged, as if it were alreadie executed. For he not only thought to deſtroy the Duke Alfiron, and the Prince of Phenicia, but alſo thought to ſubuert the kingdom, and King of Raſia, whom he imagined to be father vnto Arfilio, and if thoſe warres happily ſuccéeded, to paſſe againſt the Grecian Emperour, whom he knew to be frée of the daunger that Don Galaneo of Antioch, had put him in. So that theſe imaginations made him longerſtaie then he had purpoſed, preparing all neceſſaries for thoſe warres.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXII.
               
                  
                     How don Brianell, required by the Prince don Bellianis, departed towards the Kingdome of Antioch. How the duke Alfiron married the Princes Perſiana, and what ſtraunge things happened in the Iouſts vnto the Princes Contumeliano, Arfileo, and Floriſpiano.
                  
               
               THe Knight (as is ſaid) being within the Citie of Bollera, made famous by their being there, were within fiftéene dayes throughly whole of their woundes, though not of that which the amorous Prince don Bellianis had in his hart, for the loue of the bewteous Princeſſe Florisbella, which had ſo penetrated his tender breaſt, that he determined (vpon the good ſucceſſe of thoſe affaires) neuer to ceaſe till his eyes might enioy her happie ſight, thinking therewith to mitigate the crueil paſſions of his tormented heart.
               Thus continuing there vpon a day, taking apart the Princeſſe Perſiana, told her, that he thought it not amiſſe, if ſhe deſired the accompliſhing of her deſires, ſhe ſhould forthwith wed the Duke Alfiron, leſt the chaunges of Fortune might héereafter diſturbe it, and that the Souldan her father would not be ſo cruell, that hearing it would not reioyce to ſée her marryed to her content. Shée that nothing elſe deſired, ſaid, ſhe would in euery thing accord to his will, derogating in no reſpect from it. Wherefore thanking her for that honour, he conferred of it with the Duke, who thereto agreed, appoynting the nuptialls to be ſolemnized tenne dayes after, which was the time they celebrated a feaſt dedicated to their Mahomet.
               
               All the Knights greatly reioyced at that don Bellianis had done, preparing themſelues very ſumpteouſly againſt the mariage day, ordering a moſt ſtately Tourney in honour of the nuptialls. And in the meane time, hearing of the Souldanes preparations, and innumerable multitudes, neglected not to demaund the aide of all her friends and Allies.
               
                  And the kings ſent to their kingdomes, that all their help might there with ſpeede be vnited. And ſo theſe great enemies béeing thus nigh one to the other, were by their ſpyalls ſtill aduertiſed of eythers dooings.
               The knight of the Golden Image much gréeued to ſee theſe delayes, becauſe they hindred and kept him there, from proſecuting his attended iourney: diſpayring of hoped ioyes, wanting the preſence of the cauſer of his gréefe, which he ſomewhat lightned, by daily conuerſing with the damſels of his miſtreſſe, elſe otherwiſe he hardly could haue ſtaied there all that while, which he beguiled with pleaſant diſcourſes, with thoſe Princes and Ladies, and one day talking with the Princeſſe Aurora, about her affayres in Antioch, ſhe ſaid to him, it wold not bee vnneceſſarie ſhee ſhould write vnto the Gouernour of that kingdome, placed by the Prince Don Gallaneo, on whom ſhe repoſed great truſt.
               I thinke it not amiſſe (anſwered Don Bellianis) if you ſuppoſe it will not diſaduantage you. But who ſhall carrie it, when it is made? I ſhall want no knight to doo it (replied ſhee) or if I doo, one of my Damzels ſhall vndertake the troubleſome toyle.
               Whereupon Don Bellianis taking pen, yncke and paper, writ the letter, and when it was done, called the Prince Don Brianell (whom as is ſaid) greatly deſired to be imploied in that Princeſſe ſeruice, ſaid to him, hee ſhould bee the bearer of that letter, being a matter to be truſted on none but he. There is no reaſon (my good Lord) ſaid the Princeſſe, that you ſhould vndergo ſuch trouble: hauing alreadie hitherto taken ſo much for my ſake, you neede not now farther indanger your ſelf in theſe new, & ſuch ſeldom ſeen toiles, hauing at my hands receiued no fauour for any. It is no trouble (déere lady ſaid he) which is vndertakē in your behalf, eſpecially in ye aduancing of your glory: and therefore I am incouraged ſtraight to depart hēce. I gladly wold haue accompanied you (replied ſhe) if this preſent war did not hinder me, wher don Bellianis is alſo neceſſarily ſtaied.
               
                  It is better that you remaine here (ſaid Don Bellianis) for the Prince Don Brianell will quickely returne with anſwere. And thus they agreed, that the next day he ſhould depart, telling thoſe knights that he went about an earneſt matter of his owne, which forced him ſo to leaue them, aſſuring them his returne ſhoulde bee with ſpéede. And ſo taking his parting leaue, the inſuing morning, he went forwards on his voyage, continuing his dayly iourneyes, till hee arriued at Antioch, where there be fell him great aduentures, as ſhall be ſet downe in his due place. So leauing him, and returning to our former purpoſe, the day was at length come, wherein the royall nuptials of the Princeſſe Perſiana, with the Duke Alfiron ſhould be celebrated: againſt which time, euery one prouided thēſelues, according to their eſtate, in ſuch tumultuous times, wherein they dayly expected the arriuall of their enemies: for which cauſe, leaſt they ſhould ſuddenly be ſurpriſed, they kept in armour aboue eight thouſand men, which they had within the Cittie, beſides their campe they had without the walles, intrencht about the furtheſt place of the citie, becauſe one ſhould not trouble the other in their ſalue. Which multitudes were equally diuided in ſquadrons and battalions, as they were readie to fight ſome pitched battell. The day come, the Princeſſe Perſiana iſſued foorth (the contentedſt Ladie liuing) ſhee was ledde by the arme by Don Bellianis, going all a foote, becauſe they would be the better ſeene, with a ſoft pace. When they were ſeene by their armed troopes, they all ſhowted out aloud, ſaying. It is a iuſt thing, that we all ſpend our deareſt liues for the ſafetie of ſuch Lords, or impall their heads with the imperiall Dia
                     ••
                  m, which they ſo well deſerue, and therewith diſcharged ſo many peeces of Ordinance, and ſounded ſo manie Inſtruments of all ſorts, as it ſeemed the totall ſubuerſion of the vniuerſall world: in which maner they arriued in the temple, where they were married: which done, they returned with like triumph to the Pallace, where the Tables being couered, they di
                     •
                  ed the Bride and Bridegroome at one Table, with the two

Kings, and the thrée Princes, & at another dined many of their Nobiſitie. The dinner done, they daunced according to theyr maner, while the knights, maintainers of the iouſts entred the lyſtes. They which that day were challengers, were the Princes Arſileo, Contumeliano, and a Couſen of his, thither came a little before, a very valiant and couragious knight, called Don Floriſpiano of Su
                     •
                  ui
                     •
                  , whem being greatly loued of the Princes, caſily obtayned the breaking of the firſt launces, and ſo ordering himſelfe for it, hée beganne the iouſtes, (the Duke, with the Princes, and all his companie, béeing mounted on their Theater) which he performed ſo gallantlie, that ere hee loſt any Stirrope, he vnhorſed thirtie Knightes, all which according to the order of thoſe iouſts, hung vppe theyr Shéeldes, with theyr names, one higher then the other, as the Knight of the Golden Image iudged his deſerts, ſo that manie, onelie to bee counted valiaunter then his followe, though they thought they could not vanquiſh the maintayner preſented themſelues agaynſt him, that for haſte to bée before one an other, they almoſt tumbled one vpon an other, calling him no Knight that did not iouſt.
               At this time there came one to the Duke from the Citie gate, and ſayde to him aloude, hewe there were arryued foure Knights, that craued licence to enter, and trie theyr fortune in the ionſis: for hauing heard of thoſe feſtiuals, they came to ioy their triumphs. There is no reaſon we ſheuld feare any ſaid Don Belhanis,) and therefore let them come, for were they ſpies they can do little harme. The Knights hauing this leaue, entred, wheſe gallant ſemblance drew vpon themſelues all the gazers eyes, thrée of them were armed in a roſe colour armour, garniſhed with many little Eagles. The deuiſes on their ſhéelds were all of one faſhion, the one halfe white with blacke Eagles, and the other halfe blacke wiſh white Eagles. The other knight béeing of a bigger conſtitution, was all plated in blacke armour, and on his Shéelde was portrayted the wheele of Fortune, with a Knight placed on

the toppe thereof, from whence he ſéemed headlong to tumble downe, dragged by the hand of death, with this Motto.
               
                  Well deſerueth ſuch a fall,
                  Becomming deaths cruell thrall:
                  That doth attempt ſo raſhly.
               
               He ſéemed to be as braue a knight as 
                     •
                  uer was any ſeene▪ (except him of the golden Image) the knight béeing within the Tilt-yarde, approched where the Duke Alſiron was, and changing his voyce (which the preſent ſtate of thoſe matters brged him to) yet that he might be of all heard, ſaid: Which is the valtanteſt and chiefeſt knight in this aſſemblie, whoſe commaund the reſt obeyes? And yet by the immortall Gods, I thinke euery one might rather iudge, each of you fitter to command then to be cōmanded of any. To which words the mightie king of Armenia replied. Why do you require it ſir knight?) whoſe gallant preſence, and liberall ſpeech, deſerueth no leſſe part in the domination you ſpeake of, then in any thing elſe. And you may declare your mind to any of vs here, hauing neither more nor leſſe ſuperioritie the one then the other, beeing all equall in the bond of true amitie. If it be ſo ſaid the knight) I then demaund of you all, to aſſure mee you will let vs returne as we came, vnknowne, (the iouſts finiſhed) and that you require of vs nothing agaynſt our willes. The Duke Alfiron thus anſwered. You may iouſt when you will (ſir knight for the aſſuraunce you demaunde, wee graunt it you, although you needed not to requeſt it▪ béeing admitted within our Gates. It is ſo (replied 
                     •
                  he knight but tell me n
                     •
                  w, which is here the Duke Alfiron? I am he (anſwered the duke) but wherefore aſke you for him? I do inquire for him replied the knight) becauſe I thought ſo braue a knight as hee, and this day married, would haue maintained the field within the liſts, agaynſt all aduenturers, and not ſit and beholde the falling of other knights.
               
                  Theſe words ſome what mooued the duke, that he was about ſharply to anſwer him, had not the knight of the golden Image ſtaied him, who taking the knight by the hand, derie courteouſly ſaid. You may ſir knight teuſt when you pleaſe, for I aſſure you, you ſhall not want whereon to imploy the valour of your minde, elſe were it a ſhame that the Duke ſhould enter the liſtes on ſuch a day, hauing ſo manie good knights at his commaund. Then ſhall we ſee the bountie of theſe your knights (replied he in the blacke armour wherupon I take my leaue, and ſo went to behold the iouſts▪ All the dukes knights made way, that the foure ſtrangers might iouſt, which they ſeeing, one of the knightes of the Eagles, put himſelfe agaynſt Floriſpiano, who reſting his Launce, gaue one another ſo fierce incounters, that Floriſpiano loſt his ſtirreps, and had fallen, but that he helde by his horſes necke, and his aduerſarie meaſured his length on the ground, and ſtraight his ſhéeld was taken from him, and demaunding his name, hee replyed hee had no other, but the knight of the Eagle. Don Bellianis commaunded it to bee ſet higher then all the reſt, which ſo angred the blacke knight, that he would by no meanes ſuffer the other two to iouſt: but himſelfe choaking with rage, ranne againſt Floriſpiano, who with the great encounter tumbled to the ground, brauely ſhiuering their Launces in péeces. Whereat the multitude ſhowted out at Floriſpianoes fall. The blacke knight paſt ſuriouſly forwards, and recouered one ſtirrope he had loſt, and Floriſpiano was conuaied out of the field, and vnarmed, to take the ayre, for the cloſeneſſe of his armor had almoſt choaked him, but quickly recouering himſelfe, returned to the ſcaffold, very glad, as if he that day had don nothing. The prince of Phenicia, ſetting himſelf againſt the black knight, met both in middle of their courſe, with ſuch terrible incounters, that the knight of Fortune (for ſo was he called in the blacke armor doubled backwards vpon his horſe, looſing both his ſtirrops, but Contumeliano had fallen, if he had not valiantly ſtaid himſelfe by his horſe neck, which went thrée or foure

ſteps backe, inſemuch that euery one thought hee would haue fallen, but giuing him the ſpurres, made him furiouſly paſſe forward. Greatly aſtoniſhed was all the beholders, and ſpe
                     〈…〉
                  y the knight of the goldeu Image, that demanded of his companie if any of them knew that knight, but none could tell what he was. The beautious Perſiana calling the knight of the golden Image, ſaid to him ſoftly that none might heare: you ſhall know, ſir knight, that it is the Prince Berianeo of Perſi
                        •
                     , my brother. Is it poſſible (ſaid the knight of the golden Image?) It is replied ſhe for I well knowe him, not onely by his incounters, but ſpecially by the ſpéeches he vſed to vs: therefore looke what you haue to do, for certainly he came with intent to kill our duke Alfiron. He ſhall not effect his intent ſo replied the knight of the golden Image) for ſo many of vs are here for nothing. And ſo turning to beheld the iouſt, commaunded his armour ſecretly to be brought him. But in the meane time, Don Contumeliano and the knight of Fortune, wounded one another with piteous blowes, that at laſt the Prince of Phenicia fell to the earth from his horſe. The knight of Fortune paſſed forward, though with mightie trouble, for in all his life, he not receiued ſo ſtrong incounters. At this time the Prince Alfileo ready to burſt with anger, tooke the biggeſt lance he could find, and ſpurred againſt the knight of Fortune, that alſo came againſt him with incredible furic, that both brake their Launces in the middle of their ſhields, ſo brauely, that only the handles remained in their hands, making the reſt 
                     •
                  he in a thouſand ſhiuers, higher then the region of the ayre: the like they did by the ſecond: but at the third time, burning in choller, that the one could not ouerthrow the other, they met with ſuch vehement rigour, ſtaying themſelues in their ſtirrops, and in ſuch anger incountred, that the prince Arfileo came to the ground ouer his horſe crupper, receining a monſtrous fall: and the knight of Fortune loſt both his ſtirrops, and with much a doo got hold by his horſe mane, ſtaying himſelfe moſt couragiouſly rather deſiring to die, then to fall in that place. The Prince Arfileo roſe,

greatly aſhamed of his chance before that companie. Straight were al the ſhéelds of the aduenturers taken away, and in their places were onely ſet thoſe of the thrée challengers: for ſo commanded the Knight of the golden Image, who ſéeing him of Fortune remained ſole maintainer, in great haſte began to arme himſelfe, commanding his horſe to be brought him.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIII.
               
                  
                     The ende of the Iouſts.
                  
               
               
                  WHile things were thus vncertaine, there entred the yarde two Knights, both armed in one kinde of white armour, engrauen with many Imperiall crownes, whoſe braue preſence highly delighted all the beholders: who comming within the Tilt-yard, one of them ſpurred his Courſer with ſuch gallantneſſe, that arriuing to the ſcaffold where the Ladies and Princes were, hée made his horſe bend both his knées vnto the ground, making him paſſe forward, like to a deadly bullet ſhot from a Canons furious month. The other went to the place where the knight of the golden Image was, and as if he knew him & were ioyful of their méeting, ſaid thus vnto him. If you giue vs leaue ſir knight) we will trie our fortune with yonder knight that ſéemeth to expect the iouſts, deſiring to ſaue you the labour of arming your ſelfe where we be? I repute it as a high fauor worthy ſir replied don Bellianis, beſides euery one hath libertie to iouſt, eſpecially your ſelfe, whoſe courage I doubt not, but will attempt farre higher matters. The knight humbling himſelfe for that courteſie, ſaid. I beſeech you (ſir knight) in courteſie to fauor me with your ſhéeld, ſeeing mine cannot defend any incounter. It greatly pleaſeth me replied don Bellianis) & in lue whereof, you ſhall leaue me yours. The knight gaue him his, which was pierſt in aboue ten places, by ye incounters of lances

though it was of a moſt ſine temper
                     •
                   and taking don Bellianis, went to the knight of Fortune, and thus began. How ſhall our fight be (ſir knight) for I haue alwaies ſéen the victorie knowne onely by the ſtrength of armes, whereby none may bee called vanquiſhed, but by default of his owne valor, which is ſeldome found in iouſting, for often th
                     •
                  ron do kn
                     •
                  ghts miſcarie, through the weakneſſe of their horſes, and not of their force. Belike you craue the combat at my handes, (ſayde the Knight of Fortune) and not the iouſting? You haue vnderſtoode mee right (ſaide the knight of the Crownes) for that is it I ſeeke for. The Knight of Fortune (ſéeing the picture on his aduerſaries ſhéeld, ſo highly to reſemble another which he had ingrauen in his heart, ſo greatly deſired the combatte with him, that hée thought long till he began it,) with a loude voyce ſayde. Then (ſir Knight) bée our battell as you will, for I am readie for all things. And ſo taking a ſtrong Launce from his Page, with a ſharpe and ſtrong ſteeled Pike, came out of the liſtes, into a broad field thereby: the like did the knight of the Crowne. But while they were thus talking, the other knight of the Crownes, demanded of the other knights of the Eagles, if they would breake their launces with him. They that nothing elſe deſired, yéelded thereto, and ſo parted one from the other, beginning the gallanteſt iouſt that in all that day was ſéene. For the Knights of the Eagles were of the beſt within a great way of them, yet both were ouerthrowne from their horſes, for hardly in the worlde was a better knight then hee of the Crownes, whoſe ſeemelie bountie was of all much admyred. But at this time the two heroicke warriours the knightes of the Crownes, and of Fortune, ſpurred theyr fierie Courſers agaynſt each other, that with their furious noyſe, the earth ſeemed to tremble and ſhake vnder them, and mette like the furie of two tempeſtuous Currents, breaking through the earth, to runne into the deuouring Ocean, and on their Sheeldes ſtaying theyr Launces, pierced them togither, with their armour, and coates of male,

both reſting wounded on their breaſts. The péeces of their lances mounted higher then the clouds, themſelues méeting with their horſes, bodies, ſheelds, and helmes, in ſuch manner, that both horſes fell downe dead vnder them, and their maſters ſéemed but in little better caſe then they, in ſuch a trance they fell, that euery one iudged them dead. Ohimmortall Gods (cryed out the valiant knight of the golden Image) what terrible incounters were theſe? Dead without doubt are the beſt knights this day liuing, and within himſelfe greatly maruelled to ſée his ſhéeld pierced, which till then coulde neuer bee penetrated with any Iron. But this effect worke the armour of the braue Knight of Fortune, againſt which no inchantment preuailed, béeing forged by the arte of the wiſe Friſton, as hereafter ſhall bee ſhowen. And béeing about to diſcend to ſée if the Knights were dead, ſawe both riſe togither, who ſéeing the ſtate wherein they were, more furious then the furious Tygres of Hireania, came one agaynſt the other with drawne ſwordes in their hands, with wheſe fliſing edges they wounded one another, with the puiſſant force of their vntamed armes, that they forced their heads oftentimes to touch their knées by bending, and at laſt to ſtay their bodies, ſet their hands on the ground, and ſo raiſing themſelues, began the cruelleſt combat, and moſt dangerous fight, whoſe like the beholders till then neuer ſawe. Theſe Combattants were ſo inraged agaynſt one another, that they ſhoulde ſo reſiſt their cutting blades, which neuer befell them before. But the couragious Knight of Fortune, that greatlie haſtened the end of the fight, warding a blowe of his braue aduerſarie with his ſhéeld, ranne within him, and gaue him ſuch and ſo great a blow, that he cut his armour, with a péece of his fleſh, from which wound there iſſued an aboundant ſtreame of blood, and quickly ſtepping backe, thruſt at him with his ſword, that it pierced all his defenſiue armes, making him féele the poynt, almoſt a finger within the fleſh.
               The Knight of the Crownes féeling himſelfe ſo wounded,

and ſéeing his aduerſarie ſo nigh him, wold not ſtrike him with his ſworde, but with one of his hands got helde of his ſheelde, and ſo ſtrongly pluckt him thereby, that he had not time to ſecond any more blowes vppon him, and letting his ſword hang downe, drew his dagger, and therewith gaue him two ſuch blowes, that penetrating his harneſſe, they déepely opened his fleſh, that any other but he could no more haue fought. The knight of Fortune ſeeing his enemie ſo vſe him, tooke his body ouerthwart in his armes, with ſuch furie, that both had like to haue fallen. The knight of the Crownes did the like, and ſo ſtrongly preſſed each other, that through diuers places they loſt much blood, in which manner they continued halfe an houre, neuer able to ouerthrowe one another: and ſo parting aſunder, withdrew a while to breathe, but with their fight they coulde ſcarce ſtand on their feete, yet walked the beſt they might, becauſe theyr woundes might not cloſe with cold blood, leaſt they ſhould not after end their fight: Who may expreſſe the wonder of the gazing multitude to ſee ſo fierce a fight, whoſe like none euer heard of: and with that the night ſo ſuddainly came vppon them, that they could by no meanes end their Combat. The Princeſſe Perſiana, that very well knew her brother, ſaide to Don Bellianis.
               
               Suffer not (deare ſir) that ſuch knights here dye with out cauſe: for if you do, the whole world will blame you for us beſides that, our royall vertues will therby be ſcandalized with reproach, to my euerlaſting gréefe, if it ſhould happen. Don Bellianis buckled on his Helme, and mounted vpon his horſe, accompanied with all thoſe Kings, Princes, and Lords, who ſhewed him as great honour as in the Emperour his Fathers Court he could not haue a greater, and togither they went to the field, in the place where thoſe knights were fighting, who for all their approach, would preſecute theyr Combatte, calling for knights to ende the ſame: But the Knight of the Golden Image then ſtepping betweene them, thus began, and ſaid.
               
                  Theſe Jouſres (renowined knights) were begunne onely for pleaſure, that our Knights might ſhewe their v
                     •
                  lour, and not that any controuerſie ſhould bee deſided in i
                     •
                   by the vncertaine ende of ſo cruell a battell, eſpecially betweene two ſo braue knights.
               Wherefore ſéeing the heroyke vertues of your vntamed hearts needes no farther experience, hauing amply ſhewed the rare ſtrengths of your ſtrong bodies, leauing no time for others to doo the like ſince your comming: In the behalfe of this roiall company, and knightly preſence, and for my owne ſake I do intreat you, to be pleaſed to leaue this Combat in the ſtate it is, procuring on neither ſide the end thereof: ſince neither ſide may tollerate it, giuing no more honour, nor adiudging more praiſes to the one then to the other. The knights being as courteous as valiant, adorned with no le
                     •
                  e vertue, and bounty, thē courage and fortitude: intreating each other to anſwere, thinking that he which firſt replied, ſhould be leſſe accounted in leauing of the battell: which neither of them wold do, which and ſo ſtood, anſwering neuer a word: the knight of the Crownes ſéeing, requeſted Don Beiliants to ſuffer them to 
                     ••••
                  ſh theyr worke.
               I may not do ſo replied he) and therefore doo againe intreat you to leaue it: for I ſhould be reputed of little woorth, if my intreaties might not ſo much preu
                     •••
                   with you. The knight of the Crownes requeſted him to ſtand a while aſide, till 
                     〈…〉
                   ſpoken with his aduerſarie, (which Don Belhanis dooing the other thus ſaid to the knight of Fortune. You ſee ſir Knight) what great diſcourteſie 
                     •••
                  s were, to diſcontent ſuch Knights, therefore let vs leaue our battell at this time, as it is, and we will ende it thirtie daics hence, where you will. I am content ſo to doo. (aunſwered the Knight of Fortune, and let our meeting be in the V
                     ••
                  ley of the three tountaines, which is thrée miles from this Cittie, where you ſhall finde mee onely with my Page.
               This agreed betwéene both, the knight of Fortune turned

to Don Bellianis, ſaying: (Remember ſir knight) how againſt our wills, you diſturbe our tembat, for this preſent time, which makes me reſt diſco
                     •
                  tented of you, You haue no reaſon to ſay ſo (replted Don Bellia
                        •
                     s) for as I haue perceiued what hath beene done, is to your aduantage, and if you ſo think, ſtay with vs, where you ſhall haue your wounds cured to your content, and after will I anſwere you as you will. I may not ſtay anſwered the Knight of Fortune) but heereafter w
                     ••
                   may meete when all this ſhall be ſee
                     •
                  e, and ſo awayting no other anſwere, mounted vpon a horſe, which don Be
                        •
                     lia
                        •
                     s preſented him▪ and taking his leaue, went out of the way he came And here the Hiſtor
                     •
                  e ſaith, this knight of Fortune, was the valiant 
                     •
                  rince Per
                        •
                     aneo, who hauing vnderſtood the eſtate of theſe affayres, came with intent to doo by th
                     •
                   D
                     •
                  ke, if he entred in the icuſts) what he had done by Don Gallaneo, but ſeeing his purpoſe to ſort otherwiſe, went ſo out of the Cittie, cauſing his knights to binde his wounds: which done, he neuer reſted (accompanied with them which were his nigh Allyes, the one called Don Fermoſe
                        ••
                     
                   of Solſh
                        ••
                     a, the Prince of that Iland, and the others, were Brothers, named Don C
                        ••
                     ſalaneo, and Don G
                        •
                     amal
                        •
                     s of Th
                        ••
                     ce, till he came to Perſepolis. Where (to bee breefe) we leaue out the great 
                     •
                  oye that the Souldane co
                     •
                  c
                     •
                  iued, with their arrwall.
               That ſtraight many prepared themſelues to march forwards, thinking euery houre a yeare, til they might conſtent their enemies. And the generall 
                     •
                  oy of all was ſo great, or the arriuall or their Prince, that it very hardly can bee 
                     ••
                  to downe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIIII.
               
                  
                     How the Knights with the imperiall Crowns▪ were knowne to bee the Emperour Don Bellaneo, and Fab
                           •••
                         of Trebento. And how the Emperour went to the Valley of the three fountaines, to Combat with the Prince Pe
                           •
                        iano, of Perſia.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis reſted ſomething malecon
                  
                     •
                  ent, after the departing of the Prince Pe
                        •
                     ane
                        •
                     , thinking he had made little ac
                  
                     •
                  ount of him, and was d
                     •
                  uers times about to followe him, but that her membred hée was ſorely wou ded, and ſo l
                     •
                  t him goe, hoping to méete with him ere thoſe w
                     •
                  ts ended, greatly commending his high valour, remaining greatly ſatiſfied of the manner of his fight, hauing neuer ſeene any knight that ther
                     •
                   in more cont
                     •
                  nted him, except the ſame that with him combatted, whoſe admirable courage and ſupreme excellencie he not a little admyred, and going to him that was going away with his compa
                     ••
                  ons, ſaid. You ſhall not ſo much diſcontent me (magnanimious knight) as hee did that with you fought: and therefore I earneſtly intreat you both to tell mee your name, and to remayne with vs vntill your moſt daungerous woundes bee very well cured.
               The knowing of my name is need
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ſſe, Syr Knight, for I ſhall not any way bee knowne, hauing neuer wandred theſe parts. But if this wil pleaſe you, I will vnlace my helme, vppon condition you craue no more at my hands againſt my will.
               While they were thus talking, the Prince Arfileo, Don Contu
                        •
                     n 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Floriſpiano of Sue
                        ••
                     a, and the princeſſe Perſiana and Au
                        •
                     ora, with the Duke Alſ
                        •
                     on came th
                     •
                  ther,

and thinking he would go, intreated them to ſtay the curing of their woundes: they humbling themſelues for that high fauour, accepted their pr
                     •
                  ffer, and hee which wiſh the Perſian Prince had combatted, tooke off his H
                     •
                  lm
                     •
                  , which he no ſooner did but Don Bellianis and Arfileo knewe him to be the Emperour Bellaneo, their Lord, whoſe ſight ſo amazed them, that they thought they ſaw him in a ſhadow, and not in ſubſtance, and their preſent 
                     •
                  oy was ſo great, that it almoſte made them diſcouer themſelues. And the Emperour ſeeing them ſo amazed with 
                     •
                  oy, could no longer ſtay himſelfe, but imbracing his ſonne, ſaid in the Gréeke language: What is the thing (
                     •
                  it Knight) that hath ſo amazed you? Don Bellianis after his dutie done, demaunded of him in ye ſame tongue, what the 
                     •
                  ther Knight was. It is replyed the Emperour) Sabian of T
                        •
                     eb
                        •
                     nto, ſonne vnto the Duke of that Country, who came with mee out of Conſtan
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     p
                        •
                     e to ſeeke you.
               All the reſt of thoſe Princes wondred at their acquain
                     •
                  ance, inſomuch that the galla
                     •
                  t Princeſſe Peiſiana, going 
                     ••
                  gher them, ſaid with admirable grace. I am very glad (re
                     •••
                  med Knights) and wee all reſt much beholding vnto you, that at our intreaties, you would ſatiſfie our longing d
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  e, in manifeſting your olde acquaintance, and not conceale your ſelues in theſe tumultious broyles: and 
                     ••
                   right ioyfull that ye knight of the golden Image, hath beene conuerſant in ſuch good companie, eſpecially ſo much reſembling you in fauour, and no l
                     •
                  ſſe for valiant deedes of haughtie Chiualrie. The like ſaid many others beſides her: for in deede the Prince Don Bellianis ſo much fauoured his Father, that were they both of one age, hardly might they be diſtinguiſhed one from the other. Yet the Emperour Bellan
                        •
                     o was ſomewhat lower of ſtature, and bigger ſet then hee, hauing his face honoured with a large beard, ſomething graye, repreſenting there with a high Maieſticall grauitie, with ſo pleaſing a countenance, that it excelled all Knights of his age. The Princeſſe Au
                        •
                     ora (as afore is expreſſed, hauing ſeene him in the diſcouered Caſ
                     ••
                  e, when

he combatted againſt Don Gallaneo of Antioche, nigh Conſtantinople, knewe him ſtraight, and hee her, but ſeeing howe dangerous it might bee to diſcouer him, made as though ſhee knewe him not, yet thruſting among the company that talked about, him & ſeeing him alone, ſaid that none could heare. I do not doubt but I ſhall obtaine your Graces pardon (moſt excellent Lord If I doe not ſhewe you that high honour, and royall intertainement, that your Emperious ſtate and perſon meriteth, beeing forced thereto by this times preſent neceſſitie. The Emperour more narowlye regarding her, recalled her former ſight to his rememberance, knowing her to bee ſhee that had ledde away his ſonne, and louingly imbracing h
                     •
                  r, ſaid.
               Greater is my entertainement by your kinde wordes Supreme Ladie then any other effect that might bee done by me, beeing ſpoken of ſo abſolute a Ladie. Then was Sabian of Trebento very louingly receiued of them all, as if hee were their generall brother. And ſo with the noyſe of infinit muſicail, and millitarie inſtruments, and an innumerable multituded of, they were conducted to the Pallace, where the Emperour beeing layde on a moſt rich bedde, and hauing his woundes dreſſed, was left alone to repoſe his wearie body.
               And Don Bellianis taking Sabian of Trebento by ye hand, brought him to the hall, wher they were expected by thoſe princes to ſupper, with ſuch abūdant ſoruice, as euery one may imagine: Wher Don Bellianis was demanded by all thoſe Lords, what the Knightes were: Who ſaid, they were his nigh Kinſmen, and that the wounded knight was his Vnckle, whoſe admired valour they all commended.
               May we not know (ſaid ye king of Armenia, what ye knight offortune was, that with him did combatte, be hauing himſelf ſo gallantly therein: Wee followed him hither (ſaide Sabian of Frebento) for on a bridge tenne myles hence, louſting with mee at the firſt incounter my horſe dyed, and after would by no meanes drawe his ſword, and ſo my cempanion comming to mee, I tooke my Pages horſe, and both of vs followed him,

till wée heard he was come to the Cittie. But by the way we vnderſtood of a knight, who is ſonne vnto ye Sophy of Siconia, called the Knight of the three Images. Is it poſſible (ſaide the Duke Alfiron and certainely I thinke no leſſe, remembring his wordes, and had I knowne it, the matter had otherwiſe paſte. And I aſſure you, I nothing wonder at what he did, or he is the beſt knight that euer was in theſe countries, therfore it behooues vs hourely to expect the Soldanes arriuall, for 
                     •
                  he expected nothing but his comming.
               In an ill houre may hée reſolue to come (Flonſpiano) for little is the harme hee now can doe vs. In ſuch talke they a while were in, till it was bedde time, when giuing each other the good night, were all lighted to their chambers. Th. Duke Alfiron, and the Princeſſe Perſiana, lay together in a ſumptuens bed, where they ſet an end to their long tormented Loues, conſumating that night to their greate pleaſures, though not well content, remembring within what ſhort time they were to bee beſieged, with ſo puiſſant an Hoaſte, as the great Soldan had aſſembled in Perſepolis.
               
               The valiant Knight of the golden Image, after they were al gone to bed went to viſit the watch and Centinells of the cittie, as his vſe was to doe cuerie night, and tooke with him, the Prince Arfileo, and Sabtan of Trebento, that by the waye tolde him, how from Conſtantinople, a great Nauie of ſhips with many woorthie knightes beſides the Empercur, with whom alſo came out his brothers, Don Clarineo of Spaine, and Don Lucidomore of Theſſalie, béeing firſt knighted by their father, all which companies had taken their waye after him, to the kingdome of Antioche.
               
               But the Empereur and my ſelfe landing by the way in an Iland, at our returne to the ſhoare found no ſhip, 
                     •
                  eeing carryed away by a ſuddaine ſtorme that aroſe, and ſo wee ſtayed there, ending ſome aduentures, all wée departed thence, and arriuing in this countrie, came to this Cittie in requeſt of the Knight of Forune.

know you not (ſaid Don Bellianis) what became of ye ſhippes, or were they all ſincked in the tempeſt? Wee could learne nothing of thē ſaid he) but our better hope is, they are not al loſt, What number of Souldiers brought they (demaunded Don Bellianis?) They brought replyed Sabiano) aboue two thouſand fighting men, both well appointed, and the cheyſeſt of all the Empyre. In this conference they ſpent the better two parts of the night, that at length they returned to the Pallace, and went to viſit the Emperour, with whem they ſtayed till it was morning, neuer ſatiſfying himſelf with aſking al that had befallen them in that Kingdome. The Prince Don Bellianis diſcourſed vnto him, euery thing at large, telling him hée greatly wondred that hée had vndertaken ſo great toyle, as to come to ſeeke them.
               To diſcharge the debt I was in (replyed the Emperour) for the ſuccour I receiued at the vnknowne Caſtle, both of you, and of your Cosin, for our manner (as you knowe, is to make ſatiſfaction in the ſame Coyne. And yet your dutie was, net to go aw
                     •
                  i, not making your ſelues knowne. But letting it paſſe, What was the reaſon you did ſo? Wée could do no otherwiſe (replyed Arfileo hauing promiſed ſo to do.
               They had thus chatted till the next morrowe, if the Emperour had not ſent them to bedde: Which they did, lying in that chamber, and ſlept til the Sun had the following morning dryed the could deawe on the moyſt earth. And ryſing out of their beddes, made them ready, and went altogether into the field, where the iouſtes were kept, whoſe pryze the good Knight Sabian of Trebento obtained, with immortall honor, by his braue deedes.
               In this manner reſted they a moneth, vnmoleſted of any, by reaſon of the boyſterous colde winter, which kept the Soldane from incamping his Hoaſte. In which time the Prince Don Bellianis (though hée greatly delighted in the Empereur his Fathers preſence, whom all the reſt called the Knight of the Crownes, ſuſtained ſuch gréeuous paſſions, and torments

of weart, for the abſence of his deare Ladie, that hée often ſounned to the death: nothing with him preuailing, the conſolating wordes of his Damzels, nor the Princeſſe Aurora, to whome he made knowen his griefe. But euery day grewe worſe and worſe, which the Emperour his Father ſéeing, armed himſelf vppon a day (though hée could hardly doe it) béeing not altogether well, walked with him out of the Cittie, and inquired of him very earneſtly, the cauſe of his melancholie gréefes, charging him not to conceale if by any meanes. The Prince don Bellianis tolde him, he knewe not whence procéeded his gréefe, but that he felt extreame anguiſh of minde, and coulde not conceiue the cauſe thereof. The Emperour perceiuing ſome loue paſſion tormented him, hauing many times ſéene him ſighe without cauſe, ouerpaſte that talke and ſaide. Tel me, where abouts is the valley of the thrée fountaines, for I muſt néedes go thither: It is ſome thrée myles hence (ſaid Don Bellianis) whither wée may make an eaſie walke. Whereuppon the Emperour tooke his launce from his ſonnes Dwarffe, and ſending him with his owne Page backe to the Cittie, they went towards the valley.
               The Prince demaunded of his Father, why hée went thither? You ſhall knowe (replyed hee) I haue ingaged my ſelfe to the Combatte there, with the Perſian Prince this day, and I am determined to méete him there alone without any company, for ſo wée agreed, and therefore here wée muſt part, for wée muſt not go together. Don Bellianis gréeued that the Emperour had vndertaken ſo dangerous a fight, and the more becauſe he might not go to ayde him, if any ſiniſter chaunce ſhould befall. But ſeeming to feare nothing, ſaid: I will obey your commauede (deare Lord) ſéeing you will haue it ſo, and will returne vnto the Cittie, and excuſe you till you come backe. And ſo ſhewed him the valley, and departed ſomething better ſatiſfied, to ſee what little account the Emperour made of the battell: yet he reſolued to fruſtrate it, as hereafter ſhall be ſhewen.
               
                  But here we leaue them, till wée haue ſette downe the matter contained in the enſuing Chapter, which greatly auaileth this Hiſtorie.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXV.
               
                  
                     Who the ſage Friſtone was, and what hee did, that the battell betweene thoſe Princes might not bee effected.
                  
               
               
                  IN the Kingdome of Perſia, where then al thoſe knights were, dwelt a Wiſeman, which was hée that writte this great Hiſtorie, called Friſtone, whoſe equall in the Magicke-art the world: contained not, excelling therein all thoſe of his time, for they procured to learne of him. This rare Magician was ſo greate a friend to the Perſian Prince Perianco, that all his labour and ſtudie, was to no 
                     •
                  ther office, but for the good ſucceſſe of his affaires, conſunting the greateſt part of his time to that end. For which purpoſe, hée had giuen him a moſt excellent, rich, and wel tempered ſword, that the like was not within ye earthly continent, except that of Don Bellianis, which before times appertained vnto that valorous Knight Iaſon, the which that excellent Inchauntreſſe Medea had giuen him, when they enioyed their Loues, which ſhe forged vnder the conſtillation and predominance of ſuch Plannets, that no iuchauntment might againſt it preuaill.
               This ſword procured the ſage Friſtone, for the vſe of the Prince Perianeo, but he neuer could obtaine it, becauſe Medea by her Prophecies had bequeathd it to the ſucceſſiue heires of the Houſe of Greece, placing it where Don Bellianis woon it, by the meanes of the ſage Bellona. But this wiſe Friſtone béeing in the deſart of death, where he made his habitation, hee there calling to minde his friend the Perſian Prince, came to know, that for all his valour was ſo excellent, and very felve that might equall him in ſtrength, he notwithſtanding might incurre wonderous danger. And caſting about with his Arte to know the end of that battell, the almightie God would not

ſuffer him to finde out the ſucceſſe thereof, reſeruing to his diuine Maieſtie, the knowledge of the euent of thinges, which to none others might bee permitted, and the more hee ſought to know it, the farther he was from it. Which thing ſo confounded him in his imagination, that hée could not thinke what it might bée. Wherefore he reſolued by all meanes to diſturbe the fight, iudging that afterwards, the Perſian Prince might better reuenge himſelfe vpon the Duke Alfiron, for the iniurie he had done his Father, and therefore deuiſed, what you ſhall know in the next Chapter.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVI.
               
                  
                     What Don Bellianis did, beeing gone from the Emperour, and how hee combatted with the Perſian Prince, and were parted by the means of the ſage Friſtone. And how the Soldanes Hoſte beſieged the Cittie of Bollera.
                  
               
               
                  
                     DOn Bellianis béeing departed from the Emperour his Father, ſo ſpurred his Horſe, that quickly he returned to the cittie, wherein he entred very quict, ſhewing no manner of alteration, but telling euery one, that by the way inquired of him for he Knight of thē Crownes, yt he ſtayed not farre thence, for Sabian of Trebento, his companion. Hée entred the Pallace, where méeting with Sabian, requeſted him to lend him his armour, to ſupply his preſent néede. May not I accompanie you (ſaid hee) No, (replied Don Bellianis) beſides I will preſently returne. Where left you my Lord the Emperour, (demaunded hee?) Hard by (replyed the Prince) ſtaying for me. Which ſaid he buckled on Sabians armour, which nothing differed from his fathers: and mounting a horſebacke, he tooke his way to the valley of the thrée fountaines, to méete with the Perſian Prince, and comming to a large plaine 
                     •
                  he ſpied the Emperour lying vnder a trée. But taking another way ſtayed at a place throgh which the knight muſt of neceſſitic paſſe, if he came: whoſe cōming he

attended, walking on his Horſe, and reuolued with himſelfe what he had to do, & remembring that knight loued his Ladie, hée thought therein he ſtood diſgraced, which ſo mooued his deſires to incounter him, that he iudged himſelfe ſo infortunate, that the ſame Prince would rather breake his promiſe, then come. Wherein he greatly was deceiued, for he rather would haue induced a thouſand deathes, then in the leaſt degrée falſilie his ingaged word. For the day before he marched from Perſepolis, with all his troupes, containing aboue thrée hundred thouſand Horſemen, beſides Footemen, that couered all the mountaines and plaines they paſſed by, and hee ſo ſet foorth with the manner of his march, that none could ſcape to aduertize his aduerſaries thereof: on whom hée arriued with ſuch a ſuddaine furie, that it had not béene much if they had taken the Cittie at their firſt aſſault, but that thoſe valiant Knights were within, whoſe ſtrength ſupplyed the want of a competent Armie to reſiſt their 
                     •
                  oes, and iſſuing foorth in the citties defences, begun ſo fierce and bloody a battell as euer was any ſéene.
               The Princeſſe Arfileo, Contumeliano, and the Kinges of Armenia, wi
                     •
                  h the Duke Alfiron, went out of the Cittie into their Campes, through a ſecrete doore, accompanied with all the reſt of the chiefeſt Knights, which they founde in ſeme danger by the aduerſe multitudes, with whoſe comming on al ſides, their beganne ſuch cruell maſſacring of their men, that with in a whyle, the earth was dyed with humaine blood, and coucred with dead bodies, ſlaine by their furious armes: which the Prince Perianeo ſeeing, thought he could haue no better occaſion to depart ſecretly to the valley of the 3. fountains, wher he know the knight of the Crewnes expected him, to end their former quarrell, and that he might the better paſſe vnknowen, hée had put on a ſanguine armour, without any deuiſe in his ſhield, in which manner he went till he came to the place wher Don Bellianis ſtayd, whem he thought did then but come, ſeeing him walke about, and very glad cryed out, he ſhould there ſtay, for it was a place conuenient for their combatte.

                  Don Bellianis turning about, and ſéeing him ſo altered in his Armour, kn
                     •
                  w him not, (but that he thus ſaid.) I am the knight that hath eſtabliſhed this combat with you this day: for which we are now in a good place, where none ſhall diſturbe vs. You came ſo diſguiſed (replied Don Bellianis that I knew you not. But I am right glad we are ſo well met, to ende our commenced enterpriſe. But firſt tell me (ſaid the Perſian Prince) ſince one, or both of vs ſhall here remaine, what you are? and how you are called? And I promiſe to do the like. It doth not pleaſe me replied the valiant prince Don Bellianis) for I well know you are the renowmed Perianeo, Prince of Perſia. Then if not ſo (anſwered Perſian Prince) ſatiſfie me with knowing the cauſe why you beare portraied the picture of that diuine Ladie in your ſhéeld? It is the ſhadow (replied Don Bellianis) of that c
                     •
                  liſtial ſubſtance, that imperates my heart and ſoule, and therfore 
                     •
                  o I continually bear it with me. Oh vnhappy knight. ſhall in the worlde liue any to dare ſay ſuch a thing in thy preſence? and with a fierie choller that gnawde his heart, hee turned his horſe to take his full carreare on the field. The like did Don Bellianis, méeting in the middle of their courſe with ſuch admirable force & lightneſſe, that they ſéemed more to fly, then on the ground to run. Oh who would not haue deſired to ſée this fight betwixt the flower of the worldes Chiualrie, here oppoſed one againſt the other? For the Prince Perianeo had not his like on the vniuerſe, except Don Bellianis & his father, and yet his father had Princes his brothers, though they were knighted, had not yet thitherto vſed their Armes. But to returne to our former diſcourſe.
               The two Combattants encountred each other with ſuch imp
                     •
                  tous and ſodaine ſtrength, that their Launces being big, and knottie, & their forſes without cōpare: all their defenſiue armor was pierced, and their launces paſt betwéen their left ſides and armes, and meeting body with body, ſheelds & helmes togither, made ſo huge a noiſe, as if two towers had met. Don Bellianis loſt both his ſurrops. But the Prince Perianeo, if he had not

very quickly got hold by his horſes necke, he had ſurely gon to the ground, making many ſignes of falling, yet gouerned with inplacable rage, he brauely recouered his ſtirrops, turning towards Don Bellianis, that alſo made againſt him, and regréeting one another with ſuch rigorous blowes, that all the Valley did reſound with the noiſe, ſo monſtrous were they, and where theyr ſwordes lighted, from thence it carried armour and fleſh, and laid ſo thicke vpon one another, that they had no time toward any blow with their ſhéeldes. In this manner laboured they, aboue foure houres, being ſo wounded, that it would haue made any adamantiue breſt to pittie them, and not ſpeaking any word, withdrew apart to breathe.
               The Prince Perianeo thus with himſelfe began: Is it poſſible that the enuious ſtarres that gouerned the fatall houre of my birth, ſhould make me thus vnhappy, to heare a knight in my preſence ſay, he loues thy Lady, and that thou art not able to ſatiſfie that proud fault, with ye deareſt blood of his ſtout hart, but ſuffer him to bring thée to ſuch a point, as to wiſh the pittileſſe ſtroake of an impartial cruell death? & eyther this knight is inchanted, or I am deceiued if his forces be not now far greater then the other time I tried them, and neyther toyle nor labour doth diminiſh them. But oh, Imperious Gouerneſſe of my afflicted ſoule? What is he ſhall tel thée, that this thy knight dyeth, cōfeſſing ye immooueable faith he owes thée, hauing left no hope euermore to ſée the glorious ſplendour of thy diuine beautie. But let the reuoluing heauens diſpoſe the reſolucion of my deſtined Fates, as they pleaſe, yet one of vs ere we dye, ſhall confeſſe the other moſt worthy of thy ſeruice. On the other ſide, Don Bellianis walking, conſidering with himſelfe, the valour of his aduerſarie, imagining he neuer felt crueller blowes (but of his father) and that his forces more and more increaſed, and recording the cauſe of his fight, thus of himſelfe complained. Oh Don Bellianis, vnwoorthie to bee called knight, and louer of ſo Diuine a Princeſſe, to ſuffer an other knight thus to let thee blood, and not to make his tributary

life doo homage to thy ſword, whereby thou haſt loſt both the honour and tylle of a Knight, vn
                     〈…〉
                   thou recouereſt it by making his deaths paſſage through his life.
               With the ende of which words, hee became ſo inraged, that his heart ſéemed to burne in the fierie coales of his irefull breſt, and ſo redoubled his moſt furious courage, that if there had beene 
                     •
                  oure ſuch Knights as the Perſian Prince before him, hee thought that in ſhort time to reduce them all to the mercie of his mortall Blade. With which, betwixt both hands he w
                     •
                  nt, againſt his lou
                     •
                  -croſſing aduerſarie, which did the like alſo, and rayſing his Median Sworde aloft, to deſcend it with a more furie, there appeared before him a Lady altogither like to her, whoſe Picture had with cruell yoake ſubiugated his commaunding heart▪ which ſaid vnto him. What doo you h
                     ••
                  re (renowmed Prince of Greece) knewe you not your loue that is towards mee, cannot take any effect, if firſt you free mee not from this danger?
               And therewith hee thought hee ſawe foure monſtrous Gyants, like a whyrle-winde ſnatch her thence, and that one dragged her amber guided hayre with ſuch barbarous ſauageneſſe, that his vnconquered heart reſolu'd to liquid blood at the cruel, yet a pittiful 
                     •
                  ight: and moreouer, an other following thē, cried out, let me alone with that vilde wretch for ſhe muſt dye by my hand. Which that valiant Prince Don Bellianis ſeeing, not reſpecting the fight, purſued that illuſion that he ſawe, which tooke the way downe the Valley. Héereupon his fine Armor with deuiſe of the imperiall Crownes, loſt their hewe, becomming like thoſe that the Prince Perianeo did weare at the Jouſts in Bollera.
               
               The Perſian Prince, that nothing of that had ſéen, thinking his aduerſary had left the battel for ſome other reaſon, began to follow him, but ſodainly his raines were taken out of his hāds, and looking about to ſée who ſhould do ſo, ſawe before him the deareſt fréend he had, the Sage Friſtone, who thus ſaide vnto him.
               
                  What is the matter (deare Prince of Perſia) that you follow whom you know not, nor whether it bee your aduantage ſo to doo? Take my counſaile: returne to Ballero, for I haue laide ſuch a ſnare for him, that you ſhall be fully reuenged on your enemies, and therefore follow not that knight. So this ſaid, he vaniſhed away.
               The Perſian Prince was greatly amazed hereat, and ſo great was his hate againſt the valiant knight of the imperiall Crownes, that he was about to follow him: yet notwithſtanding, reſoluing the contrary, returned to his fathers Campe, where arriuing, he found the battell ſtill to indure very fierce, through which he thruſt himſelfe, to helpe his men. Where we leaue him, till we haue expreſt what happened to Don Bellianis, purſuing thoſe inchantments.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVII.
               
                  
                     How Don Bellianis following the Sage Friſtones inchantments, Combatted with the Emperour his father, in the Valley of three Fountaines: and how Don Bellianis was led away by the wiſe Bellona, to ende a certaine aduenture.
                  
               
               
                  THe Prince Don Bellianis, as is ſaid, purſued thoſe Gyants, whom he thought carried priſoner, the Princeſſe Florisbella, in which purſuite, he had remained inchanted, by the ſage Friſtone, had it not béene for his ſword, yet was hee by him deceiued, ſeeming otherwiſe thē he was: which was all the Magician could do. And thus going alōg, he eſpied before him a knight, armed as he thought in the Perſian Princes armor, with whom he not long before fought with. And ſo ſoone as they approached togither, all thoſe inchantments vaniſhed away: wherat, like one amazed, wakened

out of ſome dreame, ſtood ſtill. But the knight that came vp the valley was his father, had, by Friſtones deuice his Armour alſo chāged. For that of Don Bellianis ſéemed like the knights of Fortune, and the Emperors nothing differed from the ſame. Who ſéeing him come with ſuch haſte, and without Launce, left his owne, and drawing forth his ſword, went to méete him with it raiſed aloft. Don Bellianis doing the like, there began betwéen them the cruelleſt fight that in al that day was fought, making their heads bowe to the ſaddle pummell with their terrible ſtrokes, ſo faſt redoubling blow vpon blow, that the mightineſſe of them ſtrooke fire out of their armour, and made them often looſe the ſight of one another. Don Bellianis at this time, thinking his aduerſaries ſtrength increaſed more and more, more furious then a furious Beare, hauing loſt none of former rage, ſtrooke at him ſo huge a blowe, that cutting his ſhield in two, it tumbled to ye ground, with a péece of his helme. But the Emperour ſtrooke at him below his ſhield, that cutting his armor, it alſo pierced his coate of male, wounding him two fingers déepe in his right ſide, and entring within him, with a furious thruſt, penetrated all his armor to the fleſh, forcing him to giue backe two or thrée ſteppes, and ſéeing that was the time wherin he ſhould ſhew the vtmoſt of his mightie forces, letting fall the remnant of his ſhield, would haue with both his hands ſtrooke him on the head. But Don Bellianis ſéeing the cutting ſword deſcend with ſuch furie, ſpurred his horſe forwards, and cloſing with him ere he could diſcharge his blowe, tooke him twixt his ſtrong armes, and lifting him out of his ſaddle, ſhaking the ſtirropes from his owne feete, he lept with him on the ground, where he opened both armour and fleſh with one mightie blow. But ouercome with rage, both at one time rayſed their ſlicing ſwords, which falling with ſuch ſtrength, the Emperour had the buckles of his helme cut, which fell on the earth, and the ſword deſcending on his left arme, it made him there a gréeuous wound. But don Bellianis was ſo ouerladen with the Emperours blow, that he was forced to ſet both knées and hands on the ground. And the Emperour ſéeing himſelfe

without the helme, ſtrooke his aduerſary ſo ſuddeinly againe with ſuch ſtrength, that he ſorely wounded him on ye left ſhoulder, and the ſword ran thrée handfuls into the earth. But Don Bellianis neuer looſing any ſparke of his admirable courage at any ſiniſter accident, raiſed himſelfe vpon his féete, and turned vpon the Emperour ere he had time to drawe his ſword from the ground. At this inſtant was ye Emperors life in wondrous daunger, being without ſhield and helme, and not able to helpe himſelfe with his ſword ſo quickly as hee ſhould. And Don Bellianis being on foote, with his ſword raiſed with both hands, and readie to diſcharge it, did ſuddeinly knowe him, and with the greateſt wonder that euer before hée was in, cried out. Oh Almightie God, in whome I doo beléeue, is it poſſible my handes ſhould commit ſo hainous treachery? And therewith ſtaied his hand.
               The Emperour hearing theſe words, ſaid: Know you me knight? Or what is the reaſon you end not your fight? Whervnto Don Bellianis replied. I doo moſt humbly beſéech you my verie deare Lord and Emperour, euen by that Lord that hath permitted we ſhould not die by ſo great deceits, that you omit and pardon this my errour, wherein I am guiltie of no fault committed againſt you. And hauing ſaide ſo, vnlaced his helme, whereat the Emperour ſtraight knewe him, which ſtrooke him into ſo great an anguiſh to ſée his deare ſonne ſo cruelly wounded by his handes, that hee was faine to ſet him downe, not being able to ſtand on his legges, looking like a man readie to breathe his laſt.
               
                  Don Bellianis thinking his woundes were the cauſe of it, ſat him downe, lamenting that vnhappie chaunce, looſing their blood ſo faſt, that it had made two Chanells, as if they proceeded from two riſing ſprings, and ouertaken by the darkſome night, were put into ſo great feare, that they diſpaired of remedie. Eſpecially Don Bellianis, doubting thereby his fathers life, who becauſe the ſuddaine amazement more troubled him then the daunger of his woundes, quickly recouered himſelfe, and imbracing the Prince his ſonne, ſaid.
               
                  Oh deare ſonne! tell me I▪pray you, why come you armed in the Armour of the Knight of Fortune? Did he peraduenture di
                     •
                   by your hands? or how is it? for I cannot expreſſe the alteration I ſuffer, till I know it.
               I weare the Armes of Sabian of Trebento, and no others: for thoſe of the Perſian Prince your ſelfe weares. I haue not chaunged mine ſaid the Emperour. But tel me, what hath befallen you ſince you leſt me, for ſurely we haue bn wondrouſly deceiued?
               
                  Don Bellianis tolde it him. Whereupon the Emperour ſpake. Surely Prince we haue bene inchaunted, and yet cannot deuiſe by what meanes: but this is the ſtraungeſt caſe I euer heard of, that both ſhould ſéeme to weare one kinde of armour, and not perceiue it, each of vs imagining the other to be the Perſian Prince. And it may bee, that Lady that cryed to you for helpe, was ſhe that ſo deceiued vs. But let vs part from hence, for we looſe much blood.
               When they were vppon going, they eſpied comming towards them, an auncient Matrone, conducted by foure monſtrous Gyants, before them was carried a Piller of fire, which lighted them their way, they came with ſuch haſte, that ere they could riſe, ſhe was vpon them, whom preſently the Gyants tooke from her Palfray, and knéeling before the Emperour, ſhe required his royall hands to kiſſe them. The Emperour refuſing to do it, tooke her vp, and ſhe vnmaſking her ſelfe, was ſtraight knowne of Don Bellianis, to be the ſage Bellona, his deare friend. Whereat conceiuing as much pleaſure as before diſpleaſure, and accounting all his daunger none, imbracing her, ſaid.
               What chaunce hath brought you hither (my good friend) at ſuch a time, which is not without ſome ſpeciall cauſe. The great loue I beare you, and the Emperour your father, (replied ſhe) is the cauſe thereof.
               But for you incurre great perill through your wounds, eate this which I will giue you, for with the like medicine you were

afore cured. They did ſo, and were therewith preſently ſo well, as if they had had no ill at all, and their armour returned vnto their former colour and deuiſes. The Emperour imbracing her, ſaid.
               For Gods ſake (Ladie) tell me this aduenture, for it doth more amaze me then any thing in all my life? I will (replyed ſhée) and hardly ſhall you know it of any but of me. You well remember the Combatte, you had agreed with the Perſian Prince: now know, he hath to his friend a great Magician, in that Art the ſkilfulleſt in all the world, this man knowing the great daunger his friend ſhould paſſe, with the Prince your ſonne, did ordaine all that which you haue ſéene, changing both your armours, that you might ſtaie one another, each of you thinking you fought with the valourous Prince Perianeo: And truſt me, his deſire had taken effect, had it not bene for Don Bellianis ſword, which for that purpoſe the wiſe Medea many yeares before kept in the Caue, where Don Bellianis woune it, being the man ſhe wiſhed might haue it, alwayes deſiring to benefit the houſe of Greece, as often heretofore ſhe hath done. For ſo was it written, where your ſonne found the ſword, if he doth remember the words. I doo well remember them (replied Don Bellianis) for thus they ſaid.
               
                  
                     This Prophecie is mentioned in the ſeeond Chapter: and here explained with effect.
                     That with this Sword, the liuing ſhould be loſt, and the dead put in poſſeſſion of the recouered, and they reſtored to their royall blood, with knowledge of their poſſeſſors. You ſee now how it hath come to paſſe: and moreouer, they ſaid, this ſhould be.
                  
               
               At the time when the fierceneſſe of the couragious Lyons, which are you two, by the greatneſſe of his ſkill, which is that of the wiſe man, called Friſtone, that in knowledge equals her, becauſe he hath all her 
                     •
                  ookes, ſhould be put in greater feare,

(but this know not he, for he did not looke whether th
                     •
                   Sword were wonne or no, or whether the valorous Prince your ſonne did weare it.) Then the liuing which were loſt (that ar
                     •
                   you two, that being liuing were loſt, by the alteration of your Armour, and ſuppoſing you alreadie dead, which would haue happened, if the fight had bene ended with the blowe of this Sword, that cut the laces of your Helme) were put in poſſeſſion of your recouered ſelues, being reſtored to your royall bloods, (which was at the point vtterly to haue bene loſt.) And the true poſſeſſors knowne (which are both you,) taking one another for the Perſian Prince.
               Now I hope you vnderſtand the aduenture you haue paſt, which not without cauſe you haue accounted ſtraunge. Greatly wondred the knights at theſe Ladies words, who againe ſaid. But for another cauſe hath my comming bene, which is to haue with me the Prince Don Bellianis, your deare ſonne, whome I muſt preſently vſe in a deare imploy, that ne leſſe concernes him, then his life.
               Take vs both with you ſaide the Emperour. I would willingly doo it (replied ſhée) but that the braue Duke Alſiron greatly néedeth your helpe, and therefore it is no reaſon to leaue him alone, and your ſonne ſhall quickly returne againe. And here doo as I counſell you, for I well knew this woulde happen, which made me write vnto you, that you ſhould by no meanes depart from the Cittie of Conſtantinople, but you would not do it, wherein it had not bene much if you had loſt your life. I will not go againſt your counſell (replied the Emperour) but tell me if my ſonne ſhall quickly returne? He ſhal (ſaid ſhe) and therefore go to the Citie, the ſooneſt that you may, and ſo making Don Bellianis mount on horſeback, who had taken the Emperours bleſſing (which with many teares did giue it him) departed as ſwift as the winde, leauing the Emperour ſo occupied with imaginations, whither his ſonne might be carried, that he knew not how to reſolue himſelfe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXVIII.
               
                  
                     How the Emperour returned to the Cittie of Bollera, and what happened him in the Souldanes Campe, before hee entred into the Citie.
                  
               
               THe Emperour remembring the Sages words, tooke his Launce and mounted on horſbacke, approching the Cittie of Bollera, almoſt by breake of day, which he founde begyt with ſo many multitudes, that he greatly wondred at their ſuddaine arriuall, and not knowing on which ſide the Duke laie intrenched, becauſe the Citie was round about beſieged, he ruſhed among thoſe Tentes, as if he had bene one of the Centinels, and thus he went till he came vnto a great pauilion, which he thought to be the Generals of thoſe troopes, and looking into it, he ſawe many knights talking with another that lay in his bed, whom he iudged according to his manner and conditions, to be the Sophy, and hard by him, he ſpied armed without his helme, the Prince of Perſia, that had bene cured after by the ſame meanes that he was, their conference was, that it would be good, to giue another aſſault vnto the Citie, for if it were but only to affright them within, it would not be amiſſe. And the Emperour being buſily harkoning to this, there came vnto him, a knight, that was Collonell of ye Court of guard, and ſaide. What doo you here, you are not in your quarters? I was walking about (ſaid the Emperour) and here I ſtaied to looke vpon this Tent. And therfore ſhall you goe to priſon (replied the other) ſeeing you haue no more care. The Emperour ſaid, let vs go whither you will. Here vpon the Collonell turned to foure knightes, and charged them to conuay that knight to his Tent. Which they going to doo, the Emperor ſorely wounded, ouerthrew them one after an other to the ground with his lance▪ and about to do the like by the Colonel, he thruſt himſelf among the Tents, calling out for help. But the Emperour that hereat became furious, reached his launce at the Souldan (that laie a bed▪ with ſuch force, raiſing himſelf on

his ſtirrops, which if it had gone ſtraight, he had no more néede to make warre, yet it miſſed him ſo little, that the Launce paſt betwixt his arme and left ſide, and ranne through all the bedding, nayling it aboue a handfull in the grounde. Which the Knights ſéeing that were talking with him, gathered about him, thinking he had bene ſlaine, and ſome went out to ſée what he was that had bene ſo hardie to do ſuch a déed: among whom was the Prince Perianeo.
               
               But the Emperour thinking it no wiſedome to oppoſe himſelfe againſt ſo many, cloſely thruſt among thoſe knights that were come thither, and ſo paſt till he came to the farther ſide of the Campe, at ſuch time that the Sunne beganne to appeare, and fearing ſome might méete and know him, and ſo fruſtrate his intent, he ruſhed with great violence vppon the guard on that ſide, and maugre their force, he paſſed through the middeſt of them, leauing aboue twentie, pitteouſly wounded on the earth. And at length arriued in his owne Camp, where being ſtraight knowne, was with great gladneſſe receiued, and ſo entered the Cittie, where the Duke and all the reſt ioyfully welcommed him, and being demaunded for the valiant Knight of the golden Image, he replied, he departed from him at the Valley of the thrée Fountaines, and woulde quickly returne.
               So leauing them, he went to reſt himſelfe, for he greatly néeded it. The Prince Perianeo being come foorth of the Tent, thinking his father had bene ſlaine, inquiring for him that had done it, came to the place where the Emperour had made that ſlaughter, there he founde ſome dead, ſome gréeuouſly wounded, and ſome in ſuch caſe as they could hardly liue long, and demannding who had ſo handled them, they replied they knewe not, ſaue that a diuelliſh Knight clad in Armour, bearing certaine Crownes vpon his ſhield, had done thoſe wonders, and in deſpight of vs all, hath entred the Citie of Bollera.
               
               By this the Prince knewe, the Knight that woulde haue ſlaine his Father, was hée with whome hée did Combatte,

though he much doubled it, becauſe his deare frined the wiſe Friſtone, had tolde him, he would ſet him in place, where hee ſhould leaue both honour and life: yet diſcontented and amazed he returned to the Tent, where he found the Souldan vp, whereat he greatly reioyced, and with no little gladneſſe, demanded how he felt himſelfe, and whether the launce had done him any harme? None (replied the Souldan) but what I conceiued with feare of death, and I aſſuredly thinke that was the knight of the golden Image, for none elſe could haue the heart to do it. So great is the bountie of this knight, replied ye prince) that none might do it but he. In theſe words you ſhall ſée it (anſwered the Souldane) for he that doth not ſée his déedes, will hardly beléeue them, my ſelf hauing ſéene him performe ſo hautie acts of Chiualry, which elſe none ſhould haue perſwaded me, that any humane creature could atchiue them: for he being wounded, ſlue the horrible Dragon of the Ryphean deſart, and the King of Cyprus aſſuring you, that when he entered with him in the liſtes, the blood iſſued twixt the ioynts of his Armour from his olde woundes. He alſo diſcouered the aduenture of the Diſpaire in Loue, with many other things which of him you haue heard. I long to try (replied the Prince) how farre his valour dooth extend. For I know not whether it be a Knight that did diſturbe me from ending a certaine Combat, and if it be he, I doo proteſt to procure all meanes til I méete with him.
               It is no wiſedome (ſaid the Souldan) to hazard your perſon 
                     ••
                   ſo certaine daunger, ſéeing with our ſouldiers you haue here, we ſhall eaſily be reuenged on them all. I will neuer leaue ſuch a battell (anſwered the Prince,) for if he be ſuch a knight as he that hurld his Lance at you, he ought with reaſon to be eſtéemed. Do you know him, (ſaid the Souldan?) Yes (replied the Prince) for yeſterday I did Combat with him in the valley of the thrée Fountains. But how did you with him (ſaid ye ſoldan?) My friend the Sage Friſtone, did part vs, anſwered Perianeo. In ſuch talke continued they till the enſuing morrow, aduertizing a whole Camp to be in readines againſt ye next aſſalt.

The duke Alfiron, and the Kings, ſéeing the knight of the golden Image came not, they altogither very ſorrowfully intreated the Emperor, to vndertake the generall charge ouer them all: which he did though vnwillingly. And hauing heard his enemies intent, taking with him the prince Arfileo, & Sabian of Trebento, he muſtred all his men, diuiding them into 5. ſquadrons. The firſt he committed to the leading of the Phenician prince, & with him his valiant coſen Floriſpiano, with 20. thouſand well appointed knights. The ſecond he committed to the duke Alfiron, with al his men, which were as many. The third led the kings of Armenia, & Teſſifantie. The fourth conducted Sabian of Trebento. And the fift gouerned a brother of the Dukes called Sallatell of the valley. And for himſelfe he wold haue none. The Prince Perianeo, diuided his troopes in ſire battalions, and euery one of 50. thouſand knights, and gaue order, that other fiftie thouſand, with all the footemen, ſhould aſſault the Citie, which were aboue fortie thouſand, with ſo manie millitarie engines, that they made ſure account to lay it leuell with the ground, with vtter deſolation of all the knights, at their firſt incounter.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIX.
               
                  
                     The cruell battell fought betweene the Dukes campe, and the Soldanes troupes, and what therein happened: with the ſtraunge actes the Emperour Don Bellaneo performed: and the terrible aſſaults giuen to the Citie.
                  
               
               THe cold gloomy winter being ouerblowne, with the warm approch of the wanton ſpring, wherein the amourous paſſions in the hearts of loue-oppreſſed knights, beganne to ſtirre vp the almoſt extinguiſhed flames, and chieflie in them, that hoped of little remedie for their gréefe, continuallie contemplating in the perpetuall captiuitie of theyr alienated ioyes, when Perianeo the Perſian Prince, deſiring ſpéedily to terminate theſe warres in ſtrong battailions, drewe foorth all

his men in fielde, which were ſo gallant and ſéemely, as anie that euer were ſéene in thoſe partes, with ſuch diuerſitie of deuiſes, Scutchions, Ancients, and Flagges, worne about their Speares, which diſplayed in the ayre, made a moſt gallant ſhewe togither, with the brightneſſe of theyr armour, that with the Sunne beames reuerberating on them, ſéemed ſo manie Chriſtaline Glaſſes, and the clamourous noiſe of ſuch multitudes, béeing ſo diuerſe, required a Captaine of no leſſe valour then his they had. Where though they were verie quiet, yet the neighing and trampling of their horſes, and theyr Maiſters noyſe guiding them, raiſing ſuch a rebounding eccho, that they coulde not heare one another.
               The Emperour Don Bellaneo, like the man that had béene in farre more daungerous enterpriſes then thoſe, taking with him the Prince Arfileo, the better to range about the battell) drewe in fielde his furious Squadrons: and perceyuing that the Sunne when hée roſe ſhined agaynſt his enemies faces, dazeling theyr eyes with his brightneſſe. Which falling out well to his aduauntage, and deſiring to looſe no good occaſion, paſſing to the foremoſt Squadron, commaunded that with a violent furie, they ſhoulde ſet vppon them, kéeping themſelues togither vnited, leaſt theyr aduerſaryes breaking through them, ſhoulde diſorder theyr rankes. And therevppon cowching theyr Launces, encountred their enemies, that were ſo blinded with the Sunne, that they ſawe them not come. But the Emperours men ſo brauely gaue the onſette, that theyr aduerſaryes coulde not breake their fil
                     •
                  s on no ſide, wherevppon theyr ſlaughter was ſo great, that in leſſe then halfe an houre, that Squadron was vanquiſhed and altogither ouercome, leauing behinde aboue thirtie thouſande ſlaine and wounded. The valiant actes that the Emperour in the meane time performed, are hard to beleeue. He with ſuch valiancie brake through the middle of thoſe rankes, as the Reapers vſ
                     •
                  d in the Moneth of Julie to reape the Harueſt of their ripened graine: ſo he left on the ground ſo manie head by head, that none durſt confront him, and ſometimes

he ſo turned his battell, that he forced them to fight, through whome hée woulde with ſuch courage breake, that neither the Princes Arfileo, nor Contumeliano, nor the valiant Floriſpiano, were able to followe him: but letting him ſo farre go before them, that they often left him out of ſight. At this time the Prince Perianeo ſéeing the diſorder of his men, tooke with him Don Fermoſell, and the two brothers Criſalaneo, and Gramalis, of Thrace, with thirtie monſtrous Giants, and paſt to his ſecond Squadron, with which gathering the remnant of the diſperſed men, encountred the Emperor, commaunding all his troups togither to aſſault the ether ſide of the battell. But the Emperor that was more politike in militarie diſcipline thē 
                  Perianeo, quickly perceiued his meaning: wherfore calling Floriſpiano, ſent him to tell the Duke Alfiron, hée ſhould commaund the whole battell to vnite it ſelfe with him, giuing no time to their aduerſaries to recouer the aduauntage they had ouer them, and that it ſhoulde bee with the greateſt ſpeede poſſible, for therein conſiſted that dayes victorie, ere the Sunne mounted aloft. Which was done ſo ſuddenly, that they almoſt met theyr enemies. The Perſian Prince perceiuing what his aduerſaries had done, fearing to bée put to fight, commaunded all his Squadrons to doo ſo, and ſpying Sauian of Trebento, which then entred in the battell) thinking him to be the Knight of the golden Image, becauſe hée did weare his armour, cowched his Launce agaynſt him, who did the like, méeting with ſuch force, that they were forced to holde by their horſes neckes. When vnawares ere hée could remedie it, two firece Giants that gyrded Perianeo, wounded Sauiano ſo rigorouſlie, that hée tumbled from his horſe. Perianeo alighted to kill him, but Sabiano, that was alreadie on his féet, gaue him ſo great a blowe that he ſtaggered him foure ſteps backwards: yet ſo manie layd upon him with ſuch boyſtrous blowes, that though he valiantly defended himſelfe, yet hardly had he ſcaped with life, if that the noyſe had not thither brought the Emperour, with the Princes Contumeliano, and Arfileo, Floriſpiano, the Duke Alfiron, and

the King of Armenia, with many other choſen knights. On the other ſide, there arriued the Soldan with twentie Giants in his companie. with him alſo came Coroliano and Doraldo, where there began ſo great a fight, that all the other battel was nothing in compariſon of that. But the couragious Emperour ſeeing his deare Sabiano in ſuch perill, in deſpight of them all, went where hée was fighting, and not knowing what Perianeo was, ouerthrew him to the ground with his horſe breſt, and alſo tumbling downe a Giant, tooke his horſe, and gaue it Sabeano, ſaying. Mount vpon this horſe knight, if you meane to liue. Which he did verie lightly, though he were ſore wounded, and with their mortall blowes, they quickly cut their paſſage through their enemes. The Prince Perianeo with extreame rage foming like chaffed boare, taking a horſe turned againſt him whom had ouerthrowne him: but ere he did it, the Souldan, and the Duke Alfiron méeting, and knowing each other, diſcharged two ſuch blowes vpon themſelues, that their heads were both wounded, from whence there ran much blood. The duke here had incurred great danger, if the Emperor had not arriued with his companie, who knowing the Soldane, came ſo nigh, that raiſing his ſworde to ſtrike him being ſo cloſe vnto him, did no otherwiſe, but with the hiltes throw him off his horſe, and going after to kill him, was ouerreached backwardes by the Prince Periance, with ſo cruell a ſtroke, that he had fallen downe. Coroliano wounded him alſo vppon the ſhoulder, that hee felt the ſworde raſe his fleſh. Wherevpon there began ſo cruell a fight betwéene them, that one ſide to take the Soldane, and another to defende him, aboue foure thouſande knights loſt their liues through theyr obſtinacie. On this ſide where the Emperour was, his men h
                     •
                  lde out couragiouſly, though the Sunne were high, and they wearie with long fighting. But one the other ſide, the Emperours men loſt their aduauntage, vnable to reſiſt their aduerſaries. At this time the aſſault giuen to the citie, was ſo fierce, that on either ſide infinite numbers died, that currents of blood ranne through the field: and beeing fewe within to defende

the Citie, it eaſily might haue béene taken. When there came a knight to the Emperour, and ſaid. Withdraw your ſelfe ſir, vnleſſe you wil haue vs al deſtroied: for they within the citi
                     •
                   haue néede of preſent helpe. Is it poſſible (ſaid the Emperor?) Aſſure your ſelfe (replied the knight) that if the Cittie bee taken, which is eaſily to be done, we ſhalbe all vtterly deſtroyed. The Emperour remembring it might be ſo, and the Sunne being verie high was in their faces, commanded a retreat to be ſounded: whereupon there enemies thinking they fled, ſet furiou
                     ••
                  y vpon them. But the Emperor gathering his men in forme of a Pyramedes, defended them in ſuch ſuch ſort, that none miſcarried, and they entred ſafely within theyr trenches, where the Emperor leauing ſufficient guard, made moſt of his men enter the Citie, to defend it, where, becauſe the aſſault of the wall might ſome what ſlaken, opened one of the Gates, which hée with the Phenician Prince, and Floriſpiano, valourouſly kept, by whoſe handes manie their died, with tenne of the terribleſt giants in all the aduerſe campe. But ouertaken with the darkeneſſe of the night, they were forced to leaue, and returne to their Tents. The like did the Emperour, King, and Princeſſe, who leauing good guarde in the Citie, returned to the Pallace, where they were receyued with more outwarde gladneſſe, then inwardly was conceiued, by the princeſſe Perſiana, and Aurora, the one for greafe to ſée thoſe wars, the other wanting the preſence of her deare friend, the Prince don Bellianis. And ſupper being ended, the Emperour withdrawing himſelf to his chamber, was taken apart by the Princeſſe Aurora, that ſayde vnto him. I beſéech your Maieſtie tell mee what is become of Don Bellianis, for I feare ſome diaſter accident may haue befallen him? The Emperour to comfort her, tolde her all that had happened in the valley of the thrée Fountaines, and howe the ſage Bellona had taken him with her. Now am I verie glad, (ſayde the Princeſſe) for I am aſſured hee ſhall haue no harme in her companie. And ſo giuing one another the good night, departed. The Emperour to his Chamber, and ſhe to hers, with the Princeſſe Floriſbellaes
                  
Ladies, that were verie ſorrowfull for the abſence of the knight of the golden Image. The Princeſſe told them, that the wiſe Bellona had conducted him with her, which were ſome better newes for them. In this muner remained the beſieged knights, and euery day came freſh ſupplie vnto the Soldane, with which he euerie day aſſaulted the Citie, ſometimes winning, and ſometimes looſing, as in ſuch accidents is often ſéene. But they within the Citie receiuing no ayde, had commonly the woorſt. Where we leaue them, till we haue dilated the ſtraunge aduentures of the knight of the Golden Image, conducted by the wiſe woman.
            
            
               CHAP. XL.
               
                  
                     Whap happened the Knight of the golden Image, going with Bellona: and how he proued the aduenture of Brandezar, on the Nycaonian mountaines.
                  
               
               IN maner aboue expreſſed, the knight of the golden Image poſted with ſuch ſwiftneſſe, that by the next morning Sun, he found himſelfe vpon a high mountaine, the barrenneſt that might be ſeene, and turning to the ſage Bellona, with whō thitherto he had not ſpoken, ſaid vnto her. Tell me Ladie) what Country is this where we are? for I aſſure you I neuer ſawe woorſe. We are nowe (replied ſhee) in the Kingdome of Egypt, on the mountaines of the King Nycaon, and there muſt you end an aduenture, which will be to your eternall benefite: excelling all that hitherto you haue done. And therefore know, that this kingdome in times paſt being the mightieſt Monarchie ouer the worlde many yeares: in which time there ſwaied the empyre, a worthy king called Nycaon, by whoſe name this mountaine is called, that you are on. This king was at great iarre, with another named Brandezar, Emperor of Babylon, whom ſo purſued him, that he was fame to immure himſelfe within a ſtrong Citie hee poſſeſt, hard by the riuer Euphrates, where Brandezar begirt him with a fearfull ſiege, that hoping of no remedie to obtaine his libertie, was driuen to vſe his Art,

being the greateſt Magician in his time, that euer had b
                     ••
                  n before him, and reſolued to do what you ſhall nowe heare.
               One night by his Arche went to Brandezars Campe, and cauſed him to be brought vpon this Mountaine: but firſt hee called his Subiects togither, and counſelled them to compounde with thoſe Caldeans, and Babylonians, for hee had determined to leaue them, becauſe his enemies ſhould not execute their reuenge on him. His ſubiects that greatly loued him, with great ſorrowe intreated him to ſtay, and ſee howe they woulde ſpende theyr lyues in his ſeruice. But hee promiſing them quickelie to returne, aſſured them he would eaſe them of their gréefe, cauſed by Brandezar. And ſo hee did: for comming hither, hée wrought ſuch inchauntments vpon him, that hée remayned in the greateſt torments and paines, that any tongue can expreſſe: and thinking that if by his inchauntments, hée loſt his vnderſtanding and ſences, hée ſhoulde not bee reuenged at his pleaſure, reſolued to leaue in his perfect iudiciall wittes: and for that cauſe inchaunted a King, with ſuch vertue and coniuration, that hée which on his finger weares it, ſhould neuer bee offended by any inchauntment, but inioy his true ſences, with all the libertie his heart elſe might wiſh, ſauing bodies impriſonment. This might he well doo, as the onelie man that in this Arte tutered Medea, béeing neuer equalled in this ſ
                     •
                  ience. And a while after, that hée knewe his vaſſalles were quitted, minded to returne, and deſcending this mightie Monntaine, mette with his valian
                     •
                   brother, who in his abſence was crowned King. Nycaon (as is ſayde) méeting, and knowing him, ranne to imbrace him. But his brother buſied with other imaginations, was greatly diſpleaſed to ſee him, and thinking hee ſhoulde looſe that mightie Empyre by his comming, cloſing within him, ſtabbed him, till hee died, and after commaunded his followers, to ſay they founde him ſo there, which they did. And he remained king, and Nycaon was buried at his mountaines foote.
               That which you néede this preſent time, is to ende this aduenture,

and to take the King from the Emperour Brandezar, which you muſt vſe in a deare imploy, and without it you ſhall liue the grieuouſeſt life that may bee thought. And becauſe you ſhall haue the greater deſire to attempt it, I tell you that the ſage F
                        ••
                     ſtone, did ordaine all thoſe things you ſawe to diſturbe your battell, and is nowe gone into the Citie of Babylon, for hée knoweth by his Art (wherein hée excelles all thoſe of his profeſſion) that if at this preſent, hée get not in his power the Princeſſe Florisbella, to giue her to his friend the Princeſſe Perianeo of Perſia, hée after ſhall not ſo eaſily obtaine her, (at leaſt by force) and therefore intendes hée by one meanes or other, to haue her for the Prince Perianeo, verie ſhortly: Wherefore it behooues her to haue that King, that his determination may bee fruſtrated. And if from the ſame Emperour, you can take the armour hee weares, they woulde greatly auaile you: for hée that weares them, can not bée moleſted by anie inchauntment, whatſoeuer, nor be knowne, vnleſſe he will himſelfe. You haue tolde mée wonders (ſayde Don Bellianis:) and is this mans ſkill ſo great, that hée may force the Princeſſe Florisbella agaynſt her will, and giue her to the Prince of Perſia? Doubt it not (replyed Bellona) for more then this can hee performe: and beléeue mée, you ſhall ſuſtaine for this cauſe great trauaile, and therefore let vs not deferre the paſſing time. Héere I commit you to God, leauing you to the valour of your heart, to finiſh what you haue to do, and take this way, which will bring you to the place, for I muſt goe no further with you.
               
                  Don Bellianis taking his leaue of her, deſcended downe that way in ſuch haſte, that hée quickely ſawe before him a ſtrong and well towred Caſtell, and looking about, coulde finde no Porche, nor Portall to enter into it. But going to the other ſide of it, hée eſpyed a little mouth of an obſcure Caue: and looking downe into it, hee thought that it deſcended to the infernall Pitte. And alſo before it, he ſawe a greate Piller of fine Chriſtall, ſo tranſparaunt, that

it ſéemed to take his light from the ſunnes owne light that then ſhined, on it were ſet certain letters, made with rich Rubies, to this effect.
               
                  
                     The inſcription of the firſt Piller.
                     The ſtraunge lodgings of Brandezar, in remembrance of Nycaons great euenge, chief in the Magicke Ault, ſhalbe concea
                           •
                        ed 
                           •
                        rom all men, till the ſtr
                           •
                        ngeſt Lyon conducted by the lit
                           •
                        le wol
                           •
                        e ſhal, wi
                           •
                        h extreame n
                           •
                        ceſtitie in ſearch of my ſkill, h
                           〈…〉
                        her arriue Whoſe val
                           •
                        ur muſt excell the fo
                           •
                        ce of my monſtrou
                           •
                         guardiants leauing all his fine tempered armor at the entrance of my caue, if he be adorned with Vertue and Fortitude. And thou couragious knight, that 
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        t this aduenture try, muſt arme thy ſelf with nought, but the war like vertue of thy magnanimious hart.
                  
               
               
                  Don Bellianis hauing read the letters, made no other account, then if he had ſéene none, but animating his reſolution, drewe forth his ſword, and would haue entred the caue, but ere he was aware, it vaniſhed from his ſight. Oh God (ſaide hee) what ſtrange things be theſe? Is it poſſible I muſt without Armour paſſe through ſo fearefull a place? And thinking it cowardize to lingur ſo long, preſently vnarmed himſelf, reſting in his hoſe and doublet, and hauing his ſword in his hand, kiſt it, and laid it downe, and recommended his ſafetie to the Almightie, as a man that had beene going to buckle with death. And conſidering with himſelfe, that in the accompliſhment of that aduenture, conſiſted the vtter loſſe, or laſting libertie of his Lady, feareleſſe hee caſt himſelfe into the Caue, wherein he ſcant had ſet his feete, but hee thought he deſcended into the moſt loweſt Center of the earth, ſometimes ſtryking his head, ſometimes his féete, againſt the ſides thereof, that hee was ſo bruiſed, he felt not himſelfe, and when he came to the bottome, he lighted with ſo great a fall, that hee verily thought hee was beaten all to peeces. And ryſing with no ſmall paine thereof,

looked to ſée where he was, but could deſerue no more, then if he were in the darkeſt night, cloſed within an obſcure Dungeon, and ſearching on all ſides for light, at laſt he eſpied a little hole, from whence there iſſued ſo very little, that he could not almoſt ſee his hands. But he was ſrant at it, when hee felt himſelfe drawne backwards, with ſuch force, that hee had almoſt tumbled with his ſhoulders on the earth, and turning to ſee who pluckt him backe, ſawe him to be a mightie giant, hauing in his hand a moſt ſharpe and puiſſant battell-axe, whith him came two Centaures, on eyther ſide, each of them led a Lyon, the fierceſt that euer he ſaw. They all came towards him to diſcharge their puiſſant blowes vppon his head, but hee ſtepping backe, eſcaped them all▪ Héereuppon the Centaures vnchained theyr Lyons, which preſently ranne vppon him, and one thinking to rent his body with his ſharp pawes, leapt at him. But he ſtretching forth his ſtrong armes, catcht him by the necke, and choked him. At this time receiued he two ſuch cruel blowes, that he was conſtrained to ſet his knees on the groūd, ſhedding much blood: And hee ſéeing the Gyant hard by him, cloſed within him to wring his are out of his hands, whereon he caſt his mightie ſtrength, the Gyant perceiuing his intent, did alſo laye faſt hold on him: héere the Centaures incempaſſed him, procuring both to drawe him from the Gyant, where there was ſeene the moſt vnequalleſt wraſtling that euer was heard of.
               
                  Don Bellianis ſtill perſiſting in his purpoſe, was ſo oppreſſed with their ſeuerall inchaunted forces, that he often loſt his breath, and they making the caue to tremble cuen with the whorſe eccho of their reſounding Clamors. But heere the Prince ſetting the vtmoſt of his ſirength, wrencht the Fawchen out of his hand, with whith go
                     ••
                  g to ſtrike the centaures, he ſawe them all at that inſtant va
                     •
                  tſh from his ſight, which more amazed him then anything elſe, and ſeeing a little pain of ſtayres before him, mounted vp, with as great courage, hauing that Fawchen, as if with all his Armour he had béene Armed.
               
                  And hauing aſcended the ſtayres, he ſawe a faire Hall, ſo which he ſhould paſſe by, ſo ſtraight a way, that vnarmed hee could haroly go through it, where there was many Armed Knights, that kept the paſſ
                     •
                  ge, with their naked ſwords. Theſe were of thoſ
                     •
                   knights that were inchanted with Brandezar, being of the ſtrongeſt then 
                     •
                  uing, whom Nycaon left for the Emperors guarde, with no other thought then to looſe their liues ere he ſhould be taken away, or kild him that there wold enter. Which Don Bellianis ſeeing, and that he muſt 
                     •
                  éeds of neceſſitie p
                     •
                  ſſe through with an inuincible heart, with the fawthen in his hand, caſt himſelfe among them, where hee no ſooner came, but two of them ſ
                     •
                  tting th
                     •
                  ir ſhoulders againſt him, moſt branely made him go three or foure ſteps back, weunding him greeuouſly on the leg, & on his head: and beeing vnarmed had almoſt kild him.
               
                  Don Bellianis feeling the ſtrength of the Knights to be ſo great, determined to b
                     •
                  haue himſelfe otherwiſe with him, and returning againe to the doore, ſtrooke at them diuers times, thinking they wold giue back, but they had no other care but to offend and defend, not ſtirring any way. Hereat the Prince warding their blowes with his Fawchen, drewe one of them vnto him by his ſheeld, with ſuch haughtie ſtrength, made him headlong tumble at his feete, and tooke his ſheelde from him, and with it about his arme, he ruſht among all theſe Knights, in ſuch a cruell fight, leaping on all ſides to ſh
                     •
                  n their blewes. In this manner laſted their fight aboue three houres, that in the end the Prince ſo b
                     •
                  haued himſelfe, that he ouercame them all, which were aboue thirtie, leauing them all breathleſſe, in the Hall. He entred into another lodging that was nert that, being wounded in twentie places, and thinking it no wiſdome to goe through ſuch a place diſarmed, turned backe, and buckled about him one of thoſe dead knights atmor, and ſo proceeding forwards, till he came to an other ſtaire, and aſ
                     ••
                  nding it, he ſawe on the toppe there of, an vgly and infernall Monſter, which made againſt him, and with ſuch force came vppon him, that he tumbled downe thoſe ſteppes he had gone vppe,

with ſo great a fal, that in all that day he had not felt ſuch paine, reſting ſo feeble, that he ſcarce had ſtrength to ſtand vp. But burning in the flames of ire, for that which befell him, mounted vp againe, with more aduiſed reſolution, leaſt the like might happen to him againe. And being at the ſtarre head, he ſaw the fearefull monſter, accompanied with a horrible dragon, which would alſo haue throwen him downe, but he leaning his backe againſt the wall, ſet the pummell of his ſword to his breaſt, and with the point towards the Dragon, expected his incounter, which was ſo mightie, that his owne force gaue him his death: for running vpon the ſharpe ſword it pierſed all his body, ſide through ſide. But the fierce encounters he receiued of both thoſe beaſts, ſo bereft him of ſtrength, and ſences, that hee was faine to ſit downe vppon the ſtayres. Where returning vnto his remembrance, found himſelfe in fayre large greene yarde, in midſt whereof, was erected a gallant Piller, like that he ſaw at the Caues mouth, whereon there was written theſe words in Caldean letters.
               
                  
                     The inſcription of the ſecond Piller.
                     What haughtie Knight ſoeuer, whoſe high valor hath hither brought, by the ſupreme courage of his hear, 
                           •
                        let him enter by that dore, where he ſhall finde the end of his demand if he exce
                           ••
                         in ſtrength, he mightie Emperor B
                           •
                        ā
                        d
                           •
                        zer, whoſe pulſlant forces neuer any in ancient ages, equalled.
                  
               
               
                  Don Bellianis that longed with deſire to terminate with a happie end that aduenture, went to the portall that the letters ſhewed him.
            
            
               CHAP. XLI.
               
                  
                     The cruel battel fough the ween Don Bellianis, & the Emperor Brandezar, with whoſe death the aduenture was ended.
                  
               
               THrough the which he was ſcant entred, but he heard the pitt
                     •
                  fuleſt la
                     ••
                  ents that euer he heard, proceeding from a

a Knight that ſuffered ſome greate torments, and harkening from whence the voyce might come, he paſt forwards, entring into a chamb
                     •
                  r, where he ſawe a Knight a
                     •
                  med in a fierie armour, that ſeemed to burne him. Round about him were many ſnakes and adders, with many other venemous wormes, that now and then bit all his body euer, and theſe holding him faſt, there came two mightie Baſſ
                     •
                  liſkes, which woulde caſt vpon him, all the poyion and blood in their body. Yet ſawe not Don Bellianis, who with fieric buttons ſeared his fleſh, which penetrated the verie boane: the intollerable paine whereof, made him breath foorth thoſe lamentabic cryes, and then begyn to complaine in this manner,
               Oh vnhappie Brandezar, the moſt vnfortunateſt that euer breathed on the orbed earth. May it bée, that the l
                     •
                  uiſh giuer of vnconſtant hapineſſe, the blinde Guydreſſe of the round reuoluing whéeled chunce (for thy greater vnhappineſſe and perpetuitie of languiſhing paines, and plaguing gréefe) ſhould ſubiugate vnder thy commaunde, the vaſte Empiers of Babylon, Perſia, and 
                     
                        •
                     rebiſond, knitting thy ioyntes with mightier forces, then any in the vniuerſall world? to giue thée new ſo high a fall, ouerwhelming thee in this preſent euerlaſting miſerie, and put thee in ſuch continuall tormenis by the handes of thy greateſt enemie, and that death hath not the power to vanquiſh thee. Oh is it peſſible, that hee that for a God was on earth adored, ſhould now tollerate ſuch helliſh pain
                     ••
                  ? Oh 
                     〈…〉
                  uell death, why commeſt thou not to craue poſſeſſion of thy 
                     •
                  ue tribute? Oh life why docſt thou haunt mee, beeing haunted with ſuch contrarious ſtarres of maligning, and vnhappie 
                     ••
                  rtune? And with theſe and other wordes, renewing his olde laments, ſo molified the Princes tender heart, that he fell in a déepe conſideration of the mut
                     •
                  bileti
                     •
                  s of Fortune, with 
                     •
                  ememberance of the high Maieſtie of that Emperour, beeing the puiſſanteſt both in poſſeſſione of Kingdon s and countries, as of propper ſtrength, that in his age liued none to equa
                     〈…〉
                   whoſe life and Chiualries hee had read beeing a child. But recording that was he whem he muſt conquer, ſtopped forward,

whereat the two Baſſiliſkes that lay by Brandezar, leapt about him and ſo faſte held him, that he could not ſturre: the like did all the other ſcrpents, which ſo cruelly bitte him, that they 
                     〈…〉
                  e his boanes ſhrinke within his armour. Don Bel
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   began to ſtrike on all ſides, but it was in vaine, for all his ſtrokes wounded but the aire, which he perceiuing, procured with meere ſtrength to paſſe away. Here was his labour doubled to no great purpoſe, yet with often falling and ryſing, hée ſo toyled, that at length he arriued to the Chayre where the Emperour ſat, which ſomewhat eaſed him, for all thoſe cruell beaſtes left him. But Brandezar that by him ſaw that knight, thinking it was his mortall fo
                     •
                  , the king Nycaon, he tooke hun ſo brauclie betwixt his armes, that he eaſilie drew him to him. Don Bellianis letting fall his Fawchon, got alſo holde on the Emperour, though he more willingly would haue with 
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  wne from him, becauſe of the extreame heate that proceeded from his armour, and ſo continu
                     •
                  d in their wraſtling till they ouerth
                     ••
                  we the Emperours Chayre, and ſo parting from one an other, Brandezar drewe foorth his ſooord, and the Pr
                     ••
                  ce tooke his fawchon, and began ſo dangerous a fight, s the like in no age was ſeene, in ſhort time ſo mangling their ſhields, that they had no vſe of them, aboundantly ſhedding their blood. Don Bellianis at this time was in extreame perill, for that the Emperours ſtrength was incomparable, and himſelfe fore wounden, which he perceiuing, awaited a blowe of the Emperour, which threwe the remnant of his ſhielde to the ground, and wounded him on the arme, but he gaue him ſo terrible a blowe on the legge, that Brandezar could no longer ſtand thereon. But looſing none of his courage, defended himſelfe vppon his knees, that made Don Bellianis diſcharge his blow s ſo faſte, that at length thinking to end the contention with one ſtroake on his head, the Emperour warded it with his ſword, and ſo brauelie thruſt at him, that had it taken him full, he might haue called it the laſte that ſhould haue ended his life, yet the fur
                     •
                  cus ſword ran through his right ſide, renting the fleſh, with the greateſt wound he had receiued all that day
               
                  
                  Don Bellianis foming through the mouth, for anger of the terrible wound, ſtrooke at the Emperour with both hands, that he cut his thigh in ſunder, where at he fell downe, where within a whyle he dyed. With whoſe death, there began ſo hortible a noyſe in all the Caſtle, with ſo monſtrous an earthquake, that Don Bellianis fell in a traunce, who recouering his ſences, felt himſelfe well and luſtie without any wound, ſeeing neither ſigne nor memorie of Caſtle nor Caue. But before him laydead the Emperor Brandezar, and his knights, which greatly gréeued him, there alſo he found his armour he had left, and putting of thoſe he had on, armed himſelfe with them of the Emperour, which were the richeſt till that houre ſéene. They were all gréene, guarniſhed with many Baſſiliſkes of gould and Azure, with many vnualuable pearles of excéeding brightneſſe, and gyrding his good ſword, went to the Emperour for the ring, the wiſe man ha
                     •
                   tolde him of, which he tooke from a finger of his right hand, the preciouſneſſe of which Jemme, much amazed him: the ſtone of it was a little Carbuncle, yéelding as great light as feure burning torches. But ſcarce had he taken the ring, when hard by he ſawe a T
                     ••
                  be, as faire as euer he ſawe any, ſet vpon twelue Pillers of Chriſtall, which ſuſtained an Altar made of the richeſt Emeraldes, in all the Orientall regions. Upon euerie Piller ſtoode ſoure Angelles, holding foure burning torches that neuer waſted▪ Uppon the Sepulcher was a ſhield held vppe by two greate 
                     •
                  reeffions, with the Armes of the Emperour Brandezar▪ and about them were written theſe wordes.
               
                  
                     The Incription on the ſhield vppon the Emperours Sepulcher.
                     Nycaon King of Egypte, chiefe Magician of his time, in perpetuall memorie of his reuenge, for the diſtruction made of 
                           〈…〉
                         kingdome, by Brandezar Emperour of Babylon, Perſia, & Trebizond, hath erected this monument,

wherein after the many torments ſuſtained by his ſkill, beeing vanquiſhed, hee lyeth dead, by his handes that in valour excelleth all Knights in the vniuerſe. Heere ſhall hee lye buiryed in this laſting monument, till the Sonne of the braue Lyon, with his force ſhal ouercome the power of my Art, obtaining the ſight heerein incloſed, not vſing the rare valour of his heart.
                  
               
               On the other ſide of the Tombe was ſet another ſhield, expreſſing the manner of the Emperours inchauntment, and for what cauſe Nycaon had ſo donc, with the manner of his libertie by Don Bellianis, who attentiuely beholding that wondrous worke, with great ioy for the obtained ring, he 
                     •
                  pted Bellona in great haſte come to him, in manner as h
                     •
                  e left her, and demanded of him how he did. Very well (replyed hee) for I haue accompliſht what you commaunded mee, yet am much amazed at what here is, for hauing ſéene none to do it. Heere lyeth buryed the Emperour Brandezar, and do greatly deſire to ſee what is within. That may not be (anſwered ſhee) for our ſtaying may much preiudice vs. Yet I long to trye it (ſaid hee:) But I will leaue it, ſeeing you will haue it ſo. And one of the Gyants that came with her, gaue him a ſhield, according to his armour, but in the middle of it, was his accuſtoined deuiſe. Don Bellianis greatly 
                     •
                  oy
                     •
                  d to ſee the picture of his Ladie. And ſo departed in the manner that they came, in little time poſting in any myles. But heere wee leaue them, returning to the great Magician Hiſtorie.
            
            
               CHAP. XLII.
               
                  
                     What Friſtone w
                           •
                        ou
                           •
                        ht, after the two Princes battell, to get into his power the Princeſſe Florisbella and how ſhe was ſuccoured by the Knight of the golden Image.
                  
               
               THe battell béeing ended betwéene the two Princes, a
                     •
                   before is mentioned, the ſage Friſtone hauing cured the Prince Perſiano of his woundes, returned to his habitatien in the deſart of death: where cailing to his remembrance the loue that Perſiano did beare the Princeſle Florisbella,
                  
which ſhe ſo little regarded, and wherein ſhe contiuually languiſhed. He caſt about with his cōiurations, by which he came to know, that if vnder the domination of the Plannet Marcury that then raigned, he got not to his hands the beauteous Princeſſe Florisbella, he ſhould after ſuffer mortall torments: for her ſake, yet coulde he not learne, whether the Perſian prince ſhould marrie her or no. And in theſe tumultuous times, thinking eaſily to get and preſent her to the Perfian Prince, before the end of thoſe warres, taking the neceſſaries to imploy his Art, arriued in little time within the ſuperbeous Babylonian walles: Where he rayſed a Tent, the richeſt and moſt ſtatelieſt that euer was ſéene: with ſo many gallant deuiſes, that it admyred euery beholder. Which no ſooner was ſeen, but it was preſently tolde the Souldane, who with the Empreſſe Siluiana his wife, and the princeſſe Florisbella his daughter, came forth to ſée it, greatly woondring at the fayreneſſe, and riches thereof: from whence they heard ſo ſwéete a mellodious conſort of muſicke, that it rauiſhed their delicate ſences: and after ſo many Trumpets ſounded, as if ſome pitcht fielde were to be fought. Which being done, there iſſued out of the tent, foure beautious Ladies, cloathed in long rich robes of imbrodered worke, they were led by their hands, by foure valiant Knights, clad all in gréene Armour, with many golden ſtarres thereon, with theyr helmes laced on their heads. Which troupe went towards the gallant princeſſe Florisbella, yt was diſcourſing with her father about the tent, and being before her, they all kneeled, refuſing to riſe both at her, and the Emperors intreaties. And one of the ladies with a cleare voice, that all might heare her, thus began.
               High and mightie Potentate, Emperor of Babilon, Souereigne Monarch of the orientall regions, and moſt renowmed Souloan, to whoſe ſupreme command, the Vniuerſall globe of all the orbed earth, might deſeruedlie owe tributary dutie, excelling all mortall Kings in honour, and in bountie, by maintaining equall and vpright iuſtice, through his vaſte Empery, with the continuall glorie of haughtie Chiualrie, daily honoured in his Courts, whoſe magnificent eſtate, the immortall

Gods doo emmulate through the incomparable beautie of his excellent Daughter, for whoſe ſake, his Empyre ſhall ſtill augment with eternall happineſſe, to perpetuall ages. Know, that the deare hope to finde redreſſe for our troubled thoughts, hath brought vs to this imperiall Cittie, where if our hopes bee fruſtrated of theyr deſires, we will returne diſpayring of future, remedie for our gréefes, wanting it here, where neuer any was denied.
               Wherefore of thée, and of this glorious Princeſſe, wee muſt obtaine a boone, before we do explayne the cauſe of our comming. Require what you will (ſaid the Souldane) for my deſire is ſo great to knowe this aduenture, that not onely one, but twentie, I doo graunt you: and therefore make vs partakers of your gréeuances. Whereuppon they roſe, and the Damozell returning to her former purpoſe, thus ſaide.
               In yonder Tent (moſt dread Lord) is the valiaunt King Gorgiana, of Soria, théefe Lord of that Land, whome you well knowe, béeing your néere Ally, that being in his peacefull kingdome, ordering of certaine Tryumphs, wherein himſelfe with moſt of his beſt knights ſhoulde bee in, thyther came many ſtraungers, and forreiners, brought by the fame of his beautious Daughter, then thought the fayreſt Lady liuing. And among many that there arriued, ſhee was demaunded of her father for wife, by the great Magician, Herodiano, king of the Ile of pearles, one of the braueſt Gyants hitherto ſéene. But he being informed what he was, returned him, that his daughter being too young, was not determined yet to marrie: therefore he craued his pardon. Which anſwer, highly vexing Herodiano, that they being the nezt day in the ordained Jouſtes, there appeared on the one ſide of the field, theſe foure Knights that here you ſée, who ruſhing within the Tourney, in ſhort ſpace ouerthrew aboue one hundred Knights, with ſuch déepe woundes, that moſt of them could no more riſe. And they like furious Dragons ranne vp and downe the fielde, that none

durſt abide their furie. Which the King ſéeing, encountred them with tenne knights, againſt whom onely thrée went, and the other imbraced the King in ſuch cruell manner, that both fell downe, and the reſt left his Knights deadly wounded.
               Then on the ſuddaine, appeared the Tent you yonder ſée, in which the king was ſet, with his Daughter, and theſe foure knights remained as their kéepers, whome no humaine power is able to ouerrome, becauſe they are inchannted: and within the ſpace of foure dayes, they vanquiſhed aboue foure thouſand knights that came to liberate their king, which not a little gréeued vs. But in the ende, ſending for the counſaile of a wiſe man, a great fréend vnto our king, wee receined this aunſwere: that the impriſonment of the king and his daughter could not be remedied, but by a Ladie, whoſe beautie ſhould excell the honourable Princeſſe Meridianaes, and that finding her, ſhe ſhould prooue the aduenture of the Tent, in which the Princeſſe would giue her a ſworde, which in her hand ſhe holdeth, with which thoſe knights ſhould be vanquiſhed, and the inchantment ended. Hnd for this effect, he would worke, that the Tent ſhoulde bee brought where we would wiſhe to haue it, wherein wee foure might very ſafelye goe, for onely theſe ſame knights ſhoulde bee our chéefe defenders.
               In this manner haue we in ſhort time trauailed through moſt part of Paganiſme, but neuer could finde any that did ſurpaſſe the beautie of our Princeſſe Meridiana. And by the way, hearing the fame propogated through this Eaſterne world, of the rare, and ſoly excellent beautie of the Princeſſe thy deare Daughter, we are hither come to intreat thée to ſuffer this aduenture tryed in thy court, which will no little enternize thy great glorie, ſetting an end to our many toiles, which we haue, and elſe ſhall ſuſtaine. And this is the boone which you and your excellent Daughter the princeſſe Florisbella haue granted vs.
               The Souldane reſted highly aſtoniſhed, at the Ladyes

tale, greatly pittying the miſaduenture happened to the King Gorriano, his kineſman, deſiring to vndergoe any perrill for his libertie, and anſwering the Lady, ſaid. It greatly gréeueth me (gracious Ladies) that this miſchance hath befallen your King, and his Daughter, and it would highly content me, that you may finde remedie in my Court. But tell mée the Lady, that proouing it, and not ending it, doth ſhée incurre any danger? None (replied ſhe) for ſhe that doth not excell the Princeſſe in beautie, may not enter therein, and from the doore may you ſee what is within.
               I am contented (ſaid the Souldane) that the aduenture bée t
                     •
                  ye
                     •
                  . But I will firſt ſée the Combatting of the Knights, for I beleeue in my Court there are ſuch that think to ſaue the Ladies that labour. Your will be done (repli
                     •
                  d the damzel though it be better that your Knights doo not ſo indanger themſelues, for their toyle will be in vaine. Yet for all this will I haue it ſo, ſaid the Souldane. And thereuppon cōmanded all his knights, to try the aduenture: and the Damzels with their knights, returned to the ſent, in the entring whereof, it ſeemed to open in the middeſt, where ſtraight was ſéene a throane with thyrtie ſ
                     •
                  eppes, which ſeemed made of pure Chriſtall, in the middle thereof, ſat the King Gorgiano, armed with all his Armour, he leand his hand vppon his Chayre, and on his hand, his head, ſéeming very mellancholy: at his right hand, ſat the beauteous and gallant Princeſſe Meredian, in like manner as her Father. On the toppe of all the Thro
                     •
                  ne, appeared Cupid the blinde GOD of loue, with his bowe and arrowes, whoſe making was ſo artificiall and naturall, that euery one thought him aliue. At his féete lay a Knight ſore wounded, with an arrow in his breſt, who ſeemed with one hand to craue mercie, but with the other, hee held a ſcrowl
                     •
                   very fair
                     •
                  ly written with plaine Caldean letters, expreſſing for what reaſon the King Gorgiano was impriſoned.
               Héere then arriued all the Souldanes Knights, in number aboue three thouſand, and were the valianteſt in all his whole Empyre.
               
                  The firſt that would prooue the aduenture, was a Couſen of his, called Baltaſano, of Nu
                        〈…〉
                     idia, who as it ſeemed, was chiefe ouer the reſt: he was armed in a roſe colour Armour, and taking with him two knights, would haue entred the tent, but the inchaunted knights that defended it, leauing one to kéepe it, made againſt them, and at the firſt incounters ended the ſtrife, caſting the Soldans knightes on the ground. This done, the inchaunted knightes began to range about the field, that within a whyle they left none to withſtand them, and hauing no more to do, returned ſo quietlie to their tent, as if they had done nothing. The Soldan greatly amazed at this ſuddaine exployte, had farre more deſire then before to haue the aduenture ended, wherefore firſt commanded the dead and wounded knights to bée carryed away, and then willed the Ladies to trye their Fortunes, highlie praiſing the knightes valour, thinking them inuincible. Many Ladies tryed their chaunce, but none coulde enter the Tent, who returned as ſhamefaſte, as the Knightes had beene diſhonoured by their falles. Which the Princeſſe Florisbella ſeeing, tooke by the hand the beauteous Mattaroſa her Couſen, béeing one of the gallanteſt Ladies in all her Fathers Empiers, and ſaid to her. Shall wée (faire Couſen) prooue this aduenture, although for my parte, I knowe where ſo many haue failed, I ſhall do but little. Euen as pleaſe you (replyed the faire Mattaroſa though I perceiue you mocke vs all, but I will trye it firſt, becauſe I will not reſt with imagination, that you ended it by firſt proouing it, which then will be ſaid you did béeing the faireſt, which I will not yéeld vnto, the contrarie beeing ſo well knowne. It pleaſeth you 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  eaſt (ſaid the Princeſſ
                     •
                  ) but for the trying of this aduenture I would bée glad that you might end it, to ſaue me from that daunger and feare: and wee ſhall after trye the aduantage you haue in that other. Th
                     •
                  n belike (replyed the excellent Mattaroſa) you will not graunt mee to bee the fa
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  ſt though I end the aduenture: which ſéeing it is ſo, I promiſe you to finde out a Knight that ſhall defend it againſt all the world. You promiſe much (replyed the Princeſſe) for I know

not what knight will bée ſo hardie, as to attempt ſo haughtie an interpryze, vnleſſe it bée the knight of the Images, of whom I beleeue you ſhall obtaine nothing againſt me. Al this know, I (anſwered the Infante.) But I haue a knight in theſe partes, that farre excells him, both in valiantcie and faireneſſe. How know you that (ſaid the Princeſſe) for I neuer heard any ſuch thing. Ile tell you (replyed the Infant.) To my Fathers kingdome there came a meſſenger, that brought a letter from the Sophy, father vnto the Prince Perianeo, requiring his ayde, to bée reuenged of a ſubiect of his, that with the helpe of a knight, called of the golden Image, had ſlayne his Sonne in law, the Prince Don Gallaneo, and had ſtolne his daughter Perſiana, and recounted ſuch wonders of this knight, and of his rare beautie, which hardlie we beléeue, but that wée were informed thereof by other meanes. And this knight will I haue to defend my beautie, which netwithſtanding, I feare he will not, for I haue heard he beareth your picture grauen on his ſhield. I am ſtrooke into a great amazement (aunſwered the Princeſſe) with your diſcourſe, and cannot comprehend that any Knight in the world, would bée ſo madde, to preſume to beautifie his armour with my portrature. And I aſſure you, if he heere arriueth, he ſhall doo much to ſaue his head, in recompence of his preſumption. Trouble not your ſelfe with any ſuch thought (ſaid the Infant) for you would much more gréeue, if you ſhould ſée all this place full of vanquiſhed knights in my behalfe. In this manner chatted theſe two Mirors of rare beautie, till they approached the rich tent, where there ſences were rauiſhed with the rare melodious Muſicke that thence ſounded: and parting handes, the beauteous Mattaroſa entred the tent, where one of thoſe Knightes tooke her by the hand, and brought her to the ſteppes: whereon the infant courteouſly began to mount. All the beholders iudged the aduenture ended: which not a little gréeued the Princeſſe, becauſe ſhe had not firſt tryed it. But ſhe had not aſcended the third ſteppe, when ſhe felt her ſelfe ſtayed, and ſtriuing to go vppe, ſhe ſuddenly found her ſelfe without the Tent, to her greate

gréefe, becauſe ſhe had not ended the aduenture. The Princeſſe héereat laughing, ſaid. I knowe not (faire Couſen why you ſought a ſword, ſéeing you muſt not vſe any combatting with me. I knowe not what to aunſwere (ſaid the pleaſant Infant but that no truſt is to bée repoſed in theſe inchauntments, béeing onely made according to their Authors minde: yet trye you it, that we may ſée your merits, for it may be, your companie would leſſen my gréefe. The Princeſſe going to trie the aduenture, ſhée ſawe entred by the farther ſide of the field, a Knight in a gréene Armour, very rich, with many golden Baſſiliſkes thereon, whoſe gallant diſpoſition more contented her, then any the euer ſawe. In his ſhield was drawne her picture ſo naturall, that it ſéemed aliue: by his ſide did ride an auncient Ladie maſkt, bringing in her hands a naked ſword, ſo bright, that it look like a tranſparant glaſſe of fine Chriſtall, ſet againſt the Sunne: which ſhe ſeeing, ſtayed herſelfe. The Knight and the Ladie went ſtraight to the tent. But Friſtone ſéeing them at firſt enter in the field, began to make his coniurations, not knwowing who they were, nor to what end they came, nor neuer could knowe it, becauſe Don Bellianis had on the Emperour Broudezars armour: and the ſage Bellona, which was ſhe that came with him, carryed the ſame Emperours ſword: yet hée ſtraight knewe 
                     •
                  he effect of their comming, and beléeuing to haue no let in his intent, tranſformed himſelfe into a moſt monſtrous and vglie Gri
                     〈…〉
                  on, and went ſtraight to the Princeſſe, and taking her by her armes, would haue gone away with her.
               But the Knight of the Baſſiliſkes arriued ſe ſuddainely, that hée had no time to do it, and with his ſword ſtryking at him, cutte all his feathers, and wounded him on his ſhoulder, and the good ſwoord not onely wrought this, but alſo made the Sage Friſtone, for to returne to his naturall forme, falling preſently on the ground, bléeding apace: Whom the inchaunted Knightes ſtraight tooke and conuayded within the Tent.
               
                  
                  Don Bellianis ſtepping to the Princeſſe, ſaid. Faint not, Vſurpreſſe of anothers heart, but animate your ſelfe, till you be fréed from him that ſo great harme would haue done you. The Princeſſe did ſo, with ſuch amazement by the feare, that ſhée knowe not in what world ſhe was. The like happened the infant Mattaroſo. But Don Bellianis béeing aduertiſed of Bellona what hée ſhould doo, ſtepped to the Tent, where hée was aſſaulted by the foure inchauntred Knightes, with ſuch hardineſſe, that they put him in great extremitie, for though by vertue of his ſword, their inchauntment preuayled not againſt him, yet were they very valiant and couragious. But the Prince ſéeing himſelfe before his Lady, and conſidering that to bée the firſt battell in her ſeruice, ſo handled his aduerſaries, cutting armour, fleſh and all, himſelfe ſuſtaining great labour, and the loſſe of blood. The Princeſſe trembled for very feare, thinking ſhe ſhould bee put in like danger againe. The infant Mattaroſa that was more hardie, ſaid. What thinke you (faire Couſen) of yonder knight? Surely I thinke it is he that I tolde you of, for by the deuiſe of his ſhield, and the report of him, I doe not doubt it. We ſhall now know it (replyed the Princeſſe:) But let vs intreate our Gods to frée him from the daunger he is in for our ſakes. And therewith looked to the fight, wherein the knight had brought his aduerſaries to ſuch a paſſe, that they had almoſt fallen, whereuppon their iſued foorth of the Tent two mightie Gyants, that aſſaulted the Prince, giuing him ſuch blowes, that they made his head kiſſe the ſaddle pummell. But he with double force (increaſed with his rage) ſo behaued him with them, that hee threwe two of the Knights dead to the ground. And ſéeing the battell ſo long indured, reſolued to enter within the tent in diſpight of them, knowing that if he did it, the fight would ceaſe, & the inchauntment end.
               The Knights and Gyants perceiuing it, layde faſte holde on him, but he béeing of mightie and vnmatched forces, maugre their power went in with them, and with his ſword hée gaue ſo hard a blowe vpon the ſteppes, that hee mad a darke

ſmoake, like a thicke miſt, aſcend vpwards, which ſo blinded the beholders eyes, that they ſaw not one an other. But by meanes of the Sage Bellona, it vaniſhed, remaining no memory of Tent nor aduenture, ſaue the two dead knights that lay on the earth. Who were able to ſet down the amazed admiration that euery one conceiued, ſéeing thoſe ſo ſtraunge things, and they were in ſuch caſe as if that had bene the fearefull day of doome: ſpecially the Soldan ſéeing all that had happened, who went to ſpeake vnto the knight that was already mounted on his horſe.
            
            
               CHAP. XLIII.
               
                  
                     What the Knight of the Baſſeliskes paſt, with the Souldane of Babylon, after the battell, and with the Princeſſe Florisbellaes departing vnknowne, promiſing ſpeedily to return and and ſerue her.
                  
               
               THe Prince Don Bellianis, ſéeing the aduenture ended, according to his deſire, mounted a horſebacke to depart, for ſo Bellona would haue him do, but perceiuing the Souldane comming towards him, he thought it diſcurteſie to part without ſpeaking, ſtaid, and ſéeing he was come nigh him, ſetting his hand on his ſaddle, alighted with admirable lightneſſe, and proſtrating himſelfe, demanded his hands to 
                     〈…〉
                  ſſe them. The Soldan, againſt all intreaties, did alſo diſmount, ſhewing the like curteſie that the knight did, (for he was a prince abſolute in all Courtly behauiour) had not Don Bellianis ſtaied, to whom the Souldan thus ſaide. I cannot comprehend the cauſe excellent knight) that hauing broght to end the greateſt and no leſſe ſtrange aduenture hitherio ſeene, liberating vs from ſuch daunger, you ſhould depart, bereauing vs of your defined conuerſatiō by ſo ſedain departure from our court, which I would vnwillingly haue you do, though you were newly put in as great daunger as the laſt you vndertooke in our behalfes (which notwithſtanding the Gods defend. And farther I ſay, if at my requeſt you deny to do it, withſtanding my authoritie, you ſhal be conuicted by her, for whoſe remedie, our immortall Gods, I thinke brought you hither. Where he imbraced him with loue, as

the benefit receiued bound him to. Don Bellianis was ſtrooke into ſuch an amaze, that he knew not how to be reſolued, thinking if he did not obey the Souldan, the vnkindneſſe would be greater, then the ſeruice he had done him. And on the other ſide, he conſidered, that he might incurre no leſſe daunger by diſcouering himſelf, not knowing Bellonaes intent, in ſo concealing him. But to ſalue all, the beſt he might, made this reply. It doth not a litle gréeue me (moſt mightie Lord) that I cannot do you the ſeruice my heart deſires, becauſe it lyeth not in my power, being hither brought by yonder Lady that you ſée, without whoſe leaue I may diſpoſe of nothing: but binding my dutie to your ſeruice for euer, as the perſon that moſt honour on the earth deſerueth. While they were thus talking, the Sage Bellona came to them, and with her the two ſole excellencies of beautie, the Princeſſes Florisbella, and Mataroſa, with ſuch rare brightneſſe (that it would obſcure the midday Sun in all his pride, ſhining in the middle heauen where he dwelles. The aboue all faireſt, the faire Princeſſe Florisbella, ſole diuine perfection of an earthly obiect, came with ſuch a gallant ſemblance, that no humane heart could haue bene ſo obdurate, but would haue melted at her ſight: ſhe was cladde in a white ſatti
                     •
                   gowne, with a peticoate of the ſame, all cut vppon moſt rich cleth of Golde, and euery cut tacked with a great Orient Pearle, which were ſo many and ſo well ſet, that they made ſo ſtraunge a worke, that the curiouſneſſe thereof could not be diſcerned, the ſléeues were long and large, hanging to the ground, cloſed with wyer of maſſiue gold, ſet with the ſame Pearles, and lyned with the ſame cloth of golde, hung out with many vnualuable Jewels, her Amber haire diſheuelled ouer her ſhoulders, hung backwards gathered togither behinde her eares, vppon which ſhée had a Coronet garniſhed with Dyamonds, Rubies, Saffyres and pearles, of more woorth then that whole Cittie before, on her Carkanet pended a Carbunckle as bigge as two Walnuttes, that yeelded ſo much light as foure great Torches burning in the darke. Her Gorget was ſo open, that plainly might be diſcerned the rare excellency of the Creator of all thinges, in the pure wonder of the Sunne-out clearing whiteneſſe of her breſt, adorned with in
                     •
                  ſtimable

Gemmes. And although ſhe thus came attired, more beautie did glorifie her garments, from the diuine naturall of her face, then was hir beautie graced by the brightneſſe of thoſe ſtones, ſuch ſole ſupremacie did make her abſolute, for no artificiall woorke could diminiſh nor augment her fauour. The ſtately paſſage of her féete, no more ſéemed to moue, then the gentle blaſt of the milde blowing winde. The Princeſſe Mataroſa was attired in that maner, whoſe perfection had no equall, in the abſence of her faire Coſin. In this maner arriued they, where the Souldan was talking with the Princeſſe don Bellianis, who ſeeing the excellency of his Lady, that farre excelled the portrayture of his ſhield, reſted ſo confounded with admiration, that his braue heart vnable to reſiſt ſo fierce an aſſault, all couered with a cold ſweat, as if that were the laſt moment of his life, loſt his ſences, that had not the Souldane (who thought ſome mortall wounde had cauſed it) held him faſt about the necke, he had fallen to the ground: yet notwithſtanding he was in ſuch a traunce, that he felt nothing that was done vnto him. Whereat the Princeſſe Florisbella being verie ſorrowfull, ſtepped to him to vnlace his helme. But the Sage Bellona quickly running thither, cryed out ſhe ſhould not doo it: and imbracing the Prince, ſaid that euery one heard. What is the matter knight) that in time that we moſt néede your helpe, you ſhewe ſuch weakneſſe? The Prince at her words, recouered himſelfe, and greatly aſhamed at the accident, replied. You know (deare Lady) that I came no otherwiſe, ſeeing the hand of cruell death knocked at my heart, vnleſſe I be ſuccoured with preſent remedie. Our immortall Gods will not permit it (Sir Knight, ſaid Florisbella) that we hauing receiued ſo abſolute remedie by the helpe of your vallourous arme, your life ſhould be bere
                     •
                  t you, to depart vngratified for your deare merits. Whereto he anſwered.
               In all humble dutie, lower then lowly earth, I kiſſe your beauteous handes, (ſole excellent Princeſſe,) for the vndeſerued fauour of your words, whoſe power hath only power to cure my decaying life, diſpairing of 
                     •
                  ll remedie and deare comfort in the whole vniuerſe, but by this.
               
                  While they were thus talking, the Soldan knew Bellona, whom with great ioy he imbraced, ſhe would haue kiſſed his and the Empreſſe hands, but the Soldan wold not ſuffer it, ſaying. Why haue your (deare friend) kept your ſelfe away ſo long time, not viſiting vs? for I know no cauſe you had for it, but now ſhal you pay for al, not departing ſo eaſily as you thinke. And I pray you tell, who is this valorous knight yt comes with you? for I am ſure, you knew of our diſtreſſe, ſéeing you came in ſo great time of need. The wiſe woman made this reply. You ſay true (dread Lord) for knowing your danger, and that ſurely you had loſt the princeſſe your daughter, I vndertooke this iourny, impoſing ſo great a danger vpon this knight, as he vnderwent by our comming. And beléeue me, his equall liues not this day in the world, and without him, my comming had bene in vaine: and hitherto I did not viſit you, becauſe you had no néed of me. I beléeue it (replied the Souldane) and now that our ioy may be compleat, I pray you make this knight vnlace his helme, and remaine here ſome fewe dayes, for it would greatly vex me, if ſuch a knight ſhuld go from my Court vnknowne. This muſt be pardoned (ſaid ſhe) for he muſt depart vnknown: and therfore I pray you do not importune him about it, for it cannot be otherwiſe. Hereupon they went where the two Princeſſes Floriſbella & Mataroſa were chatting with Don Bellianis, intreating him to put off his helme. Wherupon the Souldan ſaid. If you obtain no more then hitherto you haue done of this knight, I beléeue he will depart vnknowne. He will not ſo much wrong vs, (ſaid the Princeſſe vnleſſe he will haue vs make litle account of his ayd we receiued. And ſeeing he faith he will do what this Lady doth commaund him, I hope ſhe will not leaue vs ſo vnſatiſfied, in recompence of her long abſence. I do beſéech your excellency (ſaid Bellona) not to vexe your ſelfe: for I aſſure you, if he now diſcouer himſelfe, it will coſt him no leſſe then his life, in lieu of the pleaſure he ſhould do you therein. And let this ſuffiſe, which according to our power we haue done. But yet in reſpect of this diſpleaſure, I doo certifie you, that your couſin the Princeſſe Aurora is wel (though ſorrowfull, wanting your company,) ſhe we left in Perſia, with the Ladies you ſent to ſéeke her, and thither muſt we goe ſhortly.

This hath greatly comforted me (ſaid ſhe) yet reſt not altogither ſatiſfied, wanting the effect of this my deſire. I cannot expreſſe the oppreſſion of my gréeued heart (moſt excellent and ſupreme Lady) ſaid Don Bellianis, to haue ſo yoked the libertie of my condition to a ſtranger power, that I cannot now, though it were with the certaine daunger of my life, ſatiſfie the deare obedience of your high commaund: for I haue ſo tyed my ſelfe to anothers will, that I muſt not do more then what this Lady here ſhall appoint me. But I do proteſt and promiſe you, by our high immortall Gods, (hauing freed my libertie,) to returne with all ſpéede to ſerue you, and the Souldan your father, whence I will not part, but by your commaund: in token whereof, I do beſeech you accept this King, which coſt me no litle labour, with abundant loſſe of my blood, to obtaine it. Wherewith you ſhall be ſafe and ſure of any ſuch accident as this laſt. And taking off his Gaunlets, diſcouered the Alablaſter whiteneſſe of his hands. The Princeſſe heart was ſomewhat abaſhed, adding more beautie, to her beautie, by the roſeat tincture of a vermillion bluſh, not knowing whether ſhe ſhould take the King which the knight preſented her, thinking ſhée ſhould thereby do him a greater fauour then ſhe would. Which the Infant Mataroſa perceiuing, being greatly ſatiſfied with the knights behauiour, ſaid vnto her. What doth your highneſſe doubt? why do you not accept the precious gift of this valourous knight? wold you ſée vs euery day in like daunger? which if you deſire, I aſſure you we ſhall not euery day haue ſo good helpe: for though I ſuſtained ſome perill, yet was there none that ſuccoured me. Receiue this gift (daughter) ſaid the Souldane, for it is no ſmall thing to kéepe the pledge of ſo valiant a knight. All this while the diſcréete Princeſſe, holding downe her eyes, gazed on don Bellianis hand, thinking with her ſelfe, that if his face, with the diſpoſition of his bodie, did agree with it, the whole world could not affoord a gallanter not better knight, of whoſe valour, ſhe was ſufficient witneſſe. And ſéeing her Image on his ſhield, imagined this was the knight whoſe praiſes her couſin had ſo inhouſed. Whereupon the ſubtill God of Loue, on a ſuddain, tooke his tributary v
                     •
                  ties, by the poſſeſſion of her heart, and with ſuch a violent ſtroake, penetrated it,

that hauing no defenſiue proofe, nor the ſhielde of reaſon to withſtand it, but vnprouided, aſſaulted by his ſubtiltie, yéelded at the firſt encounter, reſting ſo vanquiſhed, that ſhe neuer had the power to recouer the former libertie of her heart. And the more ſhée thought on him, the more ſhe did inſnare her ſelfe, as the diſccurſe of this preſent booke mentioneth, for no ſmall forments this vnſéen ſight of don Bellianis Couſin here, and with a ſuddaine ioy conceiued by her thoughts, dying her beautie to make it more faire, with the colour of an Orient Ruby. Firſt, thinking that her Fathers commaund, and her Couſins perſwaſions, were ſufficient armour to ſhield her from after ſcandall: with lowly courteſie on both parts, ſhe tooke the King, ſaying. I do receiue (Sir Knight,) this preſent at your hands, leſt it be ſaide, I do deny the grateſulneſſe I owe, for the good turne you did, and taking poſſeſſion of this which is the leaſt, you ſhall remaine bounde to that which is the moſt, I meane your ſpeedie returne, to attend the Souldane my dread Soueraigne: and becauſe you ſhall not forget it, I will kéepe this as a pledge, left me, by you, as alſo in remembrance of her, that againſt my will doth lead you away, before you haue receiued any ſigne of guerdon of my father. Yet before you goe, I pray you let vs know the daungerous deceit we had like to fall in. I do moſt humbly beſéech you, (ſole preſident of diuine excellency) ſaid (Don Bellianis) to let me kiſſe the wonder of your handes, that I may thereby enioy the fruition of ſo high a fauour as you haue done, in the acceptance of the ſmall gift of ſo meane a Knight as I am, in reſpect of your highneſſe. Againe, promiſing my returne ſhall be ſo ſhortly, as the obedience of your commaund requireth, vnleſſe my hopes be fruſtrated by death: and turning to Bellona, intreated her, ſéeing ſhe knew the beginning and end of that aduenture, ſhe wold fully ſatiſfie the Princeſſe therin. Which ſhe did, in manner alreadie ſet downe. And hauing done, craued leaue to depart. And ſo kiſſing the Souldans hands, and the Empreſſe Siluiana bad them and the Princeſſes farewell.
               
                  Don Bellianis did the like, with ſuch griefe (as any in his caſe may imagine) leauing his heart with the Princeſſe, and for it, carrying away hers. The Princeſſe Mataroſa pleaſantly ſaid thus vnto

the Prince. I do beleeue ſir Knight, that the Sage Bellona hath ſo maiſtered you, that you ſpeake not but when it pleaſeth her, and if it be ſo, tell it me? for I preſume to obtaine leaue of her, for your tongue to play. Don Bellianis, that through his great amazement had net ſeene her, but ſeeing her, replied. This hath not bene the cauſe of my ſilent ouerſight, (courteous and pleaſant Lady but the imaginations of the ſight there ſéene, which with my ſuddaine departure hath ſo increaſed my admiration, and ſo intrapt me in my owne thoughts, that they haue ſuffered me not to regard the deſerued merits of your worthie perſon, robbing the power of my ſpéech, to conſound me more in the déep conſideration of my harts ſubiection. Then belike the fault is very litle (anſwered ſhe) by the ſpéedie redreſſing of our daunger, wearing ſo good an armour as that. The preſent blindneſſe (deare Lady ſaid he) is better to preſerue my future ſight. At your returne, you ſhall explaine me this (ſaid ſhe) for now I do not vnderſtand it. Whereupon the braue Prince don Bellianis mounted a horſbacke, not ſetting his foote in the ſtirrope, as was his cuſtome, and very gallantly managing him, he made him bende his knées vnto the earth: and bending downe his owne head in ſigne of his dutie, departed in maner as he came, with vnſpeakable ioy, to haue ſo happily finiſhed that aduenture before his Lady, to his immortall glorie, which were it not tempered with griefe of his departure, it had bene inough to kill him. But here we leaue him, till farther accidents ſhall refreſh his remembrance.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLIIII.
               
                  
                     What the Princeſſe Florisbella did, after the Knight of the golden Image was departed. Of her Laments and Conference with the Infant Maturoſa, her Couſin.
                  
               
               THe Princeſſe Florisbella, remained ſo amazed with the ſuddaine departure of the new Louer, that ſo quickly had made a praie of her tender hart, that all her imaginations, were on nought but of Don Bellianis, and till he went cleane out of the field, ſhe accompanied him with her ſight, ſo ſtedfaſtly fixing her eyes after him, that had not her couſin called her away to follow the Souldane and Empreſſe that were returning to the Court, there ſhe had ſtaied, forgetfull of her ſelfe. The Infant Mataroſa, ſaid vnto her by the way: What ſay you (faire Couſin) to that great knight? did you euer ſée in all your life a man of more valor? And truſt me, I thinke it be he I told you of, a iltle before his comming. I greatly deſire to ſee the fairneſſe of his complexion, whether it accorded with the conſtitution of his bodie, and gallant behauiour. I know not what I ſhould ſay (replied the Princeſſe) for he hath not ſéemed ſo well in my eyes, and though his valour haue freed me from the daunger you ſawe, great is his preſumption notwithſtanding, to beare my picture with him about the world, and his diſcurteſie is no leſſe, to depart vnknowne vnto the Souldan my father, and nothing reſpecting our intreaties, leauing mee ſo diſcontented, and I had not taken his ring, had not my father cō
                  manded, and you perſwaded me vnto it. You haue no reaſon to blame him for it (ſaid her Couſiin) for he could do no otherwiſe, being bound vnto the contrarie by the ſage Bellona, and I know not what Princeſſe or greater Lady woulde haue refuſed ſo deare a ſeruice as this knight offered you ſo liberally, which you ſéemed to accept moſt vnwillingly. Speake not of it (anſwered the princeſſe, for I had like to haue ſhewed my ſelfe as vnthankefull, in taking it as he diſcourteous in not doing what I intreated him. But if returne hee ſhall knowe the diſcontent hee did me. Aſſure you ſaid her pleaſant Couſiin, if he would be my knight, I would not hammer on theſe doubts.
               
                  If he returnes, hée ſhall be (anſwered the Princeſſe.) I will yéelde vnto it (ſaide the Infant) if you obtaine it without ſuch cerc
                     ••
                  
                  uie as you make. It may bée I ſhall at his returne (the Princeſſe made anſwere) and therefore reſt contented. I perceiued no ſuch intent in him (replied the Infant▪) In ſuch like diſcourſe went they with the Soldane, and Empreſſe, till they arryued to the Pallace, where the Princeſſe, ſaying ſhée felt her ſelfe diſtempered, left her Couſen, and her Ladyes, withdrawing alone vnto her Chamber, to conſider at more leyſure of him that had ſo diſpleaſed her. And ſhutting the doo
                     •
                  e after her, with a penſiue heart vnable to reſiſt her paſſions, ſhee caſt her ſelfe vppon her bedde, and with teares trickling down: her Cheekes, with ſighes that interrupted the cleare paſſage of the ſpeech, ſhée ſayde with a ſoft voyce. Oh vnhappie Princeſſe Florisbella, what vuluckie houre was that wherein thou diddeſt goe to ſée that curſed aduenture? that hath béene the cauſe of theſe thy torments and anguiſhe of heart, making thée héereafter bondſlaue to griefe, and in the ende gaine thy fréedome by death. Ah, deceytfull Ladies, fatall was the moment wherein I graunted you the boone you craued, to gaine for my good will, ſo manie paynes. Oh ſage Bellona, if from one daunger you haue liberated mée in a greater, you haue intrapped mée. And I doo beſéech the Goddes, to terminate theſe woes with my vntimelie death. For what auayles it mée to bée commaundreſſe ouer ſo manie Kings, Princes, Lordes, and Signiories, if the fatall deſtinies of my vnhappie chaunce haue, tied the libertie of my heart vnto a Knight vnknowne, of whom I ſawe, but armour and his horſe, neither knowe I what hee is, denying to diſcouer his face. Oh immortall Goddes, if this you haue ordered in the heauenly Synode of your decrées, why did you not alſo ſummon mée to appeare before your celeſtiall Thrones, to heare your cruell ſentence giuen againſt mée? But what ſay I, diſgraced that I am? For it may bee, that Knight is one of our Goddes? For who coulde elſe haue had the power to do what he did in ſuch a ſhort time? And ſo inthrall the quiet peace of my heart. Oh Prince, howe haue the Goddes reuenged thée, becauſe I neuer

regarded thy high merits, puniſhing my contempt by that knight that would not ſhow me his face, whom peraduenture you may be he, that would not diſeloſe your ſelfe, being diſpleaſed by my rather? But aye me thou art no
                     •
                   he, for thy wordes neuer ſo penet
                     •
                  ated my heart, nor the ſ
                     •
                  ge Bellona, (they great enimie by reaſon her 
                     〈…〉
                  e Princeſſe Aurora) had not brought thée in her 
                     〈…〉
                  . But aye me, diſtreſſed ſoule, bee it as it will, onlie I
                     〈…〉
                   laug
                     ••
                  ſh in perpetuall torments, and in the ende, hope 
                     •
                  o 
                     〈…〉
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               While the Princeſſe thus complained, her Couſen Mataroſa, that by her 
                     〈◊〉
                   withdrawing, did ſuſpect what it might bee, that came through a ſecret doore where ſhe was, and ſtaid to ouerheare her, but could vnderſtand nothing what ſhe ſaid, and greatly wondring at this noueltie, ſhe went away, and came to her Chamber doore, and knocked, which awaked the Princeſſe out of her lauient, who brying her eyes, ordering her ſelfe ſhe beſt ſhe could, opened the doore and let her in. But her Couſen ſeeing her in that caſe, diſſembled what ſhe thought, and ſaid. How now Couſen) doth the feare of the laſt aduenture laſt ſo long that i
                     •
                   ſo troubles you? Or is it becauſe you did no more good therein th
                     •
                  n I? Or is it the diſcontent you conceiued of the diſcourteous knight? If the laſt, tell me it, and wee will procure him to redreſſe the wrong? The Princeſſe couering her face, with a bluſh, like the mo
                     ••
                  ings Sua
                     •
                  e riſing in the Eaſt, aunſwered. Do not put me in more daunger then there was the laſt, (deare Couſen) for you make me thinke you knowe that Knight, making me imagine, that by your meanes I am ſnared in the deceyte of yonder inchauntment. In this manner paſt theſe Ladies many dayes, diſcourſing on nothing but the déeds of the knight of the Baſ
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ſks for ſo they called him, by reaſon of the armour heed id weare, and the Princeſſe Florisbella euerie day with longing deſire, expecting his returne, ſtill continued in her vſuall laments, wherein her Couſen one day taking her, woulde néedes knowe the cauſe of them, which ſhée, by great importunitie declared, which was no ſmall comfort to her after woes. But here wee leaue them till their time, with the Soldane, greatly doubting whether

this was the Prince of Perſia, which hée confirmed to bee, becauſe he would not diſcouer himſelfe. But his Lords perſwaded him to the contrarie, ſaying. This Knight better became his armour then he. But now the ſtorie turnes vnto the Prince don Brianell, whom we left in his iourney towards Antioch.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLV.
               
                  
                     What don Brianell did after hee was gone from Bollera, and how he was informed of the ſtate of Antioch.
                  
               
               WIth great deſire to procure the good ſucceſſe of his Ladies commaund, deparded don Brianell to Antioche, thinking that to effect ſo waightie a matter as that his foundation was weake. But continuing his voyage, meeting with no aduenture woorthie the rehearſall, at length arriued at a Citie not aboue twelue miles from Antioch, called Miriana, where hee reſolued to ſtay, and learne the ſt
                     •
                  te of the kingdome. And alighting at a houſe of good credit, was verie well 
                     〈…〉
                   by the owner of the houſe, that was one of the beſt Knights in that Countrey. So ſupper ended, diſcourſing alone with him of diuerſe matters, he demaunded who was King of that Countrey, 
                     •
                  eeing then troubled with ciuill mut
                     ••
                  e
                     •
                  ? The hoaſ
                     •
                   with teares in his eyes, thus anſwered. You ſhall knowe ſi
                     •
                   Knight that after the King Pompeiano, ou
                     •
                   ſoueraigne was ſia
                     ••
                  , by the men of the Perſian Soldan▪ a kinſman of his, called Don Gallaneo, became our King, who gouerned vs in peace, maintaining law and iuſtice with all vprightneſſe. But ſince, we haue vnderſtood he was 
                     •
                  lame at Perſepolis, by ſo
                     ••
                  e of the ſame Soldans ſubiects, and in wh
                     •
                  ſe abſence there gouerned vs as Viceroy, a noble man named Damartyno, who with great wiſdom and di
                     ••••
                  tion, kept vs in quiet concord, till a brother of the King of P
                        〈…〉
                     a, by name the fearefull Tremolcano knowing yt in reuenge of the death of don Callaneo of Antioch, the king of Cyrus, with two more brethrē of his, were ſlaine in Perſia, calling vs tra
                     •
                  tors and reb
                     •••
                  , with a great power came vpon vs, & ſ
                     ••
                  u
                     ••
                  ng the Country, Gariano which is a great

Lord in his Countrey, tooke our Gouernor, ſaying he would haue rebelled with the land, and hath impriſoned him in a caſtell, taking poſſeſſion of the whole kingdome, ſaying. Don Gallaneo hath no nigher allie then he, and ſo executeth daily ſuch tyrannies on the afflicted people, that we deſire rather to die, then liue. This is ſir, the truth of your demaund. But tell me (ſayde Don Brianell) left your King Pompeiano no iſſue to inherite his kingdome after him? He did replied his hoaſt) one daughter called the Princeſſe Aurora, whome we thinke to bée dead: for wée haue neuer ſince heard of her. But if ſhe be not dead (ſayde Don Brianell) and comming hither, will you not receyue her? We will all die in her b
                     •
                  hal
                     •
                  e, (replyed hee.) But theſe traytour are ſo ſtronglie fortifi
                     ••
                  , that wée ſhoulde hardly effect anie good, vnleſſe there were ſome to incourege the people of the Countrey, and for this none better then ſhe Gouernour Damartyno, but that his impriſonment forbiddes it for euer. Is his guard ſo great (ſayd Don Brianell) that you thinke he may not be liberated? The guarde (replied he is not ſo great, but that the Cittie is ſo nigh vnto the Caſtell, that vpon the giuing of the watch-worde, aboue thirtie thouſand men would arme themſelues. And within the Caſtell, there is a Mine that reacheth vnto the King Tramolcanos Pallace. How know you this, (ſaid don Brianell?) Becauſe you ſeeme a man on whom I may repoſe greater truſt, I will tell you (anſwered the hoaſt) I was Lieutenant of the caſtell, vnder Damartyno thrée yeares, and then knew I it, and that way went I often to ſpeake with him, which makes me the more pittie his impriſonment. Don Brionell liked well of his hoaſts wordes, and perceiuing hée wiſhed well to the affayres of the Princeſſe Aurora ſayde. Can you tell mée howe I might get vnto that Mine to go into the Caſtell? I do (replied hée) but what dooth it concerne you, that you will vndertake ſo daungerous an enterpriſe. I am his nigh A
                     ••••
                   (ſayde don Brianell) and woulde willinglie put my ſelfe in hazarde to ſet him at libertie. Although it ſeemes impoſſible to ſcape with life, in this enterprize (ſayde the hoaſt) becauſe there is within, a Couſen of the Giantes, with tenne Knightes, I will notwithſtanding doe it, and helpe

herein while I liue: and therefore will goe with you to Morrowe to Antioche, béeing an honour to looſe my life in companie of ſuch a Knight. Don Brianell thanked him for it, promiſing that if their enterprize had a good ſucceſſe, his paynes ſhoulde bée well quitted. The deedes doo bring with them theyr recompence (ſayde the hoaſt) and more then this, am I bounde to doo for Damartyno. The next morning, ſaying that hée muſt goe about certaine affayres to Antioche, clad himſelfe all in Armour. For though he were poore, yet was hee one of the valianteſt Knights of that Countrey, all his life trained vp in chiualdrous deſignes. Which don Brianell ſéeing, wondered at it, not knowing hée was a Knight, and ſo departed towards Antioch.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVI.
               
                  
                     What don Brianell, and Palineo of the venture did, arriuing at Antioch, and the daunger they were in.
                  
               
               WIth intention aforeſaid, trauailed theſe two Knights, till they came within ſight of the citties of Antioch, which was one of the beſt, and well peopled Citie of the world, for there was within, aboue a hundred thouſand great houſholds. Don Brianell highly admyred the Turrets and Towers of the ſame, which were numberleſſe, and the Sunne reuerberating on them, made the Citie ſéeme of a burning flame. What thinke you (ſir) of this noble Citie, demaunded the hoaſt? Well, replied don Brianell, for I haue not ſéene a more fayrer, and that better contented me. Not without reaſon doo you ſay ſo, ſayde his hoaſt) for I aſſure you, there is but thrée fayrer at this preſent, which are Babylon, Memphis, and Conſtantinople, which notwithſtanding ſcant in fayreneſſe equals this. I pray you tell me your name ſaid don Brianell) for I greatly deſire to know it, ſéeing we ſhall be better acquainted hereafter. My name is (ſayde he) Palineo of the Venture: and ſeeing this occaſion requires it, I woulde gladlie knowe yours before wee come to Antioche. I am called the aduenturous Knight (anſwered don Brianell)

and do beléeue you neuer heard me named, hauing neuer trauelled this way before. I haue no doubt of it ſir, replied Palineo▪
                   but you muſt now chaunge that name here, for it is ſaid a knight ſo called, was preſent at the King of Cyprus death. Thus went they till they met a Knight ſore wounded, going in great haſte. Don Brianell ſtaying him, demaunded the cauſe of his haſtie iourney in that manner? You ſhall know, ſir, replied the knight, that the Countie Gariano, to exerciſe his knights order yeſterday, a tourney of a thouſande on each ſide, ſo many of his, agaynſt the like number of the fierce king Tramolcanos: which on either part this day was begunne verie bloodie: but in the meane time, entring there in, two of the kings couſens, haue made ſuch a maſſacre of the Counties knights, that none dare confront them, and my ſelfe being wounded, as you ſée, am thus going to be cured, in a Caſtell not far from hence, and ſo paſt away. What were we beſt to do, ſir Palineo, demaunded don Brianell? That we go to the iouſts (anſwered he) and there we ſhall ſée what we haue to do And thus reſolued, arriued at the Tilt-yard, where but 500. of the counties knights were left, and they ſo wounded, that they could no longer withſtand their aduerſaries, by reaſon of the cruell ſtrokes of the kings cauſes. Which don Brianell perceiuing, and his valiant heart abhorring to be idle, ſaide to Palineo, Let vs ſuccour thoſe almoſt vanquiſhed. Be it ſo replied he. Whereupon 
                     ••
                  wching their Launces, entred the liſtes, and at the firſt encounters, ouerthrow two of the Giants knights: and don Brianell before his Launce broke, vnhorſed more then ſixe. Palineo with a loude voyce cried out thus. Courage, courage, knights of Antioch, and ſhew the valour of your mindes, leaſt now you bee reputed vanquiſhed, which neuer hitherto hath happened. Who 
                     ••
                  boldned with this ſpeech, ſeeing the haughtie deedes of don Brianell, couragiouſly renued the bloodie ſkirmiſh.
               The two Giants ſéeing that noueltie in the Cities knights, and how the Prince don Brianell, like a bloodie Dragon perſecuted their men, did both togither aſſaile him, to giue him his death. But he that in greater perils had beene in, awaited them couragiouſly, well couered with his ſheeld, and they arriuing both

at one time with their ſlycing ſemilers, diſcharged two mightie blowes vpon him. But don Bryanell ſpurred his horſe 
                     •
                  orward, within them, that the blowes lighted not full on him, notwithſtanding his ſheelde was cleft cleane in two, and he wounded one with a mightie thruſt, that the ſword appeared at his backe, 
                     〈…〉
                  g dead on the ground. And ſeeing an other furious blowe from the other gyant deſcend vppon his head, and being deſtitute of a ſhéeld, c
                     ••
                  ſt the ſ
                     ••
                  itor with his ſword, which beeing of a better temper then the Gyants, it cut it in two, and ſtraight thereupon ſtrooke the Giant on his arme, which from his ſhoulder fel to the earth. Who ſeeing himſelfe maimed of his lims, turned his horſe, and roaring fled away. Who were able to expreſſe the greefe and rage of Tramolcano, to ſée one Couſin ſlaine, and the other wounded to death? Thereupon calling out to his m
                     •
                  n to take that Knight, that had committed ſo great treaſon: whereat, many incompaſſed Don Brianell: wherfore Palineo went to help him, amazed at his haughty déedes.
               The count Garianos men brauly defended him, yet had hee remained priſoner, (for the diuelliſh Tramolcano deſcended with all his men had not Palineo that foreſawe the daunger, pluckt him by the arme, and ſaid to him. Follow me ſir knight, if you wil ſaue your life, for it will be reputed no leſſe valour to ſaue it thus, then ſ
                     •
                  aying to kill all this company. Don Bryanell allowing his counſaile, rained his horſe backwards, & went away in deſpight of all that looked after him. So ſoone as the king was come downe frō his window, the tourney was parted, and he commanded of thoſe and other knights aboue 4000. to follow the murtherers as hee called them▪ of his Couſins, and dead or aliue they ſhould bring thē to him, and he taking with him, the dead bodies of his ſlaine Couſins, returned to his pallace, to arme himſelfe, minding in perſon to follow the ſearch: all which, was but in vaine, for Palineo knowing all thoſe wayes, nookes and lanes, that was thereabout, iſſued out of the Cittie, in ſight of all the knights, ſpurring without 
                     •••
                  gring, till they came into a litle Groaue, & turning on the right hand, entred into a garden, vnſéene of any, and paſſed to the farther ſide thereof, vnto a houſe, where ſhepheards in ſtormy weather

withdrew themſelues, and there ſtaying, don Brianell, ſaid, ſéeing they were not ſéene of anie, Let vs light here, if you pleaſe, that our horſes may reſt, and from hence, may we well ſée if any followes vs. Wherevpon looking from the high Mountaine, and eſpying none, diſmounted from their horſes, and put them in a ſtable that there was, giuing them hay, and prouender, they there found. And with great ioy of their good ſucceſſe, diſcourſed of their late aduenture, greatly pleaſed with the death of theſe two giants, whō 
                  Palineo ſayd, did great outrages in that land. I hope (ſaid don Brianell) we ſhall eaſily enter the caſtell. Hardly ſhall we do it (replied Palineo) yet we will trie it, ſéeing we are come to that effect. In the meane time, were it good we had ſomewhat to ſupper. That were not amiſſe (replied don Brianell) if our prouiſion were better. Let me alone for that (ſaid Palineo) ſo ſoone as it is night, for I alſo greatly deſire to ſée what is done in the Pallace, the better to order our affayres. And thereupon expected the approach of the couerer of nightly actions.
            
            
               CHAP. XLVII.
               
                  
                     What don Brianell and Palineo did, going out of the Cittie of Antioch, how they entred the Mine, and of their fight withthe Caſtell, about the libertie of Damartyno.
                  
               
               THe darke night béeing come, ſo obſcure as they wiſhed, Palineo vnarmed himſelfe, and leauing don Brianell behinde, put on a cloake he found in the houſe, which the day before a ſhepheard had there left, and muffling his face, went to the Citie, where, taken for a ſhepheard, he paſſed vnknowne, till he came to the Kings Pallace, where he found many armed knights that returned from the ſearch, among whom was the King himſelfe, mad with anger, that hée could not heare of the two knights that ſlue his Couſens. Among this troupe, had Palineo occaſion to go in, and ſo went vnto the Mynes mouth, whoſe doore was ſhut, and ſeeling whether it might bée opened, hée found the Locke verie weake, for the doore vſed onelie to bée ſhutte, becauſe that ſecret might not bée diſcouered.
               
                  And ſo returned to the Citie, and brought ſome victualles for himſelfe and his companion, wherewith, béeing almoſt tenne a clocke, he came to Don Bryanell, where with a good ſtomacke they ſupt, hauing eaten nothing ſince their comming from Miriana, and hauing done, Palineo ſaid. Let vs be gone, for if longer wée ſtaye, the King and the Countie may haue ſupt, and ſo wée bee locke out of the Pallace. But what ſhall we do with our horſes? (ſaid Don Bryanell) for I would not willinglie looſe mine, becauſe this Cittie containes none ſo good. If (replyed Palineo) wée dye in this enterprize, wée ſhall not néede our Horſes: but if wée ſcape, liberating according to our deſire, our friend Damartyno, the matter will be leſſe, in looſing them. Don Bryanell replying neuer a word, armed himſelfe, and carrying his Helme in his hand, put on the ſhepheards cloake, which Palineo had before woorne, who ſaid vnto him: You paſſe me, in diſguiſing your ſelfe, incurring no leſſe daunger, then I doe: for if with the many lightes I be known by mine armor, in the Pallace, you are like to ſuffer wt me. But what ſhal wée do (ſaid don Bryanel?) There can we do no otherwiſe (replyed he) but in the cittie we way better ſhift. And being come thither, by the way they met two or three Pages, Palineo ſtepped to one, and taking him by the cloake, made as hée would drawe his ſword, the Page feared therewith, left it him, and got away, crying out, they would murther him. But Palineo calling don Bryanell, croſte another way, becauſe he would not be ſéene. Don Bryanell could not ſtand for laughter, to ſée what deuiſe Palineo had found to get the others cloacke. What ſay you to this? (ſaide Palineo:) hée that hath nothing, muſt ſhift to get it with little labour. Nowe ſo the Godes helpe mée (ſaid Don Bryanell) it was well done, and the quickneſſe you performed it with, makes me thinke you haue not a feawe times vſed it. You ſay true (anſwered Palineo) for ſome time through neceſſitie, I haue helped my ſelfe with like deuiſes, which is nothing: for in neede, this cloake was as well mine, as his that woare it, and perchaunce more too.
               In this manner arriued they at laſte in the Pallace (after the clocke had ſtrooke twelue) where the King was yet at Supper,

and méeting with the Captaine of the kings guard, thinking they belonged to the Countie, demaunded whence at that time they came. They replyed, we came from ſeeking thoſe knightes, the King our Soueraigne commaunded to be brought vnto him, and not finding them, we returned to vnarme our ſelues. So they paſte, till they came to the Mine, and ſéeing none was by, opened the locke, and went in, and chayning the doore faſte on the inſide with lockes and chaines, they found there, and féeling with their hands, went along: And by the way Palineo ſaid. It behooues vs to conſſder how we ſhall behaue our ſelues, and though you excell in valour, all thoſe that weare armour, yet in the end is it not amiſſe, to auoyde all daunger: therefore let vs goe ſoftly, for it may be, we ſhall frée Damartyno without blowe of ſword, or Lance. I would we were alreadie within, (ſaid don Bryanell) and as for the reſt, it would not be much, we ſhould ſo doe, through your good pollicie. At length they came to the doore on the farther ſide, that went into the Caſtle: which paſſing, Palinco ſhutte 
                     •••
                  ſt, that none might that way diſcrie thē, and giuing one another a watchword, to knowe themſelues in any daunger befalling them, groping with their hands, they came to the place wher Palineo knew the priſou was, which they found ſure locked, which gréeued don Bryanell, thinking they ſhould not doe as they would. But Palineo ſaid. Courage (ſir knight) and we wil finde meanes to open this doore. And if not replied don Brianell) our ſwordes ſhall breake it open You ſay well (aunſwered Palineo) and therefore let vs ſoftlie go to the Caſtle Gate, and that none heare vs, make it ſure, that neither by the one, nor by the other, if we preuaile, any may beare the newes: and ſo going thither, Palineo tooke a handfull of earth and caſt in the lockes, through the keye holes, that it was impoſſible without breaking, to open them.
               I haue learned more of you (ſaid don Brianell in one day, then euer my Tutors taught me in tenne yeares. It might be (anſwered Palineo) they were neuer in ſuch daungers as I, and therefore could they not teach you, that which by experience is learned. By this time were they hard by one of the ſeruants of the Caſtle, who perceiuing they were not of the Court of guard, ranne to the

Gyants lodging, crying out, that ſtrangers were within, which cries made the Gyant amazed, eappe out of his bedde, and arme himſelfe, whyle the man cryed about, arme, arme, the Caſtle is ſurpriſed. Whereuppon, aboue tenne Knightes that were within were feared out of their beddes. Which the two knights ſeeing, Palineo ſaid. Followe me knight, before theſe vnite themſelues. Yet for all their haſte, their appeared many burning torches, at whoſe light, they ſawe the fearefull Gyant comming, with a mightie Mace in his handes. Another way came there ſixe Knights alreadie armed.
               
                  Don Bryanell required Palineo to aſſault the Knights, while he withſtoode the Gyant, who if he had thought them to bee but two alone, had not armed him: and rayſing his heauie Mace, would haue diſcharged it vppon his aduerſarie, but he ſtepping aſide, made him looſe the blowe, and wanting his ſhield, hoyſted aloft his ſword, with both handes, and grounded it with mightie force, vpon the Gyants head, whereon he wore a brazen Scull, which being cutte, made him a little wound. The Gyant nothing regarding the blowe, would haue plucked him to him, but don Bryanell ſéeing death before his eyes if once the Mace tooke him full, ſtraight caſte himſelfe vppon him, and with muchado wrung the Mace out of the Gyants handes, but he tooke don Bryanel betwixt his armes, thinking to ſtifle him, but he with a valiant hart, drewe his dagger, and ſtabd it to the hiltes, twiſe or thriſe in the Gyants breaſt, who féeling himſelfe deadly wounded, let him go, and drewe foorth a mightie Courtleaxe, that hung by his ſide, and with it ſtrooke at don Bryanell, which he ſeeing come right to his head, ſtarted aſide, yet for all that, it cut his helme quite downe on the one ſide, and deſcending lower, it parted his armor, waunding him ſorely on the ſide, yet not dangerouſly. Don Bryanell wt one blowe ſtrooke at his leg, which the Gyant for haſte, hauing not armed, was cleane cut of, making him like a tower fal to the ground: wher roaring like a lyon, within a little while, he gaue his ſoule to him, that through his euill workes, had
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  g
                     •
                   expected it.
               Which 
                     •
                  one, don Bryanell went to helpe Palineo, that was in a 
                     •
                  ierce combatte, with the Knights of the Caſtle, which were all there: among whome, hee ſhew
                     •
                  d the braue courage of his

minde, and had ſlaine alreadie foure, and with the reſt (though with daunger) hée behaued himſelfe very brauelie, which highly contented Don Bryanell, that looked on, but thinking it no time to be ydle, valiantly aſſayled the knights, felling two dead at two blowes, and not long after, the reſt not able to ſuffer his mortall blowes, fledde downe towards the Caſtle Gate, where the Porter trying to open it, to call for helpe, but all his labour was in vaine, which the knightes ſéeing, returned againe to their aduerſaries, where quickly they fell breathleſſe at their féete, with all the reſt of the Fortes, leauing none of the Gyants companie aliue in the Caſtle
               This diſpacht, theſe two braue Warriours ſearched about the Caſtle, to ſee if any were hidde, but finding none, don Bryanell ſaid. We haue done ill, in not ſauing one, to doe what we would, and ſerue vs at our néede. Gréeue not hereat (replyed Palineo) for wee haue no ſuch buiſineſſe, nor néede more ſeruice, then I can doe, being not ſo déepely wounded, that we ſhould require any ſuch helpe.
               You ſaye well (aunſwered don Bryanell) but vnleſſe I be deceiued, you are ſore wounded, and my ſelfe am in like caſe, and before we looſe more blood, let vs ſet Damartyno at libertie. Be it ſo (replyed Palineo:) and ſo tooke the keyes of the Priſon from the Porters ſide, and opened it, where they found him ouerladen with boultes and Irons, pale, megre, and weake, for want of ſuſtenance, taſting no foode ſometime in two, nor three dayes, whom the knights ſéeing, could not ſtay the teares in their eyes, knawing him to be one of the loyaleſt Knights liuing in thoſe dayes. Damar
                        •
                     yno ſéeing thoſe Knightes enter in that manner, ſaid. What would you with mee Knightes? is your Lord now contented to end my life, which would bee no little comforte to my many torments?
               
                  Palineo no longer able to conceale himſelfe, vnlacing his helme, with great ioy to ſée him aliue, ſaid thus. You haue no cauſe to feare vs (moſt loyall Knight) being now at length ſet at libertie by the handes of this valiant Knight, to whome you are no leſſe bopnd, then for your life.
               
                  And by yours (ſaid Don Brianel) for without you, mine had little auailed. Wheruppon taking away his irons, with great gladneſſe he imbraced Palineo, ſaying. I did aſſure my ſelfe, my meſ
                     •
                   deare fréend, you would not faile me in my neceſſitie, for in ſuch times true friends are knowne, more then in proſperitie, and humbling himſelfe to Don Brianell, craued to kiſſe his hands▪ ſeeing his perſon & that good deede required his dutie. Don Brianel ſhewed him the like courteſie, and taking him vp, ſaying. Tha
                     •
                   for that litle hee had don, he deſerued no ſuch thanks, being bound to more thē that for him for her ſake, that ſent him. Sir knights ſaid Damartyno, I haue certaine ſeruants in priſon ſome where about this Caſtle, for I know they were brought in with me, them I pray you let vs frée▪ ſo they went to ſéeke them, and Damartyno greatly woondred to ſée ſo great ſlaughter by two Knights.
               And after they had found the ſeruants Don Brianel and Palineo, they were laid in two beds, in the Caſtle, and were cured by one of Damartynos ſeruants, that were very ſkilfull in that ſcience, and there they continued certaine daies, till they were wel, giuing order, that if any came from the king, they ſhould be admitted to them. But Don Bryanell the firſt day, required one of the ſeruants ſecretly to fetch their horſes, where they had left them, which ſo ſoone as it was darke, was done, that not a little contented Don Bryanel, for he highly pryſed his horſe, being neuer a better in that whole kingdome, and through the hurly burly in that Cittie, none remembred they within the caſtle. But after they were through well, Don Bryanell ſaid to Damartyno, and Palineo, being altotogither. Hitherto (ſir knight) you haue not knowne the occaſion of my comming, nor knowne what I am, hauing neuer ſéene mee before, but to aſſure you of both, read this letter, from the honourable Princeſſe Aurora, by which you ſhall know the beginning and the ende of my trauaile. Damartyno taking it, opened it, and read it, to this effect.
               
                  
                     
                        THe diſinherited Queene of Antioch, Aurora, Princeſſe of Miriana,
                        to thee, the moſt loyaleſt of all creatures, her louing Knight, Damartyno of the Valley, gouernour of our

Kingdome, by our will, though by a ſtrangers hand, health.
                     
                     
                        I knowe the vnhappie chances, ouerthrowes, and vnfortunate miſaduentures, haue not beene vnknowne to thee, (as the man that hath ſuſtained the like) which haue by the prouiſion of our immortall Gods, befallen the King Pompeiano thy Lord, and my deare Father, as alſo the feared abſence of my perſon, ſo neceſſarie to eſcape the furie of the Prince Perianeo, of Perſia, and Dou Gallaneo of Antioch. And now repoſing my confidence on the high eſtate of thy deſcent, in the great loyalty I haue known in thee, & by the loue my father bare thee, (whoſe death partly on ſome of them is reuenged, as this knight will more at large tell thee I hope the like ſhall alſo be ſeene in thy preſence, through thy meanes) and order: eyther by my comming in perſon to theſe, or with an hoaſt of men, ſufficient to regaine our rights: for which cauſe I ſend thee, this valourous knight, excellent not onely in armes, but in al things elſe, required in a noble mā. With him ſhalt thou determine the beſt, and the ſpeedieſt meanes, for theſe aſſaires we mooue, but the Gods protect thee, and preſerue thee in that ſtate of loialtie, which thou euer glorieſt in.
                     
                  
               
               So ſoone as Damartino had read this letter, did again imbrace Don Brianell, ſaying. I could not haue or deſire better newes, thē theſe (ſir knight) to comfort my afflicted hart, ioying to know of the welfare of my ſoueragne. But how ſhal we do, for this tyrant and vſurping king Tramoſcano, is ſo mightie and ſtrongly fortified in this land, that we may hardly oppoſe our ſelues againſt his forces: I am of opinion (ſaid Palineo ſeeing we are to begin ſo great an enterpriſe, we make it knowne vnto the Duke of Siluania, to whom, hauing Don Gallanco granted all his liuings, the vſurper hath now for ſome cauſes diſconſented, & hee I am aſſured ſéeing you at libertie, will not denie all his aid, aſſiſting you, to reobtaine that which he hath loſt, or elſe looſe what he hath new. I doo very well like what you haue ſaid (replied Damartyno) and therefore you and I will to morrow go to him, leauing this Knight in the caſtle, to anſwere any that comes from the Cittie.
               
                  It were better we all goe togither ſaid Palineo and if any come, we will leaue order with theſe ſeruants what they ſhall do. Be it ſo (ſaid don Brianell) and I thinke beſt we goe ere it be day, that we be not ſéen putting on ſome of the armor of the giants knights. So reſolued on this, went to reſt themſelues, and about midnight they roſe and changed their armonr, Damartyno and Palineo taking the beſt horſes in the Caſtle, departed, commanding their ſeruants, if any came from the Cittie, they ſhould tell them the Gyant had commanded none ſhould enter to ſpeak with him, becauſe he was not well. And that they ſhould make them anſwer, according to their demand, in the Gyants behalfe.
            
            
               CHAP XLVIII.
               
                  
                     What befell Don Brianell and his companions, with the Knights of the Lions, and how knowing one another, they all returned to the Caſtle.
                  
               
               TWo parts of the night were ouerpaſt, whē the dazeling light of pale ſhyning Dyana, would giue place vnto the eaſterne riſing of the mornings ſunne, whoſe clear approach, excelleth from the heauens the obſcure darkneſſe of the gloomie night: when theſe thrée knights iſſued forth of the caſtle, vpon mighty c
                     •
                  urſers, with ſtrong and knotty lances in their hands, and onely with two pages to carry their ſhéelds, taking the right way to the citie of Siluania, where they thought to finde the duke. Now ſaith the hyſtory, they were not gone ſix miles from the Citie, but they ſaw comming towards them, the way they went, two knights, the braueſt and gallanteſt that euer they ſaw, they brought with them ſix pages, al vpō faire horſes. Did you euer ſee gallanter knights in your life, ſaid Don Brianell to Damartyne? No truly replied he. Aſſure your ſelf, ſaid Palineo, they be not of this countrey, for none here can ſit a horſe, nor manage him ſo brauely, yet by their armor they ſéeme nouel knights. What makes you think ſo, ſaid don Brianel? Becauſe they haue on thē no ſuch ſignes as you, (rep
                     ••
                  t he) wherby it ſéemes they haue not bin in many cōbats, or at leaſt with that armor, and if you think good, it would not be amiſſe to try if theyr ſubſtance doth agrée with their ſhewe.
               
                  Doo not ſo (ſaid the prudent Damartyno) put not your ſelfe to ſuch tryall, for oftentimes combats are ieſtingly begun, but in earneſt ended, eſpecially, bicauſe me thinks, your knights wil brauely defēd themſelues. With this talk they came nigh one to the other, wherby they ſawe them armed, in a roſe coloured armor, excéeding rich and curiouſly grauen, with many Lyons, crowned with lawrell wreathes, one of them ſtepped forward, and méeting the thrée knights, in the Perſian tongue ſaluted them, they did the like, with much curteſie. Come you (ſir knights, ſaid he of the Lions) from the citie of Antioch? Yes replied they) we yeſterday came thence. But why doo you aſke it? Becauſe (ſaid hee) I go in ſearch of a Knight, whome I hope to finde there: it may be you knowe him. What deuiſe weares he in his armour? Or what is is name, demanded they? I knowe not howe he may call himſelfe this way. (replied he of the Lyons.) But he weares a tawney Armor, with a ſea waue, and on his ſhield ingrauen the Picture of a moſt faire Lady: and I knowe if he be in theſe parts, he cannot but be named according to the courage and high valour of his minde. Don Brianell hearing this, thought they demanded for Don Bellianis, and becauſe he ſpake in the perſian language, he imagined he was gon from Bollera where he had left him, and that this might be ſome friend of his, that followed him: and deſirous to be better informed of this, ſaid. This knight you aſke for, is not in this countrey. But if you wil tell me what you would with him, Ile tell you where you may finde him: for though this knight is no leſſe named then you ſay, none can giue you better inſtruction of him then I. That I faine would ſpeake with him, there is nothing I more deſire: therefore you may greatly fauour me, to tell me the place of his abede without farther queſtion. I will tell you (ſaid don Brianell) and let me knowe your name? I am called the knight of the Lions (ſaid he) I am neuer the wiſer for that name (replied don Brianel) and therefore vnleſſe you be more plaine, you ſhal not know of me what you would. You are a ſtrange man (ſaid the knight of the lions) to denie me my requeſt, hauing told you my name, for in that you know me not, I am not bound to tell you, who my grandſi
                     •
                  r was. It is a meruaile you are not knowne (anſwered Palineo)

hauing ended ſo many aduentures, with that armour, which they ſo teſtifie, ſéeming wondrous battered, and it may be a wonder, you were not without farther queſtion knowne, ſince the Kingdome of Antioch is ſo full of your proweſſes. Whereunto the Knight of the Lyons thus replyed. By your wordes I perceiue, becauſe I ſhould not by you haue ſaid, what you did by me, you ſo haue mangled your armor, and not that with them, you haue béen in any fight: And if you haue in you, ſuch déedes as words, proudly to breath vnſéemely 
                     •
                  eaſts, I gladly would breake a launce with you, vpon condition, that if I vanquiſh you, this knight be bound to tell me what I demaunded, and if I be vanquiſhed, yours ſhall be my armour, that you may imploye them in ſuch enterpriſes you ſpeake of. Be it as you pleaſe (anſwered Palineo) if my companion will agree to the condition. I am content (ſaid Don Brynnell.) Wherupon Palineo turned him abuot to take his carrere, ſo did the Knight of the Lions, with great furie méeting in the middeſt of their courſe, and ſtaying themſelues in their▪ ſaddles, their incounters were ſo ſtrong, that the Knight of the Lions loſte his ſtirropes: But Palineo by the fierce ſhoute, was vnhorſt clean
                     •
                   ouer his horſe cropper: and his aduerſarie paſte away with moſt gallant continent, towards don Bryanell, that much wondred at the braue incounter, to him thus ſaying. Séeing (ſir Knight) in you remaines, to diſcharge the condition of our controuerſie, I intreate you to ſatiſfie my demande? Don Bryanell béeing about to anſwere him, arriued Palineo, ſaying. Knight of the Lions, let vs end our battell, for though I haue fallen, I am not euercome. I am bound to no more (ſaid he) hauing ſaid I would but breake one launce, and ſince you are fallen, you haue no reaſon to vrge this any more, but that this Knight doe kéepe his promiſe. Let him be iudged firſt ouercome (ſaid don Bryanell) and the reſt ſhall quickly be fulfilled. But the ethe
                     •
                   Knight of the Lions, féeing this, went to them, ſaying. There can no right iudgement be giuen on this controuerſie, for both you will ſay he is not vanquiſhed, though he be. But I will trie it with you (ſaid he) towards don Brianell, which of them is vanquiſhed, and therefore paſſe no ſentence hereon, for our battell ſhall arbitrate it, and what we elſe would

                  Don Briaenll perceiuing that the knight threatned him, made no anſwere, but rained his horſe about, cowching his Lance to méete his aduerſarie, who was nothing ſlack to doo the like. And like two furious lions incountred with mightie ſtrength, making the earth tremble vnder them.
               The Prince don Bryanell encountred the knight of the Lions, in ſuch ſort, that penetrating his ſhéelde and armor, hee made him bēd his head backwards vnto his horſe crooper. But the knight of the Lyons, ſtrooke him on the vyſor of his helme, which being of a fine temper, reſiſted there the furie of the Launce, which for all that, breake his laces, making it flie from his head, conſtraining him to ſaue himſelfe, by holding about his horſes necke, almoſt beſides himſelfe: thinking he had loſt his eyes. In this maner ſtoode he a while, till he recouered his ſences, and then ſéeing his aduerſarie come towards him, with his ſword drawne, aſhamed of his accident, and mad with rage, did the like, couering his head with his ſhéelde, for want of a helme. But 
                     •
                  re he could doo ſo, he was ſodainly knowne by the knight of the Lyons, and hee that iouſted with him, thinking he had done him ſome greate harme, ſheathed his ſword, and in the Gréekiſh tongue, ſaid. Stay Prince of Macedon, for you muſt not combatte with me. Which don Bryanell ſéeing, did the like, and ſaid. Who are you, that knowes me in a ſtrange land? The Knight not replying, vnlaced his helme, whom ſtraight Don Bryanell did ſo too, demanding for his deare Brother Don Bellianis? He is very farre from hence (replyed Don Bryanell.) But what is that valiant knight that comes with you? It is my Brother Don Clarineo of Spaine (anſwered he) and I doe greatly ioy to haue met with you, for elſe we kn
                     •
                  we not what to do.
               By this Don Clarineo was thither come, and with great loue imbraced him, and ſaid. To the great wonder of Damartyno and Palineo, to ſée their good agréement, it had almoſte coſte vs deare, to knowe of you againſt your will, what we required, and I aſſure you, if you longer conceale your ſelfe, I will no more ſéeke you.
               Wée are in a ſtrange Land (replyed Don Bryanell) therefore

can I doo no otherwiſe, though more danger it ſhould coſt me. But what ſhall we doo? for thinking to finde you in neceſſitie, the Emperor and vs, ſhipt our ſelues with one hundred thouſand men, which are not farre from hence. For knowing you were come to reſtore the Princeſſe Aurora to her kingdome, we departed to aid you.
               Where left you my Lord the Emperour, demaunded Don Bryanell? He is not with vs? I aſſure you (anſwere Lucidamore) for he and Sauian of Trebento were ſeparated from vs, by a certaine aduenture. All this talked they, that Damartyno and Palineo did not vnderſtand, though they thought they knew one another.
               Wherefore don Brianell ſaid to the Princes, it behooueth you to ſay, that the Souldan of Babilon hath ſent this armie, to plant the Princeſſe Aurora, in her kingdome, that theſe knights may more willingly further vs: for in theſe affaires, they are very forward. Is my brother here, demanded Don Clarianeo, and my Couſin, the Prince Arfileo? I left them in Perſia (replied Don Brianell) in a bloodie controuerſie againſt the Souldane, about the death of Don Galfeo of Antioch. Is it poſſible ſaid (Don Clarianeo?) I aſſure you, you haue greatly gladded me with the death of that traytor: but tell me, did my brother Don Bellianis kill him? He did (anſwered Don Brianell,) and hereafter I will informe you al the manner how. And now aduertiſe your Pages to ſay, you all now come away from Babylon. So they ſhall, ſayde Don Claryaneo.
               
               Whereupon Don Brianell called to him Palineo, (that was much abaſhed at his fall) and ſaid to him and Damartyno. You are (ſir knights) to giue the immortal gods great thanks, for directing our affaires better then wee wiſhed, for theſe knights are my néere kinſmen, and for whome I would vndertake any danger in the world. I ſpeake this Syr Palineo, becauſe you ſhould not vex your ſelfe at your chance, nor diminiſh your good will towards me, for what is paſt. And beſides all this, they are come about the ſame matter (we haue in hand) landing a ſtrong army, ſent to this end, frō the Soldan of Babilon: which wil not a litle help vs, being

here hard by: Wherefore conſider what beſt we may doo, for in this nor in any thing elſe, none of vs will in no manner contradict your counſaile. Whereunto Palineo ſomewhat comforted, made this anſwere.
               I could not haue receiued greater comfort for my ouerthrowe then this, being done by ſuch a knight, and your Allye, for which cauſe, he onely deſerueth to gain the honor of all aduentures in the world: & therfore do I remain no leſſe bound to his ſeruice, though I beleeue he little néedes it, then heretofore I was to yours. I doo greatly thanke you (Sir knight) ſaid Don Clarineo, thinking my ſelfe happie to haue met you, and do reioyce we came not to handy blowes, being ſure to haue béene vanquiſhed by you, as your courteous words, ſufficiently do ſhewe. And therefore, I do ſurrender all the honour of the victorie to you, as your due, and reſting yours for euer, as my future déedes ſhall approoue. And ſo imbracing one another, expeld all enuious rancor from their valiant hearts. This done, Damartyno ſaid: he thought good, they all returned to the Caſtle, whence that morning they were returned, where they might conclude what ſhould be performed, and that in the meane while, one of the Pages ſhould goe and charge the Armie to ſtay where they had left it, till they receiued farther order. This counſaile being alowed, they ſent two of theyr pages with this cō
                  mand, and themſelues returned to the Caſtle, where hauing reſted that day, they reſolued that the prince Don Lucidamore and Damartyno, ſhould that night goe vnto the army, and before the morning light, they ſhuld cōduct cloſe to the walles of Antioch, which they alreadie knew to be in armes, with aboue one hundred thouſand fighting men, becauſe by their ſpyes they were aduertiſed of their power, and the vſurping king accounting them to bee enemies, determined to méete them in field, yet commanding the Cittie gates to be faſt ſhut, leaſt vnwares it ſhuld be ſurpriſed, leauing within 40. thouſand men to defend it. And he with the County Gariano, prepared to ſet forth. Moreouer, it was reſolued, that don Clarianeo and don Brianel, with his fréend Palineo, ſhould paſſe through the myne into the Citie, & procure to open one of her gates that they might enter to them, and by that meanes win it, which

was ſo ſtrongly fortified with munition and men, that they within feared nothing, for the ſpace of two yeares. So Damartyno & his companion, departed to the armie, where arriuing, hee greatly reioyced to ſée the good order thereof. Don Lucidamore, notwithſtanding his pages had deliuered his meſſage, did himſelf gaue cō
                  mandement, they ſhould ſay they were ſent by the great Soldan of Babylon.
            
            
               CHAP. XLIX.
               
                  
                     The great danger the Princeſſe don Clarianeo, & don Brianel, ſuſtained in the citie of Antioch: how they were ſucco
                           •
                        ed by the knight of the ſſe Bal
                           ••
                        ks. The winning of the Cittie, and the death of the Tyrant Tramolcano.
                  
               
               THe appointed houre being come, which made euery one think it a year, ſo much they d
                     •
                  ūred to be within Antioch, & hauing ſéene the ſignall of the approach of the Emperors arme, the valiant knights don Clarianeo, don Brianel, and the politick Palineo, opening the doore of the mine, went through it to the Pallace, but they were ſcarce at the pallace ſide, when they heard a great noiſe, and harkening what it might be, they vnderſtood it was, becauſe the army of ſtrangers had ſo ſodainly appeared before the walles, whither the king Tramalcano, with the coūty Gariano, were going, with an infinit companie, to ſée if they would aſſault the Cittie before the morne, whereto there lacked not two houres. All which indéede was ſo: for Don Lucidamore and Damartyno, hauing cō
                  manded all their mē to hang ſcarſes vpon their armor to be known from their enemies, did at that time conduct their troupes, hard by the gate, which ſhould be opened for their entrance. Be in quiet ſaid Palineo, and lette mee go forth to ſee what we were 
                     〈◊〉
                   doo. Doo what you will (anſwered Don Brianell for heere wee
                     ••
                   ſtay for you. And preſently opening the doore, ſoftly hee went foorth▪ How like you this Knight, ſaid Don Bryanell? What ſhoulde I ſaye of him? (aunſwered Clarianeo) but that I neuer ſawe a more br
                     •
                  uer Knight, I meane of more pollicie, in all my life before.
               
                  Hereuppon don Bryanel, recounted vnto him, all that in his companie he had done, which greatly contented Don Clarineo: at which time, he returned, ſaying. (Sir knight) the Gyant is gone, with all his companie, let vs now followe him, doing as the time ſhall miniſter occaſion. They did ſo, thruſting themſelues among thoſe that were going to the walles, where arriuing, they ſaw the gate faſte ſhutte, which they had determined to open, and that the Gyant hauing paſte a Gariſon there, was going to ſpeake with the County Gariano.
               
               I beléeue (ſaid Palineo) wee ſhall haue more adoo to open the Gate, then wée had thought. I haue (aunſwered don Clarineo) conſidered, how we may doo it: which is, that your Couſen (meaning don Bryanell) ſhall kéepe the paſſage from the Mine, letting no more paſſe hither: and that you (Sir Palineo) ſhall by force take the keyes from the Porter, and with them, procure to open the gate, and I will defend you, from theſe that are alreadie here: And this muſt be with the ſpéede, that the valour of our courageous hearts, and their charge we haue enterpriſed, doth binde vs to. Whereupon don Brianell ſetled himſelfe in the paſſage, which being narrowe, he could ſcarce defend himſelfe. Palineo with greate courage, by the light of many torches, that were kindled, ſtepped to the Porter, and with his ſword cleaning his head in two, at one blowe, ſnatcht the keyes from his ſide, but ere he did it, many knightes aſſaulted him, to giue him his death. The valiant Prince don Clarineo, not forgetting what he had to do, ſtept before, to defend him, beſtowing ſo mightie and mortall blowes, on euery one which approched, that they fledde from him, as from the preſence of death. By this time had Palineo, through his ſpéedie diligence, opened the gate, had not the fearefull Tramoleano (hearing that ſuddaine accident thrre) with an infinit number of knights, returned with his heauie Mace, tamming wt ſuch a furie, that if don Clarineo had not ſtepped behinde the dead horſes and knightes, that he had ſlaine, he had wondrouſly ſcaped his life, at that firſt fury of the horſes incounters, but dooing as is ſaid, he wounded the mightie Gyants horſe, thruſting his ſword quite through his head, that the furious beaſt, in ſuch manner raiſed

himſelfe, that he ouerthrewe his Maiſter. The treachereus Countie Galliano, would haue done the like by Palineo, but hée ſtepping aſide, tumbled him from his horſe, with one blowe. And certainely, they could not haue giuen two better blows, then theſe, that more might helpe them. For when the Gyants knights, that were about a hundred, ſawe their maiſters downe, alighted alſo, becauſe the narrowneſſe of the place might not be a cauſe to hurt them, with their horſes. The fearefull Gyant being very heauie, with great gaine rayſed himſelfe, and foming through his mouth, blaſpheming all his Gods, went againſt Clarineo, who being ioyned with Don Brianell, were both in a fierce ſkermidge, giuing, and receiuing mightie blowes, whoſe eecho rezounded in ye campe without the cittie. And the gyant ſeeing him there, reſht in, to hold him, whyle his men did kill him, but hauing no aduantage in ſtrength ouer him, don Clarineo to ſcape from his handes, brauelie pluckt him to him, that both fell downe, where hee was pittiouſly wounded, and had not his ſtrong armour defended him, he there had left his life. And getting from the Gyant, he began with them a moſt cruell fight (with ſuch danger as any may imagine.) Whom Palineo ſéeing ſo fore wounded, wōdred how he breathed. Don Bryanell was in no leſſe perill, for ſo many layd on him, with haſte to paſſe by, that he bléeded as faſt as any of them. In this daunger were they all thrée, looking for nothing but death, though the King and Trapter County, were wounded no leſſe then they. For Don Clarineo minding to leaue his life reuenged, ſo laide on them, and others, that all were imbrues in their owne bloods. And whoſoeuer then had ſéene them, would haue rather iudged them ſo many raging Tigers, or hungrie Lions, then knights, hoping of no ſuccor of thē without: for thogh they procured to enter, could not approch the gates, being defended by ye gyants gariſon. While this thus paſte, at ſuch time as the giuer of the bright light illuminated the darke night, there came downe a valley, not farre from the cittie, a mightie piller of fire, & after it, followed a knight, with two of the vglieſt gyants, that euer were ſéene, who with ſuch furious ſpéede (as doth a thunderbolt breake through the aire) approached to the Wall, and ſette a Ladder againſt it.
               
                  The knight that came with them, whoſe armor was all garniſhed with Baſiliſks, alighted from his horſe, and without let of any that were below, he mounted thereon to the top of the wall, where he beſtowed ſuch deadly blowes, that ere they were aware of him, he had tumbled aboue fiftie ouer it dead. Don Lucidamore, that ſuch haughtie proweſſe ſaw in one Knight, leauing his armie to Damartynos charge, quickly climed the ladder, and ſcarcely was he on the top, when the giants taking it, returned the way, and in the maner they did come, leauing the beholders amazed with wonder. The knight of the Baſiliſke comming, inſtructed in what he ſhould do, deſcended certaine ſteps of ſtone that were in the wall, beating downe on both ſides many knights before him, clearing the way for don Lucidamore, that followed him, making no leſſe ſlaughter then he, on that rebellious people. At length he arriued at the gate where don Brianell was, wearie and tyred, who ſeeing the Knight of the Baſiliſkes, thinking him to be one of his enemies, ſtrooke him a mightie blow, but he knowing him, defended it with his ſheeld, and ruſht in where he was: there ſpied he Clarineo, that had before him aboue thirtie Kinges ſlaine, and then with one blowe, threwe the Countie Gariano dead to the earth, but was in extreame daunger, becauſe he looked to the truſty Palineo, who through the much blood he had loſt, was in a trance, that he was faine to beare him cloſe to the wall, where he kept him before, himſelfe making ſtupendious déedes. And there arriuing thr knight of the Baſiliſks, in the Gréekiſh tongue he ſayde. Courage, braue knight: for you are alreadie ſuccoured. At the ende of which words, with one mightie blowe he cut off the Giants leg, that he fell downe, where he breathed his laſt, and beating away all the knights about him, he quickly freed that Gate, ſtepping both vnto the Portall thereof, where Lucidamore, and don Brianell were. And the troopes that were without, ſéeing they could not enter in, had ouerthrowne all that ſide, making a great breach in the wall, through which ten knights might eaſily paſſe togither, with ſuch furie preſſing in, that they extreamely were oppreſſad. Defend you this entrie (ſaid don Clarineo,) to the knight of the Baſiliſke) while I open yonder gate, which he did

ſo brauely, that in deſpight of them that firſt arriued, he firſt ouerthrew aboue fiue hundred dead, and deadly wounded, making the reſt giue place vnto his puiſſant ſtrokes. Don Clarineo went to Palineo for the Keyes, which he by no means would let go cut of his handes, and with them opened the gate. Which beeing ſéene of the campe, with great clamours approached to enter into the Citie. The Knight of the Baſiliſkes, and his companions, perceiuing it, withdrewe themſelues to giue that furie place, with whoſe arriuall the battell in ſuch manner was renued, that the place was filled with heaped Mountaines of dead men: and this becauſe the King Tramolcanos multitudes were infinite, and expert, and knowing that if they loſt the Citie, they ſhould all pay the tribute of their deathes by their enemies ſwordes, fought like mad men. But the Princes hauing recouered theyr knights, togither with the knight of the Baſiliſkes, and don Clarineo, hauing aſſured the perſon of Palineo, whom he founde with life, vniting themſelues, preſſing in the thickeſt of the battell, with ſuch courage, as they augmented in themſelues, with deſire to ſee thoſe affaires terminated with a good ende. The curreuts of blood beganne to runne about ſo faſt, like Riuers deſcending from ſo many mountaine toppes. Damartyno conſidering that the Citie woulde hardly be woonne by that meanes, by reaſon of the manie people within to defend it, commaunded all his men to name aloude the Princeſſe Aurora, which they ſo did, ſaying, Antioch, Antioch, for the Princeſſe Aurora. Which crie and name, the people of the Countrey hearing, and thinking their Ladie and Princeſſe was there, whom they ſo grealy deſired, abandoned the men belonging as well vnto the traytour Countie, as the Giant, and withdrewe themſelues, which they had not don in the beginning, becauſe they thought them enemies vnto the Citie, and land, themſelues crying within as the others did without, trampling vnder their horſe hoofes, and maſſacring without pitie thoſe traitors, in ſuch ſort, to reuenge themſelues, for theoutrages done by them, that ere it was woonne, they left not one aliue to beare the newes of their deſolation, hauing ſlaine that morning aboue foureſcore thouſand, wanting not aboue ſixe thouſand Chriſtians. And this hapned through

                  Damartynos policie, which if it had not béene (though their aduerſaries had alſo in the end all died by the ſword) their loſſes had bin infinit. This done, don Lucidamore cauſed to be proclaimed, that none vpon paine of death ſhould ſturre any thing in the Citie, but quietly lodge therein, without oppreſſing or moleſting any way the meaneſt Citizen of the ſame. And hauing taken all the fortreſſes, caſtels and holds of the Citie to their power, calling don Clarineo, and don Brianell with him, went all togither to the knight of the 
                     〈…〉
                  s, who being mounted, would depart. But don Clarineo, remembring the danger he had freed him front, with greet loue imbraced him, ſaying.
               Oh moſt glorious and renowmed knight, the excellenteſt that euer did draw ſword, I hope you will not ſo greatly wrong vs, ſo to depart vnknowne, hauing liberated all of vs from ſo great danger. For which not onely our liues, but the whole glorie of the laſting victorie of this battell, is too little recompence. For ſuch ayd, thinking our ſelues ſufficiētly honored, by ſolie knowing what you are. This ſp
                     •
                  ke he in the Gréeke language: for when he at firſt did ſuccour him, he incouraged him in the ſame tongue. I know not excellent Prince) anſwered the knight of the baſiliſke, how I may cancell the bandes you tie me in, by the incomparable merits of your wordes, yet notwithſtanding vnloſe my helme Don Locidamore more amazed then at firſt, to know his brother, did preſently vnbuckle it, whereby the excellencie of his complexion was ſéene. Whom don Clarineo knowing, reſted ſo confuſed with content, that the teares ran downe his cheekes, and with a high voice, ſaid. Oh mightie Lord, that for vs all did ſuffer, what great wonder do I ſee? hauing before mine eies my deare Lord & brother the Prince don Bellianis? Wherupon he ſtraight lept from his horſe, to kiſſe his hand. The like did all the reſt. Don Bellianis ſeeing them do ſo, diſmounted alſo from his horſe to imbrace all thoſe knights, with ſuch content as may be imagined. Here wants nothing now (ſaid don Lucidamore to end our demaund: but the preſence of our Lord the Emperor. That ſhall not néed (rep
                     •
                  ted don Bellianis) for I haue left him well within the Citie of Bollera, and hard by Perſepolis, whither we muſt go with all ſpéede.
               
                  How arriued he there demanded don Charineo) hauig leſt himſelfe farre from thence: That I knowe not (ſaid don Bellianis but I left him where I tell you, and there I beleeue we ſhal finde him
                     •
                   Here were they ſeperated by the multitude of the knights, yt came to doe their duties to don Bellianis, not able to expreſſe their ioye with his ſight: And he commanded them all, to keepe his, and all their names ſecrete, for he would haue none of the Cittie knowe what they were. Aod hauing done with their gréetings, they went to the king Tramolcanos Pallace, where they lodged, and their men about the Cittie were entertained, hauing voyded it, of the dead carcaſes, offering no iniurie nor wrong to any Cittizen. They alſo carried the noble Palineo to the Pallace, which had recouered his ſences, whom all thoſe Knightes viſited, and highlie honoured. With whoſe preſence, he highly reioyced, as alſo to ſee thoſe buſineſſe ended. Don Clarineo and don Brianell were layd in two rich beddes, hard by Palinios, where their wounds, which were many, were dreſſed by verie ſkilfull Chirurgions. Don Bellianis taking in his companie Damartyno, whome hee greatly eſtéemed, for the Princeſſe Auroraes reporte of him, and went about the Cittie, and aſſembling together all the States thereof, and chiefeſt Cittizens of the ſame. Don Bellianis made them a ſhorte diſcourſe, thanking them for their loyaltie, they alwayes obſerued, promiſing they ſhould all haue their loſſes requited, with full and ample ſatiſfaction and ſhewed them the letter written to Damartyno. They greately conſolated by his ſpéech, promiſed to procure the reſtitution of the whole Kingdome: vpon which concluſion, don Bellianis returned to the Pallace, leauing Damartyno giuing order, to recouer the reſte of the Prouince, without more ſpilling of blood. To which effect he ſent meſſengers, to all Citties and places of importance in the kingdome.
            
            
               
               CHAP. L.
               
                  
                     Howe the whole kingdome of Antioch being recouered, the ſtate of the Countie Gariano was giuen vnto the politike Palineo of the Venture, and leauing Damartyno gouernor there, all thoſe Princes departed towards Perſia.
                  
               
               SO ſoone as it was knowne through all the Kingdome of Antioche, the totall ruine and vtter deſtruction of the vſurping King, and all his forces, they all aroſe agaynſt the Tyr
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  ts garriſons, knowing thoſe Knights came from their lawfull and right Princeſſe, ſo that vtterly ſubuerting thoſe aduerſe ſtrengths, leauing no man with life, they ſent Ambaſſadors to Antioche, to make them know theſe euents, ſo happily brought to ende: which greatlie gladded them, ſending thither Gouernours to order thoſe vprores, till all thinges elſe were otherwiſe concluded. By this time the wounded Knights were through well, except Palineo, that beeing woorſe wounded, was longer in healing. But one day being altogither in Councell, it was determined, that Damartyno (as before) ſhould ſway the gouernment of the whole Kingdome, and did ſweare all the people to obey him. And though hée refuſed it, alledging he was farre in yeares, and therefore it better became him to withdrawe vnto a priuate life, leauing the variable chaunces of the giddie worlde: yet in the 
                     ••
                  de he was forced to doo it, at the intreaties of all the Nobilitie of the lande, that highlie eſtéemed them. And don Bellianis hauing vnderſtood of his couſen don Brianell, the great toyle and daungers that the pollitike Palineo had in thoſe buſineſſes ſuſtained, called him before all the greateſt Peeres, ſaying thus.
               If the merits that your valour, and your worthy perſon do deſerue, ſhould accordingly be recompenced (valiant & politike warriour) all this kingdom were inſufficient to counterpoiſe your high deſerts, being by your onely means recouered: for it is manifeſt, that you were the cauſe of the reſtitution therof, as alſo of Damertynos libertie: the glorie of all which things deſeruedly ſhoulde to

your ſelfe be attributed. Which notwithſtanding, I intreat you, (not regarding the ſmalneſſe of the gift, but ſhe good will of the giuer, and as a token of your farther deſeruings) to accept as your owne, the whole eſtate, and Lands belonging to the County Gariano: wiſhing it were in a better time, that I might expreſſe my loue towards you, with larger effects, according to the vſance of my minde. Yet will I procure the Princeſſe Aurora to confirme you this, with promiſe of a greater recompence. All thoſe Lordes that were there preſent, highly allowed and commended, what Don Bellianis had, eſpecially the Princes Don Bryanell and Clarianeo. To whom Palineo thus made anſwere. Excellent Prince, and moſt heroyicke, for ſo may I with reaſon though I do not know you) call you, hauing on me extended the magnificence, of your royall minde, by the bountie of your liberall hand, which in no leſſe a perſon then I ſpeake of can be ſeene, hauing 
                     •
                  one nothing that might deſerue ſo much as the company of ſuch famous knights: but the greatneſſe of your largeneſſe paſſing al compare, bindeth me to this: And ſo doo I receiue theſe fauours, onely to imploy the ſame, togither with my life in your ſeruice: & the Princeſſe Aurora my ſoueraigne Lady, beſeeching the immortall gods, that when I do forget this dutie, that then I may be made an example of the like ingratitude to all in the vniuerſall orbe. And therevpon proſtrating himſelf vpon his knées, deſired to kiſſe his hande. But Don Bellianis refuſing it, imbraced him with great aff
                     •••
                  i
                     •
                  n. The like did all the other knights: calling him thereafter Count Gariano, hauing deſerued it by the vertue and valour of his minde, poſſeſſing nothing of his anceſtors, but a horſe and armor, & weapons. Don Bellianis hauing finiſhed this action commanded, all his army ſpéedily to ſhip themſelues, charging all the leaders and Captaines to bend their voyage to Perſia, and attend his comming or order, from him at Perſepolis: making them kn
                     •
                  we the danger wherein he had left the Emperor there. They with a good winde departed, leauing don Bellianis alone, with onely his brothers, and don Bryanell, that determined to méete them by land, After all this, they continued eight daies in Antioch, which being pacified and quieted, they reſolued the inſuing day to depart. The

Count Gariano, a
                     ••
                   the Gouernor Damartyno, greatly ſorrowing for their a
                     〈…〉
                  t before they went, they ſo much intreated them to 
                     〈…〉
                   themſelues, that don Bellanis not able to deny it, 
                     •••
                  d them what 
                     •
                  he
                     •
                   were, taking their words, they ſhould not diſ
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  ſe it to 
                     •
                  ny who reſted amazed: yet very glad that theſe affaires were concludes by ſo great a prince: and giuing thē guides to 
                     〈…〉
                   their way to Perſia, they at length departed. In which iourney 
                     〈…〉
                   them, the Hyſtorie here endeth this firſt part: 
                     ••••
                  ng h
                     〈…〉
                  ten barke, in the doubtfull ſurges of 
                     〈…〉
                  , on the quiet ſhoare of 
                     〈…〉
                  tie and patronag
                     ••
                  g fauours.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   