
      
         
            
            
            THE
Silkewormes, and
their Flies:
Liuely deſcribed in verſe, by T. M.
a Countrie Farmar, and an apprentice
in Phyſicke. For the great benefit and enriching of England.
            
            Printed at London by V. S. for Nicholas Ling, and
are to be ſold at his ſhop at the Weſt ende of
Paules. 1599.
         
         
            
            
            To the moſt renowned Patroneſſe,
and noble Nurſe of Learning
MARIE
Counteſſe of Penbrooke.
            
               
                  GReat enuies Obiect, Worth & Wiſedoms pride,
               Natures delight, Arcadia's heire moſt fitte,
               Vouchſafe a while to lay thy taske aſide,
               Let Petrarke ſleep, giue reſt to Sacred Writte,
               
               Or bowe, or ſtring will breake, if euer tied,
               Some little pawſe aideth the quickeſt witte:
               Nay, heau'ns themſelues (though keeping ſtil their way)
               Retrogradate, and make a kind of ſtay.
            
            
               I neither ſing Achilles baneful ire,
               Nor Man, nor Armes, nor Belly-brothers warres,
               Nor Britaine broiles, nor citties drownd in fire,
               Nor Hectors wounds, nor Diomedes skarres,
               Ceaſe country Muſe ſo highly to aſpire:
               Our Plaine beholds but cannot holde ſuch ſtarres:
               
                  Ioue-loued wittes may write of what they will,
               But meaner Theams beſeeme a Farmers quill.
            
            
               I ſing of little Wormes and tender Flies,
               Creeping along, or basking on the ground,
               Grac't once with thoſe thy heau'nly-humane eies,
               Which neuer yet on meaneſt ſcholler fround:
               And able are this worke to aeterniſe,
               From Eaſt to Weſt about this lower Round,
               Deigne thou but breathe a ſparke or little flame
               Of likeing, to enlife for aye the ſame.
            
            
               Your H. euer moſt bounden.
T. M.
            
         
         
            
            The Table.
            
               1 WHen garments were firſt vſed. Fol. 2
               2 Whereof garments were firſt made. 3
               3 Diuers opinions how and when ſilke was firſt inuented
and worne. 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
16 17 18 19 20.
               4 Whether the Silke-worme or the Silke Flie were firſt
created. 21 22 23.
               5 Whether the egge or the henne be firſt in nature. 24
25 26 27.
               6 Why the ſilke flies are onely of a white colour. 28.
               7 What day of the weeke they were firſt created. 29
30 31.
               8 The rare vertues and chaſtity of Silke Flies. 27 28
33 38
               9 That they are not to be ſcornd as being little and therefore
contemned creatures. 34 35 36 37.
               10 Their wonderful encreaſe and propagation. 39 and
65 66.
               11 Their manner of dying. 40 66.
               12 That their egges are more worth then the egges of any
Flier: yea then the Philoſophers egge, if there were any
ſuch. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47.
               13 Their egges muſt be kept in a temperate place. 48.
               14 They are not to be hatched til the Mulbery tree buds.
50.
               15 Why the Silke-wormes beeing crept out of the ſhel
feede onely vpon Mulbery leaues. 51 52 53.
               16 How long they feede: When their meate is to be
gathered: In what quantity they are to be dieted. 55.
               17 That variety of meates is naught for them. 56.
               18 Their table is to be kept cleane. ibid.
               
               How the ſicke are diſcerned. 59.
               19 Of their ſleepe: ibid.
               
               20 How they muſt be diſtributed when they grow great. 57.
               21 The cauſes of their ſickneſſe. 59.
               
                  
22 Signes of their readineſſe to worke, and how then they
muſt be vſed. 60.
               23 How long they worke. 61.
               24 When the wormes are metamorphoſed into Flies. 61.
               25 When and how their ſilke is to be winded vp. 61.
               26 The ſorts and vſe of their ſilken threede. 63 64.
               27 How their egges are to be preſerued. 67.
               28 That the ſilke of Silke-wormes is the beſt of al other. 68.
               29 What profit and pleaſure ariſeth in keeping of them. 71 72 73 74.
               30 Keeping of Silke-wormes hindereth neither Shepheards,
Spinſters, Weauers, nor Clothiers. 75.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Faults eſcaped in Printing.
            
               
                  
                     page
                     line
                     fault
                     correction
                  
                  
                     5
                     11
                     for
                     the
                     reade
                     thy
                  
                  
                     7
                     3
                     euer
                     neuer
                  
                  
                     7
                     14
                     courſer
                     Courſers
                  
                  
                     9
                     19
                     priuate
                     Priuie
                  
                  
                     17
                     3
                     his
                     this
                  
                  
                     17
                     13
                     layes
                     laye
                  
                  
                     19
                     2
                     h harſes
                     herſes
                  
                  
                     27
                     4
                     through
                     thorough
                  
                  
                     29
                     10
                     through
                     thorough
                  
                  
                     48
                     2
                     Enicthean
                     Erycthean
                  
                  
                     56
                     1
                     us
                     as
                  
                  
                     59
                     1
                     I any
                     If any
                  
                  
                     66
                     15
                     dropt
                     drop
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧Of the Silke wormes
and their Flies.
            
               
                  
                     SYdneian Muſe: if ſo thou yet remaine,
               In brothers bowels, or in daughters breaſt,
               Or art bequeath'd the Lady of the pla
                        •
                     ne,
               
               Becauſe for her thou art the fitteſt gueſt:
               Whoſe worth to ſhew, no mortall can attaine,
               Which with like worth is not himſelfe poſſeſt:
               Come help me ſing theſe flocks as white as milke,
               That make, and ſpinne, and die, and windle ſilke.
            
            
               For ſure I know thy knowledge doth perceiue,
               What breth embreath'd theſe almoſt thingles things:
               VVhat Artiſt taught their feete to ſpinne and weaue:
               What workman made their ſlime a robe for kings,
               How flies breed wormes, how wormes do flies conceiue:
               Frō natures womb, how ſuch a nature ſprings,
               Whereof none can directly tell or reede,
               Whether were firſt, the flie, the worme, or ſeede.
            
            
               A time there was (ſweete heau'ns reſtore that time,)
               When bodyes pure to ſpotleſſe ſoules firſt knit,
               Deuoyd of guilt, and ignorant of crime,
               Vpright in conſcience, and of harmeleſſe wit,
               Diſdaind to weare a garment nere ſo fine,
               As deeming coates and couers moſt vnfit,
               Where nothing eie could ſee, or finger touch,
               Which God himſelfe did not for good auouch.Gen. 1. verſe 3
                        •
                     .
               
            
            
               
               Yea, when all other creatures looked baſe,
               As mindful onely of their earthly foode:
               Or elſe as trembling to behold the place,
               Where iudge eternall ſate, and Angels ſtood:
               Then humane eyes beheld him face to face,
               And cheekes vnſtain'd with fumes of guiltie bloud,
               Deſir'd no maske to hide their bluſhing balles,
               But boldly gaz'd and pried on heau'nly walles.
            
            
               The breaſt which yet had hatcht no badde conceat,
               Nor harbor'd ought in heart that God diſpleaz'd,
               Did it for ſilken waſtcotes then intreate?
               Sought it with Tyrian ſilks to be appeaz'd?
               No, no, there was no neede of ſuch a feate,
               Where all was ſound, and members none diſeaz'd:
               Nay more, The baſeſt parts and ſeates of ſhame,
               Were ſeemely then, and had a comely name.
            
            
               But when ſelfe-will and ſubtile creepers guile,Gen. 3.
               
               Made man to luſt, and taſte what God forbad,
               Then ſeem'd we to our ſelues ſo foule and vile,
               That ſtraight we wiſht our bodies to be clad,
               Seeing without, and in ſuch great defile,
               As reft our wittes, and made vs al ſo mad:
               That we reſembled melancholique hares,
               Or ſtartling ſtagges, whom euerie ſhadow ſcares.
            
            
               
               Then Bedlam-like to woods wee ranne apace,
               Praying each tree to lend vs ſhade or leaues,
               Wherewith to hide (if ought might hide) our face
               From his al-ſeeing eyes, who al perceaues,
               And with ful-brandiſht ſword purſues the chace,
               Traitors of reſt, of ſhade, and al bereaues:
               Permitting men with nothing to be clad,
               But ſhame, diſpaire, guilt, feare, and horror ſad.
            
            
               Theſe robes our parents firſt were deckt withal,
               Then fig tree fannes vppon their ſhame they wore:
               Next, skinnes of beaſts, (to ſhew their beaſtly fall)
               Then, hairy cloathes, and wooll from Baa-lambs tore,
               Laſt,Plin. lib. 12. ca. 10. & lib. 24. cap. 12. Eaſterne wittes, from mane of Camels tall,
               Made water-waued ſtuffe vnſeene before,
               But til the floud had ſinners ſwept away,
               Nor Flaxe, nor Silke, did ſinful man array.
            
            
               For ſo it ſeemed iuſt to Iuſtice eyen,
               Defiled men to weare polluted things:
               And Rebels not to clothe in Flaxe or line,
               Which from the ſacred loines of Veſta ſpring,
               Cleane, knotleſſe, ſtraight, ſpotleſſe, vpright, and fine,
               VVhoſe floure is like fiue heau'nly-azurd wings,
               Whoſe ſlime is ſalue, whoſe ſeed is holſom food,
               whoſe rinde is cloth,Plut. lib. de Iſid
                        •
                      & Oſir. whoſe ſtuble ſeru's for wood
            
            
               
               Or ifA moſt famous ſpinner in Lydia, of whom Ouid 6 metam. 
                  Arachne erſt made ſiſters threed,
               Was it thinke you, for euery man to weare?
               Or onely for the ſacrificers weede,
               VVho of th'immortall prieſt a type did beare?
               Wearing not aught that ſprang from brutiſh ſeed,
               But what from out it ſelfe the earth did reare:
               So that till holy prieſthood firſt began,Exodus 28.
               
               VVe neuer reade that linnen clothed man.
            
            
               Yet ſome conceiue whenOrpheus a moſt famous Poet. Ouid 1 I
                        •
                     met. 
                  Theban ſinger wanne,
               VVood-wandring wights to good and ciuill life,
               (Which erſt with beares and wolues in deſarts ran,
               Knowing no name of God, law, houſe, or wife)
               That then his brother Linus firſt began
               The Flaxmans craft (a ſecret then vnrife)
               Deuiſing beetles, hackels, wheeles, and frame,
               Wherwith to bruſe, touſe, ſpin & weaue the ſame.
            
            
               But Silke (whereon my louing Muze now ſtands)
               Was it the ofſpring of our ſhallow braine?
               Spunne with theſe fingers foule? theſe filthy hands,
               Tainted with bloud, reuenge, and wrongful gaine?
               Ah no, who made and numbreth all the ſands,
               Wil teach vs ſoone that fancie to be vaine:
               Farre be it from our thoughts, that ſinfull ſence,
               Should make a thing of ſo great excellence.
            
            
               
               Ne neede wee yet withHironimu
                        •
                      vida
                        •
                     , Biſhop of Alba. lib. 1. de Bombyc
                        •
                     
                   
                  Tuſcane Prelate flie,
               To fictions ſtrange, or wanton Venus eyen:
               Who ſeeing Pallas taught from Saturne hie,
               To clothe her ſelfe and hers with weaued line,
               Yea all the Nimphs and Goddeſſes in skie,
               To weare long ſtoles of Lawne and Cambrick fine:
               Fretted to ſee her ſelfe and boy new borne,
               Left both to heau'n and earth an open ſcorne.
            
            
               
                  Reuenge ſhe cri'de vnto the ſire of Ioue,
               
               As ſhe lay hidde vnder th'Idalian tree:
               Affoord ſome rayment from the houſe aboue,
               If but to hide the ſhame of mine and mee.
               So may thou learne from vs The art of Loue,
               
               Whereby to winne each Ladies heart to thee.
               But grumbling Chuff reiected ſtill her prayre,
               Whereat lamented heau'ns and weeping aire.
            
            
               Then Cyprian Queene perceiuing that no cries
               Could pierce the leaden eares of ſullen Sire,
               Straight lodg'd her ſonne in faireOceanus his daughter, a moſt braue virgin. Ouid 6 met. 
                  Phillyraes eies,
               And caus'd him thence to darte vppe ſuch a fire,
               As had conſum'd the very ſtarres and skies,
               Yea melted Saturnes wheeles with hot deſire:
               Vnleſſe that very houre he had come downe,
               And beg'd her aide, on whom he late did frowne.
            
            
               
               How often, as his loue on Pelion hill
               Stoopt downe to gather herbs for wounds and ſores,
               Strew'd he before her Tutſan, Balme, and Dill,
               Long Plantaine, Hyſope, Sage, and Comfrey moares?
               Offring beſides, the art and perfect skill,
               Of healing bloudy wounds and feſtred coares:
               How oft (I ſay) did he each day deſcend,
               And booteleſſe al his vowes and wooings ſpend?
            
            
               He lou'd▪ ſhe loath'd, he liked, ſhe diſdain'd:
               He came, ſhe turn'd, he preſt, ſhe ranne away,
               Neither by words, nor gifts ſhee could be gain'd,
               (For onely in her eies the Archer lay)
               Regarding nought but (wherein ſhe was train'd)
               VVounds how to cure, and ſmartings to allay:
               As for the wound of Loue, ſhe felt it none,
               And therefore litle heeded Saturns mone.
            
            
               Thus thus perplext the chiefe and graueſt God,
               (Or rather God ſuppoſd of higheſt place)
               Toucht now, nay throughly ſcourg'd with Cupids rodde,
               Sent from the eyes but of a mortal face,
               Flewe downe forthwith where Venus made abode,
               And proſtrate lying at her feete for grace:
               Promiſ'd the richeſt clothing for her Art,
               That now ſhe did, or could deſire in hart.
            
            
               
               VVho eareleſſe of reuenge, and innely grieu'd,
               (True beauty aye is ful of rueful mone)
               VVas euer wel til Saturne was releeu'd,
               His inward griefes aſſwag'd, & ſorrowes gone.
               And finding him, of hope, and helpe, bereeu'd,
               (For ſtill Phillira was more hard then ſtone)
               Sith that, quoth ſhe, the virgin ſcorns thy loue,
               Try whether craft and force wil make her moue.
            
            
               Transforme thy ſelfe into a Courſer braue,
               (VVhat cannot loue transforme it ſelfe into?)
               Feede in her walkes: and in a moment haue
               VVhat thou haſt woo'd to haue with much adooe:
               VVhereto, conſent the auncient Suter gaue,
               In courſer clothes, learning a maide to wooe,
               Filling ech wood with neighs and wihyes ſhrill,
               VVhilſt he poſſeſt his loue againſt her will.
            
            
               For leſſon which, his Miſtris to requite,
               Not with vaine hopes in lieu of friendly deeds,
               By Maiae's
                  Mercurie, poſtmaſter to Iupiter. ſonne (before it grew to night)
               He ſent a Napkin ful of little ſeeds,
               Tane from the tree where Thisbes ſoule did light,
               To make her ſelfe and boy farre brauer weeds,
               Than Pallas had, or any of the ſeu'n,
               Yea, then proud Iuno ware the Queene of heau'n.
            
            
               
               Withall, by him he ſent the myſterie
               Of weauing ſilke, which he himſelfe had found,
               When chac'd from heau'n by ſonnes owne trechery,
               Hee was compel'd to wander here on ground,
               Where, in the depth of griefe and pouertie,
               The heigth and depth of Arts he firſt did ſound:
               Yet would he this to none but her reueale,
               By whoſe deuiſe hee did Phillyra ſteale.
            
            
               What? ſhall we thinke, that ſilke was a reward.
               Beſtow'd on craftie dame for aide vniuſt?
               Would men, nay, ought they haue ſuch hie regard,
               Of that which was the lone and hire of luſt?
               Not ſo, what ere th'Italian Biſhop dar'd
               To faine for true, and giue it out with truſt:
               Yet ſith ſilke robes the bleſſed High-prieſt wore,
               They were not ſure the firſt fruits of a whore.
            
            
               
                  Veſpaſians
                  Plinius Secundus, lib. 11. cap. 2 Scribe affirmes in Cean lle,
               
                  Latous
                  Called Pamphia, a moſt princely Damſell. daughter, quicke of eye and wit,
               Hunting abroad, times trauaile to beguile,
               Chaunc'd at the length vnder a tree to fitte,
               Where many ſilken bottoms hangd in piles,
               One by another plac't in order fit.
               Shee tooke one downe, and with her faulcon eye,
               Found out the end that did the reſt vntie.
            
            
               
               Looke how the hungry Lambe doth friske and play,
               With reſtleſſe taile, and head, and euery limbe,
               When it hath met his mother gone aſtray,
               Who abſent blear'd and tear'd as much for him:
               Or as Aurora leapes at breake of day,
               Seeing her louely brother riſe ſo trim,
               No leſſe that Princeſſe triumph't (if not more)
               Finding out that which was not found before.
            
            
               
                  Loues Schoolemaſter
                  Ouid lib. 4. Metam. records a tale moſt ſweete,
               Of louers two that dwelt at Babilon,
               
               Equall of age, in worth and beautie meete,
               Each of their ſex the floure and paragon,
               Next neighbours borne on ſide of ſelfeſame ſtreete,
               For twixt their parents houſes dwelled none,
               Him Pyramus, her Thisbe men did call,
               Coupled in heart, though ſeuered by a wall.
            
            
               As neighbours children, oft they talke and view,
               That neighbourſhip was formoſt ſteppe to loue,
               Loue, which (like priuate plants) in ſhort time grew,
               Pales, wals, and eues, yea houſes and all aboue,
               Nay Hymeneus feaſts were like t' enſue,
               And ſacred hands giue ring and wedding gloue,
               Had not vnhappie parents that forbad,
               Which to forbid, no cauſe but wil, they had.
            
            
               
               If louers ſpake, it was now all by lookes,
               None deign'd or durſt be trouchman to their mind,
               Paper was barr'd, and penne, and inke, and bookes,
               Not any helpe theſe parted priſoners find,
               But of a rift along the wal that crookes,
               (A wall of flint, yet more then parents, kind)
               Which, were it old or new, none it eſpies,
               But louers quicke, al-corner-ſearching eyes,
            
            
               This rift they vſde, nor onely as a glaſſe,
               Wherein to ſee daily each others face,
               But eke through it their voyces hourely paſſe,
               In whiſpring murmurs with a ſtealing pace:
               Sometimes when they no longer durſt (alas)
               Send whiſprings through, when keepers were in place,
               Yet would they ſhift to blow through it a breath,
               Which fed & kept their hoping harts from death.
            
            
               Enuious wal (ſayd they) what wrong is this?
               Why doth not loue or pittie make thee fal?
               Or (if that be for vs too great a bliſſe)
               Why is thy rift ſo narrow and ſo ſmall,
               As to deny kind loue a kindly kiſſe?
               For which we neuer proue vnthankful ſhal,
               Although in truth we owe inough to thee,
               Giuing our eyes and voyce a way ſo free.
            
            
               
               In vaine thus hauing plaind in place diſtinct,
               When night approacht, they ech bad ech adew,
               Kisſing their wal apart where it was chinckt,
               Whence louely blaſts and breathings mainely flew:
               But kiſſes ſtaide on eithers ſide faſt linckt,
               Seal'd to the wal with lips and Louers glue:
               For though they were both thick and many eake,
               Yet thicker was the wal that did them breake.
            
            
               Roſe-fingredThe morning, Homer. Iliad. 4. Dame no ſooner had put out
               Nights twinckling fires and candles of the skie,
               Nor Phoebus
                  The Sunne. brought his trampling ſteeds about,
               Whoſe breath dries vp the teares of Veſtaes
                  The earth. eie,
               But ſwift and ſoft, without all noyſe or ſhowt,
               To wonted place they haſten ſecretly,
               Where midſt a many words muttred that day,
               Next midnights watch, each vowes to ſteale away.
            
            
               And leſt when hauing houſe and cittie paſt,
               They yet might erre in fields, and neuer meete,
               At Ninus
                  Which was without the gates of Balilon, towards the forreſt. Sabell. Enneiad. 1. cap. 6. tombe their Rendes-vous is plac't,
               Vnder the Mulb'ry white, and hony-ſweete:
               Growing hard by a ſpring that ranne at waſte,
               With ſtreames more ſwift then ſpeedyThe ſwift riuer of Donawe. 
                  Iſters feete.
               There they agreed in ſpite of ſpite to ſtand,
               Whē
                  The Charles waine. Monarchs 
                     •
                  eame had paſtThe great ſtar following Vrſa maior. 
                  Bootes hand.
            
            
               
               Conſent they did, and day conſented too,
               Whoſe Coach ranne downe the ſeas in greater haſt,
               Then euer it was wont before to doo,
               Loue-louing night approched eke ſo faſt,
               That darkneſſe leapt, ere twilight ſeem'd to go,
               Wherat though ſome gods frown'd, ſome were agaſt,
               Yet Lethes
                  Sleep the brother of forgetfulneſſe. Ci
                        •
                     . lib. de nat. deorum. brother did the louers keepe,
               Chaining their guard with long and heauy ſleep.
            
            
               How feately then vnſparred ſhe the doore?
               How ſilent turn'd it on the charmed cheekes?
               And being ſcap't, how glad was ſhe therefore?
               How ſoone arriu'd where ſhe her fellow ſeekes?
               Loue made her bold, loue gaue her ſwiftneſſe more
               Then vſually is found in weaker ſexe,
               But all in vaine: nay rather to her ill,
               For haſte made waſte, and ſpeede did ſpeeding kil.
            
            
               The griſly wife of brutiſh monarch ſtrong,
               With new ſlaine prey, full panched to the chinne,
               Foming out bloud, came ramping there along,
               To ſiluer ſpring, her thirſt to drowne therein,
               Whereat the fearefull maide in poſting flung,
               (ForThe Mooneſhine. 
                  Lucines eye bewrayde the Empreſſe grimme)
               Into a ſecret caue: and flying, loſt
               A ſcarfe (for Pyrams ſake) beloued moſt.
            
            
               
               When ſauage Queene had wel her thirſt delayde,
               In cooling ſtreames, and quenched natures fire,
               Returning to the place where late ſhe prayde,
               To eate the reſt when hunger ſhould require,
               In peeces tore the ſcarfe of hapleſſe maide,
               With bloudy teeth, and firie flaming ire,
               Whilſt ſhe (poore ſoule) in caue plaid leaſt in ſight,
               Fearing what ſhould her loue befall that night.
            
            
               Who comming later then by vow he ſhould,
               Perceiu'd a Lions footſteps in the ſand,
               Whereat with face moſt pale, and heart as cold,
               With trembling feare tormented he doth ſtand.
               But when he ſawe her ſcarfe (wel knowne of old)
               Embru'd with bloud, and caſt on either hand?
               O what a ſigh he fetcht? how deepe he gron'd?
               And thus, if thus: yea, thus he inly mon'd.
            
            
               Shalt thou alone die mateleſſe, Thisbe mine?
               Shall not one beaſt be butcher to vs both?
               What? is my Thisbe reft of life and ſhine?
               And ſhal not Pyram life and ſhining loath?
               Mine is the curſed ſoule, the bleſt is thine,
               Thou kep'ſt thy vow, I falſified mine oath,
               I came too late, thou cam'ſt (alas) too ſoone,
               Too dangerous ſtanding, by a doubtfull moone.
            
            
               
               O Lions fierce (or if ought fiercer be,
               Amongſt the heards of woody outlawes fell)
               Rent, rent in twaine this thriſe-accurſed me:
               From out your paunch conuey my ſoule to hell:
               Whoſe murdring ſlouth, and not the ſiſters three,
               Did Thisbe ſweete, ſweete Thisbe fowly quell:
               But cowards onely call & wiſh for death,
               Whilſt valiant hearts in ſilence baniſh breath.
            
            
               Then ſtooping, ſtraight he took hir ſcarfe frō ground,
               And bare it with him to th'appoynted place,
               Kiſsing it oft, watring each rent and wound,
               With thouſand teares, that trailing ranne apace.
               Salt teares they were, ſent from his eyes vnſound,
               Yea ſalter then the ſweate of Oceans face:
               At laſt (hauing vnſheath'd his fatall blade)
               Thus gan he cry, as life beganne to fade.
            
            
               Hold earth, receiue a draught eke of my bloud,
               (And therewith lean'd vppon his ſword amaine)
               Then falling backward from the crimſin floud,
               Which ſpowted forth with ſuch a noyſe and ſtraine,
               As water doth, when pipes of lead or wood,
               Are goog'd with punch, or cheeſill ſlit in twaine,
               Whiſtling in th'ayre, & breaking it with blowes,
               Whilſt heauie moyſture vpward forced flowes.
            
            
               
               The Mulb'ry ſtrait (whoſe fruit was erſt as white
               As whiteſt Lilly in the fruitfullſt field)
               Was then and euer ſince in purple dight,
               Yea euen the roote no other ſtaine doth yeeld,
               With blackiſh gore being watred all that night,
               In morneful ſort, which round about it wheel'd,
               Onely her leaues retaind their former hue,
               As nothing toucht with death of louer true.
            
            
               No ſooner was hee falne, and falling, freed
               Of perfit ſence: but ſhe ſcarce rid of feare,
               Returnes againe to ſtanding fore agreed,
               Not dreaming that her loue in kenning were,
               Her feete, her eyes, her heart and tongue made ſpeed,
               To vtter all things lately hapned there,
               And how ſhe ſcap't the Lioneſſes clawes,
               By letting fall a ſcarfe to make her pawſe.
            
            
               But when ſhe vewd the newly-purpled face
               Of Berries white: that changing chang'd her mind,
               New ſignes perſwade her, that is not the place,
               By either part to meete in fore aſsign'd.
               Thus doubting whilſt ſhe ſtood a little ſpace,
               She heard a flittering carried with the winde,
               And viewed ſomewhat ſhake in quiu'ring wiſe,
               Which ſtraite reuok't hir feete, but more her eies.
            
            
               
               Her lippes grew then more pale then paleſt Boxe,
               Her cheekes reſembled Aſhwood newly feld,
               Grayneſſe ſurpriz'd her yellow amber locks,
               Not any part their liuely luſtre held:
               Yea euen her vent'rous heart but faintly knocks,
               Now vp, now downe, now falne, now vainly ſweld,
               Toſt like a ſhippe whenOne of the Northweſt windes. 
                  Corus rageth moſt,
               That ankers hath, and maſts and maſter loſt.
            
            
               But when ſhe knew her faithfull fellow ſlaine,
               O how ſhe ſhrikt and bruz'd her guiltleſſe arme,
               Tearing her haire, renting her cheekes in vaine,
               On outward parts, reuenging inward harmes,
               Making of teares and bloud a mingled raine,
               Wherwith ſhe Pyram drencht, & then thus charmes:
               Speake loue, O ſpeake, how hapned this to thee?
               Part, halfe, yea all of this my ſoule and mee.
            
            
               Sweete loue, reply, it is thy Thisbe deare,
               She cries, O heare, ſhe ſpeakes, O anſwere make:
               Rowſe vp thy ſprights: thoſe heauie lookers cheere,
               At which ſweete name hee ſeemed halfe awake,
               And eyes with death oppreſt, againe to cleere.
               He eyes her once, and eying leaue doth take,
               Euen as faire Bellis
                  The white Daiſy. winkes but once for all,
               When wintersHarueſt. vſher haſtneth ſummers fall.
            
            
               
               When afterwards ſhe found her ſcarfe al rent,
               His iu'ory ſheath voide eke of rapier gilt:
               And hath his hand (quoth ſhe) thy ſoule hence ſent?
               And was this bloud by this thy rapier ſpilt?
               Vnhappy I: but I no more lament,
               But follow thee euen to the vtmoſt hilt.
               I was the cauſe of al thy hurt and croſſe,
               Hold, take me eke a partner of thy loſſe.
            
            
               Whom onely death could from me take away,
               Shal death him take from me againſt my will?
               Not ſo, his power cannot Thisbe ſtaye:
               Who euen in death wil follow Pyram ſtill,
               His blade (yet warme) then to her breſt ſhe lays,
               And falne thereon thus cri'de with crying ſhrill:
               Parents vniuſt which vs deny'd one bed,
               Enuy vs not one toomb when we be dead.
            
            
               And al you heau'nly hoſtes allot the ſame:
               And thou O tree, which couereſt now but one
               (One too too hot, forPyramus ſignifieth as much as fiery. ſo imports his name)
               But couer ſhalt two carcaſſes anone:
               Weare ſignes of bloud from both our harts that came
               In mourning weed our miſchiefes euer mone.
               She dead: Tree, Sires, & Gods gaue what ſhe praide,
               Black growes the fruit, and they together laide.
            
            
               
               Since which time eke ſome otherNatal. Com. lib. vlt. Mytho. Authors faine,
               Their humming ſoules about theſe hapleſſe trees,
               To be tranſported from th'Elyſian plaine,
               Into the ſnowy milke-white Butterflyes:
               Whoſe ſeedes when life and moouing they obtain,
               How e're they ſpare the fruit of Mulberies,
               Leaue yet no leaues vntorne that may be ſeene,
               Becauſe they onely ſtill continude greene.
            
            
               Yet that there might remaine ſome Pyramis,
               
               And euerlaſting ſhrine of Pyrams loue,
               When leaues are gone, and ſummer waining is,
               The little creepers neuer ceaſe to moue,
               But day and night (placing in toyle their bliſſe)
               Spinne ſilke this tree beneath and eke aboue:
               Leauing their ouall
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      like bottoms there behind,
               To ſhewe the ſtate of eu'ry Louers mind.
            
            
               For as in forme they are not wholly round,
               As is the perfit figure of the skie,
               So perfit loue in mortals is not found,
               Some little warts or wants in all we ſpie,
               Nay eu'n as fine and courſe ſilke there abound,
               The beſt beneath, the worſt rold vp more hie,
               So ſometimes luſt o're-lieth honeſt loue,
               Happy the hand that keepes it from aboue.
            
            
               
               Againe, as theſe fine troupes themſelues deuoure,
               Spinning but ſilken hharſes for their death:
               VVhich done, they dye therein, (by Natures power
               Transform'd to flies that ſcarce draw one months breath)
               So louers ſweet is mingled ſtil with ſower,
               Such happe aboue proceeds or vnderneath,
               That ſtill we make our loue our winding ſheete,
               VVhilſt more we loue, or hotter then is meete.
            
            
               OthersPlin. lib. 6. cap. 17. report, there was and doth remaine
               A neighbourCalled Seres. people to the Scythian tall,
               Twixt Taurus mount and Tabis fruitful plaine,
               Moſt iuſt of life, of fare and diet, ſmal,
               Louers of peace, haters of ſtrife and gaine,
               Graye ey'd, redde cheek't, and amber-headed all,
               Reſembling rather Gods then humane race,
               Such grace appeard in words, in deeds, and face.
            
            
               VVhoſe righteous life and iuſtice to requite,
               (Whether with wind or raine, no man doth know)
               God ſent vnto them ſilke-wormes infinite,
               In Aprils wane when buds the mulb'ry ſlow,
               Which here and there in euery corner light,
               With ſixe white feete and body like to ſnow:
               Eating each leafe of that renowned tree,
               The matter of theſe ſilken webbes we ſee.
            
            
               
               Theſe webbs for wares they on their coaſt exchange:
               For alien none muſt come into the Land,
               T'infect their people with religions ſtrange,
               And file their temples with polluted hand:
               Neither do they to other nations range,
               New faſhions, rites or manners t'underſtand:
               Better they haue at home, where euery ſlaue
               Weares ſilks as rich as here our Princes braue.
            
            
               Theſe be the tales that Poetizers ſing,
               Of Silken-worme, and of their ſeed and meate:
               Sweete, I confeſſe, and drawn fromVVherof only the muſes drank, as Poets imagine. Helique ſpring,
               Full of delighting change, and learning greate.
               Yet, yet, my Muſe dreames of another thing,
               And liſteth not of fictions to entreate.
               Saye then (my Ioye) ſay then, and ſhortly reede,
               whē ſilk was made, & how theſe ſilkworms breed.
            
            
               Was it thinkſt thou found out by induſtry?
               Inſpir'd by viſion or ſome Angells word,
               When firſt the name of ſacred Maieſty,
               Was giuen from heau'n toMelchiſede
                        •
                     . 
                  Salems prieſt and Lord?
               Did not before tenne thouſand Silk-worms lye,
               And hang on euery tree their little cord?
               Yes, but (like Hebrues harps on Babels plaine)
               Vntoucht and vſe-leſſe there it hang'd in vaine.
            
            
               
               Before, moſt men liu'd, either naked quite,
               Or courſly clad in ſome beaſts skinne or hide:
               The beſt were but in linnen garments dight,
               Wherein themſelues the greateſt men did pride:
               Yea afterward in time of greateſt light,Mat. 13.
               
               When chiefe Baptizer preach't in deſart wide,
               Where ſaid he, ſilken robes were to be ſought,
               But in kings courts? for whome they firſt were wrought.
            
            
               Though whether worme or flye were formed firſt,
               No man ſo right can tel as wrong preſume:
               Yet this I hold. Till all things were accurſt,
               Nothing was borne it ſelfe for to conſume.
               No Caterpillers then which venture durſt,
               To rauiſh leaues, or tender buddes to plume:
               For onely life and beauty liu'd in trees,
               Til falling man cauſ'd them their leaues to leeſe.
            
            
               The earthly heards and winged poſts of skye,
               And eu'ry thing that mou'd on Eden ground,
               Fed firſt on hearbs (as Duke ofMoſes. 
                  Horeb hie,
               Author of Natures ſtory moſt profound,
               Sets downe to vs for perfit verity,
               (Gaines aide of none but fooles and wittes vnſound)
               When for mans foode trees eke allotted were,Gen. 2. verſe 29
               
               Which from themſelues did fruit or berries beare.
            
            
               
               Durſt then the fineſt worme but touch the meate,
               Or diſh which for his ſoueraigne was ordain'd?
               Durſt they figges, nuts, peares, plummes or mulb'ries eate
               Before their lord with treaſō foule was ſtain'd?
               No certs no, but when ambitious heate,
               Reuok't the bliſſe which ſinneleſſe Sire had gain'd:
               Then wormes in common fed with vs, and tore
               Our trees, our fruits, yea eu'n our ſelues therefore.
            
            
               Say Romanes heau'nly-humaneHerod. Act. 12. Orator,
               Whoſe words dropt ſweeter then Hymettus dewe:
               SayAntiochus Epiphanes. 
                  Salems ſcourge and Iudaes tormentor,
               Whoſe very name doth pomp and glory ſhewe:
               SayPlato, who died eaten of lice, as Diogenes Laertius writeth. thou whoſe writtes men as diuine adore,
               Inſpir'd from heau'n with knowledge giuen to few:
               What are you now? what liuing were you then
               But worms repaſt, though wiſe and mighty men?
            
            
               Foule-footed bird, that neuer ſleepeſt well
               Nor fully, but on higheſt pearch do'ſt breathe:
               Whoſe outward ſhreeks bewray an inward hell,
               Whoſe gliſtring plumes are but a painted ſheathe:
               Whoſe taile, though it with pride ſo lofty ſwel,
               Yet hides it not thy blackneſſe vnderneath.
               Tell me: what haſt thou got by climing thus,
               But to thy ſelfe a ſhame, and loſſe to vs?
            
            
               
               To vs alone? nay ſtowteſt Okes likewiſe,
               Hard-harted willowes by the water ſide,
               Sweete Cedar wood which ſome thinke neuer dies,
               AndThe Bay. Daphnes tree though greene in winters tide,
               Yea ſtone, and ſteele, and things of higheſt prize,
               From natures womb that flow in greateſt pride:
               What are they al but meate for wormes and ruſt?
               Two due reuengers of ambitious luſt.
            
            
               Before thou waſt,Called Coſſi, which being fat, were counted a moſt daintie dish in Rome. C
                        •
                     el. Sec. lib. 28. An. lect. were Timber-worms in price,
               And ſold for equal weight of pureſt gold?
               FedTitmiſe. creeping birds one barke-deuouring lice?
               Were ſilk-worms fromThe firſt and principall place whence they were brought into Europe. Polyd. virg. lib. 11. de inuent. &c. 
                  S
                        •
                     rinda brought and ſold?
               Deuoured they the leaues of tree moſtThe Mulbery is called the wiſeſt tree, becauſe it neuer buddeth till all danger of cold be gone. wiſe,
               With fury ſuch as now we do behold?
               Rather beleeue as yet they were not borne,
               Or onely fed on graſſe, on hearbs, or corne.
            
            
               For ſith their chiefeſt vſe is to arraye
               This little breathing duſt when time requires,
               VVith gallant guards and broydred garments gaye,
               VVith ſcarfs, vales, hoodes, and other ſoft attires:
               VVhoſe ſenſe from ſenſe is fled ſo farre away?
               Whoſe mind to beare ſo wrong a thought conſpires,
               As once to deeme theſe Silken-mercers ſent,
               VVhen nakedneſſe was mans chiefe ornament?
            
            
               
               But ſith they are, and therefore framed were,
               Which firſt was fram'd? the egge? the worme? or flie?
               No doubt the flie, as plainely ſhall appeare,
               To all that haue but an indiff'rent eye,
               Though twooEuangelus in Macrobius lib. 4. ſat. cap. 3. & Fir
                        •
                     us in Plutarch. lib. 2. ſymp queſt. 3. great Clarks contrary thoughts did beare,
               And ſentence gaue, without iuſt reaſon why,
               That egges were made before the hardie Cocke
               Beganne to tread, or brooding henne to clocke.
            
            
               Pretend they did, that leaſt and ſimpleſt things,
               (Which none train'd vp in reaſons ſchoole gainſay)
               Of things compounded are the formoſt ſprings,
               Eu'n as a lumpe of rude and ſhapeleſſe clay,
               Into the mould a Moulder cunning brings,
               And by degrees compels it to obey.
               Forming by art what he in mind fore-thought,
               Out of a maſſe that iuſt reſembled nought.
            
            
               So eke though egges ſeeme things confuſed quite,
               And farre vnlike what afterwards they prooue:
               Yet formoſt place they challenge by their right,
               For who e're ſaw a cock or henne to mooue,
               Till firſt they came from out the yolke and white,
               And time, and heate, and place, and ſitters loue,
               Had formed out a nature from the ſame,
               Deſeruing wel anothers natures name?
            
            
               
               Springs not from egges that hugeThe VVhale Leuiathan,
               The Torteſſe eke, and bloudy Crocodile?
               Fiſh, Lyzards, Snakes, andLocuſts or graſhoppers. Skippers African,
               VVhoſe hurtful armies waſte the coaſts of Nile?
               Nay if with one fitte word the world we ſcanne,
               May it obtaine a fitter name or ſtile,
               Then that we ſhould a common egge it call,
               VVhich giueth life and forme and ſtuffe to all?
            
            
               Nay, did not once that cheerefull brooding ſp'rite,
               Before the earth receiued forme or place,Gen. 1. verſe 
                        •
                     .
               
               Sitte cloſely like a henne both warme and light,
               Vpon the wauing neſt of mingled maſſe,
               VVhilſt yet nights torches had obtain'd no light
               Nor Sunne as yet in circled rounds did paſſe?
               Yes, yes: the words are ſo apparant plaine,
               That to deny them, were but labour vaine.
            
            
               Theſe ſome do vſe with other arguments,
               To proue that ſeede and egges were firſt in time.
               VVreſted from quires of ſacred Teſtaments,
               And thoſe of heathen wittes the chiefe and prime:
               VVhich for authentique held by long deſcents,
               If I gaineſay, perhaps may ſeeme a crime:
               Yet rather would I carry crime and ſcorne,
               Then falſely thinke, imperfect things firſt borne.
            
            
               
               For reaſon ſaith, and ſenſe doth almoſt ſweare,
               Natures entire to be created furſt:
               Bodies t'haue beene before the members were,
               The ſound before the ſicke, the whole, the burſt,
               That confidence had time when lacked feare,
               That bleſſed ſtate fore-went the ſtate accurſt:
               Briefely, al bodyes that begotten beene,
               Were not before created bodies ſeene.
            
            
               Now what are ſeedes and egges of wormes or foule,
               But recrements of preexiſting things,
               The bodies burden voyd of life and ſoule?
               Yea, from themſelues corruption onely ſprings,
               Vnleſſe by brooders heate (as from the whole)
               They changed be to belly, feete, or wings:
               Reſembling them now metamorphoſed,
               In, by, and from whoſe eſſence they were bred.
            
            
               Yea,Diphilus and Senecio, their arguments againſt Firmus and Euangelus, of whom at large in Macrobius and Plutarke. vſual phraſe ſuch dreames confuteth quite,
               For neuer man, this is an egges henne ſayd,
               But this a hennes egge is, ſhewing aright,
               That egges are things by former natures layde,
               Begotte of mingled ſeede by day or night,
               Neither with skinne, nor ſhell, nor forme arrayd,
               Till long they haue abode in natures neſt,
               And wearied womb be with their weight oppreſt
            
            
               
               Againe, to thinke that ſeede was made before,
               The ſubſtance whence it is ingendered,
               (Namely from out much nutrimental ſtore,
               Through exceſſe of humours perfited)
               Or elſe to gheſſe it formed was of yore,
               Ere pipes were laid through which it ſhould be ſhed,
               What is it but to dreame of day or night,
               E're darkneſſe were, or any ſhew of light?
            
            
               Sith eke all winged creatures by one day,Gen. 1. verſe 20 & 24.
               
               Are elder then the heards that crawle and creepe,
               Conclude with truth and confidence wee may,
               All flies were made ere wormes beganne to peepe,
               Both they which all day long at baſe do play,
               And night once come, do nothing elſe but ſleepe,
               And theſe which onely liue to leaue a ſeede,
               From whence the neuer-idle ſpinſters breede.
            
            
               Silke-flies I meane, which not one breaſt alone,
               But all throughout, on head, wings, ſides, and feete,
               Beſides pure white, elſe colour carry none,
               For creatures pure, a colour thought moſt meete,
               Martial'd the firſt of all in glorious throne,
               Whereon ſhall ſit the Lord and Sauiour ſweete,
               Who with tenne thouſand Angels all in white,
               Shal one day iudge the world with doom vpright
            
            
               
               No ſpotte on them, as els on eu'ry flye,
               Bycauſe in them no follies euer grew,
               No crimſon redde doth for reuengement crye,
               No wauering watchet, where al harts be true:
               No yellow, where there is no Iealouſie:
               No labour loſt, and therefore voide of blue:
               No peachy marke to ſignifie diſdaine,
               No greene to ſhew a wanton mind and vaine.
            
            
               No orenge colour, where there wants deſpight,
               No tawny ſadde, where none forſaken be:
               No murry, where they couet nought but light,
               No mourning black, where al reioyce with glee:
               In briefe, within, without, they are al white,
               Wearing alone the badge of chaſtity:
               Bycauſe they onely keepe themſelues to one,
               Who being dead, another chuſe they none.
            
            
               True Turtles mine, begotten with the breath,
               Not of a lewd laſciuious mortal Ioue:
               
               Whoſe lawe was luſt, whoſe life was worſe then death,
               VVhoſe inceſts did defile both wood and groue,
               But with the breath of him who vnderneath
               Rules Stigian king, and heau'nly hoſts aboue,
               Aſsiſt me if I erre in ſetting forth
               Your birth dayes ſtory; and ſurpaſsing worth.
            
            
               
               Aſſoone as light obtain'd a fixed ſeate,
               (which equally was firſt ſpread ouer all,
               Giuing alike, both gliſtring, ſhine, and heate,Geneſis 1.
               
               To euery place of this inferiour ball)
               Two maſter-lamps appear'd in welkin great,
               Th'one king of day, whom Poets Phoebus call,
               And th'other Phoebe, ſoueraigne of the night,
               Twinnes at one inſtant bred and borne of light.
            
            
               Him heau'nly Martiall high, in Pallace plac't,
               Built all of cleere and through-ſhining gold,
               With columnes chryſolite moſt brauely grac't,
               And flaming rubies, glorious to behold,
               Wearing about his yellow-amber waſt,
               A ſloping belt, with ſtuds twiſe ſix times told,
               Wherein were grau'n moſt artificially,
               Twelue ſtatelyThe twelue ſignes in the zodiake. Peeres of curious imagery.
            
            
               About him, as in royall Coach hee ſate,
               Attended Houre, Day, Minute, Month, and yeare,
               Spring, Summer, Harueſt, Winter, Morning, Fate,
               With Inſtancie, who then was driuer there,
               Whipping his fiery ſteedes fromFor it was then ful harueſt and not ſpringtime, as the vulgar ſort do hold. 
                  Libraes gate,
               Not ſuffring them to ſtand ſtill any where,
               Saue once in Gibeon when fiue kings were ſlaine,
               By firſt-madeIoſua cap. 10. Champiō with their faithles train.
            
            
               
               His ſiſters court built al of ſiluer tri'de,
               And Iu'ory charret ſet with Diamons,
               Emboſt with Orient pearles on either ſide,
               Wheeld al with Saphires, ſhod with Onyx ſtones,
               Declar'd in what great pompe ſhe firſt did ride
               Amongſt the other twinckling Paragons,
               Before her honour ſuffred an eclipſe,
               Through ſerpents guile, and womans greedy lips.
            
            
               Her handmaids then were perpetuity,
               Conſtant proceeding, and continuance:
               No ſhew of change or mutability
               Could iuſtly then themſelues in her aduance:
               Her face was ful and faire continually
               Not altering once her ſhape or countenance,
               Till thoſe lights chang'd for whom al lights were made,
               And with whoſe fall the heau'ns began to fade.
            
            
               Yet ſtill on her waitOceanus is the king, & his wife Thetis is counted the Queene of the ſeas. 
                  Ocean and his wife,
               
                  Nais
                  The Lady of the riuers. the faire, and al the watry crue,
               Nights, Riuers, Flouds, Springs, hauing elſe no ſtrife,
               Then who may formoſt proffer ſeruice due:
               Bloud, choller, phlegme, (the rootes and ſappe of life)
               Are at her beck, waining or ſpringing new,
               According as from throne celeſtiall,
               She deignes to ſhine in meaſure great or ſmall.
            
            
               
               When they were crowned now in royall thrones,
               And entred in their firſt and happieſt race,
               Amongſt thoſe gliſtring pointed Diamons,
               Which cut out times proportion, lotte, and ſpace:
               Behold the earth with heauy burden grones,
               And praies them both to eie and rue her caſe:
               And with their friendly hands and meeding art,
               To haſten that which ready was to part.
            
            
               For eu'n next morne the All-creating Sire
               
               Had ſent abroad,Gen. 1. I know not I, what word:
               Much like to this, Let Sea and earth conſpire
               
               All winged troupes the world for to afford:
               Wherewith the aire: euen to the deſart fire,So called by Pyndarus, becauſe nothing liues in it.
               
               Was ſo with great and little flyers ſtor'd.
               That none but winged people ſawe the eies,
               Of any ſtar or planet in the skies.
            
            
               O how it ioyes my hart and ſoule to thinke
               Vpon the bleſſed ſtate of that ſame daye?
               When at a word, a nodde, yea at a winke,
               At once flew out theſe winged gallants gay,
               Tide each to each in ſuch a friendly linke,
               That eu'n the leaſt did with the greateſt playe:
               The doue with hawks, the chickens with the kite.
               Feareleſſe of wrong, rage, cruelty, or ſpite.
            
            
               
               Pert marlins then no grudge to larkes did beare,
               Fierce goſhawkes with the Pheſants had no warre,
               Rau'ns did not then the Eagles talens feare,
               Twixt Cuckoes and the Titlings was no iarre,
               But coaſted one another eu'ry where
               In friendly ſort, as louers woonted were:
               For loue alone rul'd all in eu'ry kind,
               As though all were of one and ſelfe ſame mind.
            
            
               How ſafely then did theſe my Turtle-ſoules
               Diſport themſelues in Phoebus cheerefull ſhine?
               How boldly flew they by the iayes and owles,
               Dreadleſſe of crooked beakes or fiery eyen?
               Nay, who in all the flocks of winged foules
               Said once in heart, This pris'oner ſhal be mine?
               When none as yet made other warre or ſtrife,
               Then ſuch asA Poeticall God, and ſuppoſed inſtructor of brides and bridegroomes. 
                  Hymen makes twixt man & wife.
            
            
               But ſince the fall of parents pufft with pride,
               Not onely men were ſtainde in viciouſneſſe,
               But birdes, and beaſts, and wormes, and flies beſide,
               Declining from their former perfitneſſe,
               Did by degrees to imperfections ſlide,
               Tainted with pride, wrath, enuie, and exceſſe:
               Yea, then the husband of one onely henne,
               Was afterwards contented ſcarſe with tenne.
            
            
               
               Hence, gowts in cocks, and ſwelling paines appeare,
               Hence, Partridge loynes ſo feeble we do view,
               Hence, ſparrow treaders liue out ſcarce a yeare,
               Hence, leproſie the Cuckoes ouergrew:
               Breefely, none did in true loue perſeuere:
               But theſe white Butterflies and Turtles true,
               Who both in life and death do ne're forſake
               Her, whom they once eſpouſed for their make.
            
            
               They chooſe not (like to other birds and beaſts)
               This yeare one wife, another wife the next,
               Their choyſe is certaine, and ſtill certaine reſts,
               With former loues their mindes are not perplext,
               Hee yeeldes to her, ſhe yeelds to his requeſts,
               Neither with feare nor ieloſie is vext:
               She clippeth him, hee clippeth her againe,
               Equall their ioy, and equall is their paine.
            
            
               Remember this you fickle hearted Sires,
               Whom luſt tranſporteth from your peereles Dames,
               To ſcorch your ſelues at foule and forraine fires,
               Waſting your health and wealth in filthie games,
               Learne hence (I ſay) to bridle badde deſires,
               Quenching in time your hot and furious flames,
               Let little flies teach great men to be iuſt,
               And not to yeeld braue mindes a prey to luſt.
            
            
               
               When thus they were created the firſt day,
               Alike in bigneſſe, feature, forme and age,
               Cladde both alike in ſoft and white array,
               And ſet vppon this vniuerſall ſtage,
               Their ſeuerall parts and feates thereon to play,
               Amidſt the reſt of natures equipage:
               Who then ſuppos'd (as ſince ſome fooles haue thought)
               That little things were made & ſeru'd for nought.
            
            
               Diſwitted dolts that huge things wonder at,
               And to your coſt coaſt daily ile from ile,
               To ſee a Norway whale, or Libian cat,
               A Carry-caſtle or a Crocodile,
               If leane EpheſianHeraclitus, that euer wept. orDemocritus that euer laughed at the worlds folly. th'Abderian fat
               Liu'd now, and ſaw your madneſſe but a while,
               What ſtreaming flouds would guſh out of theyr eies,
               To ſee great wittols little things deſpiſe?
            
            
               When looke, as coſtlieſt ſpice is in ſmall bagges,
               And little ſprings do ſend foorth cleereſt flouds,
               And ſweeteſtCalled Onis in English. 
                  Iris beareth ſhorteſt flagges,
               And weakeſt Ofiers bind vp mighty woods,
               And greateſt hearts make euer ſmalleſt bragges,
               And little caskets hold our richeſt goods:
               So both in Art and Nature tis moſt cleere,
               That greateſt worths in ſmalleſt things appeare.
            
            
               
               What wiſe man euer did ſo much admire
               
                  Neroes
                  Made by Zenodorus: of which, and alſo of Theodorus image, more in Plin. lib., 4. cap. 7. & 8. Coloſſus fiue ſcore cubits hie,
               As Theodorus Image caſt with fire,
               Holding his file in right hand hanſomly,
               In left his paire of compaſſes and ſquire,
               With horſes, Coach, and footmen running by
               So liuely made, that one might ſee them all?
               Yet was the whole worke than a flie more ſmall.
            
            
               Nay, for to ſpeake of things more late and rife,
               Who will not more admire thoſe famous Fleas,
               Made ſo by art, that art imparted life,
               Making them skippe, and on mens hands to ſeaze,
               And let out bloud with taper-poynted knife,
               Which from a ſecret ſheat he ranne out with eaſe:
               Thē thoſe great coches which thēſelues did driue,Made by Gawen Smith. Anno. 1586.
               
               With bended ſcrues, like things that were aliue?
            
            
               IngeniousIoannes Regi
                        •
                     montanus▪ of whom Ramus at large in Proem, lib 2. Math. Germane, how didſt thou conuey
               Thy Springs, thy Scrues, thy rowells, and thy flie?
               Thy cogs, thy wardes, thy laths, how didſt thou lay?
               How did thy hand each peece to other tie?
               O that this age enioy'd thee but one day,
               To ſhew thy Fleas to faithleſſe gazers eye▪
               
               That great admirers might both ſay and ſee,
               In ſmalleſt things that greateſt wonders bee.
            
            
               
               Great was that proud and feared Philiſtine,
               Whoſe launces ſhaft was like a weauers beame,
               VVhoſe helmet, target, bootes, and brigandine,
               VVeare weightFor they weied 6000 Shekles of braſſe. ſufficient for a ſturdy teame,
               VVhoſe frowning lookes and hart-diſmaying eyne,
               Daunted the talleſt king of Iſraels realme:
               Yet little ſhepheard with a pibble ſtone,
               Confounded ſoone that huge and mighty one.
            
            
               Huge fiery Dragons, Lions fierce and ſtrong
               Did they ſuch feare on cruelPharaoh. Tyrant bring,
               VVith bloudy teeth or tailes and talens long,
               VVith gaping Iawes or double forked ſting,
               As when the ſmalleſt creepers ganne to throng,
               And ſeize on euery quicke and liuing thing?
               No, no. The Egyptians neuerYet for feare of them they honoured their Gods in the forme of cats. Plaut. lib. de Iſ. & oſi. feared mice,
               As then they feared little crawling lice.
            
            
               Did euerA moſt famous trumpeter. Plin. lib. cap. 56. Piſeus ſound his trumpet ſhrill
               So long and cleere, as doth the ſummer Gnat,
               Her little cornet which our eares doth fill,
               Awaking eu'n the drowzieſt drone thereat?
               Did euer thing do Cupid ſo much ill,
               As once aAnacreon in one of his latter Odes. Bee which on his hand did ſquat?
               Confeſſe we then in ſmall things vertue moſt,
               Gayning in worth what they in greatneſſe loſt.
            
            
               
               But holla, Muſe, extol not ſo the vale,
               That it contemne great hilles, and greater skie,
               Thinke that in goodneſſe nothing can be ſmall,
               For ſmalneſſe is but an infirmitie,
               Natures defect, and ofſpring of ſome fall,
               The ſcorne of men, and badge of infamy?
               For ſtill had men continued tall and great,
               If they in goodneſſe ſtil had kept their ſeate.
            
            
               A little diſmall fire whole townes hath burnd,
               A little winde doth ſpread that diſmall fire,
               A little ſtone a carte hath ouerturnde,
               A little weede hath learn'ed to aſpire,
               The little Ants (in ſcorne ſo often ſpurnd)
               Haue galles: and flies haue ſeates of fixed ire.
               Small Indian gnattes haue ſharpe and cruel ſtings,
               Which good to none, but hurt to many brings,
            
            
               And truely for my part I liſt not prayſe
               Theſe ſilke-worme-parents for their little ſiſe,
               But for thoſe louely great reſplendant rayes,
               Which from their woorks and worthie actions riſe,
               Each deede deſeruing well a Crowne of bayes,
               Yea, to be grauen in wood that neuer dies:
               For let vs now recount their actions all,
               And truth wil proue their vertues are not ſmall.
            
            
               
               Firſt, though fiue Males be brought to Females ten,
               Yet of them al they neuer chuſe but fiue,
               Each takes and treads his firſt embraced henne,
               With her he keepes, and neuer parts aliue:
               And when he is enclos'd in Stygian penne,
               Deſireth ſhe one moment to ſuruiue?
               No, no, but ſtrait (like a moſt louing bride)
               Flies, lies, and dies, hard by her husbands ſide.
            
            
               In Tuſcane towres what armies did I view
               One harueſt,Anno. Dom. 1579. when I was in Italy. of theſe faithful huſbands dead?
               Bleede, O my heart, whilſt I record anew,
               How wiues lay by them, beating, now their head,
               Sometimes their feet, and wings, & breaſt moſt true,
               Striuing no leſſe to be deliuered,
               Then Thisbe did from vndeſired life,
               When ſhe beheld her Pyram ſlaine with knife.
            
            
               But whilſt they liue, what is their chiefeſt worke?
               To ſpinne as ſpiders do a fruitleſſe threed?
               Or Adder-like in hollow caues to lurke,
               Till they haue got a cruſt and cankred ſeed?
               (Whoſe yong ones therfore, with dame Natures fork,
               Iuſtly gnaw out the wombs that did them breed:)
               Or ſtriue they Lion-like to ſeize and pray,
               On neighbours herds or herds-men by the way?
            
            
               
               Delight they with ſtrangeOf whō Pliny writeth, lib. 11. cap. 31. Ants & Griphins ſtrong,
               To hoord vp gold and eu'ry gaineful thing?
               Liue they not beaſts, and birds, and men among,
               Committing nought that may them damage bring?
               O had I that fiue-thouſand-verſed ſong,
               WhichThamyris, who wrote 5000. verſes of the worlds creation Zetzes, 7. chil: hiſtor. 108 Poet prowd did once with glory ſing,
               That whilſt I write of theſe ſame creatures bleſt,
               In proper words their worth might be expreſt.
            
            
               What wil you more? they feede on nought but aire,
               As doth that famous bird of Paradice,
               They liue not long, leſt goodneſſe ſhould empaire,
               Or rather through thatAtropo
                        •
                     . Hagges enuious eyes,
               That ſits, and ſitting, cuts in fatall chaire
               That threed firſt off, which faireſt doth ariſe:
               Affording crowes and kites a longer line,
               Then fliers ful of gifts and grace diuine.
            
            
               When maker ſaid to eu'ry bodied ſoule,Gen. 1.
               
               
                  Encreaſe, encreaſe, and multiply your kinde:
               
               What he or ſhe of al the winged foule
               So much fulfill'd their ſoueraigne-Makers minde,
               As theſe two flies? who coupled three dayes whole,
               Left on the fourth more ſeeds or egges behind
               Then any bird: yea then the fruiteful wrenne,
               Numbred by tale aSometimes, more, ſeldom
                        •
                      fewer. hundred more then tenne.
            
            
               
               Which donne, both die, and die with cheerefull hart
               Bycauſe they had done al they bidden were,
               Might we from hence with conſcience like depart,
               How deare were death? how ſweet & voyd of feare?
               How little ſhould we at his arrowes ſtart?
               If we in hands a quittance ſuch could beare
               Before that iudge, who looks for better deedes,
               From men then flies, that ſpring of baſer ſeeds.
            
            
               Go worthy ſoules (ſo
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is all one name in Greeke for a ſoule and a butterflie. witty Greeks you name)
               Poſſeſſe for aye the faire Eliſian greene:
               Sport there your ſelues ech Lording with his Dame,
               Enioy the bliſſe by ſinners neuer ſeene:
               You liu'd in honour, and ſtil liue in fame,
               More happy there, then here is many a Queene:
               As for your ſeeds committed to my charge,
               Take you no care: I'le ſing their worth at large.
            
            
               Weepe not faireThe Lady of the plaine. 
                  Mira for this funeral.
               Weepe notMiraes daughter. 
                  Panclea, Miraes chiefe delight,
               Weepe notGentlewomen attending vpon Mira and her daughter. 
                  Phileta, norGentlewomen attending vpon Mira and her daughter. 
                  Erato tall:
               Weepe notGentlewomen attending vpon Mira and her daughter. 
                  Euphemia, norGentlewomen attending vpon Mira and her daughter. 
                  Felicia white:
               Weepe not ſweeteGentlewomen attending vpon Mira and her daughter. 
                  Fausta. I aſſure you all,
               Your cattels parents are not dead outright:
               Keepe warme their egges, and you ſhall ſee anone,
               From eithers loynes a hundred riſe for one.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ The ſecond booke of the Silke-Wormes
and their Flies.
            
               O Thou whoſe ſweet & heau'nly-tuned Pſalmes
               The heau'ns thēſelues are ſcarce inough to praiſe!
               Whoſe penne diuine and conſecrated palmes,
               From wronging verſe did Royall Singer raiſe,
               Vouchſafe from brothers ghoſt no niggards almes,
               Now to enrich my high aſpiring layes,
               Striuing to gheſſe, or rather truely reede,
               What ſhall become of all this little breede.
            
            
               This little breede? nay euen the leaſt of all,
               The leaſt? nay greater then the greateſt are:
               For though in ſhew their ſubſtance be but ſmall,
               Yet with their worth what great ones may compare▪
               
               What egges as theſe, are ſo much ſphericall
               Of all that euer winged Natures bare?A compariſon of the Silkeflies egges with other egges.
               
               As though they onely had deſeru'd to haue,
               The ſelfe ſame forme which God to heauens gaue.
            
            
               From Lybian egges a mightieThe Oſtrich. bird doth riſe,
               Scorning both horſe and horſemen in the chace,
               With Roe-bucks feete, throwing in furious wiſe,
               Duſt, grauell, ſand and ſtones at hunters face,
               Yet dwels there not beneath the vauted skies,
               A greater foole of all the feathred race:
               For if a little buſh his head doth hide,
               He thinkes his body cannot be eſpide.
            
            
               
               From egges ofThe Eagle. her whoſe mate ſupporteth Ioue,
               
               And dares giue combate vnto draggons great,
               With whom in vain huge ſtagges and Lions ſtroue,
               Whoſe onely ſight makes euery bird to ſweate,
               Whom Romanes fed in Capitole aboue,
               And plac't her Enſigne in the higheſt ſeate,
               What elſe ſprings out but bloudy birds of praye,
               Sleeping al night, and murdering al the daye?
            
            
               From egges of famous Palamedian foules,
               And them that hallow Diomedes toomb,
               In bodies ſtrange retaining former ſoules,
               VViſe, wary, warlike, ſaging things to come,
               VVhoſe inborne skil our want of witte controules,
               Whoſe timely fore-ſight mates our heedleſſe doom,
               Comes ought but cranes of moſt vnſeemly ſhape,
               And diuing Cootes which muddy chanels ſcrape?
            
            
               YeaPeacocks. you whoſe egges Hortentius ſometimes ſold,
               At higher rate then now we prize your ſire.
               Proud though he be, and ſpotted al with gold,
               Stretching abroad his ſpangled braue attire,
               VVherby, as in a glaſſe, you do behold,
               His courting loue, and longing to aſpire:
               VVhat bring ye forth but ſpectacles of pride,
               VVhoſe pitchy feete marres al the reſt beſide?
            
            
               
               Thriſe bleſſed egges ofThe Pelicane. that renowned dame,
               Who bleeds to death, her dead ones to reuiue,
               Whome enuious creepers poyſon ouercame,
               Whilſt ſhe fetcht meate to keepe them ſtil aliue,
               How wel befits her loue that ſacred Lamb,
               
               That heal'd vs all with bleeding iſſues fiue?
               Yet hath your fruit this blotte, to ouer-eate,
               And glutton-like to vomit vp their meate.
            
            
               VVintersRobbin-red-breſt. 
                  Orpheus bloudy breaſtedVVrenne. Queen,
               Sommers ſweete ſolace, nightsNightingale. 
                  Amphion braue,
               
                  Linus
                  Linnet. delight, Canaries clad in greene,
               AllPies, parrat
                        •
                     , ſtares, &c. linguiſts eke that beg what hart would craue,
               Selling your tongues for euery trifle ſeene,
               As almonds, nuttes, or what you elſe would haue:
               Ofſprings of egges, what are you but a voice?
               Angring ſometimes your friends with too much noyſe.
            
            
               VictoriousThe houſe-cocke. 
                  Monarch, ſcorning partners all,
               Stowt lions terrour, loue of martial Sire,
               True farmers clocke, nights watchman, ſeruants call,
               Preſſing ſtil forward, hating to retire,
               Conſtant in fight, impatient of thral,
               Bearing in a little breaſt a mighty fire:
               Oh that thou wert as faithful to thy wife,
               As thou art free of courage voice and life!
            
            
               
               Chaſte is the Turtle, but yet giuen to hate,
               Storkes are officious, yet not voide of guiles,
               Hardy are Haggeſſes, but yet giuen to prate,
               Faithful are Doues, yet angry otherwhiles,
               The whiteſt ſwimmer nature e're begate,
               Suſpition blacke and iealouſie defiles:
               Briefely, from egges of euery creature good,
               Sprang nought diſtainted but this little broode.
            
            
               As for thatCalled by Alchimiſts Ouum Philoſophorum, the Philoſophers egge. egge conceiu'd in idle braine,
               Whence flowes (forſooth) that endleſſe ſeed of gold,
               The wombe of wealth, theA medicine famous in Homer to extinguiſh all kinde of griefes and paines. 
                  Nepenthes of paine,
               The horne of health, and what we deareſt hold:
               I count it but a tale and fable vaine,
               By ſome olde wife, or couſning friar told:
               Suppoſed true, though time and truth deſcries,
               That all ſuch workes are but the workes of lies.
            
            
               For when the Sire of truth hath truly ſaide,
               That none can make the couering of his head,
               Theſe ſlender haires, ſo vile, ſo ſoone decaide,
               Of ſo ſmal worth though nere ſo finely ſpread
               Shal any witte by humane art and aide,
               Transforme baſe mettals to that eſſence redde,
               Which buies, not only pearles and precious ſtones,
               But kingdōs, ſtates, & Monarchs frō their thrones▪
               
            
            
               
               Ah! heau'ns forbid (nay heau'ns forbid it ſure,)
               That euer Art ſhould more then Nature breede,
               Curſe we his worke whoſe fingers moſt impure,
               Durſt but to dare the drawing of that ſeede,
               Yet when they haue done al they can procure,
               And giuen their leaden God a golden weede:
               
                  Zeuxis his painted dogge ſhal barke and whine,
               When Ioue they turne to Sol or Luna fine.
            
            
               
                  Siſyphian
                  Siſyphus was one of king Aeolus ſonnes, delighted in robbing and couſening of his neighbours, wherefore this puniſhment was enioyned him, to roule a ſtone continually to the top of a Pyramidall and moſt ſteepe hil, til it reſted there, which was an impoſsible thing to performe, becauſe he could neuer pitch it. Ouid 3. met. ſoules, bewitched multipliers,
               Surceaſe to pitch this neuer pitched ſtone,
               Vaunt not of Natures neſt, nor Orcus fires,
               Hoping to hatch your addle egge thereon:
               Reſtraine in time ſuch ouer-prowd deſires,
               Let cre'tures leaue Creators works alone:
               Melt not the golden Sulphur of your hart,
               In following ſtil this fond and fruitleſſe art.
            
            
               Record what once befel great Aeols
                  Salmoneus, another ſonne to Aeolus, who for counterfetting thunder, was turned (as Seruius conceiued) into a Salmon, ſonne,
               For counterfetting onely but the ſound,
               Of heau'nly Canoniers dreadful gunne,
               That ſhakes the beams and pillers of this round:
               A fiery boult from wrathfull hand did runne,
               Driuing falſe forger vnder loweſt ground:
               Where ſtil he liues ſtil wiſhing to be dead,
               Spotted without, within al ſtaind with redde.
            
            
               
               Remember eke the Vulture gnawing ſtil,
               That euer-dying euer-liuingPrometheus, ſonne of Aſia & Iaphet, who enterpriſing (as Paracelſus doth) to make man, was tied vppon mount Caucaſus in chaines, there to be eaten euerlaſtingly by Vultures, and yet neuer to die. Ouid 10. Metam. wretch,
               VVho ſtealingly with an ambitious will,
               From Phoebus wheeles would vitall fire reach,
               Thinking to make by humane art and skill,
               His man of clay a liuing breath to fetch:
               Beware in time of like celeſtiall rods,
               And feare to touch the onely worke of gods.
            
            
               But if you ſtill with prowd preſumptuous legges,
               VVill needes clime vppe the fiery-ſpotted hil,
               Pilfring from Ioue his Nectar voyde of dregs,
               And that immortal meateCalled Ambro ſia. which none doth fill,
               If ye wil needes imbeſill thoſe faire egges,
               VVhich in her child-bedde did theirLeda, who being gotten with childe by Iupiter in the forme of a ſwanne, brought forth two egges, out of the one came Caſtor and Clytemneſtra, out of the other Pollux and Hel
                        •
                     na▪ Heſiodus. mother kil,
               Yet ſay not, that for gifts and vertues rare,
               They do, or may, with theſe my egges compare.
            
            
               Theſe,4. Cic. 2. de diu. theſe, are they, in dream which Romane ſpide
               Clos'd in a ſlender ſhell of brittle mould,
               Holding within, a white like ſiluer tride,
               VVhoſe inward yolke reſemblethVVhence Salomon fetcht gold euerie three yeares, which wiſedome would neuer haue permitted him to haue done, if he had knowne (as ſome imagine) how to make the Philoſophers ſtone. Ophirs gold,
               From out whoſe centre ſprang the cheefeſt pride,
               That e're Latinus, or his race did hold,
               Exchanging in al countries for the ſame,
               Meate, drinke, cloth, coyne, or what you elſe can name.
            
            
               
               Here lies theOf which Calx, water, and oyle, you may reade more than enough in Libauius: Epiſt. de o
                        •
                     o Philoſophorum, & the troubling Turba Philoſophorum, & the reuerent, D Dee, in Monad, Hierogl. Calx of that renowned ſhel,
               Here flotes that water permanent and cleere,
               Here doth the oile of Philoſophers dwell,
               Stil'd from the golden Fleece that hath no peere:
               In midſt of whoſe vnſeene and ſecret cell
               Dame Nature ſittes, and euery part doth ſteere,
               Though neither opening ſhop to euery eie,
               Nor tellingAs one or two fooles haue done. 
                  Caeſar ſhe can multiply.
            
            
               Al-working mother, Foundreſſe of this All,
               Ten-hundred thouſand-thouſand-breaſted nurſe,
               
                  Dedalian mouldreſſe both of great and ſmall,
               As large in wealth, as liberall of purſe,
               Still great with childe,3 A deſcription of Nature. ſtill letting children fall,
               Good to the good, nor ill vnto the worſe,
               VVhat made thee ſhew thy multiplying pride,
               More in theſe egges, then all the egges beſide?
            
            
               VVas it, becauſe thou takeſt moſt delight,
               To print the greateſt worth in ſmalleſt things?
               That they, the leaſt of any ſeede in ſight,
               Might clothiers breed to clothe our mightieſt kings?
               O witte diuine, O admirable ſpright!
               VVorthie the ſongs of him that ſweeteſt ſings:
               Let it ſuffice that I adore thy name,
               VVhoſe works I ſee, and know not yet the ſame.
            
            
               
               But damſels, ah: who ruſtleth in the skie?
               Methinks I heare Enithean LadyesBoreas, who by force rauished Orythyia King Erictheus daughter. Ouid 6 Metam. foe,
               Bluſtring in fury from the mountaines hie,
               Looke how he raiſeth cloudes from duſt below,
               Harke how for feare the trees do cracke and crie,
               Each bud recoyles, the ſeas turne too and fro:
               O ſuffer not his breath-bereauing breath,
               To ſlay your hopes with ouer-timely death.
            
            
               Therefore aſſoone as them you gathered haue,
               Vpon the whiteſt papers you can find,
               In Boxes cleane your egges full cloſely ſaue,
               From chilling blaſt, of deadly nipping winde,
               Let not that hoaryHyems or winter. iry-manteld ſlaue
               So much preuaile, to kill both ſtocke and kinde:
               Farre be it from a tender Damſels heart,
               On tendreſt ſeedes to ſhew ſo hard a part.
            
            
               Yet keepe them not in roomes too hot and cloſe,The ſeedes or egges of Silkeflies are to bee kept neither too cold, nor any thing hot.
               
               Leſt heate by ſtealth encroch it ſelfe too ſoone,
               And inward matter ripening ſo diſpoſe,
               That ſpinſters creepe ere winters courſe be done,
               Whilſt woods ſtand bare, & naked ech thing grows,
               And Thisbes ſap for aide be inward runne:
               For as with cold their brooding powre is ſpilde,
               So are they then for want of herbage kilde.
            
            
               
               Th'Arch-maſon of this round and glorious bal,
               Of creatures created Man the laſt,
               Not that he thought him therefore worſt of all,
               (For in his ſoule part of himſelfe he caſt)
               But leſt his wiſedome might in queſtion fall,
               For hauing in his houſe a ſtranger plac't,
               Ere eu'ry thing was made to pleaſe and feaſt,
               So great a Monarch and ſo braue a gueſt.
            
            
               Vnder whoſe feete where e're he went abrode
               
                  Veſta
                  The Earth. ſpread forth a carpet voide of art,
               Softer then ſilke, greener then th'Emerode,
               
               Wrought al with flowres, and eu'ry hearb apart,
               Ouer him hang'd where e're he made abode,
               An azur'd cloth of ſtate, which ouerthwart
               Was biaſt (as it were) and richly purld,
               With twelue braue ſignes & gliſtring ſtars inurld
            
            
               Vppon him then as vaſſals eu'ry day
               Stowt Lions waited, tameles Panthers eke,
               Fierce Eagles, and the wildeſt birds of pray,
               Huge whales in Seas that mighty carricks wreake,
               Serpents and toades: Yea each thing did obey,
               Fearing his lawes and ſtatutes once to breake:
               Yet wherto ſeru'd this pompe and honour great,
               If man had wanted due and dayly meate?
            
            
               
               Trace you Gods ſteppes,The ſeedes or egs of Silkeflies are not to be hatched till the Mulberie tree be budded. and til you can attaine
               Wherwith to feed your gueſts when firſt they ſhew,
               Haſte not their hatching, for t'wil prooue a paine,
               Filling your hearts with ruth, your eyes with dew,
               As when th'vntimely lambe on Sarums plaine,
               Fallne too too ſoone from winter-ſtarued ewe.
               To pine you ſee for want of liquid food,
               Which ſhould reſtore his wants of vitall blood.
            
            
               Attend therefore, when farmersThe Mullery ioy renues
               Her liuely face, and buddeth all in greene,
               For Hyems then, with all his frozen crues,
               Is fully dead, or fled to earths vnſeene,
               Corne, cattell, flowers, feare then no heauie newes,
               From Northern coaſts, or Boreas region keene:
               Birds ſing, flies buzze, bees hum, yea al things skip
               To ſee the very bluſh of Morus lippe.
            
            
               Let ſwallowes come, let ſtorkes be ſeene in skie,
               LetThe Nightingale. 
                  Philomela ſing, letThe Wrenne. 
                  Progne chide,
               LetLa
                        •
                     kes 
                  T
                        •
                     ry-tiry-leerers vpward flie,
               Let conſtant Cuckoes cooke on euery ſide,
               Let mountaine mice abroad in ouert lie,
               Let euery tree thruſt foorth her budding pride,
               Yet none can truely warrant winters flight,
               Till ſhe be ſeene with gemmes and iewels dight.
            
            
               
               O peereleſſe tree, whoſe wiſedome is far more
               Then any elſe that ſprings from natures wombe:
               For though Pomonaes
                  All kinde of round fruit. daughters budde before,
               And forwardThe Almonde tree. 
                  Phillis formoſt euer come,
               And Perſian
                  Peaches: brought first out of Perſia, as Columella, writeth. fruit yeeldes of her bloſſoms ſtore,
               AndAprils ſigne. 
                  Taurus hotte ſucceedethMarch his ſigne. 
                  Aries roome:
               Yet all confeſſe the Mulbery moſt wiſe,
               That neuer breedes till winter wholly dies.
            
            
               Such is her wit: but more her inward might,
               For budded newe when Phoebus firſt appeares,
               She is full leaued e're it grow to night:
               With wondrous crackling filling both our eares,
               As though one leafe did with another fight,
               Striuing who firſt ſhall ſee the heau'nly ſpheares,
               Euen as a liuely chickin breakes the ſhell,
               Or bleſſed Soules do ſcudde and flie from hell.
            
            
               Yet witte and ſtrength her pittie doth exceede,
               For none ſhe hurts that neere or vnder grow,
               No not the brire, or any little weede,
               That vpward ſhootes, or groueling creepes below,
               Nay more, from heauenly flames each tree is freed
               That nigh her dwels, when fearful lightnings glow:
               For vertue which,So writeth Pliny, lib. 10, hiſt, nat. the Romanes made a law,
               To puniſh them that ſhould her cut or ſaw.
            
            
               
               I leaue to tell how ſhe doth poiſon cure,Reade Pliny. lib. citate.
               
               From adders goare or gall of Liſards got,
               VVhat burning blaines ſhe heales and ſores impure,
               In palat, iawes, and al enflamed throte,
               VVhat canckars hard, and wolfes be at her lure,
               What Gangrenes ſtoop that make our toes to rotte:
               Briefly, few griefes from Panders boxe out-flew,
               But here they finde a medcine, old or new.
            
            
               Her bloud retourn'd to ſweete Thisbean wine,
               Strengthneth the lungs and ſtomacke ouer-weake,
               Her cluſtred grapes do proue a diſh moſt fine,
               VVhoſe kernels ſoft do ſtones in ſunder breake:
               Her leaues too that conuerted are in time,
               Which kings themſelues in higheſt prize do reake:
               Thus giues ſhe meat, and drink, medcine, & cloth,
               To eu'ry one that is not drownd in ſloth.
            
            
               Bragge now no more perle-breeding Taprobane,
               
               Of Cocos thine, thatSo Monardes calleth it. lib. de arb. Ind. all-ſupplying foode,
               Vaunt not of Dates thou famousLeo Afer. 
                  Africane,
               
               Though ſweete in taſte, and ſwift in making bloud,
               Bluſh Syrian grapes, and plums Armenian,
               
               
                  Ebuſian figges, and fruit of Phillis good:
               Bad is your beſt compared with this tree,
               That moſt delights my little flocke and mee.
            
            
               
               But wil you know, why this they onely eate?
               Why leaues they onely chuſe, the fruite forſake?
               Why they refuſe al choiſe and ſortes of meate,
               And hungers heate with onely one diſh ſlake?
               Then liſt a while, you wonder-ſeekers great,
               Whilſt I an anſwere plaine and eaſie make:
               Diſdaine you not to ſee the mighty ods,
               Twixt vertuous worms and ſinful humane gods.
            
            
               I thinke that God and nature thought it meete,Why Silkewormes eate only Mulberie leaues.
               
               The nobleſt wormes on nobleſt tree to feede:
               And therefore they elſe neuer ſet their feete
               On any tree that beareth fruit or ſeede:
               Others diuine, that they themſelues did weere
               No other tree could yeelde their ſilken threede.
               Iudge learned wittes: But ſure a cauſe there is,
               VVhy they elſe feede vpon no tree but this.
            
            
               Ne eate they all, as greedy Kafers do,
               But leaue the berries to their Soueraigne:
               Religiouſly forbearing once to bloe
               Vpon the fruit, that may their Lord maintaine.
               Nay, if theſe leaues (though nothing elſe doth growe
               In Eden rich their nature to ſuſtaine)
               Had erſt bin giuen for other creatures meate,
               They would haue chuſde rather to ſtarue then eat.
            
            
               
               In that they onely feede vppon one tree,VVhy Silkewormes feed only vpon one meate.
               
               How iuſtly do they keepe dame Natures lore?
               Who teacheth eu'n the bleare-eyde man to ſee,
               That change of meates cauſeth diſeaſes ſtore:
               The gods themſelues (if any ſuch there be)
               Haue but oneCalled Ambroſia. meate, one drinke, and neuer more,
               Whereby they liue in health and neuer die,
               For how can one againſt it ſelfe replie.2 Called Nectas
               
            
            
               Dualitie of meates was ſickneſſe ſpring,
               With whom addition meeting by the way,
               Begate varietie of euery thing,3 Read Plutark
               
               Who like a whore in changeable array,4. Sympos, quaeſt. 1
               
               With painted cheekes (as did Philinus ſing)
               And corall lippes, and breaſts that naked lay,
               Made vs with vnitie to be at warres,
               And to delight in diſcords, change, and iarres.
            
            
               Wherefore aſſoone as they beginne to creepe,
               Like ſable-robed Ants, farre ſmaller tho,
               Blacke at the firſt, like pitch of Syrian deepe,
               Yet made in time as white as Atlas ſnow,
               Send ſeruants vp to woods and mountaines ſteepe,
               When Mulb'ry leaues their maiden lippes do ſhew:
               Feede them therewith (no other ſoule they craue,
               If morne and eu'n freſh lefage they may haue.)
            
            
               
               The firſt three weekes the tend'reſt leaues are beſt,
               The next, they craue them of a greater ſize,
               The laſt, the hardeſt ones they can diſgeſt,
               As ſtrength with age increaſing doth ariſe:
               After which time all meate they do deteſt,So that they eat not in all aboue mine weekes.
               
               Lifting vp heads, and feete, and breaſt to skies,
               Begging as t'were of God and man ſome ſhrowde,
               Wherein to worke and hang their golden clowde.
            
            
               But whilſt they feede,VVhen their meate is to be
                        •
                      gathered. leral their foode be drie
               And pull'd when Phoebus face doth brightly ſhine,
               For raine, miſt, dewe, and ſpittings of the skie,
               Haue beene ful of the baine of cattle mine:
               Stay therfore, ſtay, til dayes-vpholder flie,
               Fiue ſtages ful from Eaſterne Thetis line:That is to ſay, till the ſunne be fiue houres high
               
               Then leaues are free from any poyſned ſeede,
               Which may infect this white and tender breede.
            
            
               Keepe meaſure too,In what quantitie they are to be dieted. for though the beſt you get,
               Giue not too much nor little of the ſame,
               Satiety their ſtomacks wil vnwhet,
               Famine againe wil make them leane and lame:
               Lend Witte the knife to quarter out their meate,
               As neede requires and reaſon maketh clame:
               Leſt belly break, or meagerneſſe enſewe,
               By giuing more or leſſe then was their due.
            
            
               
               Ne chāge their food (us ſome haue thought it meet)
               For Mulb'ries though they are of double kind,Varietie of meatos is naught for them.
               
               The blacker ones are yet to them moſt ſweete,
               From out their leaues moſt pleaſing ſappe they find,
               But whē they faile whilſt Scythiā
                   krimeBoreas, the Northweſt wind doth fleete,
               (Turne heau'nly hoſts, O turne that cruell wind)
               White Mulb'ry leaues, yea tender Elming bud,
               May for a ſhift be giuen in ſteede of foode.
            
            
               Sweepe eu'ry morn ere they freſh vittailes ſee,Their table is to be kept cleane.
               
               Their papred boord, whereon they take repaſt,
               With bundled Time, or ſlippes of Roſemary,
               Leaue nought thereon that from their bellies paſt,
               No not th'alf-eaten leaues of Thisbes tree,
               And when their ſeates perfumed thus thou haſt,
               Remooue them back againe with care and heede,
               To former place wherein they erſt did feede.
            
            
               Oft ſhalt thou ſee them careleſſe of their meate,The ſleepe of Silkewormes,
               
               Yea ouer-tane with deepe and heauie ſleepe,
               Like to that ſtrange and Epidemian ſweate,
               When deadly ſlumbers did on Britons creepe:
               Yet feare thou not, it is but natures feate,
               Who netheleſſe hath of peereleſſe ſpinſters keepe,
               And makes them thus as dead to lie apart,
               That they may wake and feede with better heart.
            
            
               
               Thriſe thus they ſleep, and thriſe they caſt their skin,
               The latter ſtil farre whiter then the reſt,How oft they change their skinnes.
               
               For neuer are they quiet of mind within,
               Til they be cleane of blackneſſe diſpoſſeſt,
               Whether becauſe they deeme it ſhame and ſinne
               To weare the marke of blackiſh fiend vnbleſt:
               Or that their parents wearing onely white,
               They therefore in that onely would be dight.
            
            
               As they in body and in greatneſſe grow,How they are to be diſtributed 
                        〈◊〉
                      when they grow greater.
               
               Diuide them into tribes and colonies,
               For though at firſt one table and no mo
               (Smal though it be) a thouſand wormes ſuffice,
               Yet afterwards (as proofe wil truly ſhow)
               When they proceede vnto a greater ſize,
               One takes the roome of tenne, and ſeemes to craue
               A greater ſcope and portion for to haue.
            
            
               The loft wherein their tables placed be,VVhat manner of roome their table muſt ſtand in.
               
               Muſt neither be too full, nor voide of light,
               Two windowes are inough, ſuperfluous three,
               Plac't in ſuch ſort that one regard the light
               Of Phoebus ſteeds vpriſing as we ſee:
               And from the other when it drawes to night,
               We may behold them tired as it were,
               And limping downe the weſterne Hemiſphere.
               
            
            
               
               Glaſde let them be, or linnen-couerd both,
               To keepe out fell and blackeAnts or Emets. 
                  Monopolites,
               
               The Myrmedonian crue, who voide of ſloth
               Do wholy bend their forces, toile, and wittes
               To priuate gaine, and therefore are ful wroth
               To ſee this nation any good beſits:
               Working themſelues to death both night & day,
               Not for themſelues, but others to array.
            
            
               The greedy imps of her that ſlue her ſonne,
               
                  Pandions
                  Wrennes and Robins. daughter, bloudy harted Queene:
               The wingedSparrowes. ſteedes in Venus coach that runne,
               Inflam'd with filthy luſt and fires vnſeene,
               Pnrſue this flocke, and wiſh them al vndone,
               Bycauſe they come from parents chaſte and cleane:
               O therefore keepe the caſements cloſe and faſt,
               Leſt quellers rage your harmeleſſe cattle waſt.
            
            
               If alſo careleſneſſe haue leſt a rift,
               Or chincke vnſtopped in thine aged wall:
               Where-through a noyſome miſt, or rayny drift,
               Or poyſned wind may trouble ſpinſters ſmall,
               Mixe lime and ſand, deuiſe ſome preſent ſhift
               How to repel ſuch cruel foe-men al:
               Small is the charge compared with the gaine,
               That ſhal ſurmount thy greateſt coſt and paine.
            
            
               
               I any ſeeme to haue an amber coate,How the ſicke are known from the whole, & in what ſort to bee vſed.
               
               And ſwell therewith as much as skinne can hold,
               Wholy to ſloth and idleneſſe deuote,
               Tainting with lothſome gore the common fold,
               Of deadly ſickeneſſe t'is a certaine note,
               VVhoſe cure, ſith none haue either writte or tolde,
               VViſedom commands to part the dead and ſicke,
               Leſt they infect the faultleſſe and the quicke.
            
            
               Colde ſometimes kills them,Outward cauſes of their ſickneſſe ſometimes ouer-heate,
               Raine, oyle, ſalt, old and wet, and muſty foode,
               The ſmel of onyons, leekes, garlick, and new wheat,
               Shrill ſounds of trumpets, drums, or cleauing woode:
               Yea ſome of them are of ſuch weakeneſſe great,
               That whiſprings ſoft of men or falling floud,
               Doth ſo their harts and ſenſes ouer-wheele,
               That often headlong from the boord they reele.
            
            
               Forbeare likewiſe to touch them more then needes,
               Skarre children from them giuen to wantonneſſe,
               Let not the fruit of theſe your precious ſeedes,
               Die in their hands through too much careleſneſſe:
               VVho toſſe and roule and tumble them like weedes
               From leafe to leafe in buſie idleneſſe,
               Now ſquatting them vppon the floore or ground,
               Now ſquaſhing out their bellies ſoft and round.
            
            
               
               Thus being kept and fed nine weekes entire,Signes of their readineſſe to worke.
               
               Surpriz'd with age ere one would thinke them yong,
               With what an ardent zeale and hot deſire
               To recompence thy trauels do they long?
               They neither ſleepe, nor meate, nor drinke require,
               But preſſe and ſtriue, yea fiercely ſtriue and throng,
               Who firſt may find ſome happy bough or broom,
               Whereon to ſpinne and leaue their amber loome.
            
            
               Then virgins then,They muſt ſcoure themſelues two daies before you ſet them to worke. with vndefiled hand
               Seuer the greateſt from the ſmaller crue,
               For al alike in age like ready ſtand,
               Now to begin their rich and oual clue,
               (Hauing firſt paid as Nature doth command,
               To bellies-farmer that which was his due)
               For nothing muſt remaine in body pent,
               Which may defile their ſacred monument.
            
            
               So being clenſde from al that is impure,
               Put each within aFor that is the beſt and ſafeſt way to looſe none of them. paper-coffin fine,
               Then ſhal you ſee what labour they endure,
               How farre they paſſe the weauers craft of line,
               VVhat cordage firſt they make and tackling ſure,
               To ty thereto their bottom moſt diuine,
               Rounding themſelues ten thouſand times & more,
               Yet ſpinning ſtil behind and eke before.
            
            
               
               None ceaſe to worke:How they work not aboue nine daies. yea rather all contend
               Both night and day who ſhall obtaine the prize
               Of working much, and with moſt ſpeede to end,
               Whilſt roſieThe ſunne. 
                  Titan nine times doth ariſe
               From purple bedde of his moſt louingAurora. the morning. friend,
               And eke as oft inThe weſterne ſea. 
                  Atlas vally dies)
               Striuing (a ſtrife not eaſie here to find)
               In working well, who may exceed their kind.
            
            
               Yea ſome (O wofull ſight) are often found
               Striuing, in worke their fellowes to excell,
               Lifeleſſe in midway of their trauerſt round,
               Nay thoſe that longeſt here do work and dwell,
               Liue but a while, to end their threed renownd,
               For I haue ſeene, and you may ſee it well,
               After that once their bottoms are begunne,
               Not one ſuruiues to ſee the tenth dayes ſunne.
            
            
               Go gallant youths, and die with gallant cheere,
               For other bodyes ſhortly muſt you haue,
               Of higher ſort then you enioyed here,
               Of worthier ſtate,How they are turned into flies when Dogge daies end, or thereabouts. and of a ſhape more braue,
               Lie but three weekes within your ſilken beere,
               Till Syrian dogge be drownd in weſterne waue,
               And in a moment then mongſt flying things,
               Receiue not feete alone, but alſo wings.
            
            
               
               Wings whiter then the ſnow ofAn exceeding high hil in Aſia 
                  Taurus hie,A deſcription of the Silkeflies.
               
               Feete fairer thenVenus Paramour, ſonne to Cinara, king of Cyprus, by his owne daughter Myrrha. 
                  Adonis euer had,
               Heads, bodies, breaſts, and necks of Iuory,
               With perfit fauour, and like beautie clad,
               Which to commend with ſome varietie,
               And ſhadow as it were with colour ſad,
               Two little duskie feathers ſhall ariſe
               From forehead white, to grace your Eben eyes.
            
            
               Then neither ſhall you ſee the bottome moue,
               Nor any noyſe perceiue with quickeſt eare,VVhem the ſilke is to be winded from the bottom
               
               Death rules in all, beneath, in midſt, aboue,
               Wherefore make haſte you damſels voyd of feare,
               Shake off delay, as ere you profit loue,
               In boxes ſtraite away your bottoms beare,
               Freed from the coffin wherin late they wrought,
               To gaine the golden fleece you ſo much ſought.
            
            
               Firſt pull away the looſe and outmoſt doune,
               As huſwiues do their ends of knottie towe,In what ſort the ſilke is to bee winded.
               
               That which lies vpmoſt is of leaſt renowne,
               The fineſt threed is placed moſt below:
               Threed fitte for kings, vnmeete for euery clowne,
               On Natures quill ſo wound vp rowe by rowe,
               That if thine eye and hand the end can find,
               In water warme thou maiſt it all vnwind.
            
            
               
               Three ſorts there are,How many ſorts of ſilke there be. diſtinct by colours three,
               The pureſt like toPhactuſa & Lampetia Ph
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     tons ſiſters. Ouid 2 Metam. their reſplendant haire,
               Who weeping brothers fal from courſers free,
               Their teares were turn'd to yellow amber faire.
               The ſecond likePhillis, Demophoons ſpouſe turned into an Almond tree. her whom impatiencie
               Made of a ſpouſe a tree moſt ſolitary:
               The laſt more white, made by the weaker ſort,
               Not of ſo great a price, nor like report.
            
            
               From out al three, but chiefly from the beſt,
               Are made,The vſe of all ſorts of ſilke. not onely robes for prieſts and kings,
               But alſo many cordial medcius bleſt,
               Curing the wounds that fullen Saturne brings,
               Which being drunk, how quiet is our reſt?
               How leaps out hart? how inwardly it ſprings?
               Speake you ſad ſpirits that did lately feele,
               The hart-breake cruſh of melancholies wheele.
            
            
               Nay euen the doune which lies aloft confuſde,
               Makes Leuant ſtuffe for country yonkers meete,
               Though it of court and cittie be refuſde,
               And is not worne in any ciuill ſtreete,
               But tel me yer, how canDiogenes that dogge, who with his dirtie ſhooes trode downe Platoes ſilken Quilt (as Laertius writeth) in greater pride then Plato euer vſed it. he be excuſde,
               VVho trampled eu'n the beſt with mired feete,
               And in a moment marr'd al that with pride,
               For making which, tenne thouſand ſpinſters dide?
            
            
               
               Now if of theſe your bottoms you require,The firſt made bottoms are beſt to be reſerued for ſeede.
               
               Some to reſerue for future race and ſeede,
               Chuſe out the eldeſt, for their forward fire
               Makes inward flye the ſooner ſpring and breede:
               Whereas the latter ones haue leaſt deſire,
               And leſſer might to perfit Venus deede:
               For why, their pride is dul, and ſpirits colde,
               Borne in the quarter laſt ofThe waining Moone. 
                  Iune olde.
            
            
               Wind none of them, which you for breede allot,
               In watrie bath, nor elſe in wine, or lye,
               Leſt outward moiſture innly being got,
               Surrounding, drownes the little infant-flye,
               And cauſe both ſtrings and ſecundine to rotte,
               So that before it liues it learnes to dye:
               Or if you haue them drenched ſo for gaine,
               At ſunne or fire to dry them take ſome paine.
            
            
               Singled, then laye them on a table neate,
               Couered al o're with whiteThat is to ſay, white paper, for the firſt writing paper was the inner rinde of a certaine reede or cane, into which Phillira was transformed. Com. Mat. in Mithol. Within 12 daies after the bottoms finiſhed, the ſilkeflies are diſcloſed. 
                  Philliraes skinne,
               Stay then againe till Phoebus chariot great
               In Oceans bath hath twelue times waſhed bin,
               And you ſhal ſee an admirable feate,
               This form'd and yet transformed broode within:
               From which new ſhapes new bodies do ariſe,
               And tailes to heads, and worms are turn'd to flies.
            
            
               
               Whereat to wonder each man may be bold,
               When ſeely worms themſelues new fliers made,
               Whilſt one anothers face they do behold:
               Muſe how, and when, & where, this forme they had,
               How new hornes ſprang frō out their foreheads old,
               Whence iſſued wings,Silke flies feede on nothing but aire. which do them ouer-lade:
               For they recording what they were of late,
               Dare not yet mount aboue their former ſtate.
            
            
               As ſtudying thus they ſtand a day or more,
               Offring to feede on nought but onely aire,
               Lothing the meate ſo much deſir'd before,
               I meane the leaues of Thisbes tree moſt faire:
               Diſdaining eke to taſte of Nais ſtore,A day or a little more after diſcloſing, they couple togither.
               
               To quench the heate that might their harts impaire:
               At length they know themſelues to be aliue,
               And fal to that for which our wantons ſtriue.
            
            
               Both long,How long they are coupled togither. and longing skud to Venus forts,
               To ſtirre vp ſeed that euer may remaine,
               He runnes to her, and ſhe to him reſorts,
               Each mutually the other entertaine,
               Ioynd with fuch lincks and glue of natures ſports.
               That coupled ſtil they reſt a day or twaine.
               Yea oftentimes thriſe turnes the welkin round,
               Ere they are ſeene vnlocked and vnbound.
            
            
               
               So hauing left what e're he could impart,When they die after diſcoupling.
               
               Of ſpirits, humors, ſeede, and recrement,
               Willing yet further to haue throwne his hart
               Into her breaſt, to whom he all things ment,
               He formoſt dies and yeelds to fatal dart:
               Ne liues ſhe long, but ſtrait with ſorrow ſpent,
               (Hauing firſt laide the egges ſhe did conceiue)
               Of loue and life ſhe ſhortly takes her leaue.
            
            
               Smal egges they be, in bigneſſe, colour, ſhape,
               Like to the meate of Indian Parrachite,Their egges in colour and bigneſſe, are likeſt of all things to Millet ſeede, wherewith Parrachitos are fed.
               
               Leſſe farre in view then ſeed of garden rape,
               In number many, yet indefinite:
               For when the females womb begins to gape,
               And render what the male got ouer night,
               Now more, now fewer ſeeds dropt from the ſame,
               As they were ſhort, or longer at their game.
            
            
               Yet ſeldome are they than a hundred leſſe,VVhat number of egges they lay.
               
               Sometimes two hundred from their loynes do fall,
               Round, ſmooth, hard-ſhelld, and voide of brittlenes,
               Whited alike, and yellow yolked all,
               Whoſe vertues great no man did yet expreſſe,
               Much leſſe can I whoſe knowledge is ſo ſmal,
               Though ſure I am hence may we find a theame,
               Able to drink vpThe wateror riuer wheron all the Muſes drinke. 
                  Aganippes ſtreame.
            
            
               
               O keepe them then with moſt attentiue heede,Haw, the egges are to be preſerued.
               
               From Boreas blaſt and Aeols inſolence,
               From menſtruous blaſts & breathing keep thē freed,
               Auoide likewiſe the mil-dewes influence,
               Pray heau'nly Monarch fot to bleſſe your ſeede,
               Helping their weakneſſe with his prouidence.
               So may your milk-white ſpinſters worke amaine,
               When Morus lippes ſhal bud and bluſh againe.
            
            
               AndAn exhortation to all Farmers and Huſbandmen to plant Mulberies. thou whoſe trade is beſt and oldeſt too,
               Steward of all that euer Nature gaue,
               VVithout whoſe help what can our rulers doo,
               Though gods on earth appareld wondrous braue?
               Behold thy helping hand faire virgins wooe,
               Yea nature bids, and reaſon eake doth craue
               Thy cunning, now theſe little worms to nurſe,
               VVhich ſhal in time with gold fill full thy purſe.
            
            
               In ſteed of fruitles elms and ſallowes gray,
               Of brittle Aſh, and poyſon-breathing vgh,
               Plant Mulb'ry trees nigh euery path and way,
               Shortly from whence more profit ſhal enſue,
               Then fromMade and planted by Aegle, Arethuſa, & Hyperethuſa, King Atlas daughter. th'Heſperian wood, or orchards gay,
               On euery tree where golden apples grew:
               For what is ſilke but eu'n a Quinteſſence,
               Made without hands beyond al humane ſenſe?
            
            
               
               A quinteſſence?A commendation of this ſilke, with that which commeth from the Oſſereans, as alſo with that which is made by the Indian wormes. nay wel it may be call'd,
               A deathleſſe tincture, ſent vs from the skies,
               Whoſe colour ſtands, whoſe gloſſe is ne're appalld,
               Whoſe Mulbr'y-ſent and ſauour neuer dies,
               Yea when to time all natures elſe be thralld,
               And euery thing Fate to corruption ties:
               This onely ſcornes within her liſts to dwell,
               Bettring with age, in colour, gloſſe, and ſmel.
            
            
               So doth not yours (youOfeheſe Oſſerians or Lords of the wood, read Bonfin. lib. 1 Decad 1. Hung Hiſt. Lordings of the woode)
               Growing like webbs vppon the long-haird graſſe,
               Along theAureleanus ſurnamed the Liberall, liuing 274. yeares after Chriſt, in whoſe time a pound weight of ſilke was ſold for the like weight in fine gold. V
                        •
                     piſcus. 
                  Oſſerian bancks of Scithyan floud,
               Which into Caſpian wombe doth headlong paſſe.
               No, no: Although that ſilke be ſtrong and good
               In outward ſhew, and highly prized was,
               When bounteous Caeſar ruled citties prime,
               Yet ſoone it fades, and yeelds to rotte in time.
            
            
               IfPauſanias bookes. bookes be true, there is an Indian worme,
               As bigge asThe Dorbeetle. he that robbs the Eagles neſt,
               Shap't likeThe Spider. 
                  Arachne that doth tinſels forme,
               And nets, and lawnes, and ſhadowes of the beſt,
               Fed withThe Reede or cane. her locks, who yeelding ſtands in ſtorm,
               VVhenThe hie oakes. woods-ſurueyours lye on earth oppreſt)
               From out whoſe belly, broke with ſurfetting,
               VVhole clews of ſilk ſcarſe half concocted, ſpring.
            
            
               
               Yet that compar'd with this is nought ſo fine,
               Ne ought ſo ſweetely fum'd with daintie ſent,
               Nor of like durance, nor like powre diuine:
               Mirth to reſtore, when ſpirits all are ſpent,
               If it be ſteept in ſweet Pomanaes
                  The goddeſſe of apples. wine,
               Till colour fade, and ſubſtance do relent:
               Nay, nay, no ſilke muſt make thatCalled Confectio Alkermes a moſt ſingular Electuarie againſt Melancholie, if it be rightly made. Antidote,
               Saue onely which from ſpinſters mine is got.
            
            
               Whereof, if thou a pound in weight ſhalt take
               Vnſtaind at all (as Amiens
                  Io. Fernelius. lib. 7 qui eſt de compos. med. floure doth write)
               And with the iuce of Roſe and pippins make
               A ſtrong infuſion of ſome day and night,
               Adding ſome graines of muske and Ambres flake,
               And ſeething all to hony-ſubſtance right:
               O what a Balme is made to cheere the heart,
               If pearle, and gold, and ſpices beare a part?
            
            
               What neede I count how many winders liue,
               How many twiſters eke, and weauers thriue
               Vppon this trade? which foode doth daily giue
               To ſuch as elſe with famine needes muſt ſtriue:
               What multitudes of poore doth it relieue,
               That otherwiſe could ſcarce be kept aliue?
               Say Spaniard proude▪ & tel Italian youth,
               Whether I faine, or write the words of truth.
            
            
               
               Not euer were your princes clad ſo braue,
               Not euer were your wiues deckt as they be,
               Much leſſe was ſilk then worne of euerie ſlaue,
               And artiſts, ſprung from baſe and low degree,
               ThatHeliogabalus, for ſo writeth Lampridius. rioter whoſe belly diggd his graue,
               Clothd all in ſilke, the Romanes firſt did ſee:
               Before whoſe time ſilke wou'n on linnen threed,VVhen the ſeede of ſilkewormes was firſt brought into Europe.
               
               Was thought braue ſtuffe for any Princes weed.
            
            
               But afterwardes,So Polidor virgil writeth out of Procopius, ſaying that this happened 555. yeares after Chriſt, lib. 3 cap. 6. de ret. inuent. when holy Palmers twaine
               From outA citie of eaſt India. 
                  Serinda brought theſe worms of fame,
               And plauted Mulb'ry plants on hill and plaine,
               Wherewith to fatte and foſter vppe the ſame:
               How rich waxt Italy? how braue was Spaine?
               
               In Sattin fine, how braggd each man of name?
               Yea, euery clowne, that euen as now, ſo then,
               Habites did ſcarce diſcerne the ſtates of men.
            
            
               Vp Britaine blouds, riſe hearts of Engliſh race,
               Why ſhould your clothes be courſer then the reſt?
               Whoſe feature tall, and high aſpiring face,
               Aime at great things, and challenge eu'n the beſt.
               Begge country men no more in ſackcloth baſe,
               Being by me of ſuch a trade poſſeſt:
               That ſhall enrich your ſelues and children more,
               Then ere it did Naples or Spaine before.
            
            
               
               No man ſo poore but he may Mulb'ries plant,How eaſie and chargeleſſe a thing it is to keep ſilkworms.
               
               No plant ſo ſmal but wil a ſilke-worme feede,
               No worme ſo little (vnleſſe care do want)
               But from it ſelfe wil make a clew of threede,
               Ech clew weighs down, rather with more then ſcant,
               A penny weight,What ouerplus there is in profite by keeping them. from out whoſe hidden ſeede,
               (After the winged wormes conception)
               A hundred ſpinſters iſſue forth of one.
            
            
               Diuine we hence, or rather reckon right,
               What vſury and proffit doth ariſe,
               By keeping well theſe little creatures white,
               Worthy the care of euery nation wiſe,
               That in their owne or publique wealth delight.
               And raſhly wil not things ſo rare deſpiſe:
               Yea ſure, in time they wil ſuch profit bring,
               As ſhall enrich both people, prieſt, and king.
            
            
               Concerning pleaſure:How great pleaſure there is in keeping them, both to the eies, eares, noſe, and hands. who doth not admire,
               And in admiring, ſmiles not in his hart.
               To ſee an egge a worme, a worme a flier,
               Hauing firſt ſhewd her rare and peereleſſe art,
               In making that which princes doth attire,
               And is the baſe of euery famous Mart?
               And then to ſee the flie caſt ſo much ſeede,
               As doth, or may, an hundred ſpinſters breede.
            
            
               
               Againe to view vppon one birchen ſhredde,
               Some hundred Clewes to hang like cluſtred peares,
               Thoſe greene, theſe pale, and others ſomewhat red,
               Some like the locks hanging downe Phoebus eares:
               And then, how Nature when each worme is dead,
               To better ſtate in tenne dayes ſpace it reares:
               Who ſees all this, and tickleth not in minde?
               To marke the choyſe and pleaſures in each kinde.
            
            
               Eye but their egges, (as Grecians terme them well)
               And with a penne-knife keene diuide them quite,
               Behold their white, their yolke, their skin, and ſhel,
               Diſtinct in colour, ſubſtance, forme, and ſight:
               And if thy bodies watchmen do not ſwell,
               And cauſe thee both to leape and laugh outright,
               Thinke God and nature hath that eye denied,
               By which thou ſhouldſt frō brutiſh beaſts be tried.
            
            
               When they are worms, mark how they color chāge,
               From blacke to browne, from browne to ſorrel bay,
               From bay to dunne, from dunne to duskie ſtrange,
               Then to an yron, then to a dapple gray,
               And how each morne in habites new they range,
               Till at the length they ſee that happy day,
               When (like their Sires and heau'nly angels bleſt)
               Of pure and milk-white ſtoles they are poſſeſt.
            
            
               
               Lay then thine eare and liſten but a while,
               Whilſt each their foode from leafage freſh receaues,
               Trie if thou canſt hold in an outward ſmile,
               When both thine eare and phantaſie conceaues,
               Not worms to feed, but ſhowrings to diſtil.
               In whiſpring ſort vpon the tatling leaues:
               For ſuch a kind of muttring haue I heard,
               Whilſt herbage greene with vnſeene teeth they teard.
            
            
               When afterward with needle pointed tongue,
               The Flies haue bor'd a paſſage through their clewes,
               Obſerue their gate and ſteerage al along,
               Their ſalutations, couplings, and Adieus:
               
               Heare eke their hurring aud their churring ſong,
               When hot Priapus loue and luſt renewes,
               And tel me if thou heardſt, or e're didſt eye,
               Like ſport amongſt all winged troupes that flye.
            
            
               Tis likewiſe ſport to heare how man and maide,
               Whilſt winding, twisting, and in weauing, thay
               Now laugh, now chide, now ſcan what others ſaide,
               Now fing a Carrol, now a louers lay,
               Now make the trembling beames to cry for aide,
               On clattring treddles whilſt they roughly play:
               Reſembling in their riſing and their falls,
               A muſicke ſtrange of new found Claricalls.
               
            
            
               
               The ſmel likewiſe of ſilken wool that's new,
               To heart and head what comfort doth it bring,
               Whilſt we it wind and tooze from oual clew?
               Reſembling much in prime of fragrant ſpring,
               When wild-roſe buds in greene and pleaſant hue,
               Perfume the ayre, and vpward ſents do fling,
               Well pleaſing ſents, neither too ſowre nor ſweete,
               But rightly mixt, and of a temper meete.
            
            
               As for the hand, looke how a louer wiſe
               Delighteth more to touch Aſtarte ſlick
               Then Hecuba, whoſe eye-browes hide her eies,
               Whoſe wrinckled lippes in kiſsing ſeeme to prick,
               Vpon whoſe palmes ſuch warts and hurtells riſe,
               As may in poulder grate a nutmegge thick:
               So ioy our hands in ſilke, and ſeeme ful loth
               To handle ought but ſilke and ſilken cloth.
            
            
               Such are the pleaſures, and farre more then theſe,
               Which head, and hart, eies, eares, and noſe, and hands,
               Take, or may take, in learning at their eaſe,
               The dieting of theſe my ſpinning bands,
               VVhoſe ſilken threede ſhal more then counterpeiſe,
               Paine, coſt, and charge, what euer it vs ſtands,
               So that if gaine or pleaſure can perſwade,
               Go we, let vs learne the ſilken-ſtaplers trade.
            
            
               
               But liſt, me thinkes I heare Amyntas ſayne,
               That ſhepheards skill wil ſoone be quite vndone,Keeping of silkewormes hindreth not the keeping of ſheepe nor, Sheepheards.
               
               Behold faire Phillis ſcuddeth from the plaine,
               Leauing her flocks at randon for to runne,
               Lo Lidian clothier breaks his loomes in twaine,
               And thouſand ſpinſters burne their woollen ſpunne:
               Ah! ceaſe your rage, theſe ſpinſters hurt you nought
               But wil encreaſe you more then ere you thought.
            
            
               For carde an ounce of ſilke with ten of wooll,
               How fine, how ſtrōg, how ſtrange a yarne doth riſe?
               Make trial once, and hauing ſeene at ful,
               Your new found ſtuffe, chaffred at higheſt prize,
               Then blame your idle heads and ſenſes dull,
               Truſt not conceit, but credite moſt your eyes:
               Laughing as much, or more, thē ere you mourn'd,
               When feare you ſee to ioy and vantage turnd.
            
            
               Laugh now (faire Mira) with thy Virginswhite,
               For why your egges committed to my care,
               Are growne ſo much in bigneſſe, worth, and ſight,
               That Kings and Queens to keep them wil not ſpare,
               Yea Queen of Queenes, for vertue, witte, and might,
               Perhaps wil hatch them twixt thoſe hillocks rare,
               Where al the Graces feede and Siſters nine,
               Who euer loue, and grace both thee and thine.
            
            FINIS.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   