
      
         
            
            
               
A TARGET FOR TILLAGE, BRIEFLY CONTAINING THE MOST NECESSARY, PREtious, and profitable vſe thereof both for king and ſtate.
            By IOHN MOORE Miniſter of Gods word, and Parſon of Knaptoft in Leiceſter ſhire. Anno 1611.
            
               PROV. 14. 4.
Where no oxen are, there the crib is emptie; but much increaſe cometh by the ſtrength of the oxe.
            
               RA.
SPEI.
.AN
CHO
            
            
               LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM IONES.
            1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVORSHIPFVLL, SIR WILLIAM TVRPIN knight, &c. his approued good friend and Patron, the increaſe of all Gods bleſsings and graces with the ſound ioy and peace of a good conſcience be multiplied continually through Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               PEruſing my paper notes, and finding ſome heads of doctrine touching this argumēt of tillage, deliuered vpō occaſion of my calling to the publike place: & withall conſidering, and vnfainedly



bewailing the hard hap of the generall expected hope, for the neceſsarie redreſse of the dangerous decay thereof; as a welwiller of the common good of my coūtry, I haue added theſe my ſecond thoughts to my former meditations, to be (if may be) as a further ſpurre for the more ſpeedy reforming of this groſse abuſe, or at leaſt a Chriſtian warning to preuent a further miſchiefe. VVhich my beſt endeauour I preſent to you (right worſhipfull) not onely as a pawne of greater duties purpoſed for your kind deſerts, but for that I am perſwaded



of your innocencie and harmeleſneſse herin, as alſo of the honeſtie and vprightneſse of your hart for your countries good. For howſoeuer ſome in ſecret may vncharitably cenſure you, and put you in the catalogue of the iuſtly accuſed: and ſo nibble at your credite, as one not altogether free from this great offence: Yet dare I be bold to ingage my poore credite, that whatſoeuer action of yours hath but a ſhew of any hinderance, you would be ready to redreſse, and moſt willing to redeeme with any tolerable priuate loſse for the publicke



gaine. And ſo beſeeching the almighty to increaſe your loue to our Church and common-wealth, that ſtill you may procure the profite and welfare of them both, by all poſsible purpoſe and practiſe; I commend you to Gods grace, with the good ſucceſse of this needfull buſineſse. From my poore ſtudy in Sheas by this of Aprill. 1611.
            
               Your Worſhips throughly deuoted in the Lord Ieſus, IOHN MOORE.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CONſcionable Reader.
            
               MY purpoſe is not (diſcreet Reader) here to pleade with pen and paper for the belly and back of Libertines and Epicures, of Swilbolles and Swaggerers, or of any other idle drones, and wretched Atheiſts, neglecting all lawfull callings and Chriſtian meanes, to liue orderly and honeſtly either in Church or common-wealth. All theſe I acknowledge to be the greateſt waſters and ſpoylers of our country, worſe by many degrees, then any depopulators, oppreſsors or decayers of tillage: (which yet I no further iuſtifie then did the Prophets Sodome and Gomorrah before Ieruſalem, Ezec. 16. 48. 56. Eſa. 1. 10. for her rebellions againſt the Lord) for theſe I aſsure thee do good to



none, no not to themſelues, nothing at all regarding the priuate or publike good: but making hauocke of the creatures, do liue of the labours of other men for the preſent time, and ſurfetting vpon Gods blessings, do take a courſe to bring the whole world to confuſion, and ſo with all expedition to haue the earth for their intollerable looſeneſse to ſpew them out. Leuit. 18. 25. & 20. 22. Our land ſwarmeth too full of ſuch vermine, who like the graſhoppers of Egypt, Exod. 10. 14. 15. begin to couer the face of our countrey, eating vp al the fruite they can come by, that no greene thing ſhall grow by their wils, and ſo darken the land and obſcure the glory thereof. So that looke what left of the palmer worme (the oppreſsors Iocl. 1. 4. 5. of the land) that haue theſe malt-worms deuoured, and the reſidue of thoſe canker-wormes and cormorants, haue theſe caterpillers conſumed. The truth is, this viperous brood and wicked generation haue mutually conſpired, if not the deſtruction, yet a mightie conſumption of



our deare common-wealth, the damme and nourſe of vs all. I abhorre to ſpeake of the damnable crue, and curſed company of drunkards and belly gods, whom the diuell hath taught a new trade of eating and drinking by meaſure, and methode. Their yards of cups, and order of carowſing with ſuch low courteſie, & ſalutations of their honeſt mates abſent; after an idolatrous ſort proſtrating themſelues to their Bacchus and belliegod, I ſhame to dilate. Beſides the tricke of Tobacco to temper their weſtie brains, and to adde both pleaſure and thirſt to Deut. 29. 19. their vnmeaſurable deſire of drinking. I cannot reckon vp the thouſands of mault and good graine, waſted and helliſhly ſpent by theſe Helluoes and Harpies. All theſe. (I know) abhorre the plough, and are enemies to the ſtate: who yet (I confeſse) in their high talke do iuſtifie tillage, and wil be ready (no doubt) to reforme the decay thereof, with ſpade and peckaxe. The humours of any ſuch



I deteſt to pleaſe, as being moſt horrible. Here onely I ſolicite the pitifull caſe of painfull plowmen, tradeſmen, and poore labourers, not able by their paines, and gaines, to furniſh their families with ſufficient food, who ſometimes for want thereof, breake out into fearefull clamors againſt the tyrannous dealing of vniust incloſers and needleſse ouerthrowers of tillage, who are here onely taxed. Neither am I ſo ſenſleſse, ſimply to condemne all kind of paſtures and feedings, knowing that euery creature in the kinde haue their proper place and portion of the earth allotted of the Lord: Beſides the Chriſtian libertie of men to vſe them for their beſt gaine and good. Yet doth God allow ſuch care of ſheepe and oxen, that Chriſtian men ſhall be forgotten? and 1. Cor. 9. 9. that ſo much prouiſion ſhall be made for theſe, that the poore ſhall want their food? God forbid. I know there is a profitable vſe of hedging and ditching for the diuiſion of mownds, and propertie of



mens right & inheritance; not to ſpeake of the neceſsary prouiſion of wood, maintainance of peace, and increaſe of many other profits amongſt neighbours, who otherwiſe (perhaps) would proue contentious and iniurious one towards another: yet quite to hedge out the poore, and by this meanes to ouerthrow the plough, is a helliſh practiſe. And thus hauing vnfolded my mind and true meaning, I commit thee to him that hath the hearts of all in his hand to make them pliable to his ſeruice and publicke good, both of Church and common-wealth.
            
               Thine in the Lord Ieſus, IOHN MOORF.
            
         
         
            
            THE PRINCIPALL points of the Treatiſe following.
            
               1. The fruite and profite of honeſt labour and huſbandrie; it yeeldeth plentie and abundance.
               2. The earth vſed in her kind is verie ſufficient to relieue all the inhabitants thereof.
               3. There is no worldly bleſsing comparable to the excellent fruits of the earth, by the meanes of tillage.
               4. Gods wonderfull wiſedome and prouidence for the preſeruation of the ſocietie and fellowſhip of mankind, that as the inferiors cannot be without the ſuperiours, no more can theſe without the other.
               5. The ſingular vſe and neceſsitie of tillage; kings themſelues cannot be without it.
               6 There is no ground or field ſo neceſsarie and fruitefull as that which is in tillage.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TARGET FOR TILLAGE.
            And the abundance of the earth is ouer all: the king alſo conſiſteth by the field that is tilled. Eccleſiaſtes cap. 5. verſ. 8.
            
               KIng Salomon after his Coherence. moſt fearefull fall, recouering himſelfe by true repentāce (throgh Gods grace and powerfull working of his holy Spirit) doth teſtifie by this booke the vndoubted markes thereof to Gods Church, to which againe in his old age he was reconciled and receiued. And purpoſing herein to ſet out the true happineſse and felicitie of Gods children, and ſo to confute all contrarie opinions of the conceited vanities of men concerning the ſame; which he had



proued ſo to be by his owne too deare experience: And hauing in the former chapters by an argument of inductiō, ſtrongly concluded againſt many particular actions and things ſo highly eſteemed and valued in the world, he cometh now in order to examine the trade of husbandrie and tillage. As if one ſhould haue demanded of him: But what ſay you Salomon, to the great abundance and plentifull increaſe of the fruites of the earth by the meanes of good huſbandrie and tillage? Indeed (ſaith he) I muſt needs confeſse that the abundance of the earth is ouer all, that Sence. there is no worldly thing ſo neceſsary and profitable to the naturall life and being of mankind; & that euen kings themſelues and the greateſt potentates of the earth haue neede of the poore husbandmans trauell and toyle in tilling of the ground, for that the vſe of the fruites thereof are farre to



he preferred before gold, ſiluer, and all other worldly pelfe: yet with the reſt they haue their miſeries and afflictions, and can in no wiſe make vs truly bleſsed.
            So that theſe words containe a Diuiſion. commendation of the husbandmans life and calling, and that in three reſpects. Firſt, in regard of the ſubiect 1. of his labour, being the earth. Secondly, for the manner and kind of 2. his labour, which is tillage. Thirdly, 3. for the fruite that followeth his pains, which is here ſet out and amplified: firſt, by the quantitie, yeelding abundance. Secondly, for the qualitie, being ouer all; and that in two reſpects. Firſt, for the excellency and preciouſneſse thereof ſurmounting all. Secondly, in regard of the communitie and vniuerſall vſe thereof, fit and ſufficient for all men, and thoſe not the baſeſt, but the higheſt kings themſelues.
            
               
The ſumme of all is this, That the Summe. aboundant and plentifull fruits of the earth (by the meanes of tillage) are an incomparable earthly bleſsing, without the which, neither king nor ſtate can be maintained.
            
               And the abundance of the earth, &c. The husbandman by his tillage and Doctrine 1. labour hath abundance: whence we learne the fruite and profite of honeſt labour and husbandrie; it yeeldeth plentie and abundance. He which tilleth the land ſhall be ſatisfied with Prou. 26. 19. bread, but he that followeth the idle ſhall be filled with pouertie, viz. he that painfully trauelleth in his lawfull calling, to maintaine and vphold the ſtate wherewith God hath bleſsed him, ſhall haue abundance of all neceſsarie and good things: but ſuch as are idle ſhall be poore and miſerable, Prou 23. 21. for beggerie is their end. The ſower went out ſow, and although his labor Math. 13. 23. and ſeed were the ſame, yet the ſoyle



was not alike, but the good ground made him amends, that his trauell was not in vaine, where ſome one corne yeelded an hundred fold, ſome ſixtie, ſome thirtie: for he that ſoweth 2. Cor. 9. 6. liberally ſhall reape plentifully. And thoſe that break vp the fallow ground and ſow in righteouſneſse, ſhall ſurely reape after the meaſure of mercie: and God will raine downe a bleſsing vpon their paines, as the Prophet truly Hoſ. 10. 12. alludeth and applyeth it to ſpirituall indeauours.
            One reaſon hereof is Gods bleſſing Reaſon 1. vpon his owne ordinance, in proſpering both the worke & the workeman. The bleſsing of the Lord (ſaith Prou. 10. 22. Salomon) maketh rich, not mans wit, and labour, nor any other meanes. And he onely ſhall with ioy eate the Pſal. 128. 2. fruite of his hands that feareth God, and is bleſsed: for otherwiſe it is in vaine to riſe early, and to lie downe Pſal. 117. 2. late, and to eate the bread of ſorrow:



our paines are to no purpoſe, our carke and care to no end: though we eate and fret our hearts with worldly griefe, for the bettering of our eſtate: all the meanes we can vſe ſhall be miſſpent & vnprofitable, without Gods ſpeciall bleſsing be present with vs. He that planteth and he that watereth 1. Cor. 3. 7. are nothing of themſelues, but God alone, who by his gracious bleſsing giueth a moſt happy increaſe. For as the earth is the Lords, and the Pſal. 24. 1. fulneſse thereof: ſo he maketh it barren and fruitfull at his pleaſure. Beware therefore (ſaith Moſes to Iſrael) leſt thou ſay in thine heart, My Deut. 8. 17. 18 power and the ſtrength of my owne hands hath prepared me this abundance, but remēber that it is the Lord thy God that giueth thee power to get ſubſtance.
            Secondly, the ſtate and condition of the earth is ſuch, by the meanes of Reaſon. 2. Gods curſe vpon the ſame, for mans



ſinne, that now by nature it is ſo barren and fruitleſse, that except Adam and his brood get their bread with Gen 3. 17, 18 19. the ſweate of their browes, the earth will yeeld them nothing but briers & brambles, thornes and thiſtles, &c. Force it they muſt by their great toile and trauell, or elſe it will not be fruitfull. So that now the hand of the diligent Prou. 10. 4. maketh rich, but a ſlothfull hand maketh poore. Such onely as with diligence and honeſt labour go about their buſineſse and affaires, God will bleſse: but ſuch as are giuen to idleneſse and ſloth (neglecting their duties, or truſting to vnlawfull and indirect courſes) ſhall ſurely want and come to nought. I paſsed (ſaith Salomon) by the field of the ſlothfull, and Prou. 24 30, 31. 32. lo it was growne with thornes, and nettles had couered the face thereof; I conſidered it well, I looked vpon it, and receiued inſtruction. See the confuſion that idleneſse worketh, and



the bitter fruits thereof, barrenneſse to the ground, and beggery to the perſon, euen to ſuch as haue the meanes and vſe them not.
            Therefore as the ſight hereof was for Salomons learning, ſo let it be for Vſe. 1. our inſtruction: that we vſe all diligence and induſtrie in our places and callings, vpon the poore meanes that God hath lent vs to that end. Let vs as Gods ſtewards be painfull & faithfull in our places, vſe his gifts and graces 1. Cor. 4. 11. well, employ our talents to his gaine and glory, and ſo to our owne Mat. 24. 5. good. For to him that hath ſhall be giuen, and to him that is negligent & Math. 25. 29. careleſse, and ſo wanteth and hath not, ſhall in the end that litle be taken away which he hath. And ſeeing that the hand of the diligent maketh rich, and that God promiſeth a bleſsing to his owne ordinance, and hath ſanctified all lawfull meanes for the remouing of the curſe, let vs be carefull



thus to auoide it, and obtaine a bleſſing: for God the good houſholder cannot abide to ſee any man ſtand idle Math. 20. 34. in the market place of this world, but thruſts them out, and ſends them into his vineyard, ſo that they that 2. Theſ. 3. 10. will not worke muſt not eate.
            Secondly, it reproueth thoſe that Vſe 2. thinke their owne induſtry ſufficient to make them rich, and procure them food: whereas all the meanes in the world is in vaine without his bleſsing and care.
            And here let thoſe of the Miniſtery Vſe 3. learne, that as their office and calling is a ſpirituall husbandry and a painfull plow, ſo it muſt be throughly 1. Cor. 3. 9. followed: for who ſo ſlacketh his Luk. 9. 62. hand from his plough, and looketh backe in this buſineſse, ſhall quickly make balkes, and ſo procure a barrenneſse of his ſoyle. And as Gods word Math. 13. is the onely ſeed that they muſt ſow: ſo let them be carefull for the proſpering



and preſeruation of the ſame in the hearts of the people. And then let them not be diſcouraged, but comfort themſelues (in this thankeleſse calling to the world) by the example and experience of the poore husbandman, that if they do their dutie they ſhall haue abundance of fruit by Gods bleſsing. And although the ſoyle of mens ſoules by nature be both barren and fruitleſse of good: yet their labour ſhall not be in vaine in the Lord. The husbandman muſt 1. Cor. 15. 58. 2. Tim. 2. 6. labour before he receiue the fruites, he muſt plow and ſow, &c. before he can looke for his crop and happy harueſt. He muſt waite for the precious Iam. 5. 7. fruite of the earth: he goth forth weeping Pſal. 126. 6. (as it were) to low his ſeed: but at the appointed time returneth with ioy, and bringeth his ſheaues; he may ſow in teares, but he ſhall reape in ioy.
            Secondly, abundance of fruite Doctrine 2.


               
being attributed to the earth, it further teacheth vs: that the earth vſed in the kind is very ſufficient to relieue all the inhabitants thereof.
            God no ſooner had made man, but he prouided meate out of the earth for man; yea for men and beaſts and all liuing creatures in their kind. Firſt, God gaue man life vpon the Gen. 1. 30 31. earth, and then gaue him liuing out of the ſame. So carefull was God for mans ſuſtenance, that the things which ſhould maintaine him were made before him, and produced out of the earth for his prouiſion. See Gods wonderfull and particular prouidence herein for all liuing creatures. God ſendeth the ſprings into Pſal. 104. 10. 11. the vallies, which run betweene the mountaines, to giue drinke to all the beaſts of the field, and to quench the wild Aſses thirſt: where likewiſe the fowles of the heauen do dwell, and ſing among the branches. He maketh



alſo graſse to grow for the cattell, and hearbes for the vſe of man, that ſo he being ſtrengthned by the vertue of thoſe herbes and fruite of trees (his firſt appointed food) might bring Gen. 1. 20. foorth by his labor and trauell, bread and all manner of ſuſtenance out of the earth (husbanded and tilled in the ſweate of mans face) that ſo both mā 
               Gen. 3. 18. 19. and beaſt may haue all manner of food miniſtred vnto them out of the ground, for the maintenance of their life. Yea God prouideth wine (ſaith See Tremel. Dauid) to glad mans heart, and oyle Pſal. 104. 15. to make his face to ſhine, and bread to ſtrengthen his heart. No prouiſion is wanting, either for his neceſsitie, pleaſure, or profite: for all the earth is filled with the fruite of his workes: So much as the birds haue their neſts and foode in the high trees and Cedars of Libanon, and the Storke her Ver. 17. 18. dwelling in the Firre tree. The Goats Roes, Does, and Conies, are not forgotten: 23. 24. 27. 28. 31.


               
for whom he hath made the mountains and rocks for their refuge & reliefe. Thus is the whole earth ful of thy riches, ô Lord, all creatures in their kind waite vpon thee, thou giueſt them meate in due ſeaſon, and they gather it: thou openeſt thy hand and they are filled with good things, Glory be to thee for euer.
            Now the reaſon why God hath Reaſon. made the earth ſo plentifull for all kinde of prouiſion, is, for that as he hath ordained it to be (as it were) the mother of al liuing creatures here below: ſo likewiſe hath he fitted and furniſhed it to be as an able and tender nourſe to suckle them (as I may ſo ſpeake) with her breaſts, to bring them vp and ſuſtaine them. And therfore when through drought and dearth it fails therin & deceiueth the inhabitants, Men (ſaith the Prophet) ſhal lament for the teats, euen for the Eſay. 32. 12. pleaſant fields and the fruitfull vine.
            
               
Which doctrine ſerueth, firſt, to confute the muttering and murmuring Vſe 1. of wicked & vnreaſonable people, that blame the earth for her barrenneſse, and cry out of the vnkindneſse of the times and ſeaſons. But miſery (ſaith Eliphaz to Iob) cometh Iob. 5. 6. not out of the duſt, neither doth affliction ſpring out of the earth; but man is born to trauel as the ſparks fly vpward. The cauſe then of all wants and defects in the earth, is not in it, but in vs, who haue angred the Lord by our ſinnes: for as ſparkes come frō the hote fire, ſo doth ſinne proceede from our corrupt nature, which procureth Gods curſe vpon the whole earth and our ſelues. So ſaith the Prophet: A fruitfull land God maketh Pſal. 107. 34. barren, for the ſins of them that dwel therein. And he threatneth by Moſes that for the ſinnes of the people, the Deut. 28. 23. heauens that are ouer their head ſhall be braſse, and the earth that is vnder Agge 1. 10.


               
their feete, iron: that is, that the heauens ſhall giue them no more moiſture for increaſe, then if they were of braſse; and that the earth for want of raine ſhould be as iron, and ſo altogether vnfit to yeeld them any fruite. Againe, it is many times mans idleneſse and ſlothfulneſse that cauſeth barrenneſse and want: and the cruelty of oppreſsors in decaying of needfull tillage, that procureth penury.
            This point alſo ſerueth to condemne Vſe 2. all wretched Atheiſts, who ſo mightily cry out and complaine of the increaſe of mankind, ſuppoſing the earth cannot ſuffiſe them; praying ſtil for plagues, that ſo they might haue plenty. And what is this elſe but to raile againſt heauen, and ſo helliſhly to blaſpheme the Lord God of hoaſts himſelfe? and to make the earth (ſo kind and fruitfull) as an vnnaturall mother and ſtepdame to the creatures?
            
               
               Is ouer all: That is, excelleth all other increaſe. Whence we learne in Doctrine 3. the third place, that there is no worldly bleſsing to the excellēt fruit of the earth by meanes of tillage. Now to omit many thouſand commodities which the ground bringeth forth, & to come to our bread which the earth procureth by corne and grain ariſing from husbandry and tillage: what is able to weigh with this bleſsing in the ballance, which is ſo neceſsary for the life of man, that our Sauiour teaches vs to pray eſpecially for it, not ſo Math. 6. 11. much as once mentioning any other thing? For what are gold and ſiluer, pearls and pretious ſtones to this our daily bread? And therfore it is rightly called the ſtaffe of bread, being the Leuit. 26. 26. ſtay of our life, as the ſtaffe to the impotēt & aged; which God threatneth Eſay 3. 1. to breake when he will puniſh a wicked people, ſo that they ſhal eate their bread by weight with care: and on Ezeck. 4. 16.


               
the contrary, that he will bleſse the bread and water of thoſe that ſerue him: ſo that they ſhall eat their bread Exod. 23 26. Leuit. 26. 15. Pſal. 65. 13. with plenteouſneſse. Therefore ſaith the Prophet, when the vallies ſhall be couered with corne, men ſhall ſhout for ioy and ſing; yea and all the creatures ſhall clap their hands (as it were) in their kind, and reioyce with mirth, when our garners and corners Pſal. 144. 13. of our houſes are ful with diuers ſorts of ſtore (the want whereof cauſeth the husbandman to be aſhamed:) Ioel 1. 11. this is a bleſsed thing euen in the cenſure of Gods Prophet.
            Now the reaſon why this plentifull Reaſons. kind of increaſe is ſo incomparable, is, for that it is welnigh the life & liuing of man and beaſt. And for this bread in particular, it is the ſtrength of Pſal. 104. 15. mans heart, & the ſtay of his life as we haue heard; euen Eſau that wretched reprobate being almoſt famiſhed for want of food, could ſay, Giue me Gen. 25. 32.


               
bread, and take my birthright: what is it to me being almoſt dead? And how pitifull is Ieremies complaint for his deſolate people in the famine, for want of food? All the people ſigh Lam. 1. 11. (ſaith he) and ſeeke their bread, they haue giuen their pleaſant things for meate, to refreſh their ſoule. The children and ſucklings ſwoone in the ſtreets, they haue ſaid to their mothers, where is bread and drink, when Cap. 2. 11. 12. they gaue vp the ghoſt in their mothers boſome? They that did feede delicately, periſh in the ſtreets: they Cap. 4. 5. that were brought vp in ſcarlet, embrace the dung. The Nazarites that were purer then the ſnow, whiter Verſe 7. then the milke; that were more ruddy in body then the red pretious ſtones, and like the poliſhed Saphir; their skin, now for want of food, Verſe 8. cleaueth vnto the bones, and withereth like a ſtocke, their viſar is now blacker then a coale; ſo that they that



are ſlaine with the ſword, are better then they that are killed with hunger, Verſe 9. for they fade away as they were ſtriken through for the fruits of the field. So ſharpe are theſe euill arrowes of Ezeck. 5. 16. famine for want of food and fruits of the earth. Hunger pierceth the heart of man with as ſenſible a pain as doth the ſharpe point of a dagger or dart, becauſe it directly fighteth againſt the life of man, and he dieth a moſt painfull death (though not ſo violently) whoſe deadly wounds do longer pricke him. A ſhorter puniſhment (though heauier) doth not kill the heart ſo much as that which is of longer continuance, though lighter. Therefore to auoide this extremitie of famine, the poore people are conſtrained Nehem. 5. 3. to gage their houſes & their vineyards and their land, to take vp corne for their family. And the Egyptians gaue to Ioſeph for corne and Gen. 47. 15. bread, not onely all their money that



they could make, but ſold to him their Horſes, Aſses, Sheepe, &c. yea themſelues as ſeruants and ſlaues to Pharaoh for want of bread. And Elies ſonnes will bow for a morſell of 1. Sam. 2. 36. bread: and therefore Iacobs ſuite to God in his iourney, was, that if God Gen. 28. 20. would but onely giue him bread to eate, and clothes to put on, that then he ſhould be his Lord and God, &c.
            The vſe is, to teach vs: firſt, that whenſoeuer God pincheth vs with Vse 1. the want of this bleſsing of bread and ſtore of the fruits of the earth, that then in anger he threatneth the taking away of our liues, ſhooting his euill arrowes of famine to wound our very Ezeck. 5. 16. ſoules. Euill indeed in regard of the euill effects and conſequents thereof.
            Secondly, we muſt learne to ſet a greater price, and farre more highly 2. to eſteeme and value theſe outward bleſsings of increaſe, that whenſoeuer



the Lord doth loade the earth with plentifull ſtore of fruits, and maketh pleaſant fields (as it were) to laugh vpon vs: when he burſteth the winepreſse, Ioel. 2. 24. and filleth our ſtorehouſes, that then (I ſay) we enlarge our hearts and haue ſtore of praiſes for him. And as these earthly bleſsings manifeſt his loue and care to vs: ſo let vs expreſse our kindnes to him, by our publiſhing and proclaiming of our thankfulneſse, in remembrance of his mercies. Let vs ſay with the Princely Prophet, What ſhall we render to the Pſal. 116. 12. Lord for all his benefits towards vs? &c.
            Laſtly, it ſerueth to reproue all carnall 3. Epicures & vnthankfull Atheiſts, which when they are fed to the full, & ſwim in their delights & pleaſures, make their belly their god, and their Phil. 3. 19. 1. Cor. 15. 32. Eſay 22. 13. fleſh their ſhrine; that fling out their heeles like wilde colts and fat horſes that are prouender prickt, againſt



their rider: that are more vnkind then the Oxe and the Aſse that know their maiſters crib; yet theſe men that are Eſay 1. 2. 3. fed ſo full, and fare ſo finely (being ſo kindly nouriſhed of the Lord) will not know him, but rebel againſt him; & like to Bores in the franke, & ſwine at maſt, wallowing and tumbling in their owne dung of their vncleannes, neuer regard nor look vp to the ſtore houſe of heauen, from whence they haue their food and fulneſse. Like filthy Sodomits, their fulneſse of bread leades them to fulneſse of idleneſse, Ezech. 16. 49. villany, and all kind of vncleanneſse: not vnlike the carnall Iſraelites whom God had fed with the fruite of the field, and cauſed to ſucke honey out Deut. 32. 13. 14 15, &c. of the ſtone, and oyle out of the hard rocke, butter of kine, and milke of ſheepe, with the fat of lambes and Rams fed in Baſhan, and Goats; with the fat of the graines of wheate, and the red licour of the grape had he filled



them. But he that ſhould haue bin vpright, when he waxed fat ſpurned with his heele; thou art fat, thou art groſse, thou art laden with fatneſse; therefore he forſooke God that made him, and regarded not the ſtrong God of his ſaluation. Neither let any man loath Gods good creatures, or deſpiſe any or the leaſt, for the abundance thereof, nor yet abuſe them to licenciouſneſse (as the manner of many is) in drunkenneſse and gluttony, in chambering & wantonneſse, (adding drunkenneſse to thirſt) or yet Deut. 29: 19. without due reſpect, in beſtowing them vpon their hounds, dogs, and horſes, leſt in the time of neceſsitie they be not forced earneſtly to deſire but the ſuperfluity of that, which heretofore they haue giuen to their beaſts. So was the prodigall perſon Luk 15. 24. 26. plagued, (not keeping himſelfe at home) nor content with Gods bleſſings in his fathers houſe, but running



riot, wandering, & waſting his wealth and honeſty, was forced in the famine to ſcramble with the ſwine which he kept, for their food, which yet was glad of the huskes, when they had eaten the kernell.
            
               The king conſiſteth by the field that is tilled. viz. Hath need of the huſbandmans Text. labour to till the earth by the fruits whereof he and his 
                  •
               ubiects are maintained. Whence we may further obſerue Gods wonderful Doctrine 4. wiſedome and prouidence for the preſeruation of the ſocietie and fellowſhip of mankind: that as the inferiors cānot be without the ſuperiors, no more can theſe without the other; euen the king himſelfe hath need of the ruſticke carter and clowne (as he is miſcalled) to till the ground. As there muſt be ſuch as rule, without confuſion of all things: ſo there muſt be ſuch as will obey. As there be maiſters, ſo there muſt be ſeruants. The



king cannot go to plow, yet if he will conſiſt and be vpholden with his ſubiects, the land muſt needs be huſbanded. As God hath appointed to euery one their place, ſo he hath fitted them with ſeuerall qualities and gifts, and enioyned them ſpeciall employments for the common good. There is the head and the body, and there be many members: yet euerie one hath his peculiar place, euery one his office and order for the common good of the whole. The eye cannot 1. Cor. 12. 17. 21. ſay to the head, nor the head to the feete, I haue no need of you. All is not an eye nor an eare, &c. Yea thoſe Verſes 2
                     •
                  . 23. members that are reputed the baſeſt and vileſt, nature hath moſt honored and reſpected. As without all the members the body is vnperfect: ſo without theſe neceſsary callings the body politick of the commonweath is lame. So is it alſo in the Church. Are all Apoſtles, are all Prophets, are



all teachers? No, God hath ordained ſome Prophets, ſome Euangeliſts, ſome Paſtors and Teachers, for the Eph 4. 12. 23. 14. worke of the Miniſterie, and edification of the body of Chriſt, that ſo we may grow vp in him, which is the head, vnto a perfect man, and vnto the meaſure of the age of the fulneſse of Chriſt.
            The reaſon of which doctrine is for that it ſpecially maketh for Gods Reason 1. glory, whoſe wiſedome and prouidence is ſeene in this goodly order of all his creatures, when as we ſee and behold how he hath made euery one ſo profitable in their place, and nothing in vaine, but for the mutuall helpe and good each to other.
            Secondly, God will haue it ſo to be, to linke vs all together in loue and Reason 2. care one of another. This debt is alwaies owing, and muſt ſtill be paide Rom. 13. 8. amongſts Chriſtians, not onely for the community of nature, but for



that our God hath made vs ſo ſeruiceable and profitable in our ſeuerall places, and for one anothers vſe.
            And to conclude, God hath ſo fitted Reason 3. vs to ſerue one anothers turne, to humble the higheſt, ſtanding ſometime in need of the meaneſt poore man. Euen the king hath need of the very clown, & noble Naaman of his 2. King. 5. 3. 5 ſlauiſh handmaid; and that to beate downe our pride and ſelfloue, who otherwiſe would not be beholding to any, no not to God our maker, if we could ſhift for our ſelues.
            The vſe is, firſt, for our inſtruction Vſe 1. to teach vs to know that we are not borne for our ſelues, but for the good of our brethren. Our graces and gifts are not our owne, but giuen vs of God to the edification of others; which therfore muſt make vs to leane and looke one towards another in the time of need, when iuſt occaſion ſerueth: The ſuperiour to reſpect the inferiour,



the rich the poore, the wise the ignorant; and ſo with holy Iob to be eyes to the blind, and feet to the Iob 29 15, 16. 17. lame, and a father to the poore. If (ſaith he) I did contemne the iudgement of my ſeruant, and of my maid, when they did contend with me: what ſhall I do when God ſtandeth Iob. 31. 13. 14. 15. vp againſt me? what ſhall I anſwer? He that hath made me, hath he not made him? hath not he alone faſhioned vs in the wombe? So the Apoſtle Paul inferreth vpō the former point, that we reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that Rom. 12. 15. 16. weepe, that we be of like affection one towards another, not high minded, nor wiſe in our owne conceit.
            Againe, it ſerueth to reproue all Vſe 2. ſuch as abuſe their headſhip and preheminence, and ſuch as by this pretence go about to trample all their inferiours vnder foote, who vrge the dutie of others, & neglect their own.



Am not I a king, a Lord, a maiſter? Am I not a Magiſtrate, a Landlord, a father, &c. And doſt thou know me? Yes, but doeſt thou know thyſelfe and God; and why he hath preferred and promoted thee? Namely to do good and no harme, to helpe and not to hurt? Knoweſt thou not that there is a King of kings, & a Lord of lords? My brethren (ſaith Iames) be not many Iames 3. 1. maiſters, knowing that we ſhal receiue the greater condēnation. Speak & 5. 6. not euill one of another, grudge not one againſt another, leſt ye be cōdē
               ned: behold the Iudge ſtandeth before the doore. And therefore as the Apoſtle exhorteth the Hebrewes, Heb, 13. 17. that they deſpiſe not their teachers; (for that they watch for their ſoules) ſo let not the higheſt Potentate, and greateſt men in place, contemne the poore husbandman that laboureth for their bodies. God will haue a mutuall ſubiection amongſt all, and a reciprocall



reſpect, and reflection of the beames of loue, and all holy duties, amongſt Chriſtian brethren. From which iniunction, Chriſt Ieſus himſelfe was not exempted, who waſhed his Diſciples feete, to teach them humility, Ioh. 13. 5. 14. who became poore to make 2. Cor. 8. 9. Eſay 53. 4. vs rich, &c. Surely he hath borne our infirmities, and carried our ſorrowes, and ſo muſt we beare one anothers Gal. 6. 2. burthens, and ſo fulfill the law of Chriſt.
            
               The king conſiſteth by the field that is tilled. viz. Neither he nor his ſubiects can liue without tillage: whence obſerue the ſingular vſe and neceſsity Doctrine 5. of tillage. Kings themſelues cannot be without it, neither in regard of their owne eſtate, nor their ſubiects: for as all muſt haue food and ſuſtenance, ſo muſt the neceſsary meanes therunto be vſed and embraced. The ſweet fruits of the earth will not now be gotten without the ſweat of mans



face. Adam himſelfe the hei
                  •
               e of all Gen. 3. 2. 3. the world, muſt firſt till the ground, before he haue his food, and not onely he, but his heires muſt go to plow, if they will haue any profite. Neither was it infamous at the firſt, for the greateſt men of renown, to be ſeen & very expert in this trade of tillage. It was Noahs calling, as before, ſo after Gen. 9. 20. Gen. 26. 12. 1. King. 19. 19. the floud. And to paſse ouer the Patriarches and Prophets, as Iſaac, Eliſha, and many other: Chriſt himſelf is not aſhamed to call his Father an Iohn 15. 1. husbandman. And this is the title of Gods Miniſters, they are Gods huſbandmen, his people their field and husbandry, and his word and the obedience thereof, the ſeed & fruite of their labors. Yea God himſelfe is ſaid to be the teacher of the trade, in the Propheſie of Eſay: Doth the plowmā 
               Eſay 28. 24. 25. 26. plow all the day to ſow? doth he open & break the clods of his ground? When he hath made it plaine, will he



not then ſow the Fitches, and caſt in Wheate by meaſure, and the appointed Barley and Rie in their place? For his God doth inſtruct him, to haue diſcretion, and doth teach him. Who then dare deſpiſe this neceſsary calling, whereof God is the Author, and the knowledge whereof he himſelfe is the teacher? and not rather glorifie God who giueth ſeed to the ſower, 2. Cor. 9. 10. skill to the plower, and increaſe to his labour, to rid the earth from the curſe of penurie and barrenneſse, and ſo by this ſanctified meanes to make it yeeld food for mans reliefe? But howſoeuer great men haue vndergone this calling (to omit the ancient and famous houſes of the Romans recorded in hiſtories, being called Cicerones, Fabij, Piſones, of the graine they ſowed, and labour they delighted in,) this is moſt ſure, that there were neuer any mighty Potentates, which maintained not the plow,



whether Pagans or Profeſsors. Pharaoh that Egyptian king how famous Gen. 47. was he for his treaſury of corne, by that means, throughout all the world, becoming a nourſe to all nations, and the keeper aliue of the whole Church of God? And it is recorded of Nebuzaradan 2. King. 25. 12 the king of Babels ſteward, after the ſacking of Ieruſalem, that he left of the poorer ſort (no doubt by the kings cōmandemēt) to dreſse the vineyards, and to till the land. So Vzziah 2. Chro. 26. 10 the king of Iuda, not onely builded towers, but increaſed plowmen, and dreſsers of vines, without the which it had bene in vaine, to haue medled with the other; and the reaſon is added of this his indeauor and care, for that he loued husbandry.
            Moreouer, how is it poſsible for Princes guards and troopes at home, beſides their huge hoaſts and ſcattering armies abroad, to be maintained without the plow? For if in the multitude



of the people the honor of the Prou. 14. 28. king conſiſteth, for the want whereof he cometh ſodainly to deſtruction: and if many people cannot be maintained without much food: and if much prouiſion of food cannot poſſibly be come by, but by much tillage (ſince the plow according to the prouerbe, bringeth enough;) then muſt this conſequent be as neceſsary, that neither the king himſelfe, nor his ſubiects and followers, can be vpholden without much tillage: for what can the king do when he wanteth food for his people? As the king of Iſrael ſaid to a woman in the ſiege of Samaria, crying out to him; ſaying, Helpe my Lord ô king: Seeing the 2. King. 6. 27. Lord (ſaith he) doth not ſuccor thee, how ſhall I helpe thee with the barne or with the winepreſse? And how fearefull & lamentable was the eſtate of the honorable Lords and delicate Ladies in the ſiege of Ieruſalem, for Lam. 4 5. 7.


               
want of food as before we obſerued?
            The reaſon is Gods ordinance & iniunction, that Adam & all his iſsue Reaſon 1. ſhall labor for their liuing, and ſo prouide their bread with painfulneſse & ſorrow, a iuſt reward for ſinne. Man I cōfes, liues not by bread alone: yet as the end of Gods prouidence is, that man ſhould liue, ſo the meanes of his prouidence is, that mā ſhould liue by bread: which bread muſt needs be got by his trauell and tillage. A corporall ſubſtance is to be maintained by corporall ſuſtenance, & as mā at the firſt was takē out of the earth, ſo will God haue the fruits of the earth to be his food as the fruite of his trauell: that ſo by the bread of the earth our bodies of earth may be noriſhed & relieued. Our mortal life is vpholden by earthly meanes, and as meates are ordained 1. Cor. 6. 13. for the belly, and the belly for meates: ſo death ſhall diſsolue both it and them to earth againe.
            
               
The conſideration whereof muſt Vſe 1. cauſe vs with all chearefulneſse to honour God in the meanes, and ſo to vſe them to his glory, and our neceſsary good. He that will eate muſt labour in a lawfull calling, and get his liuing by his Chriſtian painfulneſse. The ſlothfull man luſteth, and his Prou. 13. 4. ſoule hath nought: he will not plow becauſe of winter, therefore he ſhall Prou. 20. 4. beg in ſommer, and haue nothing. Therefore loue not ſleepe, leſt thou & 20. 13. come to pouerty, but open thy eies, & thou ſhalt be ſatisfied with bread. His meaning is, that the ſlothfull perſon ſhall fall into extreme pouertie: and though he beg to get his liuing, yet men ſhall haue no remorſe of his miſerie. And therefore ſuch careleſse perſons muſt take heed in time, and apply their buſineſses, if they will haue plenty and abundance, againſt the time of need: for as much food is in the field of the poore; ſo is the field Prou. 13. 23.


               
deſtroyed without diſcretion. Be the ground neuer ſo barren, yet by Gods bleſsing it will yeeld the poore huſbandman increaſe enough, by his diligent labour in tilling, and ſowing the ſame in due ſeaſon. And many a one (who hath a good ſtocke & fruitfull ſoyle) by neglecting the meanes, and not ordering things aright, waſte all that they haue, and come greatly behind hand. For he that will not ſow, ſhall not mow; and iuſtice it is with God, and men, that he that will not worke, ſhall not eate. Chriſtians 2. Theſs 3. 10. muſt not now looke for miracles, but vſe all lawfull and ordinary meanes for meate: Chriſt would not turne ſtones into bread (as the diuel would Math. 4. 4. haue him) but reacheth vs to be diligent in our callings (though without carking and diſtruſtfull care) and then Math 6. 34. ſufficient for the day will be the trauell thereof.
            Secondly, it reproueth and condemneth Vſe 2.


               
all ſuch as hinder this abundance of Gods bleſsings, by intercepting, or vtterly aboliſhing this myſtery of tillage, to wit, all ſuch perſons as decay both houſes and husbandries, that lay the land waſte, and labour to make it a wilderneſse in regard of men, fit only for a few ſuch monſters in mens ſhape, and all kind of their cattell which they deſire to keepe; hauing rooted out men (the image of the eternall God,) turned houſes into buſhes, and poore people into ſheepe, preferring the fellowſhip of beaſts before the ſocietie of men, made like to God. Such kind of ſpoylers of their countrey may in ſtead of their neighbours (whom they haue rooted out) ſalute their oxen, ſheepe and horſes, which they haue nouriſhed & increaſed. A fearefull wo is pronounced againſt all ſuch as thus dwell alone with the deſtruction of their brethren: Ioyning houſe to houſe,



and field to field, till there be no place for the poore, that ſo they may be placed by themſelues in the middeſt of the earth. This is in mine eares (ſaith Eſa. 5. 8. 9. the Lord of hoaſts) and for this ſhall their owne houſes one day be deſolate, and their great and ſtately pallaces without inhabitant. Theſe are waſters of their countrey, who delight rather in Abimelechs plow, to Iudg. 9 45. ſow the land with ſalt, (as he did the city) to make it barren and fruitleſse, then with good ſeede of corne and graine for the plentifull prouiſion of food for Gods people: and take greater pleaſure to ſow the ſoyle with the innocent blood of their poore brethren, then in procuring the meanes of abundance of bread, by good huſbandry and tillage; and ſo in Gods account do make their poſseſsions fields of blood, purchaſed in effect Math. 27. 8. Act. 1. 18. with the hazard of the liues of Gods inheritance, for the want of food.



And to ſpeake the beſt of them, the ſeed which they ſow in ſuch waſte & decayed places, is for the moſt part no better then ſheep tritles and dung of their beaſts, to make their paſtures profitable onely for themſelues. If beaſts (ſaith one) could ſpeake, they Bernard. in Cant. would exclaime againſt ſuch men, & call them beaſts, or worſe then beaſts, who onely rauen when they are hungry, and being ful do ſpare their prey. Aug. But theſe neither full, nor faſting, wil abſtaine from deuouring One forreſt is ſufficient for many Elephants and beaſts of diuers kinds to liue in, & to feed together. In the woods and wilderneſse are an vnknowne number of Beares, Wolues, & Tigers; of Lions, Leopards, and Panthers, to omit ſo many Oſtriches, Dragons, Satyres, & ſerpents. All theſe (after a ſort) endure one another, & liue together in their ſeuerall continent: yet theſe moſt cruell and vnreaſonable oppreſsours,



as wilde Bores roote vp the forreſt of their countrey and cōmonwealth, and like Wolues, delight in the deuouring o
                  •
                men, who are their owne fleſh and proper nation. Their woods and parkes, and paſtures, will not ſuffiſe them, but ſtill they pale in, and put out. One Lordſhip, one country, nay a whole world (I warrant you) will not ſtanch and quench the helliſh thirſt of theſe inſatiable cormorants. They licke vp the poore and Num. 22. 4. their poſseſsions, as the Oxe doth the graſse; they eate them vp, as it were Pſal. 14. 4. bread, and yet like greedy dogs can neuer be ſatisfied. This is the generation Pſal. 59. 14. 15 that the wiſe man ſpeaketh of, whoſe teeth are as ſwords, and their chawes as kniues, to eate vp the afflicted Prou. 30. 14. out of the earth, and the poore from amongſt men, that tread vpon the poore, and take from them burdens Amos. 5. 11. & 8. 6. of wheate; ſuch as buy the poore for ſiluer, and the needy for ſhoes:



ſuch as plucke off their skin from thē, and the fleſh from their bones, and Mich. 3. 2. 3. chop them in peeces as for the pot, and as the fleſh within the cauldron. The Lord hath ſworne by the excellency of Iacob: ſurely I wil neuer forget any of their workes. Shall not the land tremble for this, and euerie one that dwelleth therein mourne? Thou Amos 8. 7. 8. haſt conſulted ſhame to thine owne houſe, by deſtroying many people, & haſt ſinned againſt thine owne ſoule: for the ſtone ſhall cry out of the duſt, Hab. 2. 10. 11. and the beame out of the timber ſhal anſwer it: Wo be to him that buildeth a towne with bloud, and erecteth a citie by iniquitie. The iawes of theſe Lions would be broken by godly Iob. 29. 17. Magiſtrates, and the poore oppreſsed people (that are as their prey) would be plucked out of their teeth. But they are great ones, and feare not the Princes ſword; yet let them know, that there is a great God, who is a



righteous iudge, and a reuenger of theſe wrongs: who one day will proceed againſt them; whoſe word hath paſsed ſentence already, neither will it be long before the execution come. They couet fields, and take them by Micha. 2. 2. 3. violence, and houſes, and take them away; ſo they oppreſse a man and his houſe, euen a man and his heritage. Therfore thus ſaith the Lord againſt this family, I haue deuiſed a plague whereout ye ſhall not plucke your neckes. Though ſuch men dwell in deſolate cities where none inhabite but themſelues, and where houſes Iob. 15. 28. 29 30. are brought to ruinous heapes, which they cauſed by depopulation and oppreſsion of the poore; yet ſhall they not be rich
                  •
               , nor their ſubſtance continue, neither ſhall they bring their ſumptuous houſes to perfectiō: the flame ſhall drie vp his branches, & he ſhall go away with the breath of his mouth: feare ſhall dwell in his



houſe, becauſe it is none of his, and brimſtone ſhall be ſcattered vpon his Iob. 18. 15. 16 17. 19. 21. habitation; his rootes ſhall be dried vp beneath, and aboue ſhall his branches be cut downe, his remembrance ſhall periſh from the earth, & he ſhall haue neither ſonne, nor nephew, amongſt his people, nor any poſteritie in his dwellings. Surely ſuch are the habitations of the wicked, and this is the place of him that knowes not God. Yet theſe men will not be reclaimed, ſtill they build with one conſent the towers of confuſion; they will not be hindered and ſtayed, but Gyant-like make warre againſt God Gen. 11. 6. and the good of their countrey, to bring it to confuſion vpon the face of the earth, & ſo openly in effect publiſh to all, that they neither feare God in heauen, king on earth, nor diuell in hell: and proclaime to all the world, that there is no feare of God before Rom. 3. 18. their eyes. But a fire ſhall conſume



them, and as they haue deuoured ſubſtance, Iob. 20. 15. 19. 20. 27. 29. ſo they ſhall vomite vp their ſweet morſels, for God ſhall draw it out of their bellies; and as they haue vndone many, & forſaken the poore, and ſpoyled houſes which they built not: ſo ſurely ſhall they feele no quietneſse in their body, neither ſhall they reſerue of that which they deſired: the heauens ſhall declare their wickedneſse, and the earth ſhall riſe vp againſt them. This is the portion of wicked men from God, and the heritage that they ſhall haue of him: for deſolation and deſtruction are in Eſay. 59. 7. 8. 9 their paths, and the footeſteps whereby you might trace thē, are waſting, ſpoyling, and ruinating whole houſes and families. Like Rauens they build their houſes high, and loue to liue alone; and like deuouring Kites, that prey vpon the carkaſses of the poore. No ſeed can grow, for theſe Crowes, in the furrowes of the field,



nor ſcant in the church, if they might haue their wils. For hauing deſtroied the commonwealth, they ſeize vpon the Church, and hauing waſted and taken away the bread of men, they challenge the bread of God, yea the ſhewbread and conſecrate things, Leuit. 21. 6. 8. 17. 21. moſt vnlawfull for them to haue. They ſeeke to liue of the altar though 1. Cor. 3. 13. they belong not to the altar, but rather take a couſe to ouerthrow the whole ſeruice and ſacrifice, and the ſeruants of God, that otherwiſe wold more chearefully and painfully attend vpon it. Dauid would not drink 2. Sam. 23. 15. 16. 17. that water which was drawne with ſuch danger out of the well of Bethlehem by his Worthies, though he longed and thirſted after it; yet he powred it out, for an offering vnto the Lord: but theſe men (though they haue no need) will drinke and carouſe (in the conſecrate veſsels) not water, but wine, (adding drunkenneſse Dan. 5. 23.


               
to thirſt) though it be to the Deut. 29. 19. deſtruction and hazard of themſelues & Gods ſeruants. Oh how much better had it bin for ſuch, rather to haue ſpilt it on the ground with remorſe (as a note of repentance) then in the end to be ſure to drinke the dregs of Pſal. 75. 8. Gods fearefull cup of vengeance, as a iuſt reward of this ſinne? Yet ſee a little further the dropſie of theſe mens minds, and their horſleach humour, Pro. 30. 15. that makes their hearts as a graue after all vnlawfull gaine, and a very deuouring hell that will neuer be cloyed: Eſai. 5. 15. they clayme all for their common, the whole world is not ſpacious & wide enough for their walke. Theſe Moles (to ſpeake the truth) vndermine the foundatiō both of Church & cōmon wealth, Prince & people: for though the king and ſubiects conſiſt by the field that is tilled, yet ſtill they decay it, & lay the earth waſte, ouerthrowing poore mens plows in euery place,



not letting ſo much as a poore Mill to wagge for all this, but are ready to take their tole (moſt baſely and buſily) of euery poore mans bag; taking both tole and tithes: all is fiſh that cometh to their net, and a prey for their teeth, if they can once faſten their tallants, & tentors on the ſame. Is there no balme in Gilead? is there Ier. 8. 22. no Phyſition there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recouered? But why ſpeake I ſo lowd and earneſtly to the back and belly, that haue no eares? Alas I ſee no ſalue ſufficient to heale this ſore, no medicine auaileable to cure this maladie. Let vs therefore looke vnto our God who is the alone Phyſition ſufficient, and moſt excellent at such a deſperate diſeaſe.
            In that he ſeemeth to diſtinguiſh betweene field and field, as expreſſing Text. his mind, what field he meaneth that bringeth forth ſuch abundance,



ſo neceſsary, & ſufficiēt for the king & his ſubiects: we learn in the laſt place, Doctrine 6. that there is no ground or field ſo neceſsary and fruitfull as that which is in tillage. The ſeed which the ſower Math. 13. 18. went out to sow in good ground (by his good husbandry, labour, and Gods bleſsing vpon the ſame) for one corne yeelded an hundred fold, for ſome other, ſixtie fold, and for another thirtie. And it is reported of Gen. 26. 12. Iſaacks crop of ſowing ſeed, in the land of Abimelech king of the Philiſtians, that he reaped the ſame yeare an hundreth sold by eſtimation: ſo the Lord bleſsed him, ſaith the text. And indeed, who is able to reckon vp the great increaſe of corne and graine that God doth raiſe out of the earth, by this his bleſsed ordinance of tillage and good husbandrie, filling our houſes, barnes, and garners, beſides our rickes, houels, ſtackes, & heapes of graine without number and meaſure,



ſometimes gathered and got together in one land, (as in Egypt) and ſufficient to ſerue and prouide for not only one country but many nations, as in the daies of Ioſeph: who gathered wheate like to the ſand of the ſea, in multitude out of meaſure, vntill he Gen. 41. 49. left numbring, for it was without number.
            The reaſon why ſuch abundance Reaſon 1. of fruite proceedeth of tillage, is firſt, the naturall barrennes of the earth, in regard of Gods curſe vpon the ſame, by the meanes of mansſinne, which now without painfull plowing will not be profitable and plentifull.
            Secondly, the bleſsing of God vppon his owne ordinance, when man 2. doth diligently and chearefully ſubmit himſelfe vnto the ſame, in the Chriſtian vſe thereof, as more largely was ſhewed before in the reaſons of the ſecond doctrine.
            Which ſerueth to confute the



proud conceite of many graceleſse Graziers, and the preſumptuous reſolution of many greedie decayers of tillage, which ſet their acres decayed at ſuch an incomparable valuation, ſo exceedingly multiplying their rents and reuenewes. Their great ſtockes and ſtore of all kind of cattell, ſo eaſily heeded, and maintained, without great charge or toile, makes now their preſent ſtate (as they ſuppoſe) vnmatchable: ſo that now they ſcorne at Iobs wealth (like Atheiſts) being farre beyond him, in oxen, ſheepe, & all kind of cattell. Yet here (I aſsure them) is ſome difference, that his land cried not out againſt him, nor Iob. 31. 38. 39 the furrowes thereof made any complaint in his conſcience: and that he neuer eat the fruites thereof without ſiluer, nor grieued the ſoules of the maiſters thereof, as theſe men do in euery place.
            Their innumerable tods of wooll,



their heards and droues of fallings ſufficient for the ſeruice of Court and countrey, they eſteeme to be an incomparable credit, and gaine. Nay ſome of thē are not aſhamed to ſay, that by this ſhort courſe, they auoid the curſe of digging & deluing in the Gen. 3. 17. 18. 19. earth, of plowing and ſweating for their liuing, ſo iuſtly enioyned them of God to ſinfull man. Thus they dare open their mouth not onely againſt Pſal. 7
                     •
                  9. men, but euen againſt their Maker, and heauen it ſelfe. Theſe men wil liue by their own wits and waies, deſpiſing Gods will and word, which they caſt behind them. Yet here let me reaſon a little with this greedie Pſal. 50. 17. gripe, and decayer of tillage for his owne priuate gaine. What field is ſo fruitfull as that which is tilled? the abundāce of this earth is ouer al (ſaith he that is wiſer then the wiſeſt of thē all) whoſe experience ſo dearely bought, far ſurpaſseth their conceits;



who tried all their vanities, and many more, and therefore we may truſt his reſolution, and aſsuredly preferre it before all others.
            Theſe kind of men (perhaps) reaſon well for their owne perſons and places: but where is their care for the Prince, and Gods people; for the Church and commonwealth? Their fields (I confeſse) find many beaſts, but the field that is ſowne, feedeth both men and beaſts. And here note thy charitie toward thine owne fleſh: Thou careſt for cattell, and art careleſse 1. Cor. 9. 9. of Chriſtians. Thou art kinde to thy ſelfe, and regardeſt not the ſtate of the king and his ſubiects, that conſiſt by the field that is tilled. But let the very beaſts conuince thee, the Bees, and all creatures in their kinde who are not made for themſelues, but for the common good. The ſheepe yeeld both fell and fleſh, the birds and beaſts, their yong ones and themſelues;



the Bees their honey, the Oxe treadeth out the corne, and the horſe 1. Cor. 9. 9. beareth many heauy burthens, and al the creatures helpe for the common ſeruice, and reliefe of mankind: yet thou alone amongſt the reſt (& worſe in this reſpect then all the reſt) ſeekeſt onely thine owne gaines, and liueſt to thy ſelfe, with the hurt of all others.
            But admit thou hadſt thine owne will, in turning commons into paſtures, and tilled fields into cloſing for thy cattell; where in the end wold be thy bread, without plowing and ſeedes time? Therefore when God would take away the curſe of the world, he bringeth in this bleſsing, that ſeedes time and harueſt, cold and Gen. 8. 22. heate, ſommer and winter, day and night ſhould not ceaſse, whileſt the earth remained. But theſe men by their crueltie would bring all to confuſion, that the world cannot ſtand,



if they be not ſtayed. And ſo iuſtly incurre the curſe of God, and his people: for as a bleſsing ſhall be vpon the Pro. 11. 26. head of him that ſelleth corne: ſo he that withdraweth it, the people will curſe him: for as the one prouideth for their neceſsitie, ſo the other mercileſse men (by decaying of tillage, and keeping in of corne) do procure poore mens miſerie. Now if it be ſuch a curſed ſinne, to withdraw the corne in the daies of dearth, to make it dearer, that ſo men may vtter the very reffuſe of their graine at any Amos. 8. 5. 6. rate: as thoſe tyrannous oppreſsours did in the daies of Nehemia, who cauſed their brethren to gage their Neh. 5. 3. 5. 8. 9 lands, vineyards, and houſes, yea to ſell their ſonnes, and themſelues as ſlaues, for corne: how much more intollerable an oppreſsion is it, to take away all neceſsary meanes of prouiſion, by tillage and husbandry? For if theſe men might preuaile, no corne



would be come by for any coine, for any ſuite or ſeruice, for any pricke or priſe. For where no oxen are, there the crib is emptie, but much increaſe Prou. 14. 4. cometh by the ſtrength of the oxe. Where the means of good husbandrie is neglected, there is want of neceſsaries, but by the diligent tilling of the land by teames and ſtrong cattell fit for plowing, there is plentie and abundāce both for man & beaſt. How can ſuch men pray, Giue vs this day our daily bread, that daily take away Math. 6. 11. the meanes of bread? Will they haue their bread, and not vſe the means for bread, which is tillage? Is not this in plaine dealing to tempt the Lord? Math. 4. 7. Will they haue God to feede them miraculouſly, with Manna, as he did Iſrael in the wilderneſse, to manifeſt Exod. 16. 15. his power? No, no; in Canaan God will haue plowing and ſowing vſed, & therefore when Iſrael came thither Manna ceaſsed. I ſpare here to ſpeake Ioſh. 5. 12.


               
how theſe vnnaturall oppreſsours of their brethren, cauſe the people (many times) to murmure againſt their God, and to blaſpheme his name. Beſides the ſtrange rebellions, and outragious vproares and vpriſings againſt their Prince and countrey. But is it not a wonder (to vſe the words Lib 1. Vtop. Tho. Moore. of no meane man in his time) that ſheepe that were wont to be ſo milde and gentle, and fed with ſmall coſt, ſhould now become ſo wild and rauenous, to eate vp men, and lay waſte whole countries? For theſe men (that encloſe all the commons) they pull down houſes, they ouerthrow towns leauing Churches to ſtand alone in ſome places, ſeruing only as a pen for their ſheep. And ſo cauſing poore mē of all ſorts to flit frō their dwellings, & many of thē, finding no houſes to hide their heads in, do fall to ſell their goods & houſhold stuffe; and at laſt (hauing nothing left) are forced to



ſteale, & ſo iuſtly be hanged for their labor, or at leaſt go wandring abrode, as vagrant perſons, neuer ſet on work: there being now ſmall buſineſse, ſo many good husbandries and tillages being mightily decaied. And is it not vnnaturall (ſaith another) to turn men out to bring in ſheep? Yet if they wil needs maintaine large paſtures, and ſtocke them with ſheepe, remember what God ſaith by Ezechiel: The ſheepe of my paſture are men, & we Ezech. 34. 31. are his people and the ſheep of his paſture; and the image of God in one Pſal. 95. 7. & 100. 3. man is more worth then al the ſheepe in the world.
            Therfore to conclude with exhortation, Concluſion. let ſuch as beare the face and haue the feature of mē, ceaſse now to be ſuch monſters any more: let not thoſe that are called, and would needs be accompted Chriſtians, be worſe then Cannibals. Let them learne of ſauage beaſts, to ſpare their owne



ſexe. Yea let them know and acknowledge, that all creatures here below, are a thouſand fold farre inferiour to him that is faſhioned ſo like to the very Creator himſelfe, and for whoſe ſake all other things were made to ſerue. And ſince that God and nature enioyne them this duty, let them be ſeruiceable for the beſt good of their pooreſt brethren, and ſtill remember that the earth is no ſtep-dame if it be not abuſed, nor our God any niggard (in prouiding for many millions of men and beaſts) if his owne ſanctified means be not deſpiſed. Let them not therefore now labour any longer to reduce the world to a confuſed Chaos, by inuerting, deforming, and quite defacing the moſt ſweete and amiable order that God hath inſtituted. Let not the Courtier (I ſay) contemne the Carter, by whoſe toile and tillage of the earth, both king and ſtate conſiſteth. And as they loue the



life and honour of their Prince, ſo let them labour to vphold the plow, the abundant profite whereof ſurpaſseth all. Let them tender the ſtate of the countrey, Church, and commonwealth, wherein they liue and breathe, the life of God and nature. So ſhall they be free from great offences, moſt iuſtly miniſtred by their former wicked wayes, to al ſorts of men that hither to haue ſuſtained the ſmart threof. So ſhal God be better ſerued, Chriſtian Magiſtrates & Miniſters more worthily and honourably maintained and reſpected: and (which is a ioy ſurmounting all) they ſhal haue profit ſufficient, with ſound peace of conſcience, beſides the praiſe and prayers of all that feare the Lord; in ſteed of many bitter curſes, moſt iuſtly cauſed by their former wicked courſes, &c.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   