
      
         
            
            
            THE Mahumetane or Turkiſh Hiſtorie, containing three Bookes:
            
               1 Of the originall and beginning of the Turkes, and of the foure Empires which are iſſued and proceded out of the ſuperſtitious ſect of Mahumet.
               
               2 Of their Conqueſts and the ſucceſſion of the houſe of Ottoman, vntill the preſent reigning of Mahumet the third.
               3 Of the warres and ſeege of Malta, which Solyman the great made to the great Maiſter and brothers of that order.
            
            ¶Heerevnto haue I annexed a briefe diſcourſe of the warres of Cypres, at what time Selimus the ſecond, tooke from the Venetians the poſſeſsion of that Iland, and by reaſon thereof I haue adioyned a ſmall diſcourſe conteining the cauſes of the greatneſſe of the Turkiſh Empire.
            Tranſlated from the French & Italian tongues, by R. Carr, of the middle Temple in London, Gentleman.
            Dedicated to the three worthy brothers Robert Carr, William Carr and Edward Carr, in the County of Lincolne, Eſquiers.
            ¶AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Eſte, dwelling in Alderſgate ſtreete: 1600.
            
               
               
                  The Right Honble. Francis North Baron of Guilford 1703
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the right worthy and worſhipfull his louing coſen Robert Carr of Aſuerby in the countie of Lincolne Eſquire, one in hir Maieſties Commiſsion of peace there.
            
               SIR the worthie eſtimation which firſt your Father, then your ſelfe with your Worſhipfull Brothers haue gotten, and euer retained in your countrey; for hoſpitalitie and many other your much commended vertues, together with the deſire I haue alwayes naturally had to do that declining name: (arightly ſo cald if in you & them it decay, whom all the reſt hop'te to haue ſeene the euerlaſting propagators of the ſame, and in which number I a ſappleſſe braunch of that trunke am one) to whom I owe all ſeruice or aught which might adde therevnto reputation; hath drawne mee to make tender of theſe my traductions, from the French, Latin, and Italian tongues, of this Mahumetane or Turkiſh Hiſtorie, to your ſaide ſelfe with your brothers, as true tokens of my deuoted minde, whereof to the vtmoſt of power you and they may diſpoſe; Not for I thinke this Dedication or any other acte of mine, can giue aught to the fulneſſe of your prayſes whereof euery tongue that knows you plentifully ſpeakes: But onely for I ſeeke in ſome honeſt office being an admirer of your and their vertues, to make knowen my affection (though my ſelfe vnknowen) which in many

meditations hath often wiſhed any occaſion, that in trew coullers to you and them might once make it appeare; And now not expecting longer any greater: (for what might he in occaſion expect further whoſe valew onely conſiſts in his minde) being importuned by the much intreatie of friends, that theſe my paines taken in this Hiſtorie might come abroad, I thought none ſo fit as well in regarde of my ſaide affection, as of your and their worthineſſe to whom to conſecreate theſe my leſſe worthie labors. Wherefore to you ſir the firſt both in time and place I preſent this firſt booke cōtayning the Originall of theſe Turckes with the foure Monarchies diſcended of them as the forerunner both in time and place to the other following, and not vnfitly appertayning: Becauſe this booke being furniſhed with much varietie of matter as tranſlations of Empires, chaunge of gouernment, ſmall things from their meane beginnings growing to great perſection; great things by indiſcretion and litle conſideration, ruined, and ouerthrowen: Occaſions hapning and happely purſued, drawing eſtimation and aduancement; neglected, pulling on diſſolation and diſtruction. I ſay theſe and ſuch like in this euerie where appearing to whom might I commend then your ſelfe whoſe ripe age cannot but be freſhly ſtored with multitudes of ſuch good obſeruations, gathered from preſidents, and examples, foraine and domeſtique, both of theſe and former times: And ſurely when my ſelfe aright enter in conſideration of theſe thinges (whereof theſe bookes are a rich ſtore-houſe) let mee ſpeake it with a reuerend regarde alwaies (and vnder controule of religion) I am in opinion often a Platoniſt, aſsigning all mortall affaires

neceſſarelie a periode in theyr perfection, to which hauing attayned, they fall into a retrograde of declining, vntill they be brought to the loweſt degree which miſerie, can alot: nor there long continuing, againe and againe reuiue and ariſe from foorth the aſhes like to the Arabian Phaenix, (or as the Phiſitions talke of the ſtate of our bodies) alwaies either mending or impayring but neuer ſtanding at one ſtay; So as houlding on this continuall courſe, the vtmoſt point euer of felicitie or infelicitie is conioyned in the ſelfe ſame inſtant to his next contrarie; which Macrobius well obſeruing hath worthely depictur'd in theſe wordes.
            
               Non poſſunt primi eſſe omnes omni tempore
               Summum ad gradum claritatis cum veneris
               Conſiſtes egre, & citius quā diſcendas decides
               Cecidi eg
                     •
                  , cad
                     •
                  t qui ſequitur, l
                     ••
                  s eſt publica:
            
            And as wee ſee in caſting vp accompts thoſe, and the ſame counters to fall in places now of poundes now of pence, without any certaine continuance other then ſorts to their courſe: So not vnlike is our condition heere, commaunded ſtill with the chaunge either of better or worſe, whereof Seneca according to his graue manner hath thus ſaide;
            
               Nulla ſors longa dolor & voluptas▪
               
               I nuicem 
                     •
                  adunt: breuior voluptas.
               I ma permutat breuis ho
                     •
                  a ſummis:
               Nemo confidat nimium ſecundis.
               Nemo diſperet meliora La
                     •
                  ſis.
            
            Which reaſons whilſt more narrowly I doe examine (though not ſo nicely as Plato to ſay that thorough the operation of the ſuperior bodies in theſe inſerior, or by the reuolution of the heauens in this or that

time this or that ſhall fall foorth) haue beegotten in mee a beleefe for maintaining a ſecond of his aſſertions viz.
            
            
               Omnes ſerui ex regibus & omnes reges ex ſeruis oriundi.
            
            For if in the reſtleſſe variation of things and progreſſe of time, vnauoydable ruine attend the ſucceſsion of greatneſſe, but aduauncement on the poſteritie of miſerie: who liues in ſo baſe and abiect fortune who may not chalenge his being from worthie aunceſters, and aſſure himſelfe in him or his to ſee the ariſing Sunne of bright ſhining honor; As on the contrarie, what other aduanced to the higheſt degree of dignitie, who may not ſuſpect the meanes of his firſt beginning, and iuſtly feare in the weaning of his fortunes to what cōdition (by the violence of this currant) he or his may be brought; All this I ſay am I drawne more redely to leane too; by reaſon of this preſent hiſtorie, for behoulding heerein from how lowly and ſmall beginnings the victorious & neuer degenerating race of theſe Ottamans, together with the inuincible nations of their Turkes are growen; that being but bare breach Tartars only, runne out of the caues of thoſe horrid countryes of the Rifean and Caucaſus mountaines, yet haue with glorious ſucceſſe in their attempts ledde captiuitie captiue, made themſelues now conquerours ouer the whole Eaſt; & in fine are become euen the terror of the Weſt. Sacking infinit numbers of Citties and Countryes: diſpoyling multitudes of Princes and high diſcended families of theyr liues, together with theyr crownes and kingdomes: and this done in ſo few yeares ſpace aboue all opinion, or what elſe before was euer executed by the antique world. It cannot be but to that which the

courſe of things doth daylie caſt vpon them; (if there be a courſe in things which is not my purpoſe further heere to diſpute:) God almightie in his ſecret iudgements doth haſten their proceedings, to chaſtice the ingratitude of vs Chriſtians for the ſmall thankefulneſſe wee ſhew for ſo many his gratious benefits liberally, (though vnworthely) beſtowed on vs. But my office is not of a diuyne, hauing in purpoſe to make knowē onely what they haue euen from the firſt done, and daylie doe, rather then the reaſon of the deede, how it is or can be done. In which I heere preſent you and your Worſhipfull brothers with three bookes. This of their Originall, and the ſeuerall Monarchies diſcended from them; Another of their conqueſts and the ſucceſſion of the houſe of Ottaman, whoſe greatneſſe hath in manner drownd all the reſt; The third of the ſmall gainefull attempt giuen by Soliman (great Grandfather to Mahumet the third of that name who now reigneth) to the Iſle of Malta, or Melita, defended chiefly by the forces of the great Maiſter, and the valiancy of the worthy brothers of that order. By which laſt booke I wold thus much inferre, that ſince the proweſſe of ſo ſmall a handfull was not onely able to withſtand, but repell the furie and huge forces of ſo confident an enemie, puffed vp with pride & aſſurance of ſo many rich ſpoiles and gayned victories: O what then would the forces of Chriſtian Princes vnited doe, ſo we might but once ſee the glorious beams of that bright ſhyning day appeare. To this I haue annexed likewiſe an abſtract (borrowed frō the Italians) of ſuch cauſes as are ſaide to giue greatneſſe to the Turckiſh Empire a breuiate onely of a larger worke yet by me vnfiniſhed, deuided into three bookes

which by gods grace ſhal come forth ſhortly, ſhadowed with the fauours of you & your brothers names. Theſe former in the meane time if it ſhall pleaſe you to reſpect with that kinde acceptance which from you they ſeeke, though not well deſerue: I of my paines receiue a large requital, who deſire nothing more; Laſtly whereas ſeuerally I aſſigne dedications of theſe books to you & your brothers, vpon my ſeuerall reaſons in their Epiſtles ſet downe: it is not of any purpoſe to deuide you or them from the pleaſure of any part, which I wiſh ſhould bee common vnto all: but rather to expreſſe thereby your mutuall natures cōformities, for as theſe books though diuerſly directed, yet thus together perticipate theyr content to all readers alike if they pleaſe, whereto the dedication giues no hinderance. So you of all liuing brothers (with the mightie admiration of men) in diſtinct bodies are ſayde to haue in euerie good thing one and the ſame vnchangeable will & minde alwayes reſident: where meum and tuum the worldes ſole contentions neuer take place. Thus wiſhing to your Worſhippe all content of your deſires, and therein the full fruition of your health, with much affection prayed for by many, I take my leaue and to your good opinion commend mee; From the midle Temple this 20. of March. 1600.
            
               Your kinſman in all faithfull ſeruice at commaund
R. Carr.
            
         
         
            
               
               I: S: To his kinde friend R. C.
               
                  THe well fed paunch, ſound ſleepes and proud attire
                  From face of men hath baniſht vertue quite
                  VVhereby the courſe of natures free deſire
                  Is cleane corrupt by cuſtomes foule deſpite.
               
               
                  So euerie light is ſpent which gratious heauen
                  Aſsignd▪ this lyfe our ſtaggering ſteppes to ſtay
                  That now a worthie wonder it ſhall ſeeme
                  If any one ſhall glorious actes aſſay.
               
               
                  The Lawrell wittes reward, the Mirtle eloquent
                  Drownd in contempt with faire Philoſophie
                  The gayning people hould for time miſpent
                  And few folkes feete the ſtrayter path doe trie
                  Yet gentle friend let mee of you require,
                  Purſue▪ the prayſe due to your harts deſire.
               
            
            
               C: S: To his louing coſen & good friend. R. C.
               
                  
                     I Speake no prayſe to thee my Coſen kinde 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  (For well of aught I know you ſeeke no prayſe)
                  But ioy to ſee that theſe our better dayes
                  Shall bee adornd with beauties of thy minde.
               
               
                  O how I feard thy modeſt thoughts inclinde
                  To ſit in ſilence muſing mourning layſe
                  In ſcorne of fame and all that honor rayſe
                  would drowne the parts which heauen to thee aſsignd
               
               
                  I know thy worth and ſo ſhall many moe
                  (Vnleſſe thy ſelfe and many moe thou wrong)
                  And ſince begoone to ſet thy ſelfe in ſhoe
                  Bring out thy ſtore in darkneſſe hid too long,
                  Nor doubt not aught for if (as earſt) I ſee,
                  That pleaſeth others which once pleaſeth mee.
               
            
            
               
               R: M: To hiis friend. R: C:
               
                  NO little glorie gaine they I confeſſe
                  who fitlie fo
                        •
                     ein
                        •
                      tongues our language teach:
                  Yet he farre more deſerues without impeach,
                  His owne braines birth who well dyd e'er expreſſe.
               
               
                  Then gentle friend make you your ſelfe not leſſe
                  To poſt vs French and Latine in our ſpeach:
                  But broach thoſe quieres of rare conceit and reach,
                  Which I haue ſeene moſt worthie of the preſſe.
               
               
                  Thoſe loue ſick Sonets, thoſe pleaſing Comedies,
                  VVhich oft with much attention I haue heard;
                  That rich diſcourſe, where loue in louing dies:
                  And of all wittes thoſe, paradoxs preſerd.
                  (O) let this age but ſome of theſe behold
                  And prayſe thy pen writ in a veyne of gold.
               
            
            
               The anſwere to his friend. R: M:
               
                  MY deareſt friend I willingly confeſſe,
                  That I whoſe life ſhould other lead & teach,
                  Am not deuoide of blame, and foule impeach,
                  VVhich (O,) I would no tongue could ere expreſſe.
               
               
                  Now for I haue my ſelfe in wotth made leſſe:
                  Too ſtale a fable to the publick ſpeach,
                  Is't not enough: but that I furthther reach
                  To blaze my follies in a printing preſſe.
               
               
                  No pardone no, both ſonges and Comedies,
                  And what beſides pleaſing applauſe hath heard,
                  VVithout remorſe in their creation dies:
                  To byrth and buriall rites at once preſerd.
                  Too much of theſe dyd men in me behold,
                  O would time paſt could be regaind with gold.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               The Preface, To the curteous Reader.
            
               IT is no ſmall wonder vnto me gentle Reader, though the worth of the argument contayned in theſe bookes were leſſe, why the examples of other nations (as in other things) ſhould not ſo much preuayle wt our countrey men, as to ſtirre vp ſome, according to the preſidents in many other languages (wherewith the world in large volumes is fraught,) to haue written ſomewhat of theſe Turkiſh affayres; For if wee regard the greatneſſe of their attempts, their fortunateneſſe in ſucceſſe, their diſcipline, or what elſe may adde aught to militarie glorie: you ſhall finde them in my conceite not inferior but superior farre in euery thing which hath giuen eſtimatiō to former ages, of which bookes we ſee euery hand and ſtudie full, whilſt theſe alone are hid from our people for want of ſome paine taking pen that might tranſfer ſo rich treaſure from ſtraungers vnto vs. If new things delight, (according to the naturall ingrafted condicion of man,) theſe are new; If benefit be expected in bookes, (& eſpecially in hiſtories,) for counſayle & forewarning miſchiefs in the examples and harmes of others, frō what former hiſtorie may we reap greater then this: ſtored with ſo many and notable preſidents of all ſorts, freſh bleeding as it

were before our eyes, (and which ſhould be a greater motiue) telling of enſewing danger, not much deuided frō our owne doores, when daylie we lamentably ſee our neighbours houſes not farre of flaming. New faſhioned clothes deriued from ſtraungers, are euery day much eſteemed, new faſhioned manners, new faſhioned wittes are affected: then either for the worth or faſhion, let theſe French and Italian traductions receiue your fauorable cenſures: I dyd propound no greater gaine in my paines, and hope of your curteſies to obtaine no leſſe, which graunted ſhall encourage me to ſhew you yet ſomewhat more worthie ere long in this argument, wherein I hauing firſt (for aught I know) broken the ice (ſauing onely the Hiſtorie of Scanderbegg of the late Perſian warres, & that of Tamberlain though exceding well done yet but perticuler parts of this diſcourſe) ſhall be glad to heare of any companion▪ for further paines, to whom this ſubiect will afford enough of ſufficient and worthie matter; And ſo crauing you would friendly correct what faults in the Impreſſion haue paſſed either by me or the Printer, I take my leaue, and reſt the ſeruant of euery well willing reader.
            
               R. Carr.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Originall and beginning of the Turkes, and of the foure Empires which are iſſued and proceeded out of the ſuperſticious ſect of Mahumet.
            
               COnſidering that I haue the penne in hand, I make ſo mine accompt, that I were as good to make an ende as to ſtaie, vntill you required of me, from whence the nacion of the Turkes are come, & what manner people they be, that haue bene ſo much vnknowen to our predeceſſors ſauing about three hundreth yeeres agone, and that Pomponius Mela, and Pliny haue made ſome mencion of them and numbered thē among the Scythians. But, to declare truely, their originall and beginning, it behooueth to beginne at the Sarazines, and than to write of the Empires, that haue beene engendered of their wicked and abhominable ſuperſtition and ſect, as the Caliphe of Baudras, the Miramamolin of Aphrick, the Souldain of Egipt, the Aſsan or Sophie of Perſe. For theſe are they from whom the Turkes are proceeded.
            MAHOMET, (whom ſome doe call Muhamet, and the Turkes mehemet, that is to ſay, loued or prayſed,) was an Arabian; & borne in a village (nigh to Mecque) called Itrarip, about the yeere, of our Lord & ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt 600. at ſuch time as the Emperor Heraclius gouerned in Grecia, & king Dagobert reigned in Fraunce, his father was named Abdala, which word may be interpreted, the ſeruaunt of God, though in deede he was

a Gentile and very Idolator. But Mahumet being an Orphan at the age of eight yeares, was left in the regiment of one of his vncles, named Abutaliph, who cauſed him to be inſtructed by a Iewe in the Mathematical and naturall Sciences▪
                and after that to be married at the age of fifteene or ſixteene years, and then inſtructed him in the trade of Merchandize, which hee practized both in Egipt and Sury, wher not a litle he frequented the company of Iewes & Chriſtians, but chiefely with a Moncke of the order of ſaint Benet called Iohn, (as the Biſhop of Ptolomais or A
                     •
                  on reporteth,) as alſo with another Monck called Sergius an hereticall Neſtorian, of whō he learned the holy Scriptures, & eſpecially the old & new Teſtament. To which knowledge whē he had attaigned & cōſidered with himſelf, that it was no great difficult matter vnder the ſhadow of Religion, ſo to draw to him the Arabians being but groſſe, rude, and Idolators: he therefore abſented himſelfe out of companie and remayned ſecret by the ſpace of two yeares. And after that preſented himſelfe to the people ſaying, that all the while of his abſence, he was with the Angell Gabriell who taught and gaue to him the law of God; and that to beleeue in Idols was fooliſh & vaine. But perceiuing, that at that time, his woords could obtaine ſmall credit, he inuented another policie. For which purpoſe he had an Eſclaue called Zeidimy to whom he told that the will of God was, that all men ſhould be free, & therfore dyd giue him immediatly his libertie, wherby frō euery part, all the Eſclaues in a countrey repayred to Mehemet, and gaue him ſuch credit, that whatſoeuer hee commanded, they obeyed him: In ſo much as this companie,

thus drawne togethers, brought no litle dread and feare to ſome great and welthie families in Mecque, as were the Caraxins, Haximins, and Benimitains, who vpon the intelligence of the drawing togethers of this wicked packe, tooke armour againſt them. Whereof Mehemet getting intelligence, fled immediatly, and retired himſelfe to the towne of Almedine, ſithens called Medinathalmaby, which is ſo much to ſay, as Medin of the Prophet, where he began in ſuch ſort to preach to the Iewes, that in ſteede to beleeue him, they beat him in ſundrie fights and his Eſclaues alſo. So as in one of theſe skirmiſhes Mehemet gat ſuch a ſtroke ouerthwart his face, that not onely hee loſt two of his ſore teeth, but alſo was left for dead in a dike ther, wherin he was caſt: though in the ende he ouercame the Iewes. And becauſe the Arabians, (which indeede be diſcended from Iſmaell the ſonne of Abraham, and of Agar his wiues maide,) were called Agarins; hee cauſed to be ordained (in that it was not honorable for his people to carie the name of a woman ſeruant,) that from thence forth they ſhould be named Sarazins, deducted from the name of Sara, the lawfull wife of Abraham, alledging that Iſmaell was engendred of Sara and not of Agar hir maiden. The which name of Sarazins, ſo long endured, vnto ſuch time as the Turkes dyd aboliſh both the name and the nation, as heereafter I will declare. Mahumet hauing thus crept into credit among ths ignorant and rude people, that hee was a Prophet and meſſenger of God, hee acquainted himſelfe with a Lady of no litle wealth and riches; named Tadiga or Cadiga being a widow, and ſo to the purpoſe,

hee behaued himſelfe towards hir, that hee married hir, although hee had three other wiues beſides hir, whereof the one was called Anoſſe, the ſecond Ahaſſe, and the third named Seick, or Zeich, whom he rauiſhed from one that was one of his bringers vp, beeſides a Concubine that he had called Marie a Chriſtian woman of the ſect of the Iacobits. And than he began to publiſh his damnable law that it was lawfull for any man to haue foure wiues. Howbeit, thorough the marriage of this Lady, Mahumet was wonderfull re'nforced and ſtrengthened, in ſuch ſort, as that thorough his welth that hee dyd get, he was able to wage ſoldiours. Whereby partly by ſorce, and partly by good oppinion that was had in him, all his neighbours obeyed him, and ſo as his trayne growing to ſuch a number thorough the multitude of Sarazins that repaired to him, the Emperour Heraclius (who at that time had vnder his dominion, both the countries of Surie, Egipt, and Africk) ſerued himſelfe with theſe people in his warres againſt the Perſians. Howbeit, it ſo afterwards came to paſſe, that at a pay of the Emperours army, among whō at that time vvere certaine bands of the Sarazins, ſo as mony vvas not ſo plentie there at that inſtant, able to pay the vvhole army: And that hee, which had the order of the pay of the army among vvhom the bands of Sarazins alſo were attending for their vvages, vndeſcretly gaue anſvvere to the Sarazins, that the Emperor had not mony ynough, there to pay the Chrictians, that vvere Souldiours; and therfore they being but dogges, ought not to demaund for vvages. With vvhich aunſvvere, the Sarazins being not a little moued, departed

from the ſeruice of the Emperour, and returned into Africk where they found Mahumet. The Emperour Heraclius, afterward ſent into Africk to leuie his tribute there, which ſeemed to bee not a little greeuous to the Africans to be ſo much troubled with ſubſidies, as they were: they falling into a mutinie, (and ſtirred thereto alſo with the ſubtill perſwaſions of Mahumet, that told them, the pleaſure and will of God was that each one ſhould liue at liberty,) the Commiſſaries of the Emperour were there ſlaine, and the countries of Egipt and Africk reuoulted wholy from the obedience of the Empire; of which rebellion; Mahumet was chiefe and their Generall: Who by reaſon of the ſame was immediately purſued both by the Chriſtians and Iewes. And albeit the Emperour did ſend againſt him a great army vnder the leading of one of his Nobilitie called Theodore, who fought ſundry battelles with the Africans: yet in the end Theodore being ouerthrowne and ſlaine. Mahumet with his Sarazius after this victorie departed from thence, & inuaded the countries of Sury & Meſopotamia, and made conqueſt of the ſame. Thus then the Greekes, loſt the countries of Sury, Egipt, and Africk, & other territories which the Emperours of Rome and Grecia, had euer in poſſeſſion from the time of Iulius Ceſar, ſauing that part of Africk which the Vandalls held who were Chriſtians, though Arrians, & there had continued from the time that the Romaines, ſuffered them to inhabit: And ſo Mahumet was crowned king in Damaſco, about the yeere of our Lord God 630. and liued after about tenne yeeres.
            After the death of Mahumet the Sarazins preferred

to his kingdome one of his diſciples & familiars, named Othamar whom▪ the Turks doe call Othmar. Howbeeit ſome affirme that hee that next ſucceded Mahumet was one called Bubacher, otherwiſe named Caliph which word ſignifieth enheritor or ſucceſſor, beecauſe hee was placed in the rome & authoritie of Mahumet, and ſo after him were called all his ſucceſſors, though ſome Italian authors doe call them Alipha. The chiefeſt place where the Caliph had his reſidence, was eſtabliſhed at the citie of Baudars which the Italians call Baldat, & the Turks Bagdet, that ſometime was the famous citie of Babilon though others hold opinion that this Citie, was that, which in times paſt was named Suſa, and is ſituated vpon the riuer of Euphrates. About this time the Sarazins conquered in a little ſpace (vpon the Greekes) the territorie of Caramanie aunciently called Cilitia where the citie of Antioche ſtandeth, and Pamphilia which at this day is called Scauri, and the towne of Selucia named by the inhabitants there Scandalor, and after that they made enterprize vpon the kingdome of Perſia, which they call Pharſie and this was about that time when the Greekes did cut of the noſe, and the tongue alſo, of the Empreſſe Martine and Heraclion hir ſonne and of the Emperour Heraclius, beecauſe they enpoiſoned Conſtantine the eldeſt ſonne of Heraclius begotten vpon an other wife at ſuch time alſo the Lumbards entred into Italy. Of Perſia, at this time, was king one called Hormiſda, named alſo by Hayton (that writeth of theſe matters) Aſcaiorth elected king next after Adaeſar, ſonne of Syroe ſonne of Coſroe or Coſdroe whom the Emperour Heraclius tooke priſoner when he recouered the city of Hieruſalem. Hormiſda,
               
hauing aſſured intelligence▪ that the Sarazins were comming to inuade him, 
                  •
               ought for ſuccours at ſuch as were his neighbours and chiefely of thoſe of Turqueſten who frontered vpon the Perſians on the Weſt & towards the Eaſt on the realme which Hayton calleth Tarſie, and vpon the famous riuer of Indus towards the North, and to the Coraſmins and Med▪
                on the South (which are the verie confines and limits which Plinie and Strabo doe appoint to the Parthes) whom the Turkes doe call Turgueſtain as Francis Freinſton ſaith. This nation which ſithens by the Frenchmen & other haue bene named Turguimans, and afterward Turks, (who among them at that time had no manner of law or policy, departed out of their countrie, to the number of ſix thouſand fighting men, to come to the ſuccour of king Hormiſda. But beecauſe (according to their cuſtome) they brought their wiues and children with them, they were the longer in comming, ſo as before they came, the Sarazins and king Hormiſda had ſought togethers, and Hormiſda ouerthrowen and ſlaine, about the yeere of our Lord God 640. And ſo the Sarazins became Lords of Perſia and of the whole countries about, ſauing the realme of Abeas, which is in Georgia, & a part of the greater Armenie called Haloen who were the refuge & receptacle of Chriſtians. The Turqui
                     ••
                  ains being by this ariued, (in that part of Perſia named Chor
                     •••
                  e
                     •
                  
                or C
                     •••
                  oſley and by ſome C
                     •
                  
                  roz
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  
               ) they vnderſtoode of the ouerthrow and death of Hormiſda: for which cauſe, they ſtaied there, and fortified themſelues in the beſt wiſe they could, and ſent vnto the Sarazins, requeſting to accept them as their friends, & withall that they would receiue tribuit from

them, for vvhich alvvaies they vvould bee at their commandement to ſerue them faithfully in their vvars, if it vvould further vouchſafe the Sarazins to beeſtovv on them the place, vvhere they at that time vvere to inhabit. The Sarazins receiued their ambaſſage curteouſly & accepted them as their friendes and offred Tributaries, hovvbeit they cauſed the Turks to lodge further of in a part of another countrie vvhich they appointed them; to thende that if they reuolted; they ſhould doe the Sarazins leſſe harme. In this manner remained the Turkes or Turquimains, tributaries, & as it vvere ſubiects to the Sarazins, vvhoſe cuſtomes, lavvs, & maners, they quickly learned through continuall trade and frequentation vvhich they had a among the Sarazins; inſomuch, as in the end ther vvas no manner of difference betwixt▪ thē, either in religion, law, or forme of life, which was very eaſie for the Turks to doe conſidering, that be ore they liued without any law, rule, or pollicie, which they wer ſooner moued to embrace onely to be pertakers of the honours and riches which the Sarazins, of whom theſe Turks became familier companions and meruailouſly well beloued, for that they tried themſelues to be euery where in their warres, their beſt ſouldiers. Thus they liued togethers about three hundred yeeres, that they were accounted in manner to be of one nacion. Howbeit the Turquimains kept themſelues alwaies a part by themſelues and grew to bee of ſuch wealth and might, that about the yeere of our Lord God 1400 they became maiſters ouer the Sarazins, by occaſion of diſcord growing among the Sarazins themſelues, as hereafter ſhal be declared.
            
               This firſt Caliphe, endured not very long, becauſe another Sarazin named Aſcaly, chaſed him from his place, purpoſing to haue vſurped his rome, howbeit he could not ſo attaine it, for he was ſlaine by the Sarazins, who preferred another (to that dignitie) called Haly.
            
            
               Haly the ſecond Calphe: was cooſen Germain to Mahumet, & his ſonne in law (as ſome affirme) hauing maried Fa
                     ••
                  ma, (whom the Turks pronounce Fatma) the daughter of Mahumet, whoſe lawes Haly chaunged, or rather anulled, and made new of his ovvne inuention, through vvhich innouation of religion, or rather ſuperſticion, the Sarazins beecame meruailouſly deuided: Inſomuch as thoſe vvhich follovved Mahumet made a Caliph in Egipt. The others remained in Perſia vvith Haly vvho alvvaies continued in ſuch reuerence and eſtimacion as vvell among them as vvith the Turks at this day, that incontinently next to Mahumet vvhen they goe about any of their affaires, they ſay Alla, Mahumet, Haly, God Mahumet and Haly. Thus the Sarazins began to be deuided among themſelues the vvhich diuiſion hath euer ſithens continued and endureth yet: For albeit the Turks & the Perſians alſo are in effect very Mahom
                     ••
                  iſts, yet differ they ſo in ceremonies, & other contrarieties of opinion, that the one do account the oother very heretiques. The Caliphe doth execute his office as though he vvere both their Pole and their Emperour. For theſe Caliphes doe ordaine gouernours and officers through euery prouince vvhere they haue authoritie, vvhich they call Sultans, vvhich may be interpreted Prouoſts o
                  •
                gouernours▪ But by ſucceſſion of time, this terme Sultan, 
               
                  •
               s conuerted to an 
                  •
               ppellation or name

roiall, and ſignifieth the word king. At the time of thisAs the Latin word Imperator at the firſt was no name of Regall power and authoritie. firſt deuiſion there was a Sultan of Alexandrie named Selym that killed the firſt Caliphe of Egipt, and returned in obedience to the Caliphe of Baudras to haue fauour.
            After this, part of thoſe Sarazines of Egipt that would not come to the obedience of the Caliph of Baudras, paſſed into Africk & chaſed from thence the Vandales, which were Christians, but heretiques, maintaining the abhominable error of the Arrians, wher theſe Vandales had domination ſithens the time of their king Gencericus, who with his nation being Vandales were chaſed out of Hiſpain by the Gothes (that were Arrians as they alſo were) and ſo arriued in Africk in the time of the Emperour Theodoſius the yong ſonne of Arcadius about the yeere of our Lord God 410. and after were tributaries to the Emperours of Conſtantinople where they remained vnto the yeere of our Lord God 668, that the Sarazins (as aboue ſaid) ther firſt entred; and eſtabliſhed a generall to rule ouer them, whom they named a Miramamolin, which is ſo much to ſay as a ruler or lord ouer ye people, & ordained his reſidence & place of dignitie, to bee at M
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  hque, at this day called Tunes nigh to Cartage. Which name of Miramamolyn hath ſithens beene chaunged: for at this day they call their king Moulee, as he that at this day reigneth at Tunys, is called Moule Aſſan that is to ſay, king or Seigneur Aſsan.
            
            I would not diſcribe to you further at length what the Sarazins did, after their conqueſts of Perſia & Afrique. But will admit a little intermiſſion vnto the yeere of our Lord God 1040. at which time they were ſubdued by the Turkes or Turſquimains their tributaries. For

otherwiſe that were againſt my purpoſe, determining rather to make an Epitome or abridgement, than a whole large Chronicle of their dooings.
            THE yeere of grace 660. Mehua (which ſignifieth ſuddaine or haſtie) Sultan of Egipt, ſucceſſor of Selym tooke the Iſle of Rhodes, and carried away the famous Coloſſe or piller of Braſſe that was eſteemed on height three ſcore and tenne elles, which an Earthquake ouerthrew as Plinie affirmeth.
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 660. Abdalla (the Sultan of Egipt after Mehua,) came to Syracuſes; where ſometime was ſlaine the Emperor Conſtantins ſonne to Conſtantine, whom his mother in law Martyn, wyfe to Heraclius cauſed there to be poyſoned: where the Sarazins ſacked the towne with a great part of the riches of Rome which the ſaid Conſtantins before had cauſed to bee brought thether to haue conueyed the ſame to Conſtantinople.
            ABOVT the yeere of 690. Abimelech (which woord may bee enterpreted the father of the King) inuaded Hiſpain, with a nauie of 270. ſhippes, but was repulſed, and from thens, paſſed into Africk, from whence, againe the Sarazins were chaſed by the Emperor Iuſtinian the ſecond: And ſo Abimelech was the firſt Miramamolyn among the Sarazins, againſt whom, the Emperor Leonce ſent a Captain of his, named Tiberius who by the armie was made Emperor, and ſo without executing further his charge, returned to Conſtantinople, againſt his Maiſter Leonce, where after he had taken him, and cut of his noſe; he caſt him in priſon in which the miſerable Leonce remained all his life: Theſe matters being done at the

time, whan Sergius, the firſt of that name, was Pope. And Theodorick or Thierry ſonne of Clouys reigned King in Fraunce.
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 712. Sultan Selyman (which is ſo much to ſay as peaſible) whom, ſome doe call QVLEMEN, the Caliphe of Baudraz beſieged Conſtantinople, but thorough peſtilence and famen, poſleſſing his Camp, he was driuen to raiſe his ſiege, which before had beene continued by the ſpace of two yeeres. And this was, at what time the Emperor Theodoxe had taken his pre
                  •
               eceſſor Anaſtaſius & made him a Monck, when Giegory the twelfth was Pope, and Chilperick the laſt King of the line of Pharamonde reigned in France.
            IN this time, alſo Mizza Miram
                     •
                  molin, ſucceſſor of Abimelech, 
               
                  •
               t the requeſt of Iulian the Conte of Conſuegra (who was ſent as Embaſſador to him, fr
                  •
               
               ▪ 
               Rodrigo King of Hiſpain) cauſed twelue thouſand men vnder the leading of his generall called Cariph, to paſſe into Hiſpain againſt the ſayde King Rod
                  •
               rigo to reuenge the iniurie done to the ſayd Conte Iulian, in that Rodrigo had deflowred the daughter (or as ſome doe ſay the wife) of the ſayde Conte Iulian, called Caba, as the Chronicles of Hiſpain doe make mencion: Who landed at Gibraltar which place our auncients name Calpe and the Sarazins, Gibelcariph (the Mount of Cariph,) and from thence marched alongſt the famous Riuer of Bet is (and by the Sarizens named Guadalquiber) which is ſo called vnto this dav. Where nigh vnto the ſame, in a foughten battell the ſaide King Rodrigo, (who was the laſt king of the line of the Gothes) was ſlayne.
            And taking hold of occaſion the Sarazines ſo farre then

proceded, that they conquered in manner the whole kingdome of Hiſpain, where they loſt the name of the Sarazins and were called by the Spanierds, Moores of the name of the countrie in Afrique (from whence they came) called Mauritania.
            THE yeere 725. Eudes Duke of. Aquitain, otherwiſe called the D
                  •
               chie of Guien (diſcended from Alarie king of the Gothes, who in the yeere of our Lord 412. at ſuch time as the Emperour Honorius reigned) dyd poſſeſſe the ſame duchie of Guien, from whence paſſing into Hiſpain, and from thence chaſing the Vandales, as before I haue ſayde, brought into Fraunce (againſt Theoderick brother of Chilperick, ſonnes of Dagobert the ſecond of that name: which Theodorick was the laſt king of the ligne of Pharamond.) Thoſe Sarazins, (who at that time were in Hiſpain, conducted by Abderaman (whom the French Hiſtoriographers doe call Adramar) King of Cordoua, who after their entrie into Fraunce, tooke the townes of Bourdeaulx, Tholoſe, Narbone, Nimes, Arles and Auignon, Platina, Blondus, Sabellicus, and other Hiſtoriographers doe write that thoſe Sarazins came euen to towres, where they were fought with, by Charles Martel, (father of Pipin,) and ouerthrowen ſo as all that euer was wonne by them before, was againe recouered by the ſame King Charles, and the Sarazins chaſed into Hiſpain, where after they remayned more than 700. yeeres. Vnto ſuch time as Ferdinand the king of Aragon did win from them the Citie and Countrie of Granado: (which was in the yeere of our Lord God 1487.) Howbeit, ther tarried and remayned ſtill ſundrie townes and villages entier, peopled with the Sarazins whom the Emperour

Charles (the fifth of that name) comming to his dominions in Hiſpain found ther dwelling, and cauſed to embrace the chriſtian faith, yet they could neuer bee cō
               pelled to chaunge their habit or the language of the Sarazins, nor perhaps ſecretly their abhominable Mahometical ſect, what face outwardly ſo euer they ſhew.
            In the yeere of our Lord God 500. the Sarazins of Africk, did take the Iſles of Corſica and Sardinia, and two and twentie yeeres after they pilled and ſacked the Iſles of Candia and Sicilia, and ſo held them more than two hundreth yeeres: at what time Pope Leo was perſecuted by the Lumbards, and ſuccoured by Charlemain.
            
            The yeere of our Lord God 837. The Sarazins vnder the leading of Sultan Saua wan the port of Ciuitauechia, in Italy and ſacked the citie o Rome, and the Church of Saint Peter, with the Mont Caſſin (otherwiſe called Saint Germain, which is the chiefe moneſtary or abbie of Saint Benet. And twentie yeeres after that they tooke the port of Ancona and ouer ran all the coaſts on that ſide of the Golfe of Venice, and likewiſe thoſe on thother ſide on the coaſt of Sclauonie: and this done in the reignes of Lotharie ſon of Lois le Piteux king of Fraunce, and Michaell Emperour of Conſtantinople about the yeere of our Lord God 900. they likewiſe aſſailed the territories of Pulia & Calabria in the kingdome of Naples, & wan Mont Gargan, otherwiſe called Le Mont Saint Auge) when as Conſtantine ſonne of Leo, who was ſonne of Baſilius. Emperour of Conſtantinople reigned and that Berengier (of the ligne of the Lombards) cauſed the eics of Lewes (who was laſt Emperour of the ligne of the French men and ſonne vnto to the Emperour Arnold) to

bee put foorth.
            In the yeere 923. Roman the Emperour of Conſtantinople, did ſtir the Sarazins to inuade the territories of Pulia and Calabria which rebelled againſt him: Howbeit the Sarazins were ouerthrowen at the riuer of Garriglian by the Marquiz of Tuſcan named Aulbry or Alberic, at the eſpeciall inſtance of Pope Iehan the eleuenth of that name.
            In the yeere 930. the Sarazins wonne the towne of Gennes, and ſpoiled all that coaſt of the Sea, when the Berengiers occupied the Empire, & fortified the towne of Fraxinet which they kept 100 yeeres.
            Thus the Sarazins continued inuading and ſpoiling the ſertile regions of Italy (while the controuerſies were depending about the right of poſſeſſing the Empire, betweene the French, the Greekes, and Lombards, & the diſcentions were on foote betweene the Popes & the people of Rome in ſuch ſort, as they enioyed the moſt part of Pulia and Calabria which they kept euen vnto the yeere of Grace 990 or thereabouts, that they were chaſed both from thence and out of Sicilia alſo, by Tancred de Haulte Ville, or Haulte Fu
                     •
                  ille in Normandy, (who firſt beegan with them) but ended by Guillaume Ferrabach ſonne of the ſaid Tancred, with the help of Maloch leiuetenant of Michaell Cathalau Emperour of Greece: And ſo they did bring back from the hands of the Sarazins Pulia, Calabria, and Sicilia, whereof the ſaid Guillaume remained lord, in the time of Robert the French king, and of the Emperour Otho, the third of that name.
            In the yeere of our Lord 1040. the number of Sultains

or Soldains began to be many: For in euery Prouince, the Caliph) as I before declared) did inſtitute one as at Damaſco one; at Hames another; at Halep the third: in Egipt another, & the like in ſundry other places; who falling at diſſention one with the other, did in the end reuoult from the obedience of the Caliph. In Hiſpain likewiſe, euerie of the Moors that could get vnder his obedience a citie or towne, would immediately vſurpe the name of a king, as at Granado, Cordoua, Toledo, Sarragoſa, Ciuilia, and Valentia. In like manner was it vſed in Africk, as at Tunes, Tripolis, Bugia, Maroch, Feſſe, and Tremeſſen and other places alſo there, ſo as in manner no kinde of amitie or friendſhip was maintained among theſe kings, but for the moſt part continuall diſſention & wars. Wherof when the Turks had got intelligence (who as yet reſted vnder the obedience of the Caliph who were meruailouſly this while encreaſed both in wealth & number of people) and withall perceiuing that the Sarazins were wonderfully weakened and diminiſhed through theſe inteſtine deuiſions & wars thus among them ſelues; they made a king whō they called Sadoc (which name is ſo much to ſay as Iuſt) and inuaded the Sarazins whom within ſhort time they ouerthrew, ſo as therby they made thē
               ſelues ſhortly dominators ouer whole Perſia and Syria, alwaies with great reuerence regarding in no wiſe to touch the Caliph, for the high eſtimation that they bare him who was ſuffered ſtill to liue quietly at Baudras. And at whoſe hands the ſaid Sadocke would be named and created the Sultan of Aſie, howbeit he liued not long afrer.
            
               After Sadoc, his ſonne Dogriz ſucceded, who did annex to the gotten Empire of his father the country of Meſopotamia which Diogines the Emperour of Conſtantinople had recouered from the Sarazins at ſuch time as they had warres among them ſelues as likewiſe the whole countrie of Cilicia, which hee gaue to his coſen Arthot.
            To Dogriz ſucceeded Aſpalam his ſonne; who about the yeere of our Lord God 1080. did ſend his Nephew Solyman into Cappadocia (being than vnder the poſſeſſion of the Greekes) to whom he gaue all there, that he could conquer: Who in ſuch ſort guided his affaires, that he brought vnder his obedience the whole Aſia the leſſe; except the Sea coaſts towards the South, and the Iſle of Cipres: And this was that valiant Soliman that gaue charge vpō the famous Godefroy de Buillon and the army of the chriſtians remaining in ſiege before the towne of Niece, in Aſia the leſſe, as before I haue ſhewed; which Solyman the ſaid Hayton doth name Solimanſa.
            About this time a Gentleman of Hiſpain named Rodrigo de Vuiar, chaſed the Moors out of a great part of the realme of Valence in Aragon and from much ofVVhence 
                     •
                   family of Mendoza in Spaine had their beginning. Caſtile, who was named by the Moores, through his excellencie, Cyd: (that is to ſay, Lord) and Cyd Ruydas, from whom the noble & famous race of the Mendozzas are deſcended.
            To Aſpalam ſucceded Melechla his ſonne who ſent Arthot the Sultan of Meſopotamia to Antioche, whervnto alſo by his commaundement, came the ſaid Solyman and tooke the ſame citie with all the country about,

and thus you ſee how the Greekes loſt all Aſia the leſſe.
            Belchiarot, ſonne of Melechla reigned after his father, who liued whan as Godefroy and the chriſtians paſſed into the holy land, and beſieged the citie of Antioche in Suria, being then vnder the dominion of the ſaid Belchiarot, and by him committed to the defence of a Turk named Aſſan or Caſſan whom in Antioche hee had ordeigned his Generall, to whom after he ſent in ſuccour one named (by Hayton) Cerbagat, and by the Frenchmen Corbadas, who ariued there when the chriſtians had already gotten Antioche, where vpon hee beſeeged them in the ſame citie a long time, but in the end Corbadas was fought with by the chriſtians ouerthrowen & put to flight, as in the Hiſtorie of that iourny plainely appeareth, wherfore Corbadas now returning back into Perſia found that Belchiarot was dead, & that his yongeſt brother pretending right to the crowne was ſlaine. Now when the Turks of Perſia could not accord and agree whom to make their King, but fought long among themſelues thervpon, the fame of their diſſention came to the eares of the Georgiens and Armenians their neighbours, being chriſtians, who conſidering the great army of the other chriſtians than remaining in Sury, immediately inuaded the Turkes thus deuided among themſelues, and did beate & chaſe them out of Perſia, ſo that ſuch of the Turks as could eſcape ſome retired towards Solyman, and ſome to Arthot, and others of their nation, being than in Aſi
                     •
                  
                the leſſe. And this was in the yeere of our Lord God 1106. at ſuch time as Baldouin brother to Godſrey reigned king in Hieruſalem. This Georgiens

after that they had thus chaſed the Turks out of Perſia pilled and ſpoiled the country, & forbearing from farther purſuit of their good fortune (as they ſhould) againſt the Souldans of Damaſco, Halep, Hames, and others that remained in quietneſſe. But with the Armenians departing from the realme of Perſia, a certaine people among the Coraſmins (whom ſome Latin Hiſtoriographers doe call Groſſiones) neighbours to that prouince which diuers doe thinke to bee thoſe whom the auncients doe name to be the Medes who vpon the Eaſt haue the Sea called Mare Caſpium, Hircanum or Abucuth, and on the South Turqueſten or Parthia, and vpon the North Cumania or Alania, and vpon the Occident or Weſt Perſia and Armenie the greater) who had none other vocation, trade or condition of life, but liued like herdmen and keepers of cattell, hauing among them neither houſe or towne (howbeit very valiant in warres) theſe entred then into Perſia, where, of very poore catiues, they beecame a rich people and made a King among them called lalaladin (which ſignifieth the gift or grace of God.) With this their king they became ſo hardy and bold as to inuade the Turks beeing in Aſia the leſſe: howbeit they were encountered by the Souldan of Turque named Aladin & ouerthrowen in a ſore foughten fielde in which conflict lalaladin their King loſt his life, & the reſt that eſcaped did aſſemble themſelues in the plaine of Rohai
                  •
               , with purpoſe to haue entred into Sury. But the Souldan of Aleph did enbarre them of that paſſage, & chaſed them euen vnto the deſerts of Arabia, who from thence, trauaſing the territory of Caldee or Aſſyrie, they paſſed the riuer of Euphrates

nigh to a caſtell there named Cacabe, and entred into Iudea (otherwiſe called the Hieruſalem) wher they cō
               mitted much outrage and damage. Howbeit in the end this multitude of diſordered people could not long abide togethers conſidering euery of them would bee a ruler, ſo as their Captaine that ſhould haue commanded could not be obeied, and ſo they departed by troopes and companyes, whereof ſome retyred towards the Sultan of Damaſco, others towards him of Halep, & ſome to him of Hames, but the moſt of them repaired to the Soldan of Egipt, to whom likewiſe repayred their Captaine Bartat; ſeeing himſelfe ſo abandoned and forſaken of his owne ſoldiors. And thus decayed the force of this nation of the Coraſmins (whom the writers of the paſſage and iourney of Godfrey doe call Hoarmins,) who maynteined their reputation but a litle time.
            IN this manner the Turkes remayned in Surie, chiefely the Coraſmins. Now for the Sarazins they deuided themſelues into litle realmes vnto the yeere of our Lord God 1240. or thereabouts, that the Tartares ouerthrew them as heereafter ſhall be declared; whilſt in the meane time the Turkes daylie continued wars againſt the kings of Hyeruſalem as followeth.
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 1103. the Turkes tooke priſoner Boemund the Prince of Antioche (ſonne of Robert Guiſcard ſurnamed Courbeſpine diſcended from Tancred, the Norman of whom beefore I made mencion.) Who, three yeeres after, was redeemed by his nephew Tangrey.
            IN the yeere 1105. the Turkes made head againſt

Baldwyn the firſt of that name (King of Hyeruſalem brotherPtolemais Opp: nunc Acre. Laodicea Opp nunc, Licquee Berythus Opp: nunc, Baruth. of Godefray) as he beſieged the towne of Acre, and were ouerthrowen, after which that towne (otherwyſe called Accon and Ptolemais) was taken by Baldowyn together with the towne of Licquee, which the auncients called Laodicea. And foure yeeres after that hee tooke the towne of Baruth ſometime called Berythus, and ſo likewiſe the towne of Sydon.
            
            In the yeere of our Lord 1115 the Turks vanquiſhed and put to flight king Baldwin the ſecond of that name at Montreal.
            
            In the yeere 1120. King Baldwin tooke Gazis (whom ſome doe call Gary,) from the Souldan of Damaz.
            
            In the yeere of our Lord 1122. King Baldwin was taken priſoner by Balach (named by ſome Alaph)Gamela Opp: nunc, Hames. Souldan of Hames (aunciently called Camela or Gamela and Gaucamela.) which word Balach ſignifieth a deſtroier: So as he remained there priſoner by the ſpace of one yeere.
            The yeere of our Lord God 1128 King Baldwin diſcomfited Doloquin (of ſome named Baldoquin) and of others called Baldecan, Souldan of Damaz, who ſucceeded to the Souldan Gazes.
            
            The yeere 1132 Foulques Daniou who maried the daughter of King Baldwin, & ſucceded in the kingdomeGeth: nunc Ybelim. of Hieruſalem, ouerthrew the Turkes at Ybelim which Place holy Scripture calleth Geth.
            The yeere 1140 or ther abouts, Alaph (or Balach) Souldan of Hames, tooke the towne of Rohaiz & there vnmercifully murdered a great number of Chriſtians.
            The yeere 1143 King Baldwin the third of that

name, ſonne of king Fulque diſcomfited at Hierico, the valiant Norradin (ſon to Baldecan,) Soldan of Damaz.
            
            The yeere 1146. The Emperour Conrad and King Lewes of Fraunce, ſonne of Lewes le Groz paſſed into Surie, where with king Baldowin they beſieged the towne of Damaſco, but could not take the ſame, and therefore they returned home into their Countries.
            The yeere 1148 after the departure of theſe ſaid two Princes, Norradin the Souldan of Damaſco beſieged Antioche, wher Raimond the Conte of Antioche iſſuing forth in a ſkirmiſh was vnfortunately ſlaine, the Contes of Rohaiz and Tripoli taken priſoners, which Contee of Tripoli, after, was ſhamefully murdered by an Aſſaſſin.
            The yeere 1160 Almery king of Hieruſalem brother to king Baldowin, tooke the towne Alexandria, & beeſieged the great citie of Caire in Egipt.
            The yeere 1170. Saladin the Souldan of Egipt began to inuade the holy land in the time of king Baldowin the fourth of that name king of Hieruſalem, at what time likewiſe the Emperour Frederic made war vpon the Pope & the church in burning & deſtroying Italy.
            The yeere 1174 king Baldowin diſcomfited the SouldanTyberias Opp: nunc, Tabaria Saladin, at the towne of Tabaria (which ſometime was called Tiberias) & after that ouerthrew a ſecond time at the towne of Aſcalone.
            The yeere 1179 king Baldowin aforeſaid fought againe with the Souldan Saladin at Margelion nigh to the towne of Tabarie, where king Baldowin then was diſcomfited.
            The yeere 1184 began that diſcention among the

Chriſtians in the holy land, which was the cauſe of the loſſe of the ſame: The originall of which was this Guy of Luſignen, hauing married the Lady Sibil ſiſter of the late king Baldowin (and widow of William Longueſpee Marquis of Monferrato) by whom ſhe had a ſon named Baldowin who at that time but ſucked his Nurce to whom appettained the kingdome of Hieruſalem; the ſaid Guy of Luſignen father in law of the infant would needes haue his title and wardſhip againſt the will & minde of Bartrand Contee of Tripoly to whoſe tuition and gouernance the childe was giuen by force of the teſtament of king Baldowin, brother of the ſaid lady Sibell, when in the mean time the infant died & ther vpon Guy of Luſignen named himſelfe king in the right of his wife, wherwith the Contee of Tripoly was wonderfully wroth.
            The yeere 1186 Saladin tooke priſoner Guy of Luſignen king of Hieruſalem, with the maiſters of the Templars and of the order of Sainct Iohn that came to ſuccour the towne of Tabarie, which the ſaid Saladin had then beſieged, ſo as vpon reſtoring of king Guy, & the both aforenamed maiſters to their liberties, Tabarie, Lique, and Aſcalone were rendred to Saladin, who in the end wan alſo the citie of Hieruſalem, & after yt the towne of Acres.
            The yeere 1147 the Templars reencountred Saladin, nigh to Caſal Robert, where Saladin ouethrew them, & ſlew in fight the maiſter of the order of Sainct Iohn Hieruſalem named Brother Roger dez Molins, which hapned the firſt day of May that yeere.
            In the yeere of our Lord God 1149 ther paſſed to ſuccour the holy land the Emperour Frederic Barberoſſee,
               
Philip the French King, and Richard King of England: Frederic tooke his way by land, and comming into Cilicia, where thorough extreame heate, deſirous to bath himſelfe (or as ſome ſay in paſſing the riuer, which ſome doe call Cauno, and the frenchmen, the riuer of Salif, & the latins doe name Cydnus which paſſeth through the famous citie of Tharſus, at this preſent named Theraſſo) was vnfortunatly drowned. The two kings his confederates ariued in Sicilia, & frō the towne of Moſſana they paſſed into the holy land, & came to the towne of Acre, which after two yeeres beeſieging they tooke. King Richard in his paſſage thether tooke the Iſland of Cypres which he gaue to king Guy of Luſignen in exchaunge for the kingdome of Hieruſalem: But after the taking of Acre king Phillip being ſickly returned into Fraunce.
            The yeere 1204 Baldouin Earle of Flaunders and Henry Conte de Sainct Paul, with his brother Loys Conte de Sauoy, and the Conte Boniface & Mont ferrat, with a great company aſſembled themſelues at Venice, to paſſe from thence into the holy land. To whom the Venetians did graunt ſhips vpon condition that beefore they paſſed they ſhould aide them to recouer the towne of Zara in Sclauonie (which before had reuolted from them) and ſo hauing done they after proceeded on their voyage to Conſtantinople whereof they poſſeſſed themſelues in the Empire which remained in the frenchmens hands about threeſcore yeares after.
            The yeere 1210. Ichan de Brene, maried the daughter of Conrad of Montferrat, and the Lady Iſabell daughter of king Amaulry: who was ſiſter of Baldouin the Meſeled; and of the Lady Sibel that was wife to Guy of Luſignen:
               
Which ſaid Ichan de Brene was made king of Hieruſalem, & crowned at the towne of Tyrus (which commonly is called Sur and Sor) by reaſon that it is ſituated vpon a rocke in the ſea. But Alexander the great to the intent to winne that towne filled vp all that diſtance of the ſea betwixt the ſame and the land with ſtone and earth, ſo as at this day the ſame remaineth firme groūd, which towne of Tirus, came into the poſſeſſion of the ſaid Conte Conrad who afterward was ſhamefullie, on a ſuddaine, murdered, by a couple of the ſect of the Aſſaſſins.
            
            In the yeere 1216. Pope Honorius the third of that name did ſend the Cardinal Colonne into Surie accō
               panied with Henry Contee of Neuers and Gualtier of Sancerre conſtable of Fraunce with others in a great nūber: who after their landing in Acre, diſcended into Egipt, & tooke there the towne of Damiat, which within ſixe yeeres after, vpon compoſition, was ſurrendred to Cordier ſon of Saladin, Souldan of Egipt: whom the frenchmen doe call Le Admiral des Cordes; In which time alſo Iehan de Brene king of Hieruſalem accōpanied with his brother Garin de Montaguae great maiſter of the order of Saint Iohns came into Fraunce, & in paſſing through Italy, the ſaid king of Hieruſalem gaue his daughter Yolant
               By what ti
                     •
                   the kings of Spaine chalenge the right of the crowne of I ruſalem. in marriage to the Emperour Frederic (ſecond ſon to Henry, who was ſonne to Frederic Barberouſſe) with the whole intereſt & title which he had to the kingdome of Hieruſalem, which the Kinges of Sicilia doe intitle themſelues to & claime at this day.
            The yeere 1229. the ſaid Emperour Frederic departed out of Italy giuing hopes that hee would paſſe into

Surie, but incontinently hee returned againe as one hauing ſmall deuocion to performe that voiage.
            In the yere 1230 the aforenamed Soldan Corder cauſed the vvals of Hieruſalem to be ouerthrovven at ſuch time as the Emperour Frederic perſecuting the church, gaue beginning to the partialities of the Guelfs & Gibelins & therwith not contented; did call in the Sarazins of Africk to his ſeruice, and gaue to them the towne of Nucera in Italy (vvhich yet is called Nucera des Sarazins) from vvhich aftervvard they vvere expulſed by the Frenchmen.
            In the yeere 1237 Theobald king of Nauarre, Emery Contee of Mont fort, & Henry Contee of Campaign, & Barre vvith a great army paſſed through Hungary & Conſtantinople into Surie, and recouered ſundry townes which the Sarazins beefore had wonne, but encountring with the Soldan Corder beetwixt the tovvnes of Acre, and Gazera (ſometime called Gaza) there they vvere diſcomfited and ouerthrovven by the ſame Soldan.
            In the yeer of our Lord God 1244 the chriſtians were diſcomfited at a place called Forbye, where were taken the Maiſter of our order of Sainct Iohns called brother Guillaume de Chaſteln
                  •
               uf and the Maiſter of the Templers named brother Herman de Pierreſort, the Archbiſhop of Sury, and two ſonnes of Signeur de Boteron, (which otherwiſe was called Botrus) with moe then three hundred Gentlemen; At which time likewiſe the cruell wars by ſea began betwixt the Venetians, & the Geneuoys about the intreſt & poſſeſſion of the Moneſtary of Sainct Saba in the towne of Acre in Sury, which may wel be ſaid another cauſe of y loſſe of the holy land.
            
               In the yeere 1249 Lewes the French king, otherwiſe named Sainct Lewes, paſſed the Seas and was taken priſoner before the tovvne of Damiat in Egipt, by the Soldan Melechſalem, but after his atteined liberty hee recouered the tovvnes of Sidon and Iaffe aunciently called Ioppe before that time taken by the ſaid Soldan. I am now come vnto the time that the Tartares inuaded the Turks or Turquimans, but to the end it may be better vnderſtood how this came to paſſe, & frō whom this people of the Tartares haue their being, it behoueth me a little to turne back, & to begin a little before this time.
            In the yeere 1231. in that country of Tartaria vvhich at this day is called Catay, (and the Orientall Scythia) at vvhich time the Tartares liued vvithout knovvledge of any law, or ſorme of gouernment: there was one (by Hayton) called Cangy, and by Paulus Venetus, Chinchis, but by Michael a Michou, (Cinguis) beegotten vpon a widdow during hir widdowhood: who hauing other children by hir former huſband, they would haue ſtaine hir all for ſhee had conceiued this Cangy while ſhee was widdow: howbeit ſhee ſo wittely behaued hir ſelfe in hir words, that ſhee cauſed them beleeue, how ſhe conceiued that birth by force of the beames of the ſun; & other father in name the child had not, which opiniō ſo taking place, was not onely auaileable to the mother, but alſo afterwards to Cangy, who cōming to perfect age, brought this barbarous people to beleeue that the almightie God, had ſent him to bee their king; & to make them Lords of thoſe other nations to whom euen vnto that time they had ben tributaries, by reaſon they neuer had head to guide the.
            
               And ſo prudentlie this Cangy can led himſelfe that he ſubdued all his neighbours, and therefore was 
                  •
               u
                  •
               
               named Cangy Can, (or Cham) hee reigned twelue yeeres, and died by the ſtroke of an Arrow which had wounded him in the knee at the aſlault of a caſtell
                  ••
                his Cangy was the firſt that perſwaded the Tartares to beleeue in one God.
            To Cangy Cham, ſucceeded Hoccata his ſon, who to know countries further of, ſent ten thouſand horſe men to inuade the territorie of Cappadocia than poſſeſſed by the Turks by whome theſe Tartares were ouerthrowen: with vvhich loſſe Hoccata being not a little mooued, he ſent againe, thirtie thouſand men, whom hee called Tamachi (that is to ſay conquerers) againſt whom, vpon the fronters of Cappadocia (which the Turks call Genech) came Guijatadin king of the ſaid Turkes, (whom Sabellicus doth name Goniat.) In whoſe army were two thouſand chriſtians (the remainder of the forces, that before came into Surie) conducted by two 
                  •
                aptains where of the one vvas called Iohn Liminad of the Iſland of Cypres, and the other Boniface du Chaſteau a Geneuoys (Sabellicus calleth this Boniface, Boniface du Molin vvho he ſaith vvas a Venetian,) but in that daies deed Guijatadin and his Turks vvere diſcomfited in the yeere of our Lord God 1239. about vvhich time alſo Hoccata died, leauing behind him three ſons, the one named Cin (vvhom Paul the Venetian calleth Cui) and of others Guys & Guyſcan,) the ſecond vvas called Iochy, & the third Baydo or Batho (as Michaell of Michou ſaith.)
            After Hoccata, his ſon Cin or Cui ſucceeded, vvhoſe

reigne not long continued.
            Next to him, Mango or Mongu whom (Sabellicus calleth Metho) coſen to the faid Hoccata poſſeſſed the Empire of Tartaria. This is that Mango Cham, to whom Pope Innocent the fourth, of that name, did ſend Frees Aſcelin, (one of the order of the Freers Preachers:). in the yeere of our Lord God 1266. as Vincent the Hiſtorial and Michael a Michou doe report.
            IOCHY whom ſome doe call Iachis one of the ſonnes of the ſayde Hoccata tooke his way towards the Weſt (being the countries of Turqueſten and the Coraſmins and part of the Region of Perſia) euen vnto the riuer of Tygris which Hayton calleth Phiſon (but I beleeue that Phiſon is that Riuer which is called Ganges) where Iochy remayned.
            BAYDO or Batho, the third ſonne of Hoccato paſſed thorough Ruſſie, Cumanie, or Comanie, and Moſcouia and entred into Polone, Hungary, & Auſtruhe burning and deſtroying the countries beefore him which afterward thorough famin he was enforced to abandon and ſo, to returne into Tartarie Comanie, which is beeyond the ſea Maior, (called Pontus Euxinus) but at this day Zauolha and Zahady. Some doe affirme that this countrie of Comanie is that which Strabo calleth Cataonia part of Capadocia, at this day called Cricaſsj. The ſayd Baydo was called by the Polonians, Bathy & Zaim Cham, of whom Tamberlane the great diſcended (as Michael a Mechou ſaith, who did write of theſe great diſtructions in theſe North Regions done by Baydo) which was in the yeere of our Lord God 1263.
            To Iochy in the orient, ſucceded his ſonne (named

according to Hayton,) Barath, and (after Paulus Venetus) Barachim.
            
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 1250. or there abouts at ſuch time as king Lewes (otherwiſe called S. Lewes) the French king paſſed the ſeas: The king of Armenie being a chriſtian (& named Hayton, perceiuing that the Tartaires had conquered ſo many countries, and were entred into Natolie, purpoſed to enterteine amitie and league with the ſaid Mango Cham or Mongu; VVho (as before) ſucceded to his coſin Gin or Cuj, ſon to Hoccata in the realme of Tartarie, onely to haue ayde againſt the Caliph of Baudraz and the Turkes of Damaſco, Halep, Haman & other places: for which he ſent towards him the great Conſtable of Armenie named Sinebaud, but the yeere after, he went in perſon; where he obtained ſuch fauor with the ſaid Mango Cham, that the ſame Cham receiued the holy law of the chriſtian faith & was baptized by a Biſhop being the chancellor of Armenie, with a brother alſo of his whom Hayton (being coſen Germain of the ſaid king of Armenie) calleth Haullon, and Paul the Venetian Allau. This Allau was ſent by his brother Mango Cham with the king of Armenie aforeſaid, accompaned with a mightie armie to make war on the Turkes, who paſſed the riuer of Tygris and tooke the realme of Perſia which remayned without gouernour ſithens the Coraſmins had inioyed the ſame.
            After which hee inuaded and tooke the countrie of the Aſſaſſins (whom the Latins doe call Arſacides) ofArſacides. which people there is much mention made in the hiſtories of the paſſage of the famous Godefride de Boillon.
            
            
               For which cauſe it cannot be much from my purpoſe if I declare partly wher this countrie of the Aſſaſsins lieth, and what people they be. This territorie being no great countrie is ſituated at the foot of the mountain Libanus towards the Orient (as Brocard the Monke affirmeth) beyond Antaradus otherwiſe called Tortoſa, and frontereth vppon Perſia towardes the North (which both the ſaid Hayton & Paul the venetian doe call Mulete.) The Lord of this countrie was called Aloadin or Aladin which ſignifieth Diuine or of God.
            THE Hiſtories of the ſayde paſſage doe name it le viel de la Montaigne (as alſo do Hayton and Paul the Venetian, who were then liuing.) This territorie is, as it were a plaine, enuironed round about with mountaines, into the which, was but one onelie entrie & paſſage: vpō the which, Aladin aforeſayde cauſed a great fortreſſe to be builded named Tigado. All the ſayd plaine naturallyTigado. is very fertile and pleaſant to the eye, by reaſon of the faire medowes, brookes, woods & groues, wherwith the ſame doth plentifully abound. Beſides which naturall contents, this Aladin had furniſhed the ſaid plaine euery where with beautifull Gardins, vergers, rich palaces, and houſes of pleaſure, in moſt ſumptuous wiſe that could be deuiſed; and therewith cauſed the ſame to be enhabited with the fayreſt young men & women of the beſt faces that any where he could finde. For which purpoſe too he waged certaine ſoldiors, to awaite and watch the getting of ſuch young men and beautifull women. Hayton ſaith that this Aladin cared for no manner of Religion. Paul the Venetian ſayeth that hee was a Mahemetiſt.
            
               When Aladin had thus ſurpriſed any young man, hee was brought to this caſtle of Tigado, and within a litle time on ſome faire day when the ſunne dyd ſhine verie cleere, one ſhould come and bring this man (thus taken) a drinke, which would enforce him ſo ſtrongly to ſleepe▪ that he ſhould ſo remaine a very long ſpace without any manner of moouing or feeling as though he were plainly dead. Than would he cauſe him to be borne into this vallie and ſo thorough his faire palaices and gardens among his beautifull women, and withall, to be clothed in rich apparell. So as, whan hee waked hee found himſelfe an other man, & as though comde into a new world. In ſuch his galantrie, hee was ſtraight wayes enterteygned feaſted with the Ladies there, and wonderfullie welcommed, with the ſhew of all manner of paſtimes and trayned to all kinde of pleaſures: which youth and luſt could deſire, and this ſo long as all that day would endure. At night after a certain banquet prepared, whervpon to repaſt, the like drink as before, to make him ſleepe, againe was giuen him. Thus being made to ſleepe; his ſumptuous apparel was taken of, & his former garments put on, & ſo brough againe into the ſaid fortreſſe from whence he went, and into ſuch place as might be much vnlike to that which he had beene before. So as vpon his awaking, he ſhould ſoone perceiue himſelfe in an obſcure & euill ſented old chamber cleane chaunged, from the place, where he could not but remember he had beene before. When Aladin vpon conference with him, would declare that the place where hee had beene was Paradice, and that it was in his power to ſend him thether whan hee would, if therefore the young man had minde to

continue ſuch bleſſedneſſe for euer it was graunted vpon condition that he would take courage and hardineſſe to aduenture his life and to die for him in ſuch ſeruice as vpon occaſion hee would commaund. To which numbers of young men for recouerie of that felicitie and Paradize whereof before they had taſted, would ſoone giue their conſent, as not eſteeming any aduenture dangerous whereby to atteigne that which hee moſt deſired, when Aladin to make theſe men the more feruent to execute his deſires would cauſe them ſundrie times to bee had to theſe places of pleaſure and to taſt thereof as beefore: And thus ſerued this peſtilent Viel de la Montaigne for ſending abroad his wicked Miniſters to murder and kill Princes euen in their owne houſes, who cared not of the loſſe of their owne liues in executing their dampnable purpoſes, ſo that they might atteigne their vain Paradize as they expected, before hand promiſed by Aladin. Of this pernicious band, were thoſe Aſſaſsines, that had almoſt killed Richard King of England in his owne Pa
                  •
               iliō being in the holy land, one of which likewiſe murdered at Sur, Conrade the Contee of Montferrat; and an other that valiaunt Contee of Tripoly in his owne houſe, whereby I thinke the Italians doe call thoſe to be Aſſaſsins▪
                which we in our French tongue doe call Brigans, that is to ſay, ſpoylers and cut-throtes.
            The ſaide Allau therefore beſieged the ſame ſtronge fortreſſe of Tigado; where before he could get the ſame hee dyd lye there in ſiege the ſpace of three yeeres. Hayton ſayeth hee beeſieged it by the ſpace of ſeauen and twentie yeeres and in the ende for want and lacke of clothes to couer theyr bodyes (though they had

victualls ynough) the Soldiors defendaunts yeelded the caſtle which afterward was razſed and laide leuell with the earth: while the ſiege thus continued Allau returned into Perſia, & king Hayton into Armenye.
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 1255. Allau with the king of Armenie returned and came againſt the Caliph of Baudraz, where they beſieged him in Baudraz, which in the ende they tooke, with the Caliph alſo, and all his treaſure, being of an ineſtimable value. Which treaſure whan Allau had ſeene, he demaunded of the Caliph, why hee dyd not therewith, leauie & wage ſoldiors for his owne defence, conſidering his ſo great meanes. Wherevnto the Caliph aunſwered; that vnto that time, hee alwayes ſuppoſed, his owne ſubiects had beene ſufficient ynough to haue reſiſted any 
                  •
               orreine enemie, which Allau vnderſtanding, immediatly cauſed all that treaſure to bee had into a tower and the Caliph there to bee ſet in the middeſt of the ſame treaſure, prohibiting that any ſhould giue him eyther meate or drinke, whereby hee miſerably dyed thorough famin in the middle of his riches. And thus ended the Empire of the Caliphes of Baudraz which vnto that time had endured aboute ſixe hunderd yeeres.
            THE yeere of our Lord 1260. Allau and the King of Armeny againe did aſſemble their armies in the plains of Rohaiz, to the ende to recouer the Citie of Hieruſalem and the reſidue of the holy land. Who when they had taken the tower of Rohaiz, they remoued to Alep, which was rendered to them, the ninth day after the beſieging thereof, though the caſtle of Alep held foorth vnto the eleuenth day after that they beſieged the Citie

of Damaſco, which alſo was rendered where the Souldains of theſe two places, beeing taken priſoners, were ſent into PERSIA with theyr Wiues and Children.
            The Prince of Antioche at that time was called Raymonde de Auſtriche, that married the daughter of the ſayde King Hayton of Armenie, to whome were giuen backe all the landes and territories which the Turkes before had bereft him. And to the ſayde king of Armenie was giuen the ſayde towne of Alep and other places which were frontering and nigh to his dominions.
            Howbeit, as Allau was nigh to Hyeruſalem, there came intelligence that his brother Mango was dead: Wherevppon Allau, purpoſing to depart into Tartarie, leaft in Sury with the king of Armenie, a nephew of his called Guibogan (named by Sabellicus, Garbocao, and by others Guithboga) with tenne thouſand horſemen. And ſo ALLAV departed out of Sury towardes the towne of Almalech where MANGO deceaſſed.
            But there hee vnderſtood, that the Tartaires had choſen to theyr King another of his brotheren named Cobila, (whome Paul the Venetian doth call Cublay) with which Cublay, the ſayde Paul was verie familyar; by whome, the ſame Paule was ſent into Fraunce vnto Pope Clement the fourth of that name in the yeere of our Lord God 1268. at ſuch time as the French loſt the Empire of Conſtantinople, and that Carles de Aniou brother of the king ſainct Lewes, was made king of Naples and Sicilie.
            
               Guibogan purſuing his enterpriſe, conquered a great part of Surie, with the help of the king of Armenie. Howbeit he would not vtterly driue forth the Turks, but onely made them Tributaries. Whereby it came ſo to paſſe, that the Chriſtians of Sydon could not there abide the Turkes to bee ſo nigh their neighbours, inuaded certaine villages of the Turkes, theyr neighbors being tributaries to the ſaid Guibogan; and ſpoyled them and tooke priſoners of them, and draue away their cattell: Such as eſcaped, came to Guibogan to complaine. Who immediatly ſent to the Chriſtians at Sydon for redreſſe: Howbeit in ſtead of amendes, the Chriſtians ſlew the meſſengers of Guibogan. Wherevpon Guibogan gathered his power againſt Sydon, and in the ende hee ouerthrew the wall of Sydon, and the caſtle of Beaufort, and therwith alſo did ſet a ſide a great part of the amitie that beefore hee dyd beare to the Chriſtians of Surye.
            The Chriſtians in Sury, being thus at diſſention with Guibogan who alſo was a chriſtian, and come vnto their aide: the Souldan of Egipt named Cathos, and ſurnamed Melechmees, that is to ſay, a King of people, made wars vpon Guibogan, ſo that in a battell, Guibogan was ouerthrowen and ſlaine, wherby the countrie of Surie remayned vnder the obedience of the ſaid Melechmees ſauing certaine townes which the chriſtians kept ſtill; in the yeere of our Lord 1274.
            At which time the towne of Damaſco was ſhamefully loſt and beetrayed and ſold by a Sarazine that had the ſame in garde, to Melechmees. Allau, this while being in Perſia, and aduertiſed of this ouerthrovv of

Guibogan and the victorie of Melechmees, & thereof giuing intelligence to the kinges of 
                  〈…〉
               ie, & Georgie, he raiſed a great army, that ioyning with the forces of theſe two kings, he purpoſed to haue entred into Surie, to haue recouered that which there was loſt, and being in readines to haue ſet forward, hee was ſodainely taken with ſicknes, wherof within a while after he died.
            Abagan ſonne of Allau ſucceeded his father & would not become a Chriſtian, as his father was, but tooke vpon him the ſuperſticion of the ſect of Mahumet, and made wars vpon his neighbours, whereby the power and might of the Souldans of Egipt began meruailouſly to augment and encreaſe, inſomuch as Bendecar otherwiſe called Benedecadar whom Hayton calleth Benededar, and by himſelfe named Melechdaer which ſignifieth the aboundant or puiſant king, being Soldan of Egipt, did winne the citie of Antioch vpon the chriſtians, with ſundry other townes, and after allied himſelfe with the ſarrares of Cumdnie and Cappad
                     •••
                  , & after inuaded Armenia, during ſuch time as king Hayton the king of Armenia was tournied and gone to A
                  ••
               al
                  •••
                towards Cobila or Cublay cham. The two ſ
                  •••
                of the king of Armenia, vpon ſuch inua
                  〈…〉
                made by the Souldan, encountred 
                  •
               he Souldan with a great Armie, which conſiſted of twelue thouſand horſemen, & fortie thouſand f
                  ••••••
               n: 
                  〈…〉
                Souldan ouerthrew them & did 
                  〈…〉
                with the 
                  〈…〉
                of one of thoſe ſons of the king of Armenia, & the other ſo
                  •
                led captiue into Egipt. Hayron hearing of this ouerthrow haſtely 
                  〈…〉
                
               Armenia, & p
                  〈…〉
               g that he could not 
                  〈…〉
                of Abagan to 
                  〈…〉
               , he proceeded

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
no farther but fell to compoſition, with the Souldan Melechdaer, and rendred to him the towne of Alep with Sangolaſſar a nigh kinſeman of the ſaid Souldan for the recouerie of his ſaid ſonne, beeing priſoner as aforeſaid, who vpon the ſame concluſions was accordingly redeliuered to his ſaid father. King Hayton vpon the returne of the ſame his ſonne did crowne him king of Armenia, whoſe name was Thyuon; & after that Hayton entred into religion, and named himſelfe Macarie, which ſignifieth bleſſed, whē he had reigned ouer the Armenians fortie & fiue yeeres, & died ſoone after, how beit afore he died he pacified king Abagan with his neighbours the yeere of Grace 1273.
            After the death of king Hayton, Melechdaer that had conquered Antioche & Cilicia, purpoſing further to enter into Natolye where were ſundrie gouernours & Captains of the Tartares beeing ſubiect to Abagan, among whom thene was a Sarazin named Paruana, who had ſecret conference with ye Soldan Melechdaer, wher of Abagan getting intelligence, raiſed a great army, and marched towards the Souldan, which the Souldan vnderſtanding, the Soldan would not abide him but fled, & Abagan folowed him into Egipt, ſo far as he could for the great heats of the countrie, which enbarred him to proceede any further, neuertheles in this chaſe he ouerthrew 
                  •
               oe than two thouſand 
                  ••••
               emen pertaining to the ſaid Souldan, and after Ab again returned into Natolie, & tooke Paruana, & cauſed him to be ſawed in ſunder with a ſawe after the manner that the Far
                  ••
               res doe vſe, & ſo to be cut in go
                  ••
               i
                  •
               s & pecces, wherewith they being ſerued at their table▪ they did 
                  •
               ated 
                  〈…〉
               
               
as the ſame meat endured.
            After that Abagan, had thus ſet in quietneſſe the countrie of Natolie, hee offered to giue the ſame to King Thyuon of Armenia, but hee durſt not receiue the ſame, through ſeare of the Souldan of Egipt, in excuſing curteouſly himſelfe & aledging that the realme of Armenia was big inough for him to gouerne, ſo that to haue greater dominions were but further troubles to him, & therfore moſt hartely he thanked him of his moſt gentle offer; which he was bounden to remember vpon due occaſion, vpon which refuſall Abagan committed the gouernāce & regement of Natolye to ſundrie of his owne Captains, among the which one named Othoman was one, from whom the Princes of the Turks, that preſently reigne, are deſcended.
            
               Abagan returned into Perſia, wher he ſtaied a certaine time, and in the meane ſeaſon he was ſtirred by the ſaid king Thiuon of Armenia to make war vpon the Soldan of Egipt, named Melechſayt (that is to ſay the king deſired) who ſucceeded next to Melechdaer & moleſted the ſaid king Thiuon: for which cauſe Abagan did ſend Mangodanior his brother with thirtie thouſand horſemen ioyned with the army of the ſame King of Armenia againſt the ſaid Souldan Melechſayt, and came before the towne of Hames, where they found encamped the armie of the Sarazins, and therevpon each ſide preparing to fight; they ordered their armie, and deuided them into three battelles, whereof the one was vnder the leading of Mangodanior, the ſecond was guided by King Thiuon, and the third by a Captaine Tartarian named A
                     •••
                  ech or Achmat, (which ſignifieth

gracious) theſe two, ſo worthely behaued themſelues with their battails againſt the like number of Sarazines, that thoſe Sarazins were vanquiſhed and put to flight. The meane time, Mangodanior who had no manner of experience (as it ſeemed) in wars, without giueing any manner of charge vpon the enemie, which towards him was readie to encounter againſt him, hee gaue himſelfe ſhamefully to flie, & ſtaied not a whit vntill he came to the riuer of Euphrates which they call Euphra, though hee was not purſued or chaſed at all by the third battell of the Sarazins, which conſiſted of thoſe people called Beduins: who in the holy Scripture are named Madiani or Madianites, and to ſuccour their companions that were ouerthrowen and fled, followed their fellowes ſo faſt as they could; but the next day, when king Thyu on and Achmet vvere returned frō the chaſe to Hames, & perceiuing that Mangodanior vvas in ſuch order departed, they follovved him, and ouertooke him at the ſaide riuer; and inſtantly required him to returne, declaring to him hovv they had vvon the battaile & put the Sarazins to flight, but for any thing they could ſay or aledge he vvould not returne but immediatly retired tovvards his brother into Perſia, about the yeere of our Lord God 1282 Abagan beeing not a little diſpleaſed vvith the flight and cowardneſſe of his brother, was purpoſed to haue gone in his owne perſon againſt the Souldain, howbeit he was enpoiſoned by a Sarazin and died leuing behinde him two ſonnes, the one named Argon and Ragait.
            Tangodor neuertheles ſucceded to his brother Abagan being elected by Tartares to be their king, this Tangodor

was ſometime a chriſtian, and at the time of his baptiſme hee was named Nicolas, but through his tomuch keping companie with Sarazins, he became a Mahomatiſt and was named Mahumet, he cauſed to be deſtroied & ouerthrowen all the churches of the Chriſtians within his dominions, and entered in amitie and league with Melechſayt Souldan of Egipt, wherfore one of his owne bretheren together with his ſaid nephew Argon, accuſed him before Cobila Cham of the aforeſaid crimes, wherevpon Cobila Cham ſent him word and commaunded him to amend and redreſſe thoſe iniuries which he had done and from thence forth to liue in a better ſort, or otherwiſe he would extremely puniſh him: but Tangodor, nothing amended with this aduertiſement from Cobila Cham, in diſpight, he cauſed his ſaid brother to be apprehended, and to be put to death. Howbeit his nephew Argon, vpon this eſcaped from him, and fled to the mountaines, and after, with the aid and helpe of his friends and ſeruants of Abagan his faide father, he ſurpriſed and tooke Tangodor and cauſed him to bee ſawen in ſunder in the middle after that he had reigned three yeeres in the yeere of grace 1283.
            Argon after that hee had put to death Tangodor his vncle was elected king, but hee would neuer accept the name and title of Cham without the leaue of Cobila who perceiuing the ſame gladly thereto did condiſcend. This Argon was a chriſtian and cauſed to bee reedified & repaired the Churches which his vncle wickedly before had deſtroyed. He vvas viſited by the kings of Armenia and Georgia to whom hee promiſed hee would goe vvith them to recouer the holy land, but the

meane time he died, as one that had not the leaſure to performe that worthie promiſe, after that he had reigned three yeeres, at ſuch time as Melechnazer Souldan of Egipt floriſhed.
            After Argon, ſucceeded Ragayt his brother, called by Sabellicus Queghat, and by others, Tagadayt, a man moſt vnprofitable to rule without either faith or law, hated of his owne, and vtterly abhorred of ſtraungers, he had a ſon named Caſſan Baydo or Bathy and according to Sabellicus called Bandon, and had a coſen alſo called Caſſan which ſucceded him anno domino 1290. This ſaid Caſſan Baydo was a chriſtian, and honoured the Churches of God, and prohibited that none ſhould ſpeake of Mahumet, which thoſe that followed the ſect, tooke it in meruailous euill part, and ſecretly aduertiſed the ſaid Caſſan or Aſſan which was ſonne to the ſaide Argon that if hee would forſake the chriſtian faith beeing alſo a chriſtian, they would proclayme him king; vnto whom this Caſſan, ſon to Argon accorded, & vnder this promiſe & hope Caſſan ſon to Argon raiſed war againſt his coſen Baydo, which Baydo hearing gathered his power togethers & encoūtred Caſſan; & ioyning in battell Baydo was ſhamefully forſaken by his owne ſubiects being Mahometiſts, that reuolted to the part of Caſſan, & ſo Baydo ther was ſlaine.
            After the death of Baydo, Caſſan was called king, but at the firſt, he durſt not declare what was reſting ſecretly in his mind againſt thoſe who brought him to this dignity by the meanes aboueſayde. Howbeit when he thought himſelfe aſſured and confirmed in his regall authoritie, hee beegan firſt to ſhew himſelfe a friend to chriſtians,

and then hee commaunded to bee put to death thoſe who counſailed him to denie the chriſtian faith.
            And after he addreſſed an armie againſt the Soldan of Egipt & the Sarazins of the which his purpoſe Caſſan aduertiſed the kings of Armenia & Georgie, who with their armies came & ioyned with him at Baudras, and from thence marched to the towne of Hames which is ſituated in the midſt of Sury, where the Souldan of Egipt called Melechſeraph who had chaſed the chriſtians out of Sury came againſt them with a great army & encamped in a great medow, thereby ſuppoſing to haue ſurprized the chriſtians, and albeit he found the chriſtians partlie in diſorder, and ſo gaue charge vpon them, yet Caſſan with the reſt of the chriſtians ſo manfully fought it out, that in the end the Souldan was there vanquiſhed & put to flight: this battell was fought the ſeauenth day beefore Chriſtmas day in the yeere of our Lord God 1300 At which battell the ſaid Hayton (that was coſen to the king of Armenia) ſaith that he was preſent, & did put the acts & doings of the ſame in writing. Caſſan purſuing his victorie marched vnto the towne of Caſana, wher the Soldan had lodged a mighty deale of his treaſure, inſomuch as Caſſan tooke the towne with all that treaſure there, & meruailed greatly what the Soldan meaned that in going to the wars he would bring ſo much treaſure with him, which treaſure Caſſan tooke, and deuided it among his ſouldiours. After that he marched to the citie of Damaſco which was rendred to him, wher he ſound that Citie was no otherwiſe furniſhied but onely with victuall very plentifully, wher the whole army of Caſſan ſtaied forty fiue daies, ſauing ſortie thouſand horſemen

vnder the leading of their Captaine Molay vvhich purſued after the Souldan. Harton not a little meruayleth that in ſo little as this Caſſan was, vvere reſident ſo many vertues and valiaunt courage, though among thirtie thouſand men, ther vvas not a worſe ſhaped and deformed perſon then he vvas.
            Caſſan being at Damaſco, he receiued intelligence that one of his Coſens named Baydo vvas entred into Perſia vvith a great army, to inuade him. For vvhich cauſe he returned into Perſia to encounter Baydo, leauing behind him in Sury, one called Molay vvith tvventy thouſand horſemen and at Damaſco a Sarazins named Capehach to bee generall of the ſame, vvho ſometime before vvas in meruailous fauour vvith the Souldan of Egipt & through certaine diſpleaſures betvvixt them reuolted from the Souldan, and to obtaine his fauour againe this Capehach ſhamefully rendred to the Soldan the tovvne of Damaſco, and other tovvnes therevnto adioyning.
            Molay thus perceiuing vvhole Sury ſtirred vp into rebellion, he vvithdrew and retired himſelfe into Meſopotamia, and after gaue intelligence to Caſſan of the troubles of Syria, who purpoſed the next winter enſuing, to retourne into Syria becauſe through the feruent heat of the ſommer then preſent there was noe graſſe or other feeding for horſes, how bee it the meane time Caſſan ſent an other Captaine named Cotuloze otherwiſe called Caroloz with thirtie thouſand horſemen giuing him alſo in charge, to aduertiſe immediately the king of Armenia, and other chriſtian Princes nigh to him adioyning of the iourney, who vpon the intelligence,

with their powers repaired and chiefely Thyuon king of Armenia, Emery of Luſignen king of Cypres, the maiſter of the hoſpitall of Sainct Iohns Hieruſalem, named brother Guillau de Villaret, and the Maiſter of the Templars, who all arriued by ſea, at the towne of Sur, and from thence marched with their armie, to the towne of Tortoſa aunciently called Antaradus: But the meane time Caſſan fell ſicke of a greeuous diſeaſe, that ſo as theſe wars for this time, proceeded no further, and euery of the ſaide princes with their powers returned home into their countries.
            Two yeeres after Caſſan determining to returne in to Surie, againe gaue intelligence of his purpoſe to the king of Armenia, & that he ſhould meete him at the riuer of Euphrates, where he and his armie ſhould abide for him, which armie of his, was ſo great, that the ſame occupied the grounds of three daies iourny in length. And as Caſſan entred into Sury the ſaid Baido inuaded the kingdome of Perſia againe, out of the which, before Caſſan ſundry times had chaſed him, & therefore Caſſan made towards him, with ſo much expedition as hee could, leauing Cotuloz with the king of Armenia and forty thouſand horſemen, to proceede in warres againſt the Souldan, who marched forward & toke the townes of Hames, and from thence went & beſieged Damaſco, where, Cotuloz and the king of Armenie had intelligence, how that the Souldain came to raze their ſiege: wherefore they leauing certaine bandes to continue their ſiege, with the 
                  •
               eſt of their army, they marched towards the Souldain, & finding him ſo ſtrongly encamped in ſuch a place where they could doe him ſmall

harme, and that the Tartares through ſcarcety of freſh water, departed from them by troopes: Cotuloz and the king of Armenia retourned to their ſiege of Damaſco, whereas in one night after, the waters about Damaſco, began in ſuch ſort ſodainely to grow, & that the Sarazins thereabouts brake in ſunder the Sluſes; that in leſſe ſpace then an houre, all the places where the army of the Tartares and chriſtians encamped, was drowned and ouerflowen with water, which through the ſodaine comming of the flud, and the darkneſſe of the night, was the more dreadfull to the whole armie, as thoſe that did not fore-ſee that water and inconuenience, whereby many of the Tartares there were drowned, as ignorant of the paſſages to eſcape, conſidering the dikes that inuironed the place of their encamping were both deepe and filled with the ouerflow of this water, ſo as a great number of the horſes of the Tartares there likewiſe periſhed, and all their baggage likewiſe: ſo as they that eſcaped had none other minde but in haſt to retourne home into their countrey▪ and the truth to ſay, they beeing thus turmoyled with waters, they were not good or meete to abide any fight.
            Conſidering aſwell their bowes as arrowes (which are the chiefeſt weapons that they doe vſe) were all to wet, and made vnprofitable thereby to ſerue: ſo as if the Sarazines that were very nigh them, had in this diſorder giuen charge vpon the Tartares, they might haue had a 
                  •
               ight good market on them: Howbeeit, the Sarazines as it ſeemed durſt not iſſue vpon

them: ſo as the Tartares had leaſure inough to eſcape, who ſtayed not much vntill they came to the riuer of Euphrates which they paſſed according to their cuſtome (for Michaell de Michou ſayeth, that euery of them that had a horſe did packe and faſten his wife children and baggage vpon the horſe, and than the huſband would take the taile of the horſe faſt in his hand: and in ſwimming, the horſe brought them all, ſo to land, and thus, they vſed to paſſe riuers, were they neuer ſo great or broad.
            The Armenians and Georgians that were in this army were enforced to retire, as the Tartares did, though a great number of them alſo periſhed & were drowned, and durſt not abide, through the great doubt, they had of the Sarazins.
            Hayton the Hiſtoriographer beeing an Armenian borne, ſaith, that hee himſelfe among others was in this army, when this departure chaunced, and alledgeth, that the whole fault of this diſorder and departure was in Cotuloz, that would not bee aduiſed by the King of Armenia, but onely would follow his owne wilfull braine: But the King of Armenia marched on to the Citie of Niniuie (which ſtandeth on the riuer of Tygris,) called by Euſebius, Nicibis, vvhere moſt curteouſlie hee vvas receued by king Caſſan, and at his departure Caſſan commaunded tenne thouſand horſemen, paied at his owne charges, not onely to attend and conduct the King of Armenia, into Armenia: but there to abide at the kings appointment, to garde and defend the dominions of Armenia: vnto

ſuch time, as hee the ſame Caſſan could conueniently raiſe an other army to returne againe in perſon againſt the Souldain of Egipt, but (alas to the great infortunity of chriſtendome) this valiant Caſſan dyed ſoone after.
            Some doe ſuppoſe that of him Sury, toke the name of Azamie, for that the Turks call Azam or Aſſam, Aſſamie: Howbeeit, it may bee, that this worde Azamie is deriued from the auncient name of Aram, ſon of Sem, who were ſons of Noe, of whom, the ſame country once was named, & by the Hebrux, Aram, yt is to ſay high or excellent, which they would pronoūce Aramie.
            
            After this Caſſan or Aſſan, ſucceeded Carbagan, whom ſome doe call Cerbagat, & the Frenchmen name Corbadan ſon of the ſayd Caſſan, who alſo was chriſtened & at his baptiſme was named Nicolas, & ſo remayned a good chriſtiā man during his mothers life, but after his mothers deceaſe, he wickedly fell into the abhominable ſect of Mahumet, which all his ſucceſſors after him, did neuer forſake, and at this daye doe maintaine the ſame.
            Of the ſaid Caſſan or Aſſan are diſcended the kings of Perſia, who in honour of this Caſſan, haue taken vpon them the Surname of Caſſan, vnto Vſſun Caſſan of whom otherwhere we haue made mencion.
            But now, we name the princes of Perſia, Sophies, for that Seichayder Sophi, maried the daughter of Vſun caſſan, & begat vpon hir, Iſmael Sophi, who reigned a little before our time, & was father to Taamar Sophi, who at this day reigneth in Perſia. The Turks doe call Perſia, Pharſie: and the Perſians, Quezelbach: that is to ſay red heads, as before of them I haue ſpoken, which

Perſians and Turks, are perpetuall mortall enemies one againſt the other, & very different in opinion touching their ſuperſticious law and beliefe.
            A little beefore, I haue made mention of the beeginning of the Empire of the Caliphes of Baudraz, vnto their end. Likewiſe of the Miramamolins vnto their deuiſions, and in ſuch ſort of the Perſians ſo much as I could get knowledge of them. Of the Othmans I haue amply inough ſpoken before, ſo as I neede not, further ſo entreat of them, leaſt I ſhould paſſe and exceede the meaſure of a Summarie or an abridgment? I haue written alſo of the beginning of the Empire in Egipt, & therfore now it behoueth me to ſhew how the ſame fell into the puiſſaunce and dominacion of the Mamaluchs.
            In the yeere 1160. that Almery king of Hieruſalem beſieged the great city of Caire as before I haue ſpoken, the Souldain named Quare who as then was alſo called the Caliphe, perceiuing that he was not able to reſiſt the chriſtians, hee required ſuccours at the Souldan of Halep, who ſent him a Captaine named Saracon or Syracon, and by ſome called, Syraſſon, who (by his nation) was a Coraſmin: this Syracon hauing in ſuch ſort giuen aide to the Caliph that his countries were defended from the enemie, and therewith perceyuing how vnmeet the Caliph was to rule through his cowardneſſe & to much feare in him reſident; & conſidering alſo how few friends he had to leane to him, in time of neceſſitie, he tooke the Caliph & put him in priſon wher he died, and Saracon made himſelfe Souldain of Egipt. Thus the Empire of the Sarazins or Arabians was transferred into the handes of the Coraſmins or 
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
            
               After Melechnazer, was Souldain, Melechſeraph (which word ſignifieth the ardent or bright Prince) who did win vpon the chriſtians the towne of Acre in Sury in the yeere of our Lord God 1293. and chaſed the chriſtians out of all Sury, which he ioyned to the kingdome of Egipt: he was the firſt that cauſed to be coined in Egipt the Ducats of Golde, which are there called Seraphes. This Soldain is named by Sabellicus and others Melecaſtraphus.
            Thus proceeded the ſaid Mammeluchs, to dominate and rule in Egipt, and did chooſe their Souldains either vpon chriſtians that became renies or that were chriſtians children, bought as aboueſaid, and educated in that forme of religion & trained ſo, to the warres as aboue is declared, albeit therwere none of theſe Māmeluchs that durſt goe alone through the city wher they were, but by expreſſe commandement of their Emyrs, who were their ſuperiors; they ſhould goe two at the leaſt togethers: and to bee briefe, theſe Mammeluchs had the authoritie and dominacion ouer all the people of Egipt & Surie, from the time they chaſed the chriſtians out of Surie vntill that Selim the great Turke, as afore is mencioned, vtterly ouethrew them & their name for euer.
            Thus, the firſt of the law of Mahumet, that reigned in Aſia, were the Arabians, whom the Hebreus and Suriens doe call Saba, and the Greeks, Sab
                  •
               i, & they themſelues doe name Sarazins: after the
                  •
               
               ▪ ther did the Turquimans or Turkes rule, who chaſed from thence the Sarazins: theſe Turks were Parthians as Hayton doth fronter and limit them. The Turks likewiſe were driuen

from thence by the Tartaries, beeing Scithians orientall, who haue taken vpon them alſo the name of the Turks though they be none in deed, and at this preſent reigning vnder the name of the Turks, who of very truth are but Tartaires and Scithians by their diſcent, which, their maner of fight and weapon therewith that they vſe, as their bowes made of horne, which our elders doe appoint and attribute to the Scithians, ſufficiently doe witneſſe. Againe the language Tartareſque, and the Turks ſpeech, are not much different: for Michael de Michou ſaith that the Tartairs who deſtroied Ruſſia, and the regions thereabouts named in their language Tartareſque, the tops of ſteeples of Churches there, Altum Bachne, conſidering thoſe toppes of ſteeples were gilded▪ ſo in the Turks language this word Altum Bachne ſignifieth a head of gold or gilded. Wherefore according to the opinion of Authors, one may iudge that they are Scithians and Tartares to whom the name of the Turks are giuen at this day, whoſe elders, in that they poſſeſſed the countrey of Turqueſtan; of that region, they haue left the name of Turks, to the Turks that preſently reigne, beeing their poſteritie, which to others perhaps is vnknowne, being ignorant both of the difference of theſe two nations, ſo far of, and barbarous, and of the chaunges fortuned in their kingdomes.
            Heere endeth the firſt booke.
         
         
            
            To the VVorſhipfull his very good Coſen William Carr of Stafford in the county of Lincolne Eſquire, and one in hir Maieſties Commiſſion of peace there.
            
               
                  SYR, to you who are the ſecond poſſeſſor of my heere expreſſed rich will, though weake power: I commend this ſecond booke of my French and Italian traductions, concerning the ſucceſsion of the great houſe of Ottoman, and thoſe their fortunate armes whether in offence, or defence taken; The rather for that your ſelfe beeing reſident in court where this argument (by reaſon of the preſent Hungarian wars and the often aſſemblies of the Germaine Princes to prouide ſome remedy for their feared harmes) is much ſpoken of▪ you may with others ſee the manner and growing of this continuing and admired felicitie, (heere by me deciphered) though the meanes how, by very few is ſeene, ſaue ſuch onely as are true ſpectators and obſeruers of high reaching pollicie; what my paines hath effected in this point, I freely giue as you may boldly chalenge it for your due; who deſire nothing more then euer to be found the generall and perticuler ſeruant of your ſelfe and your moſt worthy brothers true iointenants by vndeuided moieties (as our lawiers terme it) of mee and what I may, whereof the ſuruiuor whilſt I ſuruiue may diſpoſe of the whole: And ſo with all duety done which may be demanded of a moſt affectionate kinſman and ſeruiceable friend: I take my leaue, from the middle Temple in London this 20▪ 
               of March 1600.
            
               Your worſhips of all others moſt at command
R. Carr.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Booke
            Of the conqueſts made by the Turkes, and the ſucceſſion of the houſe of Ottoman.
            
               I Suppoſed to haue ben acquited & diſpatched from your earneſt ſuits, and fully to haue ſatiſfied your demaunds, to the beſt of my knowledge and power, touching the affaires and matters concerning the Turks. Now you deſire of me their progreſſe, and continuances, as it were from the father to the ſonne, how they haue proceeded & attained vnto the conqueſts of ſo many regions, which at this day they poſſeſſe and keepe: Yet you conſider litle the affaires, wherwith I am cōtinually occupied, nor the imbeſilitie of my memorie, that ſo redely ſhould write vnto you a Hiſtorie of matters that haue paſſed two hundred yeeres & more in Countries, ſo far of & ſundry, full of vocables & names, both right ſtrange and different, from our vulgar language. Wherefore in this requeſt, if I ſatisfie you not in ſuch good ſort as your deſire, yet you ought to accept my paines in good part, for be it well or euill, it beehoueth mee to▪ doe as you will haue me.
            In the yeere of our lord God one thouſand & three hū
               dred, at ſuch time, as the Emperour Henry, the ſeuenth of that name, purpoſed to renew in Italie the partialities & diuiſions of the Guelfes & Gibelins (at which time alſo reigned in France Philip le Bel,) there were in Natolie or Aſia the leſſe, certaine Captaines of the Turks (wher

this nacion had continued euer ſithens the paſſage and famous iourney of Godefroy de Bologne, duke of Boullon, and there had remained, euer ſince the time that they preſented themſelues againſt the army of the chriſtians, before the citie of Nice, which we may name Victoire anciently called Antigonia, vnder their valiant generall named Solyman or Soleyman. After which paſſed an hundred yeeres & more, that not any did ſpeake of this Nation, vnto ſuch time (as I haue ſaid) there were in Natolie ſundry Captaines among the which, more famous than the reſt, were Othman, Caraman, and Aſſan or Azam, called by way of dignitie Begy or Bey, which is as much, as Seigneur or Mounſi
                     •
                  ur, & in our Engliſh tongue Lord, howbeit the Turks doe abſtract and withdraw from this word Begy, this letter y, and ſo doe call them Othmanbeg, Caramanbeg, & Aſſambeg. Othmanbeg (who was very valiant and a man of great actiuitie) allied himſelfe with two Greeks Reniez, and a third being a Turke borne, the one of theſe Greeks was called Michali, & the other Marco. Of the ſaide Michali, are diſcended the Michalogli of whom, there continue ſome at this day, as likewiſe ſuch of the lignage of Marco, who are named Marcozogli, the Turke was named Aramy, of the race of whom, called Auramogly, none can be found, that any knoweth: the ſucceſſours of this Auramy, are accounted and reputed to bee of the bloud royall of the Turks, and to them, the Empire of the Turks ſhould appertaine, if euer the Othmans line ſhould be extinguiſhed. With the helpe & aid of theſe three, Othmanbag aforeſaid became of meruailous credit & puiſſance, in ſuch ſort as he cōquered ſundry cities & townes ſituated vpon the ſea ſide of La Mer
               
               Maiour otherwiſe called in latin Pontus Euxi
                     •
                  us, & amōg them the towne of Syuas which the Greeks call Sebaſie was one, which is named by vs, in fraunce Auguſte. Caraman did draw himſelfe towards Cilicia, where he reſted, & called that region according to his owne name Caramania. Aſſam repaired into Perſia, which the Turks do call Pharſic, as alſo into Aſſiria which according to his name, he cauſed to be called Azamie. Theſe laſt two and their ſucceſſours haue euer ſithens beene vnmercifully perſecuted by Othman and his poſteritie: In ſuch ſort, as vtterly they haue deſtroied Caraman his bloud, & gotten his countries. But Aſſambeg notwithſtanding (which is called the Sophi) right valiantlie doth defend his owne, and liueth in continuall warres and enmetie with the Othmans. This Othman reigned twentie and eight yeeres vnto the beeginning of the reigne of Phillippe de Valloys the french King. Which Othman was ſo ſurnamed of a certaine towne or caſtle called Othmanach ſituated in Natoly betwixt Synope and Trebiſonde the famous cities, and left a ſonne named Orcan, who ſucceded his father in his dominions.
            
               Or
                     •
                  an the ſonne of Othman maried the daughter of Caramanbeg, and after made cruell war vpon him, cauſing to bee put to death his eldeſt ſonne brother to his wife, whom before hee had taken in battaile: he tooke alſo the citie of Burſie, which the auncients named Pruſias. At this very ſame time Andronico Paleologo, then Emperour of Conſtantinople dieng, did leaue his ſonnes named Caloiany and Andronico vnder the gouernance & regiment of Iohn Catacuſan, who though hee very prudently, behaued himſelfe during the time of this his regiment,

yet through the malice of the Patriarch, and of an other perſon of baſe conditions and birth (howbeit of meruailous credit after with the Emperour) Catacuſan was expelled, who notwithſtanding found the meane, after, to returne againe to Conſtantinople more ſtrong than beefore, and for the more aſſurance of himſelfe, he cauſed his daughter to bee giuen in mariage to the young Emperour Caloiany: howbeit they could not ſo long remaine in concorde, but that the Emperour ſecretly departed to the Iſle of Tenedo, where an army of the Geneuois to the number of threeſcore Gallies came to ſuccour him, who brought him backe to Conſtantinople and chaſed from thence Catacuſan. Now he immediatly repaired for aide to the Venetians, through whoſe help retourning home aſſailed the army of the Geneuois riding with their Gallies in the Canall of Conſtantinople aunciently called Propontis: howbeeit the victorie remained to the Geneuois, and the Citie with Caloiany, who in recompence of their worthy ſeruice, rewarded them and their Captaine named Francis Cataluz, with the gift of the Iſle of Methelin, in times paſt named Lesbos: Who continued the poſſeſſion thereof vnto the time that Mahumet the ſecond did winne the ſame from Nicolas Cataluz the laſt Duke thereof: This little deuiſion engendred after moſt cruell wars betwixt the Geneuois and the Venetians: which as it brought the Citie of Venice to ſuch extremety, that it ſeemed readie to render it ſelfe to the mercy of the Geneuois, ſo in the ende it was cauſe by the alteration of fortune that the Geneuois (beeing in ſundry fights and conflicts on the ſeas a
                  •
               ter ouerthrowen by the

               Venetians) came to miſerable ruine and ſeruitude, for thereby they were enforced to yeelde themſelues, to the Archbiſhop of Milane whom they made gouernour of their Citie of Geanes, and to ſell all their lands and Seigneuries to the communaltie and brotherhood of Saint George, which is within their Citie, and laſtly to ſubmit themſelues to the french Kinges protection vnder whoſe ſubiection they remained a while, vntill hee gaue them to Iohn Duke of Calabre ſonne to Reignard King of the realme of Naples, vntill they reuoulted to Philippe Duke of Milane, whom in the end they forſooke to, in ſuch ſort as (through their inconſtancie,) they did not know well, to what good Saint, to vow themſelues: howbeit the greateſt miſchiefe was, that this forenamed warres gaue an vndoubted occaſion to the vtter loſſe of Surie & the realme of Hieruſalem (& what was worſe then that) the ſame opened to the Turks, the gate and entry to Greece and other parts of Europe, as heereafter I ſhall declare, all which was about the time that Lewes de Bauiere, & Frederic of Auſtrich contended about the obtaining of the Empire of Alemaign. The ſaid Orcan reigned two & twenty yeres vnto the beginning of the reigne of Iohn the french king which was in the yeere of our Lord God 1350. leauing behinde him his ſonne Amurath.
            
               Amurath (whom the Hungarians and the Scla
                     ••
                  nes doe call Ammarat, and the Turkes Moratbeg which is as much to ſay, as the Lord Morat, (but Froſſart ſuppoſing to pronounce this name, as they doe, calleth him Lamorabaquin,) entred to his dominions when as Catacuſan, purſued the Emperour his ſonne

in law, through the aide of Mar
                     •
                   Carlouich the Deſpot ofDeſpot: what it meaneth. 
               Bulgaria: this word Deſpot is ſo much to ſay in our Engliſh tongue as Prince or Lord: and the Prouince of BulgariaBulgari
                     •
                  
                is that Country which anciently was named Gaetae and Gepidae. This Amurath was ſecretly fauored among certaine of the Nobility of Grecia, whom the Emperor Caloiaun hated, who finding that hee was to weake, to encounter with the Nobilitie that reuoulted, hee was conſtrained to demaund and require aide of Amurath, who forthwith ſent him twelue thouſand horſemen, through whoſe help, when the Emperour had pacified his affaires, hee gaue the Turks leaue to returne home. But they hauing ſeene & taſted the ſweetneſſe & beautie of the region of Grecia, after their returne perſwaded (as it was eaſie to doe) Amurath to goe in perſon to inuade Grecia. Which he ſo did, who accompanied with threeſcore thouſand men, by the help of two great ſhips of the Geneuois (among whom he beſtowed a threeſcore thouſand ducats) Amurath paſſed the famous ſtraits called by the ancients, Helleſpontus (and now the ſtraits of Calipoli or the Caſtells by reaſon of two caſtells whereof the one is ſituated in Aſia, and the other in Europ) wherin ancient time were alſo the townes of Seſtus and Abydos. The french doe call theſe ſtraits Le Bras de Sainct George, Saint Georgesarme, where the ſaid Amurath wan the towne of Calipoli beeing on this ſide thoſe ſtraits in Grecia, & than tooke Adrianople and Philippopoli aunciently called Olympias▪
                and ſo▪ ouerran the Prouince of Romany, in times paſt called Thracia, vnto the Mountaine Rhodope, which the Greekes doe name 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the Queene and Lady of thoſe Mountaines,

which ſome a ſo do call, the mountaine of Siluer by reaſon of the mines of ſiluer that are found in the ſame: and after ouercame in 
                  •
               attaile the aforenamed Marc Carlouich taking priſoner the Conte Lazaro of Seruia, which is Miſia Inferior, (whom Froſſart calleth Le Conte 
                     •
                  e Lazaran) whoſe head hee ſmote off, which was when Charles the fourth was letted from reſiſting the ſonnes of the Emperour Lewes of Bauer to de
                  •
               end himſelfe againſt Frederic Marquiz of Miſne & the Countie of Wittenberg his competiteurs, leauing the Empire after him to his ſonne Lancelot, who ſold the Cities and Segneuries of Italy (as Milane) to the family of the viconts and others. In the ende Amurath was ſlaine by a ſeruant of the ſaid Conte Lazaro as reuenging the death of his ſaide Maiſter, the yeere of our Lord God 1373 after that hee had reigned 23 yeeres, about the beeginning of the reigne of Charles the fifth the french king, and left two ſonnes Paſait and Seleyman.
            
            
               Pazait or Baſait as the Turks doe name him, who neuer pronounce this letter P. (and called by Froſſart le Roy Baſant, ſonne of Lamorabaquin and ſometime 
                  
                     •
                  morabaquin, according to his fathers name. Enguerran & Maſter Nicol
                     ••
                   G
                     •
                  les that collected the Annales of Fraunce call him the king Baſaa
                     •
                  g. This Pazait was hardy, diligent and very couragious, he ſ
                  ••
               w
                  •
               ia
                  •
                battaile Marc Carlouich, where with him the whole Nobilitie of Seruia and Bulgaria ended their liues, and after did ouerrun the territories of Theſſalia and Macedonia, now called Thumneſtie and Albanie. He waſted whole Grecia vnto Athens which at this day is called Cethine and ſpoiled the territories o
                  •
                Boſna (which is called Miſia Superior,) Crocia and Sclauonie (that are named aunciently Dal
                     ••
                  tia and Liburnia)

and this at that time when the Emperour Lancelot ſonne of Charles the fourth liued ſo vertuouſlie, that his ſubiects ſundry times did enpriſon him, but in the end was depoſed by the Alemans, who elected at one time two Emperours, the one called Ioce Nephew to Lancelot, and the other Robert of Bauiere otherwiſe called Ruebrecht which is interpreted in their Alleman language Trouble Peace. But to returne to Bazait, who then inuaded Hungary, & there ouerthrew king Sigiſmond, (that afterward was Emperour of Alleman, called by the Hiſtoriographer Engerrant de Mountralet, Sagimont) in the renowned battaile of Nicopoli: the cauſe of the loſſe wherof was, for that the french men ther ſeruing would not bee aduiſed by the king Sigiſmond, nor frame themſelues according to the pollicie of theſe wars as the Allemans alſo counſailed them, the which Froſſart imputeth likewiſe to the orgulitie and pride of the french, where was taken priſoner the Conte of Neuers, Iohn who afterward vvas Duke of Burgoign ſonne of Philippe the firſt duke, Philip Darthois, Conte de Eue conſtable of Fraunce. Iohn le Maingre called Boucicault and ſundrie others beeing men of eſtimation to the number of ſeauen or eight, vvho all vvere ſent to Burſie, the reſt of that nacion vvere ſlayne to the number of a thouſand horſemen.
            This battaile was foughten on Michaelmas euen Anno Domini 1396 and theſe priſoners, vvere after redeemed for no little ran ſome, in expedicion vvherof great dilligence vvas vſed by one Iames Hely a gentleman of Picardie, vvho alſo vvas taken priſoner among

them, and beefore had ſerued in the Court of Amorabaquin. After this battaile, Bazait beeſieged the Citie of Conſtantinople, and had wonne it, if it had not beene that into Natolie was entered the great Prince of Tartary called Tamerlaine or Tamburlaine, (but by the Turkes Demirling,) and by ſome French Hiſtoriographers (as Enguerrant) named Le Grant Tacon de Tartarye, but the Tartariens themſelues doe call him Temircutlu, that is to ſay, the Fortunate Sw
                     •
                  ord or luckie iron, deſcended of the race of one Cham of Tartarie called Zaym Cham, of the Horde or multitude of Zauolba and Czahaday, which is towardes the riuer of Rha or Volha, which falleth into the Sea Dabacuth, by the latins named Mare Caſpium and Hircanum, which Zaym was he whom the Polonians doe call in their Hiſtories Bathy, the firſt Mahum
                     •
                  tiſt of all the Tartares. Tamerlaine, was afterward Lord of Tartarie Precopie, called by them Prezelzoph, ſituated betwixt the riuers of Tanais which they call Don, and Boriſthenes called N
                     •
                  per and D
                     •
                  r
                     ••
                  z, the which countrie of Precopie was in auncient time called Scithia Inferior, now in poſſeſsion of the Turke. This Tamerlayne was for the moſt part reſident in the great Citie of Samarcand, which is toward the ſea Caſpium, who cauſed himſelfe to bee called the Scourge of God, though his verie title of his dignitie was Vlucham, which is to ſay, the mightie Lord.
            
               Bazait hauing intelligence of the entrie of Tamerlayne into Natoly, thought it requiſit to raiſe his ſiege of Conſtantinople, and with all diligence, to encounter with the innumerable army of Tamerlayne, where nigh the city of Dangory, by our ancients called Ancira (not

far from the mountaine Stella, which Enguerrant de Monſtrelet, doth call Appadi, where Pompeius Magnus ouerthrew the famous Mithridates,) the mighty armies encountred, and cruelly did fight, in which conflict Bazait was vanquiſhed and taken priſoner, whom Tamerlaine cauſed to bee bound and made faſt with chaines of gold, and ſo to be put in a cage as though hee had beene a Lyon, in which ſort hee carried Bazait about with him, through euery region of Aſia as he paſſed, ſo long as Bazait lined, which was not aboue two yeeres after or therabouts, who died Anno Domini: 1400 after he had reigned twentie ſeauen yeeres, about the twentith yeere of the reigne of Charles the ſixth the french king. From this conflict eſcaped certaine of Bazaits ſons, who ſuppoſing to haue paſſed into Europe, chanced to fall into the hands of the Emperour of Conſtantinople who cauſed the ſeas ſurely to bee kept at that time. An other of his ſonnes named Cyris, and by the frenchmen Quirici, whom ſome alſo doe call Calapin or Calepin eſcaped ouer to Adrinopoli whoſe ſirname beeing called Ciris Cheleby was but a little of dignitie and Nobleſſe giuen to the children of the great Turk, as Achmat Cheleby, Mahumet Cheleby, or Muſtapha Cheleby, which is as much as to denominate a gentleman, according as the Spaniards doe name their Nobilitie Don Alonſo or Don Rodrigo, and the frenchmen Charles Monſieur or Loys Monſieur, being appropriate to their blood roiall. Cyris reigned ſixe yeeres or thereabouts, and left behind him a ſon named Orcan, when as his three bretheren named Muſach, Mahumet, and Muſtapha eſcaped out of Conſtantinople, while the Emperour was gone into Fraunce to the ſayd

king Charles to require ſuccours againſt the afornamed Cyris, Muſach ſlew Orcan his nephew, & for recompence himſelfe was after ſlaine by his owne brother Mahumet: And than firſt began they to deuiſe how the one brother might kill another, which vnto this time, they haue right well practized and put in vre.
            
               Mahumet the firſt of that name, after he had ſlaine his brother Muſach, vſurped the Empire, and recouered all the whole Countries of Natolie which Tamerlayne before had wonne of Bazait. This Mahumet remoued his ſeat imperiall from the citie of Burſie in Natolie, to Adrianopoli in Grecia. He made wars vpon the region of Valachie (which ſome french hiſtories doe call Valaigne and other Blaquie, and of the ancients named Beſſi and Triballi.) He alſo ouerthrew in battaile the Emperour Sigiſmond in the plaines of Selumbez and was the firſt of his nation that paſſed the riuer of Donaw or Danuby: hee ſubdued the countrie of Boſnia made war vpon Caraman and died the yeere of our Lord God 1418 and in the xxxviii yeere of the reigne of the ſaid King Charles, after hee had reigned eighteene yeeres reconing therewith the yeares of Cyris (which ſome doe not) and left a ſonne called Amurath.
            Amurath the ſecond of that name was in Natolie, when his father died, whereof ſo ſoone as hee was aduertiſed, paſſed into Europe; albeeit the Emperour of Conſtantinople did what he could to ſtop his paſſage, who ſent againſt him Muſtapha his vncle, ſonne of Bazait, whom the ſaid Emperour had kept priſoner ſithens the taking of Bazait, as before I haue tolde: howbeit Muſtapha beeing to weake, was vanquiſhed & ſlaine

in battaile by Amurath, who to reuenge himſelfe vpon the Emperor of Conſtantinople▪ ſpoiled and burnt the whole territory of Thracia in Grecia: and tooke from the Venetians the notable towne of Theſſalonica called now Salonichi, which Andronico Paleologo before had ſold them in diſpite of the Emperour Conſtantine his brother: after that, the ſaid Amurath entred into Seruia or Raſcia & conſtrained George Vucouich the Deſpot or Prince of that country, to giue him in mariage his daughter named Irinye, ſurnamed Catacuſine, notwithſtanding which affinity hee afterward came againſt this Deſpot with an army, and enforced him to flie into Hungary, towards the Emperour Albert ſonne in law to the late Sigiſmond the Emperour, leauing his ſonne George for the defence of his ſaid Countrie, this George was taken by Amurath, who cauſed his eies to bee put forth, though he was his brother in law. After the death of the ſaid Albert; Lancelot brother to the king of Pole was choſen by the Hungarians for their King, albeit that Albert had left his wife with childe, who after the death of hir husband was deliuered of a ſonne, that at his Baptiſme was alſo named Lancelot, who after, wa
                  •
                nouriſhed and brought vp vnder the keeping of the Emperour Frederic the third of that name, and was the onely cauſe, that the ſaid Lancelot of Polen, durſt make no maner of enterprize againſt the Turks nor to inuade them, leaſt in the meane time the Emperour Frederic ſhould haue annoied him vpon ſome other part, and ſo haue ſet the other Lancelot (the true king in his realme of Hungary. During this time, Amurath who could not long reſt, beſieged Belgrado (which they call Nandoralba, and

               Alba Greca, and by the Hungariens, Chrieſchiſch, but by our elders Taurinum,) ſituated betwixt the riuers of Danubia or Donaw, and Sauus or Saua vpon a verie necke of lande, where thoſe two riuers doe ioyne togethers, the which towne of Belgrado the ſaid George Vucouich before had giuen in exchange for others to the ſaid Emperour Sigiſmond for that it was the key and entrie to the kingdome of Hungarie: After which at the ſuit and perſwaſion of the ſame George Vucouich, the ſaid king Lancellot raiſed a very great army againſt Amurath, and therewith recouered the territories of Seruia and Raſcia, which he rendred againe to the ſaid Deſpot George Vucouich: to reuenge which wrong, Amurath leuied a great power, vnder the leading of one Carabey who encountring with the Chriſtians, nigh the mountaine Coſtegnaz (anciently called Hemus) was there ouerthrowen, and Carabey taken priſoner. The which two victories, with ſundrie others before and after, were obtained by the famous proweſſe, and valiantneſſe of Iohn Huniad called by Enguerrant de Monſtrelet, and Philip de Comines, Le Blanc Cheualier de la Velaign, and by the Hungarians Ianc
                     •
                   Ban, or Vaiuod, that is to ſay, Prince of Tranſiluania at this preſent Moldauia, and by the Hungarians named Sibenbourg, that is to ſay, Septemcaſtrum, but by our elders Dacia. This worthy Iohn Huniad was father to the valiaunt Mathias king of Hungary, who not long agone reigned there. After this battaile there was an abſtinence from armes condicioned betwixt the Hungarians and the Turks, for two yeres, by reaſon wherof, & with the paiment of fifty thouſand ducats of ranſome, Carabey was deliuered: the which trewſe beeing ſoone after broken by the

ſaid king Lancelot, at the inſtance and perſwaſion of Eugenius the Pope, the fourth of that name, to king Lancelot was very infortunate, for afterward he was ſlaine in the battaile ſoughten beetwixt him and Amurath nigh the towne of Verna, aunciently called 
                  
                     •
                  yoniſiopolis vpon Saint Martins day, the eleauenth of Nouember Anno Domini 1444 wher the ſaid Iohn Huniad was put to flight. Of this victory Amurath had ſmall cauſe to reioyce conſidering it coſt him very decre both in loſſe of his▪ beſt friends, & choice ſouldiers: after this Amurath toke the towne of Sophie, beeing the head towne of whole Bulgaria, Scopie, and Nouomont, and ouerran all the territories of Acarnania (called at this inſtant, Ducat or Duche) and the Prouince of Cymera (aunciently called Epirus) where hee ſpoiled and waſted alongſt the riuer of Achelous (at this day named the riuer of Pachicolan) vnto the mountaines Du Diable (in times paſt called Acroceraunii) which are part of the Mountaines called Pindus, hee tooke alſo the famous port towne, named Velone (ſometime called Aulon) and paſſed the Gulfe of Larta, in latin called Sinus Ambracius, vnto the towne of Oricus (now named Rigo) and ſo went forward towards the Gulf of Cataro (which is called Sinus Riſonicus) beeing fiue and twentie miles from the towne of Raguſa, (in ancient 
                  ••
               me named Epidaurus.) Hee enforced Iohn Coſ
                  
                     ••
                  i
                     •
                  th the Deſpot of Cymera to giue him the enpregnable towne of Croia with his three ſonnes in hoſtage, and pledge of fidelitie, all which hee cauſed to be
                  •
                come Turks the yongeſt named George Caſtrioth, at that time not aboue nine yeeres of age, was called by the Turkes Scanderbeg that is to ſay Alexander▪
                the great, who after,

became ſo valiant a Captaine, that for his worthie acts hee was comparable to the famous and moſt renowmed Pyrrus, and others his worthy predeceſſours, dominators and rulers of Epirus: for hauing commaund vnder Amurath, he conquered Seruia, and did bring to the Turks obeiſance the Countrie of Carmania▪
                how beit afterward this Scanderbeg retourning to the chriſtian faith, cauſed Amurath to looſe the territorie of Seruia, and then toke from him the ſtrong towne of Croia with all the countries, townes, & caſtells that before belonged to his ſaid father Iohn Caſtrioth, beſides that in twentie or thirty battels, wherein valiantly he fought with the Turks, he alwaies caried away with him the victorie, ſo as Amurath had neuer iuſter matter to obiect to this Scanderbeg, then to reproch him with vnkindnes, that beeing ſo carefully brought vp by him, in his tender age, ſhould ſo without cauſe reuoult▪ calling him by ſundrie letters the ingrate & vnthankfull ſonne: howbeit Scanderbeg cared ſo little for Amurath, that vpon occaſion he departed from his owne Countries, to ſuccour in perſon Ferdinand king of Naples againſt Iohn Duke of Galabre, which Ferdinand hee reſtored to his realme, & expelled the Duke from the ſame: for which deede Ferdmand afterwards, curteouſhe receiued the ſpoiled and calamitous children of Scanderbeg (whom 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                the ſecond, after the death of their father exiled and 
                  〈…〉
                of all their liuelihoode) & gaue them lands in the kingdome of Naples, ſo as they became Marquizes of Saint Angelo, and of Tripaldo: ſo as a worthy gentelman of that race named Ferdinand Caſtrioth Marquiz of Saint Angelo was ſlaine, valiantly fighting on the imperiall

part in the late battaile before Pauia. Amurath after that did winne the countrie of Moree (which in latin by our elders is called Peloponeſus) through the diſcord of two bretheren, the one called Thomas and the other Demetrius, Deſpots of the ſame country, being brothers of Conſtantine Paleologo laſt Emperour of Conſtantinople, who by reaſon that the Albanois moued warres againſt them, ſought for ſuccours to Amurath, and became his tributaries, but after denying to pay their promiſed tribute, Amurath draue them out of their whole countrie of Moree. Howbeit Demetrius afterwards retired himſelf towardes the Turque, but Thomas repayred to Rome, to the Pope where hee ended his life, leauing foure children, two ſonnes and two daughters. Amurath beeing now become aged, and wearie both of the world and of his victories, withdrew himſelfe among certaine Heremits and other Religieux, of his ſuperſticious ſect, pretending to leade the reſt of his daies ſolitarilie and in quietneſſe: & eſtabliſhed in his place his ſon. Mahumet being but yong of yeeres, to reigne and gouerne his Kingdomes, appoynting for his gouernour one Haly Baſſa, called of ſome, Caly Baſſa. Howbeit when the famous Iohn Huniades, with the Hungarians had gathered togethers a mightie army, to haue inuaded the dominions of this young Mahumet. Amurath (at the great inſtaunce and ſuite both of his ſonne as alſo of the ſayd Haly Baſſa (that could not bee obeyed) was enforced to take vppon him the adminiſtration and gouernment of the preſent affaires, who making head againſt the ſaide Hungarians in the ende, vanquiſhed and put them to flight. After which Amurath inuaded

the dominions of the valiaunt Scanderbeg, beeſieged his ſtrong towne of Croia, howbeeit hee could not winne the ſame. And in his retyring by the Mountaynes there, hee was ſpoyled by the Paiſaunts, and verie manie of his armie ſlaine, whereby Amurath entered into ſuch a meruaylous melancholie and diſpleaſure, that what by diſeaſe therewith taken, and his olde age togethers hee dyed, in the yeere of our Lord God 1451. of his age ſeauentie fiue, and of his reigne thirtie two, and of the reigne of Charles, the French king the ſeauenth of that name twentie ſixe. Thus Amurath was the firſt, that inſtituted the Ianniſaries.
            
            MAHVMET, the ſecond of that name, called by Enguerrand, and other french Hiſtoriographers Morbeſan, perhaps they would haue ſaid Morbeſalem, which is as much in the Surien or Moreſque language, as theſe woordes in the Goſpell, Vade in Pace, depart in peace. This woord Morbeſan among the Turkes ſignifieth ſo much as Duke or Duchie. This Mahumet was ſonne of the ſaide Amurath, and of Iriny a Chriſtian woman daughter to George the Deſpot of Seruia, who beganne to reigne the one and twentie yeere of his age, and two yeeres after did winne by aſſault the Citie of Conſtantinople Anno Domini 1453. where the Emperour Conſtantinie was ſlayne, by which it ſo came to paſſe, that as one Conſtantine ſonne to Helen, was the firſt Emperour of Conſtantinople: ſo an other Conſtantine ſonne of an other Helen, was the laſt Chriſtian Emperour there. This Mahumet proued in the ende, neither Muſulman or Mahometist, for in his infancye hee
               
was inſtructed in the chriſtian faith, by his ſaid mother, and after by others in the Turkiſh ſuperſticion, howbeit, whan he came to age, he cared neither for the one nor other. In the beginning of his reigne, he cauſed two of his bretheren being but of very tender age (the one, of a yeere and a halfe, the other not paſſing ſixe moneths olde) to be ſlaine: howbeit ſome doe affirme that the elder ſonne was ſecretly ſaued, an other childe beeing put in his roome, who was caried to Venice, and from thence to Rome to Pope Calixt, who cauſed him to bee baptiſed and named Calixt Othman, vpon whom the Emperour Frederic afterwards did beſtow great liuings.
            Mahumet hauing thus taken Conſtantinople as I haue declared, did inuade the dominions of Hungary, and beſieged Belgrado, from which, hee vvas repulſed by the worthie Iohn Huniades, that was then within Belgrado, with the Cardinall Angelo, and the famous gray Frier called Iohn Capiſtran▪
                From this ſiege Mahumet withdrew himſelfe and his army with ſhame inough, for beeſides his owne hurts & wounds, he loſt wholy his artillerie & baggage, with his for euer hope to haue the realme of Hungarie: beſides hee was compelled wholy to attend the recouerie of the dominion of Moree, which the Venetians had wonne from him, hauing repaired the Examilo
               ila. (which is a long wall of the length of ſixe Italian miles extending from the Gulfe Patras, which the latines doe call Sinu Corinthiacus, vnto the Bay of Egino named in latin Sinus Megaricus, betweene which two Gulfs, (as it were in the midſt of the Iſtmus, not paſſing ſixe miles broad, being a peece of groūd comparable vnto a bridge tyeng the dominion and territorie of Peloponeſus, vnto

the maine land of Grecia) the Citie of Corinthe ſtood ſometime of notable fame, but now reduced to a little village called Coranto) the which long vvall named the Examilo, Amurath in his life had cauſed to bee demoliſhed and caſt downe, to the end to haue the more eaſie paſſage into Peloponeſus: but when Mahumet came, the Venetians hoping they had beene ſtrong inough, in a battaile which they fought vvith him, vvere cleane ouerthrovven, vvhere a great number of Italian Captaines vvere ſlaine: ſo as Mahumet recouered the chiefe of the territory of Peloponeſus, foorthvvith againe after vvhich in the very ſight of the Venetians hee did vvinne from them the vvhole Iland of Negropont called alſo Euboea, ioyned to the firme & main land vvith a bridge, vvith the Ilands of Stalimene anciently named Lemnos, and Methelin called Lesbos, appertaining then to Nicholas Cataluz a Geneuois: and ſo proſecuting his good fortune hee tooke the Iſle of Saint Maura (called Nerytus, and by ſome Leucas, & Leucadia) together vvith the Iſles of Zante (aunciently named Zacynthus) and Cephalenia, (called novv Chiphalonie:) Hee recouered the ſtrong tovvne of Croya, after the death of Scanderbeg, ſpoiled the tovvne of Scodra called novv Scutare from Seigneur Aranith Comino, or Comnenus ſurnamed Golent father of Seigneur Conſtantine, vvho then gouerned the Marqueſdome of Montferrato, after the death of the Ducheſſe his niece, at vvhich time Charles the eight the French King retourned from Naples: after all this Mahumet inuaded the territorie of Boſne, and tooke the Deſpot thereof called Stephan Hierchec, and of ſome Hiſtoriographers the Duke Latic, and cauſed

his head to bee ſmitten off, compelling a yong ſonne of this Deſpot to be made a Renie, and to be circumſiſed, in ſurnaming him Achmath. Hee tooke from the Geneuois, their towne of Capha (auncientlie called Theodoſia) ſituated in Prezocopie, named by the Geographers Taurica Cherſoneſus: which is as though it were halfe and ſland, as is Peloponeſus, and hath on the one ſide the Gulf of Nigropila (called Sinus Carcini
                     ••
                  s) & on the other, the Baye called La Mer Noir, named in latin B
                     •
                  cis Paulus, from which not very far diſtant is the famous Gulfe called Palus Meotis commonly named the Gulf de li Tana, during which time of theſe his expedicions & exploits in war in countries ſo farre diſtant the one from the other; hee was aſſalted in Natolie by Piramet Caraman, who enforced him to relinquiſh his further enterpriſes. Notwithſtanding before his departure, he tooke the ſtrong fortreſſe of Mancup or Manlzup, ſituated in the Iſthmus or ſtrait peece of ground which knitteth or ioyneth Prezocopie vnto the firme land called by the ancients Taphre, now Azan or Aſſou▪
                ſtanding vpon the ſhore of the Gulf▪
                of T
                     •
                  na. That done, Mahumet retired into Natelie, and repulled from thence Caraman, inuading the countries of the ſame Caraman, whereof he did win a great part: and in his returne tooke the citie of Sinopes, the Metropolis of Pap
                     •
                  lagonia, which ſtandeth vpon the coaſt of the ſea called anciently Pontus Euxinus, & now La Mer Maiour, as alſo vpon the ſame coaſt▪ the renowned citie of Trapezonda, being the chiefe city of the Empire of Trapezonda, where he did put to death the Emperour therof called Dauid Conino or Comnenus, who was a Chriſtian, diſcended of the valiaunt Iſaac Conino, who from a meane

Captaine became Emperour of Conſtantinople, after the Emperour Michaell: all which troubles aboue ſaid came to paſſe, when as the Hungarians, and thoſe of Auſtrich moued wars againſt the Emperour Frederic to recouer Ladiſlaus (whom ſome doe call Lancelot) the ſonne of Albert, to be their king and lord, whom Frederic had in keeping, yet would not reſtore him, though he was adiudged meete to reigne: while Mahumet became thus victorious, there did ſpring a new enemie againſt him named Vſſuncaſſan or Aſſambeg the prince of Perſia, who with a great power of the Perſians (whom the Turkes doe call Keſelbach, that is to ſay, red heads, by reaſon that they did weare red hoods) entered into Capadoce and Trapeſonde, and fought two battailes with Mahumet; in the firſt of which Mahumet was ouerthrowen, but in the ſecond Aſſambeg had the worſt, and therby loſt ſundry of his dominions. This Vſſuncaſſan or Aſſambeg was ſonne in law to the ſaide Dauid Conyno Emperour of Trebiſonde, of whom beefore I made mencion, who reigned in the yeere of our Lord God 1472. Mahumet thus deliuered of his aduerſarie, retourned into Caramany after the death of Pyramet Caraman, and enforced Abraham his ſonne to ſeeke for ſuccours from the Chriſtians, and chiefelie of Pope Pius the ſecond of that name, who was determined in perſon to haue gone againſt the Turke, and for that purpoſe was repayred to the Citie of Ancona, where hee had in readineſſe a great army on the ſea: but while hee ſtayed there for the Venetians that ſhould haue accompanied him in the voyage, Pius dyed, without any further exploit done at that time.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               Whereby it ſo came to paſſe, that this army being ſcattered, and the Allemans and the Hungarians continuing ſtill at warres, this infortunate Caraman not able to reſiſt Mahumet, was in the end miſerablie ſlaine by him, and by this meane the race of Caraman was vtterly ouerthrowen, and his dominions reſted in the ſubiection of the Othmans. Mahumet now aſſured and ſafe vpon this coaſt of Cilicia, ſent Omarbey, the Sangiac of Boſnia, who was ſonne of a Geneuois, to pill and ouerrunne the countrie of Iſtria (called Liburnia) as likewiſe to ſpoile the territorie of Carinthia (commonly called Crayn) & ſo to furrow the land of Stiria (anciently called Valeria, now at this day named Steirmarck) all which countries are comprehended vnder the name of Illirium. This Omarbey in executing his princes commandement, paſſed vnto the region of Frioll, (which in latin is called Forum Iulii,) traueſing mightie and great riuers, both by foords and bridges made on boates as occaſion ſerued, and ouerthrew the armie of the Venetians that came to debat his paſſage, in which conflict were ſlaine & taken a great company of notable good Captaines of Italy. Of another part Mahumet did ſend Athmath Bacha (ſurnamed Ghendich, that is to ſay with a great Tooth, ſonne of Stephan ſometime Deſpot of Boſnia, of whom I dyd ſpeake beefore) with a great army by ſea into Italy who tooke the towne of Otrant
                     •
                  
                (called in latin Hydruntus and of the auncients I
                     •
                  pigium) ſituated in the territorie of Apulia in Italie: a little beefore which Meſith Bacha Paleologo, diſcended of the race of the Emperour of Conſtantinople, did beeſiege the famous citie of the Rhodes with a mightie army, from which hee was repulſed by

the Chriſtians that valiauntly defended the ſame. Now Mahumet not contented thus with theſe three Armies, in perſon went againſt the Soldain of Egipt, but being arriued nigh vnto Nicomedia (a Citie of Bithynia in Natoly, which Citie at this day is called Comidy, and of the Turks Nichor, Mahumet died in the yeere of our Lord God 1442 of his age 54. And of his reigne 31. About the ende of Loys the eleuenth, and the beginning of the reigne of Charles the eight the French king. This Mahumet was called by the Turks, Mahumet Boiuc, that is to ſay Mahumet the great, who left beehinde him, two ſonnes the one called Pazait and the other Zizimy, which is to ſay loue, for Mustapha his eldeſt ſonne, who was Gouernour of Icony called Iconium in Latin, dyed ſoone after the ſecond battell fought as aboue ſaide againſt Vſuancſſan, in which battell Mustapha had very valiantly behaued himſelfe.
            PAZAIT otherwiſe called Bazait the ſecond of that name, and the yongeſt as was ſuppoſed of his three Bretheren (thorough the aide and fauour of the Ianizares of whom their Laga or Captaine was his ſonne in law,) ſeized and atteigned the Empire. And Zizimy his brother, was planted in the Citie of Burſie wherewith and the dominions of the ſame hee could haue very well contented himſelfe. But Bazait would not let him reſt ſo nigh, for which with the armie that was put in redineſſe by his father to haue gone againſt the Soldan of Egipt he draue his brother Zizimy out of Burſie. So as Zizimy for ſuccour, was enforced to repaire to the Soldain of whom he was aided both with men and money, yet neuertheleſſe, after he had fought two battels and loſt them both, hee was in the ende vtterly put to flight by Achmat Ghendich Bacha,
               
and not knowing how to recouer himſelfe, retired into the Iſle of Rhodes to require ſuccors of vs Chriſtians, being then of the age of eight and twentie yeeres. Whereof Bazait beeing aduertiſed ſent great gifts and preſents to the great maiſter and counſaile of the Rhodes, beeſeeching them to keepe well his brother Zizimy and for the maintenaunce of his eſtate and entertainment, he would cauſe yeerely to bee payde to them the ſumme of fortie thouſand Ducats, as alſo during the time of his keeping he would make no manner of inuaſion vpon the Chriſtians. For which this Zizimy, for ſaftie, and to keepe Bazait in continuall feare and ſubiection was ſent, into the realme of Fraunce where hee continued very long in a houſe of the order of the Rhodes, called Bourgeneuf, but after hee was giuen to P. P. Innocent the eight of that name, and had to Rome where hee was reſident, whan Charles the eight inuaded the Realme of Naples, who needes would haue Zizimy away with him, hopeing by his meanes to recouer the Empire of Conſtantinople but the P. P. Alexander the ſixt of that name (perceiuing hee muſt depart with Zizimy whither hee would or no) enpoyſened him in ſuch ſort (as was ſaid) that after ſuch his delyuerie hee dyed within three dayes at Tarracine. Baizait thus diſpatched of his brother; beeganne to inuade the Countries of Tranſyluania and tooke Moncaſtro ſtanding on the Riuer of Neper called in Lattin Boriſthenes, with the towne of Lithoſtomo at the mouth of the riuer of Danubye. After which, he cauſed to be put to death, his famous Generall Achmat Ghendich Bacha, comparable in valour to any excellent man of warre of his time. He was ſonne to Stephan ſometime Deſpot of Boſnia as beefore I declared. This being done, to purſue the entent

and purpoſe of his father Mahumet againſt the Soldain of Egipt and partly to reuenge himſelfe vpon the ſame Soldain for mayntaining of his brother Zizimy againſt him, hee ſent a mightie armie into Sury. Of the which the Mammaluchs getting intelligence, aſſembled themſelues at Antioche, marching towardes the Turkes whome they found encamped vnder the mountaine Amanus (now called Monte Negro) wher they couragiouſly encountred their enemyes betwixt the ſame mountain and the Golfe of Layaſſe (which is called in Latin Sinus Iſsicus. Where ſometime alſo Alexander the great, diſcomfited king Darius) ouerthrew the Turkes armie, and tooke priſoner the Generall of the ſame, called Cherſeogli ſonne in law of Bazait whom they brought to the Soldain than being at his great Citie of Cair (which the Turkes called Mitzir.) But ſeeing I am thus chaunced to make mencion of theſe Mammaluchs I ſhall not much digreſſe from my matter, if firſt I ſhew you what theſe Mammaluchs are.
            This woord Mammaluch in the Surienne tongue, (beeingMammaluch the common language vſed in Africk which wee call Moreſque and the moſt enlarged and extended vulgare ſpeech that at this day is vſed in the world▪) betokeneth or ſignifieth a ſeruiteur or ſoldior. This Soldain and the Mammeluchs were of one manner of Religion, and liued without marriage, as thoſe that are of the order of the Rhodes & the knights of Malta doe, who aboue their other apparrell, vſed to weare a gowne of white Bocaſsin bright & artificially made to ſhine. And as the great Turk hath foure Viſir Bacha exceeding the others in dignitie: So hath the Soldain foure Emir Quibir ſurmounting the reſtEmir Quibir in honour next vnto the Soldain.
            
            
               For this word Emir betokeneth an Admerall and Quibir ſignifieth great. So as this woord Emir Quibir, is as much to ſay a great Admerall. Beſides, they had in their ſociety a great conſtable called in their tongue Derdard Quibir, whom Paulus Iouius calleth the great Diadaro. The Soldain being but a Mammaluch is choſen to that dignitie by the reſt of the brothers, as they doe elect the great Maiſter of the Rhodes, and moſt often hee is of one of their Emirs. Who being thus elected to be Soldain giueth to euery of the other Mammaluchs by way of reward a hundred Duckets for his welcome. All which Mammaluchs were Chriſtians Renies, or ſonnes of Chriſtians as are the Ianizaries; (who in no caſe would receiue any Turke Moore or Iewe to be of their ſocietie) being all Liuerous for ſo the Turkes doe name them. This Liuerous were aunciently named Hiberi and Circaſsi (whom they call Cercaz,) among whom the Colchi, Georgii, Albani, and others Chriſtians who were Iacobits and Neſtorians, remaining about the riuer of Phaſo otherwiſe called Phasis) were accounted. This Circaſsi beeing young whan the Tartarians dyd ſurpriſe and take them, were carryed by troopes and ſolde to the ſaide Emirs, with whom they were brought vp in the exerciſe of armes but chiefely on horſback, who beecomming very valyaunt; were made Mammaluchs obſeruing the Mahumeticall law. This order of the Mammaluchs beganne at ſuch time as the king ſaint Lois was taken priſoner before Damyate (which ſome cal Heliopolis) among whom the firſt Soldain was named Melechſalem whom they dyd kill and was the cauſe that the ſayd ſaint Loys was the more eaſily deliuered. But to returne to Bazait, this ouerthrow that the Turkes thus receiued

nigh to the Golfe of Layaſſe by the Mammaluchs, was the greateſt calamitie that euer came to the Turckes, whereof Bazait hauing receiued intelligence, and perceiuing that his affaires had ſmall good ſucceſſe on that ſide, retired his force into Sclauonye, and there tooke the towne of Durazo (aunciently called Dirrachium) and Epidamnus perteigning to the familie of the Carlouichs who affirmed themſelues to haue deſcended out of the houſe of the kings of Fraunce. That is to ſay from Charles of Durazo ſurnamed de le Faix ſonne of Peter Duke of Grauyn ſonne of Charles ſecond king of Naples, and of Hungary in the right of his wife. The which Charles was ſonne of Charles D'aniou king of Naples brother to the ſaid king ſaint Loys.
            
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 1493. Bazait ſent eight thouſand horſemen vnder the leading of Cadum Bacha to ouer runne the Countries lying betweene Hungarie and Sclauonie, againſt whom, certaine of the Nobility of Hungary Croace and Sclauony dyd aſſemble themſelues and encountered the Turckes nigh vnto the Riuer of Moraua (auncientlie called Moſchus) where the Chriſtians were ouerthrowen. Fiue yeeres after, Haly Bacha the Albaneze and Enuch with a great armie by ſea made towardes the towne of Iara or Iadera ſituated on the ſhore of the Golfe of Venice in the coaſt of Sclauony. And albeit that the forces of the Venetians (which was very mightie on the ſea,) purſued the Turkes yet durſt they not charge thē, which Haly Bacha perceiuing, tooke at their noſes the towne of Lepantho, aunciently called Naupactum.
            
            IN the yeere of our Lord God 1500. Bazait came in perſon to Modon, that ſomtime was called Methones, in

               Moree and tooke the ſame. And after, when Lewes the twelfth, the French King ioyned in aliaunce with the Venetians againſt Ludouic Sforza the vſurper of the Duchie of Milayn, Bazait at the requeſt of Sforza cauſed tenne thouſand horſemen to inuade the territorie of Friol, inſomuch as they approched euen to the towne of Triuiſo in the view of the Citie of Venice. For which the Venetians prepared immediatly a great armie on the ſea againſt the Turkes, with whom the Gallies of Fraunce vnder the charge of Seigneur Raueſtaing, as alſo the Gallies of the king of Aragon vnder the leding of the famous Don Ferrando Conſaluo ioyned, with which armie they dyd win from the Turks the Iſlands of Cephalonia, and ſaint Mauro. But (vpon certaine concluſions of peace traicted by the meanes of Meſsire Andreas Gritti (who afterwardes was Duke of Venice) betwixt the Venetians & the Turkes) were againe ſurrendered, yet the Gallies of Fraunce, paſſed forwardes to the Iſle of Lesbos, (otherwiſe called Metheline) hopeing to haue ſubdued the ſame, but not able to bring their enterpriſe to paſſe, they returned home againe. About this time beeganne the fame and renowne of Siach Iſmael the king of Perſia, by ſurname called the Sophie according to the name of his father, who was ſonne to the Daughter of Vſſuncaſſan, and of one Seich Ayder (that is to ſay the good Religioux) for he was reputed among the Perſians to bee a very good and holy man, and a Prophet called Sophi, of that ſect new begunne among the Mahumetists, which they call Sophi or Sophilar, of the which I dyd ſpeake beefore, according to the which hee lyued.
            Some holde opinion that hee was called Sophi of

the Countrey of Sophena which was vnder his dominion. But neyther the Turkes nor yet the Perſians know what Countrey Sophena is: The ſayde Seich Ayder after the death of Vſuncaſſam was ſhamefully ſlayne by the commandement of Iacopbeg his brother in law, doubtting that the people of Perſia (who meruailouſly were affected owardes Seich) would haue depoſed the ſayd Iacopbeg and made Seich to haue beene theyr King.
            For which Seich Iſmaell hearing of his fathers death beeing than not paſſing eyght yeeres of age, fledde to the towne of Leziam ſituated vppon the Sea of Abacuth (commonly called Caſpium,) where hee remayned vntill hee came to mans age, and than returned into Perſia, where finding meanes to aſſemble but three hundered men thorough theyr help hee tooke the towne of Sumach, and after, increaſing his number, hee wanne the Citie of Taurys in Armeny with the towne of Syras, where the good Armours are made.
            Hee afterwardes vanquiſhed and ſlew in fight Aluant ſonne of Iacopbeg who made him-ſelfe King after the death of his father, who was ſonne to Vſuncaſſan (Vncle to the ſayde Iſmaell) and entered in league with the Prince Aladulad or Anaudule and the Soldain of Egypt by whome hee was drawne to mooue warre againſt Bazait, againſt whom he obtayned ſundry victories. About this time Selym, the youngeſt ſonne of Bazait, departed from Trebiſconde whereof he was gouernour, and without the knowledge of his father, married with the daughter of the Cham of Tartarie Prezecopie.
            
            
               Thorough whoſe aide and a great number of Horſemen, which his brother in law (called of the Turkes Chamogly or Canogly:) brought to accompany him, (hauing already gained the hearts of his fathers Iannizaries.) Hee enforced Bazait his father to leaue to him his Empire. Which Bazait, purpoſing to draw himſelfe to the coſt of the ſea Maior otherwiſe named Pontus Euxinus and there to leade the reſidue of his yeeres in quietneſſe, dyed in his going thither, empoyſonned as was iudged by his ſonne Selym, in that they did drinke togethers at their departure. Bazait reigned thirtie yeeres, lyued threeſcore and three yeares, dyed in the yeere of our Lord God, one thouſand fiue hundered & twelue. And in the fourteenth of the reigne of Lewes the twelfth, the French king, leuing behinde him Selym, Achmat, and Corchuth.
            
            SELYM, thus hauing attained to the Empire, through the meanes aboue declared, endeuored himſelfe aboue all things to diſpatch himſelfe from the feare of his bretheren. For which firſt hee cauſed Corcuth his brother to bee put to death, who before had fled to the ſea coſt ouer againſt the Iſland of the Rhodes and there had hidden himſelfe vntill hee might haue gotten ſhipping to haue paſt vnto the great Maiſter, but being ſhamefully diſcouered by one of his owne men, in the ende was ſtrangeled with a bow ſtring. Achmat his brother dyed by lyke death, being taken in battell, accompanied with an able armie which hee had gotten togethers thorough the ayde of Siach Iſmael, and of Campſon Ciauri Soldain of Egipt. Yet through his fatneſſe and vnweldineſſe of body whereby hee was not able to abide labour on horſeback and ſo to flye, was taken & put to death. Selym, being thus deliuered

from his father & bretheren, deliberated to inuade the Sophy, aſwell for the auncient enmitie that was betwixt them, as to reuenge himſelfe of this new iniury, for ayding his brother Achmat, to make wars againſt him. Howbeit, that the more eaſely he might bring his purpoſe about, he found meanes firſt to make peace with Lancelot the king of Hungary, & than for his greater ſuertie, renewed the alliance & league that he had with the Venetiās: after which he ſet forward towards the Perſiās, whome the Sophy met, accompanied with a great nūber of men at Armes, nigh to Aſsiria, wher theſe great Princes with their Armies fought a wonderful ſore battell, in vvhich the Sophy through the Turks Artillery had the worſt, & was put to flight: forſomuch as the Perſian horſes vvere neuer frequented to the noiſe & thundring of artillery, which they could not abide to heare. This battell vvas fought in the plain of Calderan, betwixt the cities of Tauris, and Coy: which citie of Coy ſometime hath bene called Artaxata. The maner of this battel is painted in the counſail chamber at Venice, vvhich ther I haue ſeene, & is reported that Selym cauſed ſo to be done, & ſent to Venice, to the Senat ther. After vvhich conflict the citie of Tauris came into the hands of the Turks, vvith a great part of the Realme of Perſia: Howbeit the Turks had no long poſſeſſion of the ſame: For Siach Iſmael recouered al that he had loſt, right ſoone after. In ſuch ſort as Thomas the ſonne of the ſaid Iſmael holdeth the ſame at this day. Selym now retourning out of Perſia came to Trebizonda, where he taried all the winter, but the ſommer next enſuing he inuaded the prince Aladolus, othervviſe called Anardule, (vvho frontered vpon the Soldain
               
of Egipt, towards a Towne of his called Alep, by the french men named Halappe, by the Turks Adelphe, & by our anciants Epiphania, ſuppoſed to be called Aleph, becauſe it is the firſt Towne which that vvay leadeth into Sury). Vpon an other coaſt, he bordereth on the Turks, toward the prouince of Icony, & vnto Armenia the leſſe pertaining to the Perſians. All this country of Anadule, vvas ſubdued by Selym, Anadule himſelfe taken, and his head ſmitten off, by commaund. There reſted now no mo in the contrary of Selym, but onely the Soldain of Egipt, vvho vvith a great Armie vvas come againſt Caythby, the Emyr of Alep, vvho being ſubiect to the Soldain, had reuolted againſt him. The armie of the Soldain was ſuppoſed to be about eight & twentie thouſand Horſemen, the moſt part of vvhich conſiſted of the order of the Mameluchs, vvho litle eſtemed the Turks, conſidering that heretofore they had encountred them in other vvars, & giuen them the ouerthrow, as before is declared. But Selym politickly feigning as though he purpoſed to inuade the Sophy, vvhereof he made a bruit to runne: vvhan he vvas come nigh vnto the Towne of Aman, (called by our ancients Apamea, ſituated betwixt Alep and Damas,) vvas inſtantly required & prayed by the ſayd Caithby, to giue him ſuccours and ayde againſt the Soldain: Wherunto, Selym accorded right ſoone, as he, that found vvhat he deſired, and a redy occaſion, for vvhich he had long looked. Yet vvould he not vtter his thoughts therein, leaſt the two armies of the prince and ſubiect, being ready in the feeld to fight, and perceuing his purpoſe, (vvho in taking part ſought ſo to ouer throw them both) ſhould accord togethers againſt him.

Wherfore immediately he raigned with the Emir Caith by, bidding defiance to the Souldain Campſon Ciauri, with vvhom he fought in ſet field, vvhere the Souldain vvas ſlaine, and Caithby alſo as ſome doe ſay,) vvherby Selym remained Lord ouer all Siria, Damas. Hieruſalem, & Iudea. The M
                     •
                  mcluchs vvho ſaued themſelues in that battaile, returned into Egipt, vvhere vvith the others there, they choſe an other Souldain named Tomombey, vvho before, vvas Emyr of Alexandria, hovvbeit Selym hotly follovving his fortune and victories, entred into Egipt, vanquiſhed Tomombey in an other battaile, tooke the great citie of Caire, (vvhich of ſome, vvrongfully is called Carra) & named of other by more aparant reaſon Memphis,) vvhere vvhilſt Tomombey vvould haue ſaued himſelſe on the other ſide of the riuer Nyle, he vvas purſued by Canogly, vvho paſſed the riuer by ſhips, vvith ten thouſand Horſemen, (the bridge that vvas made on boats ouer the ſame, being cloyed vvith Ianizaries, ſo as he vvas not able to paſſe that vvay,) by vvhich Canogly Tomombey, being taken and brought back to Selym, cauſed him ſtraight to be ſtrangled, vvhereby the ſaid Selym remained King of Egipt, Anno Domini. 1518. Theſe victories thus attained, Selym returned to Conſtantinople, and purpoſing to remoue to the Citie of Adrianople, died in his iournyeng, at a village called Chiorlich: vvhere before vvith his Tartarians, he did fight vvith his father Bazait, and vvas ouerthrowen. Thus he died in the yeere of our Lord God one thouſand fiue hundred and twentith, of his reigne the eightenth yeere of his age the ſixe & forty yeere: and of the reigne of the right Chriſtian king Erancis the French King, the eight yeere After

that he had put to death three of his moſt worthy Bachas, Chenden Bacha, becauſe he would haue mutined his Ianniſſaires, entring into Perſia. Boſtangi, otherwiſe called Conſtantin Bacha his ſonne in law, for ſundry exactions and ſpoiles that he had committed: & Ianus Bacha, wher of none could tell the cauſe, ſauing that Selym thought him to be high minded. This Selym left but one ſonne named Solyman, called by the Turks, Selyman: whom he recommended to the cuſtody of Peribacha, who before had gouerned him in his youth.
            
               SOLYMAN came to his reigne the xxviij. yeere of his age, who the yeere next enſuing by the coūſail of Peribacha, beſeged Belgrado, & did win it from king Lewes of Hungary (the ſon of Lancelot.) who at that time was very young, hauing the Princes & Lords of his Countrie at diſcord among them ſelues, about the Regimēt of their King and of his Realme: Whereby it came to paſſe that no maner of Order was foreſeen, either for the defence or ſuccoring of that famous Place.
            The next yeere after, hee beeſieged the Rhodes, eſpying alwayes after the cuſtome of his elders, the diſcords & diuiſions among Chriſtian Princes, the which enterprice was cleerely againſt the minde and counſail of Peribacha, who accompted that Iourney very doubtfull and of no litle aduenture: Howbeit the ſame ſucceded too well with him, as he deſired.
            In the yeere of our Lord God 1527. whan Italy was in wars & troubles, Solyman entred into Hungary in fauour, as he ſaid, of Iohn de Ziphs, the Vayuod of Sibenbourg, who pretended that the kingdome of Hungarie dyd to him

onely of right appertaine: wher it came to paſſe, that the young King Lewes, comming in perſon to the fight, was ſlaine: after which, the ſaid Iohn attaining the kingdome, dyed, leauing a yong ſon, an Infant, behinde him, vnder protection of Solyman, with his Kingdome likewiſe.
            The ſame Selyman in the yeare 1535. going in expedicion againſt Thomas king of the Perſians toke from him the whole country of Meſopotamia, vvith the citie of Babilon, and in 1538 continuing at Aulona hee gaue an attempt to the vvinning of the Iſle of Corcyra. 1540 hee both beſieged and tooke the ſtrong fortres called Caſtell Nouo in Dalmatia. In the yeere 1541 Iohn de Ziphs king of Hungaria being dead as aforeſaid, & his widdow calling Solyman to hir aide, who as then vvas beſieged in the citie of Buda, by Ferdinand king of the Romains. The ſaid Solyman not onely came to releeue hir, but beating back the army of Ferdinand, tooke the ſaid citie, placed therin a Baſſa, and ſent the vviddovv vvith hir infant ſon into Tranſiluania. The yeere following the ſame Solyman defended the city of Peſtum in Hungaria againſt the vnited and aſſembled forces of the whole Germain Empire, and after toke from them the two ſtrong holdes of Strigonium and Alba Regalis, and in fine concluded peace with Ferdinand king of the Romains and Hungaria, vpon condicion of a yeerelie penſion (which they doe call a tribute) to bee paied him. In the yeere 1549 and 1550 hee vndertoke another expedicion againſt the Perſians, and eſtabliſhed a Beglerbeg at Vanum in the confines of Media and Armenia, after which he poſſeſſed himſelfe of Tripolis in Africa, Temeſwar in Hungaria, the which with the adioyning countries he committed to the defence of a

new Baſſa. In the yeere 1553▪ he commanded his eldeſt ſon Muſtapha to bee put to death at Halep: gaue order though in vaine, that Zegethum in Hungaria, ſhould be beſieged & afterward enforced his ſon Baiaſeth (deſirous to ſucceed his father) hauing firſt ouercome him in battell, to fly to the king of the Perſians, where being apprehended, he the ſaid Baiaſeth, with his foure ſons, Solyman, his nephews, were cruelly ſlaine▪ 1560 the Turks gaue a great ouerthrow to the Chriſtians, at the Iland of Garbe, while the ſaide Chriſtians were deſirous to recouer the towne of Tripolis, formerly taken, as is ſaid by the Turks. After which the ſaid Solyman attempted (but with ſmall ſucces) the Iland of Malta, yet toke that of Chios belonging to the ſtate of Genua. Laſtly being againe recald into Hungaria by Iohn of Tranſiluania he died before Zegethum in the yeere 1566. and of his age ſeauentie ſixe.
            To whom ſucceeded his ſon Selimus the ſecond, this Selimus made peace with Maximilian the Emperour euery eight yeeres to be renewed, toke from the poſſeſſion of the Venetians, the Iſle of Ciprus, & in the yeere 1571 receiued that memorable ouerthrow in that worthy ſea fought battell at Lepanto. Hee likewiſe by Sinamus Baſſa his generall, toke in the kingdome of Tunis in Africk, forty yeeres after that Charles the fift the Emperor had held it in his command, & cauſed that famous fort of the Gulet, to be ouerthrowen & leueled with the ground: This Sinamus Baſſa, is he who at this day is the great cōmander of all 
                  •
                
               Turkiſh forces in Hungaria. And ſo the ſaid Selimus in the end of the yeer 1574 died. Who left behind him a ſon called Amurath the third, the which Amurath, for the ſpace of 14 continued yeers, held wars both long

ſome & variable with the Perſian king called Mahemet Hodobende, (as much to ſay as the ſeruant of God,) which wars ſcarce determined he began to make head againſt the Chriſtians & the Emperour Rodolphe, by whoſe ſoldiors the Baſſa Boſnenſis 1593 and others at Siſciam in Hungaria had ben ſlaine. This Amurath after many miſeries inflicted vpon the poore remaynder of Hungaria, & the confines of Auſtria in the end of March, the yeere 1595 concluded his daies. To him ſucceeded Mahumet the third his ſon, who now reigneth, a yong man then of the age of thirty two yeeres, little more or leſſe, of a great ſpirit, able body, & infaligable minde, who before the performance of his fathers funerall rites, cauſed xviii of his brothers, & fathers ſons by ſeuerall concubines to bee ſtrangled, all which with their ſaid father he toke order ſhould honorably in the ſame monument be enterred, ſeauen & twenty of his ſiſters he incloſed in the Seraglio, a place in manner of a moneſtary, deputed for the retyring of the great Senior his children, & the ſafe keeping of his concubines. This Mahumet is thought to proſecut the wars againſt the Chriſtians, which his father left vnfiniſhed, with more feruent deſire & greater forces then any other before him. In this ſort as you ſee, haue I for your content entred and finiſhed this matter, which required more largely to haue ben touched, & to haue buſied one of better knowledge, which things though but ſlightly run ouer, may ſuffice to make aparant, that ſince but meane princes in regard of the vnited Chriſtian forces, haue thus encombred the courſe of their conqueſts it is not Impoſſible the like againe may be done, & greater when God ſhall encourage vs thervnto.
            The end of the ſecond booke.
         
         
            
            To the VVorſhipfull his very good coſen Edward Carr of Sleford in the countie of Lincolne Eſquier, and one in hir Maieſties Commiſſion of peace there.
            
               
                  SIR, one and the ſame loue and duetie, deriued from an infinit deſire to ſerue and honour you, formerly proteſted to your worthy brothers, and now continued towards you, hath drawen on this third booke, in ſuch ſort, as you ſee, not without ſome ſpeciall reaſon, for heerein beeing in moſt liuely and faire lines, laide forth, the perfect modells of true valour, and reſolution, with many other parts of action and exact military diſcipline, admired preſidents both for rule and example: I could not in my owne conceit better diſpoſe of, then in commending vnto you, beeing as I heare, a man in action, and one whom your countrie hath built their better hopes, when ſeruice or the like occaſion may call them therevnto: what I wiſh, and well hope, that the two firſt bookes haue obtayned from them, of fauourable acceptaunce and entertaining, my honeſt will according to my meaning: the ſame I would intreat moſt earneſtly of you, for this: which granted ſhall engage mee ere long to ſome greater taske, better fitting your worth, and in conformety more fullie ſquared to my owne deſire, till when I take my leaue and reſt, for euer in what I can.
            
            
               Your worſhips exceedingly deuoted
R. Carr.
            
         
         
            
            The third Booke.
            The Hiſtorie of Celimus ſecundus: of the warres and ſiege of Malta.
            
               WHO ſoeuer that complaine of the inconſtance and imbecilitie of humaine affaires, & the eſtate of mankinde, truely they doe it not without cauſe: for well obſeruing they ſhall ſee all things, with the heauens themſelues, ſometime flow, & ſomtime chaunge, though not according to the face of the heauens, and the poſitions, motions, and courſes of the ſtarres, (which in their times appointed, doe make returne,) the matters and ſtate of mankinde are alwaies like, for neither mankinde it ſelfe, nor their worthie acts, pollicies, arts, regiments, and lawes, (whereof the moſt part are either at this preſent, chaunged, or els vtterlie decaied,) which any conuercion or retourne of the heauens can come againe, whereof example vnto vs, are the Aſſyrians, Meds, Perſians, Aegiptians, Carthagians, Greeks, and Romains: For▪ time chaungeth and conſumeth all worldly things, which had enfolded and vtterly ouerturned, the famous acts of theſe worthie nations, in the horrible darkeneſſe of obliuion and forgetfulneſſe, if that an other (as it were a reſplendiſhing and moſt bright ſunne,) had not ben reſerued from the firſt beeginning of mankinde, that ſhould counteruaile ſuch in conſtance and imbecilitie of humaine thinges, whereby not onely to prepare an immortalitie, to ſliding and fluxible matters, but chiefelie

which all wee mortall creatures ought to deſire,) to ſhew the perfect way, to ioyfull felicitie. And that is, the memorie of the acts and dooings paſt of mankinde, which wee vſe to call and name a Hiſtorie: for when that in mankinde, there is by nature an engraued appetite and deſire of that goodneſſe, which is called felicitie, ſo as what ſoeuer wee thinke, we iuſtlie doe any thing, wee refer it to that end of goodneſſe and felicitie, but verelie that true goodneſſe, and moſt certaine felicitie conſiſteth in this point, that we may bee aſſuredly ioyned and knit with almightie God, and to bee like to him, as hee hath appointed vs: Which vnfainedlie they may affirme, to haue attayned and gotten, who that hauing brought in obedience to reaſon, the deſires of their mindes, and appetites, will found and eſtabliſhe their vniuerſall life vpon vertue, accordingly as to the perfect dignitie of mankinde is required: howbeeit, none there is, that would ſuppoſe to haue gotten certainlie and abſolutely this felicitie, except hee will liue and be conuerſant in that kinde of ſocietie and company of men, which by pollicie and wholeſome lawes, being congregated and gathered togethers is rightly to bee called a citie or common wealth, which truely, then ſhall be accompted happie▪ if that three things, (whervpon due felicitie conſiſteth,) ſhall aide and helpe the ſame, that is to ſay, That it may bee, that well it may bee, that 
               Vt ſit, et bene, et ſemper. 
               alwayes in that ſtay it may bee: And for ſo much as there bee two eſpeciall points, whereunto euery well ruled Citie or Common wealth ought to haue regard, that is to ſay, to peace and war, and that by peace, rather

than warres, wee inioy and haue happie liues, conſidering that warres ought to bee taken in hand to the ende, that wee may in peace liue quietlie: and ſuch deſire of peace is in mankinde, that no trauaile, no charge, no daungers and perilles will bee eſchewed that peace may bee attayned and gotten, when as thorough the ſame, each neceſſarie matter for quiet life is purchaſed.
            But truely, of that kinde of peace I meane, nor whan armour is layed a part, wee ſtay from moouing of warres, and in the meane time rancour and malice to haue domination in our breaſts: but rather of ſuch peace, I meane, that is grounded vpon the loue of God and beneuolence in the hartes of each good Citizen, to bee good vnto euery one. Albeeit, Sapience and Wiſdome muſt bee the Queene and vnfallable guide of vs mortall people, who if ſhee bee our guide to felicitie, ſhee is plaine and able inough, of hir ſelfe to accompliſh the ſame, it is ſhee that hath Fortune in obedience, it is ſhee that giueth vertue, deligence, and other good acts, and the ſame can make faſt to remaine in vs: but vnto hir ther be two waies addreſſed, the one by Philoſophers and eſtabliſhers of wholeſome lawes, the other, by Hiſtoriographers, the one by generall precepts of good life & demonſtrations of reaſon, the other, (by ſhew and declaration of worthie facts, comming to paſſe, and ſequels of the acts and doings of mankinde, ioyned with varietie of examples, & matters of themſelues.) leadeth & guideth vs to wiſdome, & ſo much this exceedeth the other, as the very acts & doings hath the ſuperiority ouer words & ſayings,

and as it may be well perceiued of what force it conſiſteth to alure the mindes of any, to the enbrace of the ſame: for this path way of hiſtory, both kings, generals in wars, and chiefelie rulers in common wealthes, citezins young, and olde, rich and poore, miſerable, and fortunate, ought to haue in price and eſtimation, in this to delight, this to loue, and of this to make to themſelues a fellow, companion, and familiar, as it, which vnto euery age, degree, and fortune, is moſt apt, and repleniſhed with euery kinde of examples, aſwell of priuate as publique fortune: for when we perceiue, how that fortune changeth or ouerturneth and aboliſheth high, low, and meane, men, families, common wealthes, nations, Empires and kingdomes; if there bee any thing amongſt men, that hath power to encounter and counteruaile fortune, and to ſtop hir of hir pretended courſe, it muſt bee either, onely hiſtory, or elſe none other art can be found, that with the conſideration of the ends & examples of the good and euill of all eſtates and callings, ſet before our eies, we may thereby bee brought vnto the deſired port of felicitie: For in hiſtory, as a moſt pure and cleere glaſſe, or as a moſt ample and large Theatre, and high ſcaffolde, one may ponder and way, the courſe the race, and mutations of humaine affaires, the cauſes, and motions of the euents and commings to paſſe of the fortunate and infortunate, and of their prudencies and temerities: wherewith, except we be to much guided with follie or ſlouth, wee may bee brought and led (as it were with hand) to the ſeate of quietneſſe and felicitie: in which, onely tranquilitie, and aboundance of all things to bee deſired, glorie and immortalitie is

found. Wherfore hauing not a little conſidered of what valour, the memory of thinges done is, and how much vtilitie and profit the ſame bringeth to the affaires of mankinde: I haue (ſo much as in meelieth) not onely endeuored my ſelfe in much reading of hiſtories, but alſo the ſame written in other languages, haue put in latin, and I my ſelfe likewiſe, to write the hiſtorie of the warres of Malta. Howbeit in the great plentie and abundance of the famous acts and doings of worthy perſons as, that which pleaſeth one, liketh not an other; ſo to me, though not a little it ſeemeth hard and difficult to giue due ornament of words, vnto the arts and doings of valiant ſeruiters, I haue taken in hand, to put in perpetuall memorie, the worthy warres done in the ſaid Iland of Malta, of the which ſo briefelie as I can, I will ſhew vnto you the truth.
            The warres, which Solyman the Emperour of the Turkes moued againſt the knights of the order of Saint Iohn, heeretofore founded in Hieruſalem, & now reſident in the Iland of Melita commonly called Malta, I purpoſe to write: not onely beecauſe the ſame ſeemed to bee meruailous cruell, and doubtfull to which of the parts the victorie would encline, but rather the worthie vertue and force of thoſe excellent defenders, no leſſe may vnto each one appeare, then likewiſe it may bee well perceiued, how much the force of Chriſtian nations, ioyned togethers may preuaile, and which being ſondred and diſioyned how little the ſame can doe: But before I make mencion of the beginning of the warres, it is requiſit that I ſhould touch ſomewhat of the originall and beginning of the knights of this order of

Saint Iohn, & by what meanes they firſt came into this Iland of Malta, to the end that euery thing may the more eaſely & plainly be vnderſtood & knowen. At ſuch time as the chriſtians of the Latin Church, moued wars againſt the Sarazins & Turks, & other barbarous nations, for obtaining of Hieruſalem & other cities of Syria: there were that vowed themſelues, & all the goods that they had to ſerue in defence of the moſt ſacred religion of our ſauiour Chriſt: Among theſe, were ſome that builded Hoſpitals in Hieruſalem, for receiuing and lodging of Pilgrimes, & that defended the waies and paſſages of Pilgrimes from the inuaſions of the Infidels, who alwaies ſtudied to annoy the chriſtians
                  •
                of theſe, ſome were called Ioannits, ſome Templars, ſome Teutones. Howbeit the Templars (about CC. yeres agone (by meanes of Philip le Beau the french king, & Pope Clement the fift of that name condemning that order) were vtterly deſtroied, the orders of the Ioannits, and Teutones did remaine: Neuertheleſſe the truth of the name of the Ioannits, is not according to the common fame, which ſuppoſeth that it tooke name in the honour of Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, but rather (as ſaith the Biſhop of Tyrus, who at that time right grauely wrote the acts and worthy doings of the Chriſtians in the Orient:) that the hoſpitall & houſe, (whereof the Ioannits doe account themſelues to bee bretheren) was founded by the Amalphitans people of Italy, who traded about affaires of merchandize into the Orient, (at ſuch time as the Egiptian Biſhop whom the Egiptians called their Caliph ruled in the city of Hieruſalem) and by them, their order was conſecrated to Saint Iohn a Ciprian borne, Patriaroh ſometime of Alexandria,
               
who by reaſon of his great charitie towardes the poore people of God, was called Saint Iohn the Eleemozinar▪
                But vnto thoſe, that think the name to bee aſcribed to Iohn Hircanus one of the Machabais, they ſeeme, they would craue authoritie from to much antiquitie: Howbeit I will leaue the credit thereof, vnto the authors and inuentors of the ſame. Notwithſtanding, it is moſt manifeſt, that the white Croſſe, (which the Ioannits vſe vpon black apparell,) the firſt toke of one Gerard ſometime maiſter of the hoſpitall in Hieruſalem: but their inſtitutions & rules, (wherwith their order is gouerned) one Raimund
                     •
                   Poggio a Florentine (created with no little authoritie Magiſter Equitum, (according to the warlike order of the ancient Romains) did eſtabliſh, & ſo in proceſſe of time (both by the liberality of Princes, & other nacions) they encreaſing with wonderfull wealth, & riches, they builded to themſelues (by vertue & good order,) ſuch dominacion as it were another king do me, & attained therwith no little fame & glory, howbeit when as by the ſpace o
                  •
                CC. yeeres, they had worthely ſerued in Siria againſt the infidels: at the laſt when the infidels had taken Hieruſalem, they retired themſelues vnto Ptolemais, a city in Phoenicia, & from thence, being expulſed by the Souldan of Egipt, then with a great nauie (which they gat together, partly by their owne wealth, and partly by the help & aide of the Templars, and other chriſtian nations, which ſuccored them) they inuaded the Iſle of the Rhodes, being poſſeſſed at that time by the Turks, whom they expelled from thence, where they & their poſteritie remayned, vnto ſuch time as by the aforenamed Solyman, with a great and meruailous nauie inuading

and beſieging the Rhodes (whan as with their owne onely force they could no longer reſiſt, and were forſaken, as it ſeemed, of all other Chriſtian aide and helpe) they were compelled to yeeld vp the Iland of the Rhodes into the hands of the Turkes, and ſo to forſake the ſame. This fortreſſe of the Orient in ſuch ſort beeing loſt, and that the Ioannits, had retired themſelues into the Iland of Sicilia: than by the liberalitie of the Emperour Charles the fifth of that name, they obreigned the Iland of Melita commonly named Malta, in the yeere of our Lord God 1529. and there euer ſithens haue ſtaied themſelues, which Iſland (as oportunitie ſhall ſerue when heereafter in this hiſtorie, I ſhall entreate of the beſieging of the fame, and of the counſailes and preparations of Soliman,) I will at length diſcribe. The Ioannits, thus reſted and ſetled in Malta, and their power not a little encreaſed, they ſea
                  •
               ed not by all the waies and meanes they could to endamage and anoy the Turkes, aſwell on the 
                  •
               eas to ſpoile the Turkes, as alſo in euery war that our Emperour moued againſt the Turkes, they euer ioyned their forces with the powers of the Emperour. With which ſo doings Solyman moued aſwell by his vſuall inſatiate appetite of dominacion and rule, as with his auncient hatred conceiued againſt Chriſtian religion, was meruailouſlie offended, and beegan to note and marke this their doings, and deuiſed with himſelfe by what meanes he might driue the Ioannits, from the ſeas, and vtterly (if hee could) to deſtroy them: therefore with no little dilligence and haſt, hee cauſed a great nauie to bee prepared and rigged forth, and ſo commaunded to his Admirall and Captaines of his places

on the ſea coſts, to be in a readineſſe at the next ſpring, whan as, a litle after, in perſon hee had viewed part of ſuch things as hee had before commaunded, and part by intelligence hee had vnderſtoode, to bee in readineſſe. Than calling his nobilitie together in counſaile, he vſed theſe kinde of woords to them (as was reported) which follow.
            That, which by theſe fortie yeeres I haue alwayes deſired,The woor Solyman, his Nobili that after myne other warres, I might get ſo much leiſure, whereby I might once driue out from their neſts theſe boſting Cruciats, glorying ſo much themſelues, to bee the chiefeſt propugnacle and fortres of the Chriſtians. The ſame occaſion, (mee thinketh) I haue now obtayned thorough the help of the great God and Mahumet. For, as touching the attempts of the Perſians I haue in ſuch ſort repreſſed, that they cannot harme vs. And as concerning the troubles fained to bee in Hungary, I truſt to giue ſuch orders in that behalfe, that our enemie ther, ſhall bee glad to get and hide himſelfe in the furtheſt part of Germany, and to be fayne to demaunde & craue peace at our hands.
            You, your ſelues, are not ignoraunt what complaints are daylie made vnto vs by our ſubiects and marchanuts whom thoſe of Malta (whom rather pirats than ſoldiors I call) whan they get themſelues to the Seas, they vtterly ſpoyle and reaue from them all that they haue. The iniuries of whom, and others vnto vs done, both Gods law and mans, doth mooue vs to reuenge. Nor truely there can be any thing more acceptable, or ioyful to me, or more aptly can purchaſe to me an Immortall fame, than that I might bring to paſſe (beefore I depart from

this mortall lyfe,) two things, the one to winne the Iſland of Malta, the other is to haue whole Hungary and the landes and dominions of Sarmatia in ſubiection. Except ſome will thinke that it will bee greater difficultie to mee, to expell theſe Cruciats out of their Rocks of Malta, than to our elders that droue theyr predeceſſors both out of Hieruſalem and whole Syria, and to vs alſo that after, expelled them out of the Iſle of Rhodes. But this Iſland (you will ſay) is more nigh Itally, from whens ayde may ſoone come, and with their Nauies the eaſilier to bee defended.
            Beeleeue and credit mee, that the Itallians dare not fight againſt vs on the ſeas; whan they remember howoft they haue had the ouerthrow at our handes. As for any great garriſons, the place being ſo litle and ſtraight, they cannot haue. And if they haue, they cannot feede them long. Wherefore for their affaires, wee entende this next Spring, to ſet forwards our mightie Nauie, and for that purpoſe wee haue already giuen in commaundement to euerie of our Captaines of the Seas, that with theyr Gallies and Shippes, they may bee in a readyneſſe to depart.
            The King of Arger will bee there to ſerue vs. Our Garriſons remayning at ALEXANDRIA, in EGIPT are in readineſſe. The Nauie of Dorgutes, are lykewiſe rigged foorth to ſerue vs, by my meanes. To this great and mightie Nauie of ours, wee doubt not but that the force of the Occident wil
                  •
                giue place: Which with the ayde of the grear God and Mahumet, and your inuincible courage, I firmely hope will come to paſſe.
            There reſteth no more, but for you to thincke,

how theſe warres may conuenently proceede, and to giue to vs your faythfull aduiſes and counſayles in the ſame.
            Which that you may the better doe, beeholde heere beefore your eyes the plat of the whole Iſland of Malta, and of euerie fortreſſe in the ſame, which I receiued from certayne friendes of myne right expert in diſcryuing of ſuch matters. The woords ofThe ſheweth counſai
                     •
                   of the of Mal
                     •
                  
                
               Solyman thus declared, and throughlie conſidered by thoſe, to whome both the Iſland and the order of the ſame, was right well knowne, and by them declared, what, conuenientlie was in that beehalfe to bee done.
            It was fullie reſolued and concluded, that the Nauie ſo in a readyneſſe at the appoynted tyme ſhould ſet forward, and to depart. And ſo the Nauie beeing vitailled, and the Soldiours ſhipped, tarryed onelie for windes. Of theſe proceedings of the Turke, Seignior Iean Valet, a French man borne, and at that tyme great Maiſter of Malta, both by letters and Eſpialls getting intelligence, for that hee had at Conſtantinople ſuch friends, as moſt prudently gat knowledge of the ſecret counſaile and doings of Solyman, as one not affrayde but alwayes thincking that victories remayned in the handes of God, and that the part of a prudent Generall and others at his commaundement, is to bee alwayes vigilant, dilligent and to woorke by Counſyle, and therefore hee called togethers a Counſayle of the Knights of the order, to whom in few woords hee dyd ſpeake to this effect following.
            
               What, Solyman the Turke (moſt noble and valyauntwoords let the maſtar to 
                     •
                  ann
                     •
                  ts. knights) prepareth, and how great and mightie warres hee entendeth to mooue againſt vs, I thincke of late you haue vnderſtood, ſo well, as I doe, whereof to make any long circumſtance of woordes to you, 
                  •
                neede not. The enemie is knowen, his inſatiat deſire of dominatiō and rule is knowen, his might and force is knowen, yea, & his continuall hatred againſt vs & the Chriſtian faith is no leſſe knowen to you. But now rather let euerie of vs, doe our endeuour to haue firſt almightie God to be our friend, and than to prepare euerie thing for the warres. Almightie God would be our friend, and we aſſuredly ſhall pleaſe him, if wee doe two things. One, if wee from hence foorth, amende our liues, the other is, if wee honour him with pure religion and to haue a firme hope & truſt in him, which is called Pietie. With theſe vertues, our famous elders, obtained innumerable victories againſt the infidells, in the Orient. And there is no doubt, but, if with the like vertues, we be furniſhed, wee ſhall giue ouerthrow to the cruell purpoſes of this bluddie Tyrant. Howbeit, for ſo much as Almightie God is ready to aide ſuch as would be circumſpect & apt to doe well, and not the ſlowthfull, and cowardes: Let vs therefore prouide for thoſe neceſſaries as both our profeſsion requireth, and order of warres, willeth. Whereof part, in our ſelues conſiſteth, & part in other Chriſtian Princes remayneth. As for victuall, money, armour, and other things which order of warres deſireth, wee ſhall ſo prouide for the ſame, that you ſhall well vnderſtand, that money, in neceſſaries, I will not ſpare, and much leſſe, labour, where I may enploy it.
            
               In theſe affaiers I will bee ready to ſpend all that I can make. And for any ſafegard of my lyfe, I will not eſchew any perill. As touching other Princes, I cannot beeleeue, that (vpon ſuch waightie occaſions whereof the perill no leſſe toucheth them, than vs,) they would bee negligent to giue vs ayde. As for the Popes holyneſſe, the Emperour, and the king of Hiſpain, I doubt not (for the Pietie and godlyneſſe in them remayning) but that they will ſuccour and aide vs to the vttermoſt, and that alſo they will mooue others to doe the lyke; And as for you, moſt worthie lampes and lights of Chriſtians and others of our moſt louing bretheren knights of this ſacred and martiall order, I doubt not but that you all, will ſo couragiouſly and valiauntly fight againſt this moſt cruell tyrant, ſubuerter & ouerturner of the true religion of God, and oppreſſor of all good conditions, manners, Artes, and diſcipline, in defence of our Chriſtian Religion, liues, goods, and glorie of the Latin Church, that the view of the glorious Croſſe of ours, (which this vile dog) ſo much abhorreth and contempneth) may bee ſeene to his perpetual care in Conſtantinople (where he dwelleth.) Wee haue not now affaires in the Iſle of Rhodes, farre from our aydes and ſuccors out of Aſia, Europ, and Aegipt, compaſſed about, with the enemie, both by land and ſea: but rather in the view and face of Italie & ſtrong fortified places, wherby the enemy may be eaſilie ouerthrowne. That it may ſo bee, let vs make erneſt prayer to almightie God. When the great maſter had thus giuen ende 
                  ••
                his moſt prudent woords. The Knights of the order which than were preſent,

with one voyce aunſwered, that ſooner theyr liues ſhould take ende, than that ſo comman a cauſe for want of theyr endeauours ſhould quaile, or that they on liue, to come into the handes of that cruell tyraunt Solyman.
            
            After common prayers and generall proceſſions, commaunded to bee done in euerie Church in the Iſland of Malta: there were immediatlie of the order of the Knights, three choſen, to bee Tribuni or generall ſurueiours, whereof one an Italian by ſurname called Imperadore; the other a French man borne, named Bornye; the third, a Spaniard, borne in Aragone, called Quatrius, gentlemen of great prouidence, foreſight, and right expert in knowledge of warres. Who according to theyr prudence hauing conſidered euery thing meete to this warre, they immediatly dyd put the ſame in readineſſe. For they, conſidering, that the ſuburbs and trees, nigh vnto places of fortification would not a litle bee an anoynce to the fame, they immediatly cauſed them to bee caſt downe. Thus the fortifications being viewed, and the Garriſons of euery fortreſſe there, augmented, and the ſame aboundantly victualled according to the conſidered neceſſitie thereof. Letters were immediatly ſent from the great maſter both to the Popes holineſſe and other Princes, together with diuerſe meſſengers into ſundrie places, that might giue intelligence heereof as well to the knights of this order remaining among other nacions, as to others. Of which letters, one written to Pius the fourth of that name, Pope of Rome, that of this, the others may bee well conſidered, this (as followeth) is the Copie.
            
            WHile that I endeauored my ſelfe with the force ofThe Letter frō the great maiſter of Malta to Pope Pius the fourth of that name. this our order to withſtand the great Turkiſh nauie now in readineſſe to approch towards vs: I found my ſelfe in manner vnarmed from euery neceſſary, which of my ſelfe I colde neuer haue furniſhed, if your exceeding goodneſſe (moſt holy father) both with your Letters, money, and one Enſigne of valiant Soldiors had not ayded me. So that otherwiſe I had not knowne, how wel to haue done.
            For conſidering by reaſon of the ſundrie threatnings which the Turcke made theſe ſundrie yeeres paſt, againſt this place and order; I haue beene brought to ſuch intollerable charges that I know by no meanes, how to come out of debte, of the money that I haue borowed, beſides the intereſt daylie thereof encreaſing.
            Howbeit a greater matter encombereth my mynde, which is, (whether this armie of the Turkes eyther ſhall proceede, or ſtay,) whan I perceiue, him, beeing our generall enemie, ſo dilligent to ſet forward his Nauie and continually buſie about his other afayres of warres, and wee of this order, to bee put to theſe intollerable charges.
            Will not any thinke, that, right great is the folie of vs Chriſtians, that will ſuppoſe, that whan the power of the Chriſtians is ſuch, that ſcarce it beeing able to defende themſelues: The Turke will feare to receiue any detryment at our hands. What courage will hee conceiue, when none of vs encountereth his intollerable pride.
            
               Beſides hee well knoweth, that if he might get but togethers his onely pirats that remayne heere in the Ponent or Weſt parts, hee were able, of them, in mine opinion to make a greater Nauie and Armie by ſea, than that we Chriſtians with no litle difficulty made againſt him the other yeere. Which the like againe, this yeere, I would bee right glad to ſee. Howbeit who is ſo ignoraunt that if ſuch a Nauie and force may bee made of his onely Pirats, what if a great part or the whole power of his Countries in the leuant and Orient, were ioyned togethers, may not hee than doe vs a greater detriment, if God of his goodneſſe doe not ſtay him, vnto ſuch tyme as Chriſtian Princes haue cōuenient ſpace to gather themſelues together to encounter ſo puiſſaunt and mightie an enemie.
            And whan as it ſeemeth that the Princes of the Chriſtians ſo much neglecteth the fauour of God, that with no detriments and with no infamies, they will awake from their too long ſleepe and ſlouth, it is to bee feared that God will take of his hand and to let ſlip to this cruell tyrant, occaſion and power to accompliſh his long deſired minde and furie vpon all vs Chriſtians, that no power which heereafter ſhall bee againſt him made, can bee able to withſtand his crueltie.
            Which inconueniences, I doubt not, but that your holyneſſe, long, beefore this time, hath conſidered, and that worthie minde of yours is enflamed with the deſire of ſo holy and Godly reuengement as is to bee done vpon ſo common a cruell enemie & hethen dog.

But I feare to ſeeme to much arrogant, in your holyneſſe ſight, that haue taken ſo much boldneſſe vpon me to intreat vpon ſuch affaires ſo rudely with your holyneſſe, to whoſe diuine prouidence theſe things are better knowne than to mee. Neuertheleſſe whan as ſuch things, which by eies are ſeene, doe a great deale more moue vs, then that which we heare with our eares, then I hauing theſe thinges continually before mine eyes, am ſo afected, that I cannot in ſuch waightie affaires hold my tongue, but moſt humbly and lowlie doe beſeech your holineſſe, not for this ſacred order of knights ſake, onely, which alwaies is and ſhalbe ready to liue & die for the defence of the Chriſtian religion, (conſidering by our profeſſion no kinde of death muſt be refuſed, where due occaſion ſhall be miniſtred,) but alſo in the name of whole chriſtendome that ſo much already hath taſted your moſt godly and paternall zeale and loue towards them, that for the publique tranquilitie of the ſame touching matters of faith, you laied aſide all your owne priuate commodities and affaires, calling together of late a counſaile generall: now that you would vouchſafe, to call ſome other counſaile togethers (being a matter of no leſſe importance, to repaire the wofull ruines of long times paſt, and to eſchew worſe to come) whereby Chriſtian princes gathering themſelues togethers may conuert and turne their powers againſt this peſtiferous ſerpent; and to driue him into his auncient limits, that no longer, hee haue power to deuoure ſuch multitude of Chriſtians; as to the great ſhame of Chriſtendome he hath done: For ſo far wee haue ſeene him ſpred his deadly poiſon, that now hee

hath in maner compaſſed the little limits of the chriſtian kingdomes: now conſidering that all domeſticall and ciuill warres beeing vtterly extinguiſhed, and aſſured amitie and peace by the prouidence of God beeing reſident among Chriſtian princes, it beehoueth vs now to awake. For if by miſfortune our princes againe ſhould fall to any new vvarres among themſelues, this importunate beaſt would not ſleepe, but would ſeeke how hee may worke our vtter ruine. Truely moſt holy father, for the great pietie and ſinguler prudence in your holyneſſe remaining, I hope that ſo great an occaſion of laude and perpetuall glory (whereby you may deſerue well towards both God and man,) you would leaue to no ſucceſſor of yours: With this hope I will comfort my ſelfe, truſting before I ſhall depart fro this mortall life, to ſee this ſaored
                  •
               ourny to bee aduanced againſt our cruell and commoneenemie of Chriſtes religion, beeſides which, nothing can happen to mee more ioyfully, or bee to mee a greater felicitie: If therefore in theſe matters, I haue beene either longer, or more liberall of writing, than to mee hath appertained, I hope that of your fathely clemency, you will giue pardon vnto me, whom no little care of our Chriſtian religion rather then raſhneſſe hath mooued mee thus to wright: And for my part for your perpetuall goodneſſe or rather pietie towardes this our order, I moſt humbly render to your holyneſſe immortall thankes, and ſo will continue to doe during life, and ſo doe beeſeech almightie God to preſerue your holineſſe in good and proſperous life. About this time Dom Garza di Toledo, the Viceroy

of Sicilia, vnder Philip king of Hiſpain, and gouernour of all his graces nauy in thoſe parts, fearing that the nauie of Solyman, vnder coulour to ſeeme that hee would inuade Malta, would ſtraight paſſe to the Gulet, a Caſtle ſtanding in the ſtraites and entering of the poole or ſtagne of Tunes, and to beeſiege the ſame, therefore he paſſed ouer to the caſtle of Gulet, both to furniſh the ſame with new ſupplie of Garriſon, and other neceſſaries thereunto appertaining, and in his way, the Viceroy touched at Malta, and there landed to confer with the great maſter, touching the warres pretended againſt Malta: But they hauing intelligence that the nauy of Solyman was departed from Conſtantinople, ſo as by reaſon of ſmall time, they could not tarry ſo long togethers as the waight of the cauſe required, Dom Garza immediatly departed from Malta, vnto the caſtle of Gulet in Barbaria, which when he had viewed, and furniſhing the ſame with ſuch neceſſaries as it lacked, hee retourned with all poſſible diligence into Sicilia, to rig & ſet forward ther the kings nauy. But the meane time, the1565. The 22 of March the Turks nauy vnloſed from Conſtantinople. nauy of Solyman the xxii. of March in the yeere of our ſauiour Chriſt M. D. lxv began vnlooſe from Conſtantinople, & the next day after departed from that port towards Peloponneſo, & ſo came to Methone. Ther Muſtapha Baſſa a man of the age of lxxv yeres, being appointed to be generall of the Turks army by land, ther muſtered his army where of his horſemen called Spachi, which came out of the leſſer Aſia, were ſeauen thouſand, hauing to their captaine a gentleman of the ſame prouince of Aſia, with two liuetenants. Out of Cilicia came v. C from the Iland of Mitilena came alſo iiii. C yt of euery of their prouinces

had captaines from whence they came: he had alſo of olde ſouldiers, whom they call Ianizers, foure thouſand fiue hundred, to whom Solyman himſelfe appointed two Captaines to bee their leaders, conſidering that their generall whom the Turkes (in their tongue) call Aga, neuer departeth out of Conſtantinople: Beeſides this, there be among the Turkes, a kinde of ſouldiers that liue of the fruits and ſtipends of their ſpiritualtie, of theſe in this army were thirteene thouſand, who at Conſtantinople had vowed thēſelues to ſerue for the defence of their faith and Emperour. There came alſo out of Thraſia and Peloponneſo two Captaines, and one liuetenant with a thouſand two hundred horſemen, & three thouſand and fiue hundred other ſouldiers that came from diuers places, voluntary to ſerue for wages: there likewiſe, did Pial Baſſa the Turkes Admirall, muſter his nauy wher he found to be a hundred & thirtie gallies, eleauen ſhips of burden of the leſſer ſort, a eleauen ſhips of burden of the greater making, beeſides a great ſhip that was broken beeſides Methone, in which were then ſixe thouſand barrells of gun pouder, thirtie thouſand ſhot, and ſixe hundred Spachi, of the which ſcarce two hundred were ſaued. There came alſo from the Iſland of the Rhodes ten gallies, vnder the guiding of Haliport a man of the age of threeſcore and tenne, two gallies from Mitylene vnder the leading of Salach, brother to the king of Alger, that newly was dead, alſo there were otherſoiſts & pirats ſhips, about the number of ſeauenteene. With this great and mightie nauy, the Turks departed from Methone the thirteenth day of Maie, and ariued at Malta the eighteenth day of the ſaide moneth

of Male, and tooke firſt port at the North caſt part ofThe 180 Ma
                     ••
                   the Nauie of the Turks ariued at Malta. the Iſland, which the inhabitants call Marzaſirocco. But the Turkes perceiuing that they had not a ſafe rodeſted there, they remoued from thence to an other rodeſted of that Iſland, called Maiaro. All this time the famous pirate Dorguta was not come, it was ſaid, he was tarieng in the Iſland called Meninges, commonly named Gerbas, with his ſhips, and in readineſſe to come, and that hee had ſent to the king of Tunes, foure peeces of artillery of braſſe, and other things, which hee gaue to him, to the end that the king ſhould not aide the Chriſtians in theſe wars, but rather to help the Turks with a certaine porcion of victuall according to the agreement made beetwixt them, and for theſe and other cauſes it was fayned that the Turks would firſt goe vnto the Gulat, or elſe of purpoſe theſe newes were ſowed, to the ende that thoſe of Malta crediting the ſame, ſhould at vnawares be ſurpriſed: But the great maiſter of Malta (being a man of a meruailous quicke and ingenious wit, and therewith right expert in the act of warres, and alſo wonderfull conſtant and circumſpect againſt the practiſes and pollicies of the enimie) did fore caſt theſe deuiſes and counſailes of the enimie, and right well did eſpie their purpoſes on euery ſide in his gentlemen and ſouldiers all, there was eſpied to reſt an aſſured conſtancy and meruailous liuelineſſe to ſerue in ſo worthy and moſt honorable cauſe: how beeit beefore I further proceede, this place requireth, to diſcriue vnto you the ſituation of this Iſland called Melita otherwiſe Malta. & of the eſpeciall places thereof (wherein ſo many worthie acts were done,) to make mencion. The Iſland

               Malta is placed beetwixt Africk and Sicilia, and doubteddeſcript
                     •
                  
                  ▪ Malta. whether it ſhould belonge to Africk or Europe, if it had not ben that the ancient inhabitants of Melita time out of minde, hauing vſed the common language of thoſe of Africk, ha
                  •
               e alwaies reputed the Iland to bee a member of Africk. This Iland from the North eaſt to the North weſt is drawen in length twenty miles, & in breadth twelue miles, & from the place wher it is broadeſt, it proceedeth to be ſtrait & narrow vpon the ſouth towards that part of Africk, where thoſe famous quicke ſands remaine that are called Sirtis Minor, vpon the coſt whereof is ſituated that towne which is named Leptis Parua, & vpon the North faceing Silicia, being more towards the Promontory or lands end therof, called Pachino than vnto Lilybeo, & in compaſſe and circuit threeſcore miles the Carthagians firſt inhabited this Iland, & after, as I vnderſtand one Battas, the firſt builder of the famous citie of Cyrenes, did reigne there in the time of Dido, which afterward came againe in ſubiection of the Carthagians & ſo remained vnder their dominion vnto ſuch time as the ſame in the ſecond wars of the Carthigians, that they with their nauy on the ſeas, being ouerthrowen came into the hands of the Romaines: at which time thoſe of Malta were ſuppoſed to be very wealthy by reaſon of the repaire & much concourſe of ſ
                  •
               ndry nations, through trade of marchandize that frequented thether, and famous, through ſundry notable artes there vſed, & alſo of their notable Cotton which is very ſoft & white, there growing, of which ſundry garments are made by thoſe of Malta and had much in eſtimacion. This Iland is well repleniſhed with hony there growing, whereof

ſome ſuppoſe this Iland to haue the name, and alſo very famous with the growth there, of ſweet roſes: the trees there, haue fruit twiſe in the yeere, and oft times two harueſts there, in one yeere, chiefely of barly flax & Cotten: How beit the ground ther euery where, is ſtony, vneuen, as heere an hill, there a valie, very vnfruitfull for trees, albeeit there groweth, the figge tree, Aple tree, Almonde tree and Vines planted with the much labour and diligence of the inhabitant, they haue wilde date trees but vnfruitfull, they haue exceeding plenty of great thiſtles, which they vſe for their fewell and fire. In this Iland of Malta is meruailous ſcarcetie of ſweet water, which neither the ſkies (by reaſon of little rayne there) giueth, nor yet the grounds there, yeeldeth.
            And 
                  ••
                for ſuch fountaines and wells that there bee, 
                  〈…〉
               y I beeleeue that it is the rayne that falleth in winter 
                  〈…〉
               t maketh them, and yet they bee halfe 
                  •
               alt and brackiſh, and drie in ſommer. The Inhabitants through the exceeding heate of the Sunne are ſo 
                  •
               anned, that they looke in colour much like to the A
                     •
                  thiopians ſo that rather in winter each thing that there groweth, ſeemeth to bee more pleaſant to the view & ſight. The men of this Iland for the moſt part are very healthfull of bodie, of ſclender diet, very diligent and painefull rather than apt to wars, whom old age ſoner than diſeaſe and ſickneſſe, doth take them from this life: Their forme of buildings (except their citie which is ſituated in the midſt of the Iland ſomewhat more towards the South which alſo is called Melita) hauing certaine ſuberbs about the ſame, are long & low not much

vnlike the ſheepe cotes of Barbaria, couered with reede or thacht: the little and prety dogs called the Miletean Dogs, are ſuppoſed to come forth of this Iſland, which Pliny rather aſcribeth to the other Iſland likewiſe called Malta, lying in the gulfe of Venice, betweene the Iſland Curſ
                     ••
                  la and the ſhore of Dalmatia. In this Iſland of Melita called Malta, ſome affirme that Saint Paule the Apoſtle after ſhipwracke there did land: howbeit let them beeware, it be not the other Malta, in the gulfe of Venice that Saint Luke makes mencion of, when as Saint Paule in the the ſea Adriatico otherwiſe called the gulfe of Venice, was toſſed too and fro with cruell tempeſts of weather, but that he came out of that ſea, into the other ſea of Mediterraneum, where the Iland of Malta ſtandeth, it appereth not in Saint Luke. And as to that, which they ſay, no venemous beaſt neither there is engendred, nor, if from any other place, any venemous beaſt be brought into that Iland doth harme, and the ſame ſo hath continued there, ſithens that time Saint Paule, did caſt of from his hands the viper and adder, that would haue ſtung him: howbeit it may be thought that this Iland hath naturally had that property, as likewiſe thoſe Ilāds therabouts called Gaulo, Galata, and Clupea, at this day haue the like vertue by nature, & ſundry other Ilands in that ſea of Mediterraneum, as others other wher: for the Iland of Candye nouriſheth no manner of venemous beaſt, as England hath no Wolues, nor Ireland any Serpent, conſidering both the aire of the places and nature of the grounds, are contrarious to the ſame: but touching this matter, as ſundry haue their diuers mindes, ſo, that which hath ſeemed to make againſt the common

opinions by any probable maner, I haue thought good by the way not to let paſſe but to my purpoſe I will returne. Malta vpon that part, which is towards Sicilia, is bowed and croked into ſundry bayes and rodeſteids meet for the riding of ſhippes: as for hauens and ports this Iſland of Malta hath two, beſides the hauen vpon the Eaſt part of that Iſland, called Marzaſ
                     ••
                  acco▪
                and beſides alſo the rodeſted of Saint Thomas, and an other which is not far diſtant from the ſame, called Seal or Scala: of theſe two aforenamed hauens or ports, there is one which ſt
                  ••••
               heth from the South to the North, alongeſt the ſide of a long peece of ground of the ſaid Iſland, in forme like vnto halfe an Iſland, and this hauen of the inhabitants is called Marzamuſetto, the other hauen ſtretching from the Eaſt to the Weſt is likewiſe named Porto Maior. Vpon the vttermoſt part and front of this halfe Iſland is ſituated a Caſtle or fortreſſe right ſtronglie fortified both by nature and art, called Saint Elmo, whom heereafter I will name Saint Hermes. To him that entreth into the other hauen called Porto Maior, there doe appeare vpon the left hand thereof, foure long peeces of ground towards the ſea, as it were certaine little halfe Iſlands or promontories, with as many rodeſteds or baies for ſhips thervnto appertaining: vpon the firſt of theſe ſaid foure promontories is ſituated a certaine Gallos, being the common place of execution for offenders: vpon the ſecond promontorie is planted an exceeding ſtrong caſtle vpon an incredible high and ragged rocke of ſtone, called the caſtle of Saint Angelo, nigh vnto the which, there is adioyning a towne ſeuered from the caſtle but with a dike and wall called

               B
                     •
                  rgo, and ſometime the new towne, cut and made out of a rocke right well fortified both with the ſea, and art of the ſouldiour. In the Caſtle of Saint Angelo, the great Maiſter of Malta remaineth, & in the towne, the knights of the order are reſident. Vpon the third promontorie there is a towne alſo called B
                     •
                  rgo, and a Caſtle called Saint Michael. The fourth promontorie is vninhabited: hauing a mightie baie in the ſame, ſtretching to the water of Marza, and in manner to halfe the Iſland as beefore I haue ſaid. Againe from the hauen or port of Muſetto towards the Weſt, there appeareth an other rodeſted, which is dedicated to Saint George, and an other called Benorrat: beyonde lieth the port of Saint Paule, not much leſſe then that, which is on the Orientall part of the Iſland, after, is the rodeſted called Salynarum. Vpon the other ſide of the Iſland which is towards Africk is the rodeſted called Miliaria: there bee alſo ſundry other little Iſlands not farre from Malta, as the Iſland of Gaulos, which ſome ſuppoſe to be C
                     •
                  ſira, at this day called Gozo, in compaſſe thirty miles, towards the Weſt of Malta, not paſſing fiue miles diſtant, by ſea from Malta, which Iſlande of Gozo, in the yeere of our Lord 1551 was taken and waſted by the Turks and ſixe thouſand captiues, out of that Iſland were taken & had away, at ſuch time as the towne of Tripolis in Africke, (which ſometime was called Leptis Magna,) was wone by the Turkes, from the knights of this order. Betweene Goza and the Weſt ſide of Malta, there lieth two other Ilands, whereof the greater, commonly is called Cumino, and the leſſer Cuminetto, ſeuered the one from the other, with the ſea, beeing there verie narrow.
            
               At the South and by Weſt part of Malta, there is anAd Eurotiotum. other little Iland called at this day Piper: All which Ilands are in obedience to the great Maiſter of Malta, the reſt for the moſ
                  •
                part are compaſſed with huge rockes, and raging ſeas, thus of Malta and the inhabitants thereof, (ſomuch as appertaineth to the knowledge of this preſent matter,) I thinke there is inough ſaide. The meane time, what power and army Mounſier Valet the great Maiſter of Malta, had to withſtand the Turks ariuall, I will ſhew vnto you firſt of all. In the Iland were a thouſand and three hundred ſouldiers, that tooke wages: of a thouſand of thoſe, ſome were Spaniards, ſome French men, and ſome Florentines, the reſt were Neapolitai
                     •
                  s: There alſo were a thouſand, that frequented the ſeas, pertaining to the Nauie of the Knights of Malta, and fiue hundred in the towne of Saint Angelo: Of the inhabitants of the Iland were about fiue thouſand, that were trained for the warres, and were retired from their Countrie habitations to Borgo, where the great Maiſter was reſident. There were alſo fiue hundred Knights of the order, beeſides the Prieſts and eſquires, for there bee three ſortes of them, that in this order of Malta are called bretheren: And this was the vvhole number that defended the Caſtles and Tovvnes of Saint Hermes, Angelo, and Michael, into the vvhich the ſouldiers vvere diſtributed, accordingly as each place was thought requiſit to bee defended. In the Citie of Malta (vvhereof beefore I mencioned,) vvere placed two hundred ſouldiers beſides the citizens, & foure hundred choſen out of the reſt of the vvhole Iland,

and three hundred, alſo that ſerued on horſebacke, vnto this garriſon of the citie of Malta, was appointed to be generall, one Sor
               ▪ 
               Io▪ Vagno a M
                     •
                  ncalerio, a gentleman borne in the countrie of Piemont: beſides theſe things, was prepared a meruailous furniture of victuall, armour, weapon, and neceſſaries, which vſually was to be prouided, meet for abiding of a long ſiege and other wants, and aboue all other, that which is to be deſired againſt euery infortunitie, there was planted in euery one that there ſerued, an inuincible courage, which oft times maketh the ouerthrowen to be victorious. Things beeing in this order and readineſſe, and vnderſtanding thatThe Turkes landing in Malta. ſeauen and twentie of the gallies of the Turkes had taken the port of Marzaſirocco, and had landed certaine of their ſouldiers: Immediatly Gyon the Captaine of the nauie of the order of Malta, a right diligent and forward gentleman accompanied with fiftie Arquebuſiers was ſent to view the enemie, and in ſo much as he could to endeauour to draw the enimie to ſome open places: But the Turks eſpying them, right quickly retired to their gallies againe: at an other part, where the greater part of the Turks nauie rode, ther were landed two hundred Turks, & vpon them gaue a charge, one Riuier a gentleman of france, accōpanied with eight other horſemen, who hauing his horſe ſlaine vnder him, and with the loſſe of one of his companions, came into the handes of the enimie. While theſe matters were in doing, a chriſtian man a captiue among the Turkes ſlipt from them, as they rode in the port of Vulturno, and fled into the citie of Malta, and diſcouered there to the general, the purpoſe of the enimie, ſaying that the deuiſe of

               Muſtapha the generall of the Turkes army was, that the moſt part of their army ſhould land with their great artillery, and to beſiege and giue batterie to the fortified places, whoſe opinion Piale Baſſa, the Turks Admirall, did vtterly miſlike, ſaying that if he ſo did, he ſhould but come to his manifeſt deſtruction, conſidering they had not paſſing eight thouſand Ianizers, and ten thouſand Spachies, beſides a rude and vntrained companie of mariners to be left in the ſhippes, wherefore vnto ſuch time as Dorguta ſhould come, who euery houre was loked for hee would enterpriſe nothing▪ at whoſe comming, hee would then agree, that the caſtle of Saint Hermes ſhould firſt bee beeſieged. For Solyman the Emperour of the Turkes, did commaund that nothing ſhould bee done without the aduiſe and counſaile of Dorguta, ſuch confidence and credit had this barbarous prince in the warlike knowledge and practiſe of Dorguta: But whether this intelligence were true or fayned, the Turks neuertheleſſe riding in the port of Vulturno, landed twentie thouſand of their ſouldiers, with fiue field peeces, and encamped themſelnes right ſtronglieAzorbar. in a place, which thoſe of Malta call Azorbar: that done Pial Baſſa accompanied with ſeauen thouſand with him departed to view the ſituacion of the fortreſſe of Saint Michael, vpon that part which loketh towards Saint Katherines Church, and durſt not approch nigher, beecauſe the artillery of the fortreſſe began to ſhoote of a pace, againſt him and his company, beſides, certaine of the gariſon of the fortreſſe, made a ſalie and iſſue vpon the enimie, and in ſuch ſort behaued themſelues that one named Curfeline, by ſurname called Prata a gentleman

of right ſinguler worthines, hauing in his company but one onely Spaniard, valiantly bereſt an enſigne from the enimie, & killed a Sangiaco, and certaine others of theConſultation of the Turkes. 
               Turks. So the Turks retired to their campe, vvher among the Princes of the ſame, conſultation vvas had, vvhether it were better, that battery ſhould be firſt layed to the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, or to the towne of Saint Michael: Finallie it was concluded that the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes ſhould firſt bee beeſieged. So the Turkes to view the fortreſſe, mounted vpon a hill, who beeing perceiued by thoſe of the fortreſſe, iſſue and ſalie was made, and therewith a ſkirmiſh on both ſides beegan, and after a few ſlaine on each part, each ſide retired. Matters in this ſort growing hotte, the Prince of Malta, hauing in memorie thoſe thinges that were to bee done, thought it moſt conuenient to vrge and ſtirre the Viceroy of Sicilia, in haſt to ſet forward his Nauy, that then was in rigging. Therefore hee commaunded a gallie to bee with all diligence, ſet in a readineſſe to depart towards Sicilia, for the conuaying of one named Saluago, a knight of that order, for the exploit of ſuch matters of charge, wherewith he then commanded him. The meane time the Turkes began to erect a Mount, of intent both toVallum ex
                     ••
                  uunt. Pa. 40. batter the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, & to anoy the ſhips of Malta, as they rode in the port, that therby they might open a more ſafe entry for their galies that were abroad. Howbeit the fortreſſe of Saint Elmo otherwiſe called S. Hermes, ſo troubled them with the ſtrokes of their great artillery, that the Turkes were ſaine to forſake that peece of fortification, before the ſame could take end, which

partly diſcouraged the boldneſſe of the Turks. During which time, the Turk Ochial with ſixe ſhips hauing in the ſame nine hundred ſouldiers deducted, out of the garriſon of Alexandria in Egipt, came as a ſupply to the encreaſe of the force of the Turkes. Therefore the Turks beegan an other fortification vpon an higher plat of ground then before they did, whereby, not onely they wonderfully annoied, the port where the ſhips of Malta had their rodeſted, but alſo troubled with their great ſhot, the caſtle of Saint Angelo, and beſides with entrenching they gate night the Caſtle of Saint Hermes, albeit, at the firſt they had much to doe therewith, conſidering they of the fortreſſe did what they could to enbar them, notwithſtanding in the end the Turks with much labour and diligence wherein they exceede all other nations, they accompliſhed their trench. Wherefore the Turkes, with no little expedition, in ſuch ſort and place planted their great artillery, that they determined, both the caſtle of Saint Angelo & Saint Michael, ſhould be encombered with the ſtroke of their Canon. This while, there was in the Campe of the Turks, a Spaniard, a gentleman,A fugitiue. albeit a ſlaue, he, when he had aſſuredly learned a part of the pretences of the Turkes, gaue intelligence of the ſame to Mounſier Valet the prince of Malta by a Chriſtian that was a fugitiue, which when the prince vnderſtood, he ſent two enſignes of Spaniards into the caſtle of Saint Hermes, vnder the leading of the valiant captaines Cerda and Miranda, to ſupply a certaine want ther▪ which after was to the great defence of the caſtle of Saint Hermes, & detriment of the enimie. This ſeaſon ariued Dorguta the Turk, the general of Tripolis accompanied with thirteene

ſhips and one thouſand ſixe hundred ſouldiers in them, after him alſo came tenne Brigantines, which broughtDecem B
                     •
                  emes. two enſignes of men of war, from the towne of Bona in Barbaria, and out of the Iſland of Meninges. The meane time Saluago (a Genuan borne, a knight of the order and a very forward gentleman) who (as before) was ſent into Sicilia, arriued at the citie of Meſſana, who (after hee had declared to the Viceroy, his charge, and the ſtate wherein Malta was,) was commaunded to ſhip himſelfe againe in a barque that was prepared for him to depart, for whoſe ſafe conduction two gallies vnder the regiment of the Captaines Corniſſone and Santalo, knights alſo of that order were commanded to accompany him, who left him not vntill hee was nigh the Iland of Malta, and then retourned backe into Sicilia, but Saluago, not without meruailous daunger of his perſon, and but with loſſe of one of his men, paſſed with his ſhip through the middeſt of the enimie into the towne of Burgo, about three of the clocke in the morning. This while, the Turks ſeemed to change their deuiſe, where they once determined to haue beſieged both Saint Hermes and Saint Michael, but now encamped themſelues at the water of Marza, beeing a fountaine there, which made the entrie of Saluago to be more difficult and perillous: Howbeit after Saluago had declared to the great Maiſter his charge, from the Viceroy of Sicill, immediatly the great Maiſter cauſed him to depart into Sicilia againe, and to ſhew to the Viceroy, that they had great neede to haue more aide of ſouldiers, and that for the time hee would vouchſafe to helpe them with the ſupplie of an other enſigne or two of choſen

ſouldiers, that the better they might withſtand the furie of the enemie vntill further ayde came. Saluago neither ſparing labour, or dreading perill, immediatly gat himſelfe to the ſea, and in ſhort time landed in the Port of Sarragoſa▪
                in Sicilia, where hee found thoſe two Gallies, whereof I tould you before, and in them cauſed foorthwith to bee ſhipped (as was appoynted) foure hundred ſouldiors, among whom, were ſundrie knights of the order of Melita, and with them alſo were ſent certaine expert Gunners and Cannoners.
            Theſe ſo ſhipped, Saluago gaue aduiſe that they ſhould eſchew the Weſt part of the Iſland Melita, and compaſſing about, ſhould endeauor themſelues to draw towards the Eaſt part thereof, and ſo to get vnto the South coaſt of the Iſland, and there to land at the port called Miliare, and from thence by night to conduct the ſouldiors (by places of couert,) vnto the Citie of Melita which from their landing place was not paſt foure miles diſtant, and ſo from thence eaſilie to get vnto the Caſtell of Saint Michaell. Which aduiſe ſo giuen Saluago departed to Meſſana, and there ſhewed to the Viceroy the furie of the warres in Melita, and the great lacke of ſouldiors there, and required that hee might haue but a thouſand footemen beeſides thoſe which hee had already ſent, and than hee verilie hoped that the furie of the Turckes ſhould for a time bee endured, vnto ſuch time as the Viceroy with his nauie ſhould giue further ſuccour.
            While theſe matters were putting in redineſſe, which might haue had more haſt, if that our Chriſtian Princes in ſo weightie and daungerous cauſes had not ſeemed to haue ſlept too much: the third day of the moneth of

               Iune, which was the holy day dedicated to ſaint Hermes,
               The firſt aſſalt. the Turkes ſodainely went to aſſault the fortreſſe of ſaint Hermes, ſuppoſing to haue gotten by ſcaling of ſhort ladders that part of a new fort which the Chriſtians had builded ioyning nigh vnto the conterſcarpt of the Caſtell. But the Chriſtians with the help of a new Caſemact made ſtrong and large in the dike, with faggot & earth, (which before had no manner of defence there) and by the ayde of the Caſtell alſo, worthelie withſtood the enemie; In ſuch ſort as that they filled the dike of the fort with the dead bodies of the Turkes. The Turkes notwithſtanding (by reaſon of their multitude, wherewith rather than manhoode they obtaine the victories that they get) dyd meruailouſly ſtand to their marke, in ſuch ſort, as yt with very force (though late at night) they dyd win that part of the fort which vieweth ye port of Muſſetto, and immediatly there, with a meruelous expedicion they entrenched thēſelues with a new work, to the ende they might not bee endamaged by the Chriſtians. For by the help of the Turks artillerie which were planted vpon the other ſide of Marzamuſetto they were not a litle ayded to entrench, conſidering vpon that part, their Artillerie in ſuch ſort ſcoured, that our men durſt not abide there, in that part of the fort to reſiſt, wherwith alſo the corner of a bulwarke & the curtaine of that part of the fort were likewiſe beaten in ſunder. Whereof though the height and greatneſſe was very troubleſome to the enemie; yet was the ſame litle profitable to vs, becauſe the ſides thereof was not bending & crooking ynough that therby both the ſame might the better haue ben defended, and the enemie more conueniently haue beene beaten

on the flanke. But for as much as the night approched on, the Turks to the number of fiue thouſand remained ther ſtill, for about nine thouſand gaue the aſſalt) & the Chriſtians were compelled to retire themſelues out of the fort into the fortreſſe, & to leaue the fort to the Turks that wan the ſame. The Turks through the benefit of the darkneſſe of the night with pokes ſtuffed with okam and earth, filled that part of the dike, that was vnder the ramper, that the breadth and deepeneſſe of the ſame, vpon the approach, might leſſe annoy them. In this aſlalt, aboue eight hundred Turkes were ſlaine, whereof part were Ianizaries, & part of the Spachies, beſides not a fewSpach
                     •
                  , qui ſeruent auec trois ou quatre cheualls chaſcun, et aut 200 ducats per An, et ſont tous Azamoglan et eſclaux dudict grand Turc. that were hurt, of whom a good part remained in the dikes, halfe dead & halfe aliue, for that part of the dike which was filled with them, did ſtop both them and vs from comming to help them, conſidering there was no paſſage to them, but onely that one which was in the front of the rampire, wherefore thoſe that ſo remained hurt, of very force muſt needs periſh, when none could come to helpe them. Of vs chriſtians at the firſt encounter, were ſlaine about xlv, of the which were certaine knights of the order of the Ioannits, as Gaurdamps borne in Auern in fraunce, Maſius of the prouince of Narbon in france, Contilia a Spaniard, Somatia a Florentine, & Ninecas a German, & certaine wounded, as Captaine Motta, who afterward dyed in the fortreſſe, of his hurts. The great Maiſter thinking requiſit, as reaſon was, that a ſupplie of ſoldiers ſhould be ſent to ſuccour the fortreſſe, to the aide therof, immediatly he ſent not onely ii C ſoldiours but alſo ii C gentlemen of his owne, that were knights of the Ioannits, who if they had ben moe, together with

the foure hundred that were in the caſtle, perhaps they might haue beaten the enemie both from the walles & the vtter forts alſo, & to haue defended the place longer time: But becauſe the great Maiſter lacked ſoldiors, therfore he did ſend Saluago into Sicilia as before is declared, that he might obtaine but fiue hundred ſouldiors for the time. And in the meane ſeaſon hee would abide the mallice of the enemie and to eſchew no labour or perrill: Albeit he thought that he had no litle occaſion to lament the infortunitie of chriſtian Princes, that by their long ſtay, the apparant occaſion to ouerthrow ſo cruell an enemie, ſhould bee ouerſlipt.
            Howbeit hee dyd greatlie meruaile that hee heard of no manner of ayde out of Sicilia, nor of the two Gallies furniſhed with ſouldiors, which Saluago (as before) dyd ſend: but the Gallies thorough the fault of one of the Marriners kept not their appoynted courſe; For whereas they were commaunded to eſchew the Weſt part of Melita, and to keepe courſe towards the Eaſt, they dyd not ſo, but ſayled onely towards the Weſt vnto the Iſland of Gozo, which onely was thorough the default of the Marriner affirming that hee dyd ſee certaine Gallies of the Turkes riding in the port of Miliare for the defence of the ſame. Which (as it was after well knowen) was vtterly vntrew, whan in deede, the Marryner onely thorough feare (which oft times not a litle hindereth notable enterpriſes) durſt procede no further. Whereby the great maiſter wanted his moſt neceſſarie ayde, which meruailoſly grieued as well the Viceroy and others, as chiefly Saluago, for they euidently dyd ſee, that if the Turkes dyd winne the fortreſſe of ſaint Hermes,
               
being the chiefeſt hold of Melita, the reſt of the places there not onely ſhould be brought in meruailous daunger, but alſo thoſe of the Iſland Melita ſhould bee vtterlie debarred from their entriſe to haue ſuccors. It was not impoſsible but that the fortreſſe might be eaſilie wonne and gotten, conſidering that the enemie had gotten one of the Bulwarks of the fortreſſe, and that the fortreſſe beeing but narrow of it ſelfe, was in manner on euerie part continually aſsalted, which beeing conſidered by thoſe, that could skill in warres, dyd greatly mooue them, chiefely when they perceiued that ayde ſo ſecretly came. The meane time by the commaundement of Pope Pius the fourth of that name, certaine ſouldiors were gathered to the ende that by his example, other Princes might the better bee encouraged to giue ſuccors to the order of the Ioannits, and therefore hee commaunded that one hundreth pound of golde ſhould bee giuen to Cambiano, Lieuetenant of that order in Rome, and certaine furniture of ponder to bee deliuered to him out of the Caſtall of ſainct Angelo at Rome, that nothing ſhould on his part ſeeme to want, that poſsiblie he could doe. For, vnto his holyneſſe ſouldiors, which were in number ſixt hundereth, hee appoynted Pompeio Colono to bee Captaine, and Camillo Medices to bee Lieuetenant. After this bande, followed manie voluntarie ſouldiors that both vowed themſelues to ſerue in ſo holie a cauſe, and alſo to winne immortall fame, proceeding with ſuch ardent and couragious mindes, that euery litle ſtay, ſeemed to them to be an whole yeere.
            Therefore they departing vnto Naples, found there Ioan Andrew Auria, with a leauen long ſhippes, and the

Prince of Populonia with nine, Lanicio Prouano with three, and ſo many other that were rigged foorth at the charges of other priuate perſons. Into theſe ſhips that came from Rome, all the bandes of footemen there, were ſhipt and carried ouer into Sicilia, to the Citie of Meſſana, where the kings nauie was in riging.
            While that the Chriſtians, conſidered not that the perill was ſo great as it was in deede. The Turks not ignorant of the ſame, determined to proue the vttermoſt, beefore that the powers of the Chriſtians ſhould augment, thinking that if they could get the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, the reſt were eaſily to be had, firſt thereby they ſhould be onely maiſters of Porto Muſetto, wherby they ſhould gaine a ſafe and ſure rodeſted for their nauie, ſo long as they liked. Beſides, to haue all that peece of land, betwixt the two ports, both for the beating of the fortreſſe of Saint Michael, and that no ſhip ſhould enter, or goe forth out of the hauen of Porto Maiore, without their leaue. Theſe things and others, when the Turks had pondered, they beeganne to giue a terrible batterie to the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, in ſuch ſort, as the great artillerie ſeafed not to thunder by the ſpace of foure daies continually. The next night after, the Turks ſodainlie aſſalted the breach with ladders, and almoſt had gained the toppe of the curtaine, when as our Chriſtians deſiring nothing more then to come to hand ſtrokes, couragiouſlie gaue charge on them, that in the end the Turks, were in ſuch ſort repulſed, that neuer after (vntill they wanne the fortreſſe) they durſt rayſe a ladder againſt the ſame.
            
               While on this ſide theſe matters were in dooing, the ſouldiours of the Turke Dorguta, puffed vp with a certayne pride, as though they would ſeeme to exceede the reſt, gathered themſelues togethers at Martia Scala, beeing a little baie, beetwixt the place of execution and the rodeſted of Saint Thomas, whom whan the garriſon of Borgo perceiued, they immediatly iſſued, and ſo hotte handeled them, that after the killing of a great number of them, the reſt of thoſe Turks were compelled to retire from whence they came.
            In which conflict was ſlaine Bonnemio a gentleman of Fraunce a knight of the order of the Ioannits, with ſeauen others.
            At that time, Monſerrato was ſent into the caſtle of Saint Hermes, to bee Captaine there in the place of Brolio, who beefore, there was Captaine, and thorough his intollerable watchinges and trauayles, about his charge, was fallen verie ſicke. Which Brolio oft times beefore did write to the great Maiſter that the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, was in ſuch ſort fortified and furniſhed, with euery thing thereunto appertaining, that hee thought that it was in manner impoſſible that the enimie ſhould get it, for the knights of the Ioannits and others that there ſerued, tooke ſuch encouragement by his worthy exhortacions, that comming to hand ſtrokes they fought it ſorth aboue all mens expectation, nor the Turks though they had theſe repulſes, left off ſo, but beegan a new batterie with their artillerie by the ſpace of certaine daies, and aſſalted moſt ſuriouſly the fortreſſe, with all the ingins that they could deuiſe.
            
               Among which they had inuented a meruailous bridgeA Bridge of maſtes. framed vpon maſtes, of ſuch a bredth that tenne perſons might eaſily fight on front thereupon, and of ſuch a length, that it ouerreached the dike and reſted vpon the cortaine of the fortreſſe: Beſides they placed foure thouſand harquebuſars alongſt the dike, to beate the top of the Cortaines that none within ſhould approch to the defence thereof, and than cauſed all their nauie to come neerer the ſhore of Saint Georgis port in landing theyr whole force.
            And whan as by the ſpace of eighteene dayes they had battered this poore fortreſſe, and had cruelly rent the bulwarks and Cortains thereof with thirteene thouſand ſhot, and in aſſured hope to haue wonne the fortreſſe. Beeholde one Baragamo a Biſcaian borne, one of the order of the Ioannits, accompanied with Captaine Medrano a Spaniard, and ſundrie other valiaunt ſeruitures repayred to this dreadfull Bridge, and to the great meruaile of all that dyd ſee them, there incountred the Turkes.
            The fight on both ſides was meruailous vehement, and in ſuch ſort the Turkes manfullie beehaued themſelues that they had planted one of their Enſignes vpon a Bulwarke there, which when as Captaine Medrano, had worthilie bereft, and held in his hands, and departing therewith, both hee and Baragamo, with the ſhot ofThe death of Medrano and Baragamo. harquebuſes were ſlaine. At that time thoſe three hundred ſouldiors whereof I told you beefore, which were ſent thether from the great Maiſter, ſhewed themſelues, in dooing notable ſeruice: For ſo ſoone as they perceiued the fortreſſe to conſiſt in that apparant daunger,

ſome of them hurled wilde fire vpon the bridge, ſome burning pitch and brimſtone, another ſort of them tumbled mighty great ſtones vpon ſuch as would haue entred, another part of them, kept the enimie occupied with continuall ſhot, that they durſt not come nigher.The bridge of Maſts, burnt. So that after a dreadfull fight this new deuiſed bridge of the Turks was burnt in ſunder, & with the ruine ther▪ of periſhed eight hundred Turks, the remnant, ſo well as they could (whereof few eſcaped vnhurt, and the moſt part very ſore wounded,) retired to their ſhames, leauing behinde them whether they would or no, two of the chiefeſt enſignes they had, the one pertaining to Muſtapha, the other to Dorgutes, which our Chriſtians to the great griefe of the Turkes, fixed vpon the height of the Cortaine. During this cruell aſſalt vpon the one ſide; the Turkes vpon the South Weſt part of the fortreſſe, gaue another vehement charge, in ſuch fort, as they had wonne the Va
                     •
                  mure of the ſame, which when the garriſon that remained in the Caſtle of Saint Angelo did perceiue, and thinking that with their artillery they were able to driue the Turkes, from the place which they had gotten, they vnbended at the Turkes, a great peece of artillerie, and in ſteede of them, taking one for an other, ſeauen of our Chriſtians, beeing on the Ramper of the fortreſſe, were pittifully ſlaine, which when they had perceiued, and to amend their former errour, they cauſed another great peece to bee blowen off, with the ſtroke whereof, were torne in peeces foure of the Turkes moſt notable Captaines, and twelue other of their beſt and hardieſt ſouldiers, that the Turks had. While thus furiouſly that the fight continued, the

               Turkes entrenched vpon that part of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes which is towardes the Caſtle of Saint Angelo. But our men eſpying their dooing, with pots filled with wilde fire and burning pitch, hurled among them, cauſed the Turkes right ſoone to depart. The Turkes (thus beeing expulſed by the valiant hardineſſe of our Chriſtians) retourned carefully, into their campe, leauing beehinde them dead in this terrible aſſault about two thouſand of their ſouldiers, where two hundred of our men were ſlaine, & as many hurt. In the day of this aſſault the great Maiſter eſpying oportunitie cauſed a foiſt to bee prepared, and to bee had ouer a peece of a ground vnto Martia Scala, and one therein with certaine Marriners to paſſe into Sicilia, with letters to enforme the Viceroy, and the Popes holyneſſe alſo, of the manfull defence of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes▪
                and in what extreame daunger, the ſame remained excepte ſpeedie aide and ſuccour, were giuen to the ſame: the tenor of which letters written to the Viceroy, is as followeth, hauing of purpoſe thought conuenient not to ſet forth vnto you the contents of the Popes letters, when as the effect of both the letters being one, the rehearſall of the letters of the Viceroy may well inough ſuffice.
            
               
                  
                     To Dom Garza di Toled
                           •
                         Viceroy of Sicill and High Admirall of the Kings Mauie, moſt bartie greeting.
                     SIthens Saluago departed hence, I haue ſent vnto your Grace two ſeuerall letters, which were conn
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        d

through the citie of Malta, vnto the Ilandoſ Good, which I would of god, that they had come to your hands. But after, perceiuing that neither meſſenger nor yet letters came from you, I commanded one of my men with certaine letters, to be put in redineſſe to depart vnto you, vnto Meſſana▪
                         who after that hee had prooued to get foorth, ſundry nights, and at laſt eſcaped, hee had not fully paſſed two miles on the ſea, when hee was eſpyed by the Turkes Nauie, that in all haſt made towa
                           •
                        d
                           •
                        
                        ▪ him, which when my meſſenger perceiued, with all the ſpeede hee could, retired from▪ 
                        
                           〈…〉
                         de parted, and ſo ranne his ſhip on land, 
                           ••
                        d with the loſſe of his letters hurled into the ſea, ſaued himſelfe and his company from the handes of the Turkes.
                     
                     Albeeit perceiuing now that the Turkes haue brought their Nauie out of the Port of Vulturno, and thinking with my ſelfe, how much it is requiſit that your Grace ſhould haue intelligence of matters heere already paſſed, I haue therefore cauſed a foiſt to bee ſet in readineſſe at Martia Scala, while the Turkes were occupied vpon an other part of this Iland, ſo as now I hope theſe my letters may ſhortlie and with ſafetie come vnto your handes. But what I haue thought conuenient, your Grace ſhould vnderſtand, are theſe. The fifteenth day of this month, the whole Nauie of the Turks, about night paſſed this port, and becauſe the night was darke, wee could not perceiue the inconuenience of their nauie, for we learned ſo much after that their gallies though they were left in manner vnarmed, they could not well bee towed from the place they had them,

and chiefely for lacke of water, they were enforced to departe from the port of Vulturno, and perhaps the feare of your Nauie, which they vnderſtoode (as I was enformed) to be a hundred and fiftie ſhips riding at an ancre in the port of Meſſana, was likewiſe the cauſe that they would not ride in the port of Saint Paule, but planted their ſhips aboue Porto Muſetto, and a good part of their gallies at Saint Georges, howbeit their ſhips & gallies are not ſo farre in ſunder, but if your Graces nauie ſhould come at the ſudden, in the feare that they are in, they would make ſpeede, a pace to their nauie, if they were further off diſtant. At the port of Vulturno, appeareth not one Turcke, as for their firſt encamping places at Saint Katherines, and Saint Iohns, after the burning of the villages, they haue forſaken: and now the Turks haue their nauie riding, whereas I tolde you, and their army on land lieng before the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, which as almightie God hath hetherto defended, ſo I hope, he will ſtill conſerue the ſame, and the more it is to bee hoped, in that (as yeſterday) it ſo came to paſſe, that after a moſt furious aſſalt continued by the Turkes, by the ſpace of foure houres, with foure charges giuen, and valiantly ſuſtained by our worthy ſouldiours, with the ouerthrow of a bridge, which the Turkes had planted ouer the dike of the fortreſſe, the Turkes had the repulſe not without ſome loſſe of our Chriſtians, where among others Captaine Medrano, (to my great care) was ſlaine: with this victory our chriſtians are ſo incouraged, that I hope with Gods helpe, the fortreſſe (vntill your Graces comming) may bee defended, chiefelie, in that the enimie hath partly deminiſhed the

feruent heat of their vſuall ſhot of their great artillerie, ſo as if I had now any aide or ſupplie of ſouldiers from your Grace, or mine owne two gallies that are with you, furniſhed with ſouldiours, I am in aſſured hope that the enimie ſhould neuer get the fortreſſe from me, for the defence whereof, while I loke euery houre for ſuccour, both the ſouldiours and municions, which I had, in maner are conſumed, determining not the leſſe, with that little number which is left, to continue in the defence thereof, though it ſhould coſt vs all our liues, vntill ſuch time your Grace ſhall ſend aide, who (as wee aſſuredly hope) for the pietie and famous vertue in your Grace remayning, you would not forget vs in this diſtreſſe, but rather your Grace conſidering the great danger that we are in, (which muſt needes be the ruine of vs all, if you defer any longer,) you will help vs out of hand, with ſome ſupplie of ſouldiours, when ſo eaſilie you may now ſend them, for the Turkes are departed from the Eaſt part of this Iland, ſo as thoſe which you will ſend may without any perill land at a place in this Iland called Saxa Nigra. In your Grace (after Almightie God) is ſituated our health or hope, therefore wee moſt hartely beſeech your Grace, forſake vs not in our imminent dangers, for vnto your approued wiſedome & pietie, we commit all that we haue, and ſo fare your Grace moſt hartely well. From Malta this ſeauenteene of Iune.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Viceroy hauing receiued theſe letters, and conſidering the great daunger, of the beſieged fortreſſe, was as it appertained wonderfully moued therewith, and ſhewed a meruailous deſire to ſet forward the kings

whole nauie againſt the Turks, howbeit becauſe the ſhips that ſhould come vnto him from Geanes, was at that time not arriued, it was thought expedient, that his Grace ſhould not aduenture to fight with the Turkes, vntill their comming: therefore it pleaſed his Grace to ſend Signore Giouanni Cardono, with foure long ſhippes called Galliaceis, of the which two pertayned to the knights of Malta. Vnto Cordono the Viceroy ioyned a gentleman called Robles, with an enſigne of Spaniards, beeing choſen ſouldiours. There were ſhipped, alſo with theſe about foure ſcore knights of the order of the Ioannits, that onely at Meſſana, tarried for paſſage into Malta, among theſe of the order of the Ioannits, were Signore Pariſoto the nephew of the great maſter of Malta, Vincentio Caraffa, Boninſegna, and Maldonado, both Spaniards, Centio Aquitano and others, who though through tempeſts and foule weather, they came not timelie inough to the Iſland of Malta, as was deſired, yet their comming was a meruaylous great helpe to the other Chriſtians. Which new ſupplie if the ſame had come beefore the loſle of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, perhaps therewith the fortreſſe might haue ben ſaued. Theſe foure Galliaceis departed from Meſſana the ſeauenteenth of Iune. But the Turks, the meane time (not caring for their great loſſe of ſouldiers, no more then they had ben beaſts gone to the ſlaughter houſe, determined deſperately to renew their fight,) beegan their furious batterie againe, with the great artillerie, continuing the ſame, both day and night, vnto ſuch time as ſuch breaches were made, as conuenientlie were to aſſault, then the Turkes gaue ſo furious a charge with ſuch a

multitude, and courage therewith, that vnleſſe the moſt valiaunt vertues of the defenders, ioyned with contempt of death, and hope of immortall glory, had had the ſuperioritie of the apparaunt terrour: truelie, the Turkes had either put our Chriſtians to flight, or elſe to haue compelled them to yeeld willingly the fortreſſe. Right hot was the fight on each ſide, in ſuch ſort, that both parts ſeemed to bee ſo deſprate in fight, the one to win the fortreſſe, & the other to defend the ſame, that it appeared that day would haue giuen end to thoſe wars: fiue houres it was furiouſly fought, ſo that in the end the Turks through the worthineſſe of our chriſtians were repulſed, howbeit the Turks the night following reſted not, but ſtill beat at the fortreſſe with their great artillery, that therwith the curtaines being ſo torne & rent, our chriſtians had much a doe to ſtop the enimie from ſcaling, a
                  
                     ••
                  o
                     ••
                   th
                     •
                   which our chriſtians had meruailous prouid
                     〈…〉
                  . In this terrible conflict, were ſlaine of the ſide of the chriſtians two hundred, & of the Turks part, an innumerable ſort, among whom the famous Pirat Dorguta,
                  The famous pirat Dorguta wounded to death. while he executed no leſſe the part of a prudent captaine, then alſo the function of a worthy ſouldior, through the ſtroke vpon his head with a great ſtone at this aſſalt, was wounded to death, and ſo within two daies after died, and his dead body from 
                     •••
                  n
                     •
                  e, honourablie was tranſported to Tripolis in Barbaria. But with this worthie Conſtancie, and valiaunt acts of our Chriſtians, the Captaines of the Turkes (beeing made more furious and raging, then beefore they were) collected all their Nauie into one place, and commaunded that the fortreſſe on euery ſide, both by land & ſea, ſhould be aſſalted

and that euer freſh ſouldiers ſhould continually be ſent, vntill the fortreſſe were wonne by aſſault. Therfore the Turks immediatlie cauſed, both bridges, ladders, ingins, weapon & other neceſſaries meet for the aſſault, to be with all diligence put in readines which when Mounſier Valet being then in the caſtle of Saint Angelo perceiued, fearing (as reaſon was) that the fortreſſe was not able to abide & beare the furious charge that was in preparing againſt the 
                     ••
                  me, therefore about two daies before this laſt aſſault, hee called together the counſaile of the order of the Ioannits, ſhewing them, that they all didThe counſell of the Ioannits perceiue, ſo well as hee, in what meruailous daunger, thoſe reſted, that were defenders of the fortreſſe, nor he doubted but that euery of them, for the pietie, & Godly harts in them remaining, had no little compaſſion of the perill of the reſt of their bretheren, and other worthie ſouldiours, there yet remaining, no leſſ
                     •
                   then if the caſes of the defenders were their owne, and therefore required, to ſhew their beſt aduiſe, what were requiſit for the ſafegard of ſuch valiant perſons. The matter being throughly conſidered, the counſell gaue immediateThe ſentence of the counſ
                        •••
                     l. reſolution, that forſomuch as the fortreſſe no longer could bee kept, that the liues of the defenders ſhould be ſaued, and that for the bringing awaie of the defenders, twelue foiſts ſhould be ſent. For which cauſe there was elected, three knights of the order, that they in the night following ſhould paſſe ouer to the fortreſſe and not onely to declare to the defenders, the determination of the great Maiſter and counſell, but alſo to ſuruey, in what ſtate euery thing in the fortreſſe were, after ſo many cruell aſſaults ſuffered, and that, if there

were cauſe, to forſake the fortreſſe, then the waters ther to be poiſoned, and the whole artillerie, to be cloied vp with nailes. For executing of which embaſſade foorth with departed Medina a ſpaniard, Rocca a frenchman, & Conſtantino Caſtriota an Italian, not without meruailous danger of their perſons, conſidering the Turks eſpying thē, charged at them ſundry ſhot of the harquebuze, & after their ariuall in the fortreſſe, they expreſſed to the defenders, the pleaſure & determinaciō of the great maiſter & counſell of the order. The defenders vnderſtanding, theTh
                        •
                      anſwere of the worthie defenders. great care & thought, that the great Maiſter & counſell had for their ſafetie, moſt humbly gaue thanks to them all, for the ſame. Then ſo much as concerned the eſtate of the fortres, if the ſtraitnes therof, the ſmall number of the defenders, & the great number of the enimie, ſhould be conſidered, truely the fortreſſe were in meruailous daunger, chiefely in that the enimie was purpoſed to giue of new another deſperate aſſalt, howbeit inſomuch as hetherto, they had taſted of the mercifull aide of almightie God, that vnto that time had defended them, from the rabious furie of ſo terrible an enemie, in that the place as they thought was defenſable, with munition inough, there yet remaining, and that chiefely they had required of the great Maiſter the honour of the charge in defending of the peece or place if they knew all to looſe their liues, they intended to defend the fortreſſe, to the death, perhaps ſuch occaſion of moſt honourable defence, neuer would come to them againe, therefore they were vtterly determined to ſpend their liues, for the glory of almightie God, and his holie religion.

                  
                     The race and cource of this britle life is but ſhort, but the glory of eternall life, is perpetuall. And conſidering that to each one there is an appointed death, it is to be deſired of euery good man, that this life of ours beeing ſubiect to caſualties, might rather be emploied about the ſeruice of Almightie God, and his common wealth, than to be reſerued to the extremitie of olde age. And if their chāce ſhould be that there were none other way but to dye, they hoped to leaue ſuch victory to the enemie, that the ioy and pleaſure, which they would gaine therby, ſhould coſt them the beſt blood that remained in the worthieſt Soldiours that the Turks than had. And therfore they required the meſſengers to ſhew to the great Maiſter, what they had vowed, and to continue his good opinion in them, as pertained to haue, in worthie Seruitures: & chiefely of ſuch as had giuen themſelues to that order of Knighthood.
               The three Meſſengers hauing thus receaued the defenders anſwere, containing greater courage than good hap, returned to the great Maiſter, who calling again the Counſail togethers, & hearing the valiant anſwer of the defendours, was likewiſe deſirous to heare the opiniōs of the meſſengers, Caſtriota was of opinion, that inſomuch as the defendours were yet Maiſters of the dikes, the fortres might be kept, & that he Caſtriota, (if he were commāded) would take the defēce of the Fortres in charge, and that rather he would loſe his life, than to forſake the place. But Rocca the French man was of contrary minde, ſaying, that he verely beleeued, the Fortres was not able to be kept, if Iulius Caeſar were on liue, & had the defence therof, & ſaw to what extremities, the place was brought

vnto, & that euery Bulwark ther for the moſt part, rent in ſunder by the enimies artillery, & hurled downe, & compaſſed with ſuch number of deſperate enemies; he would neuer ſuffer, that the liues of ſo many worthie ſoldiours ſhould, through inconſidered partinacitie, haue end, but rather to forſake the place, and to reſerue the liues of ſo many valiant Seruitures for other places of greatet importance. It is a valiant & worthie mans part, to doe that which a man may doe, and not to ſtretch beyond that, which a man cannot doe. And, that to be done, which as he thought, was vſed to be conſidered in diſeaſed membres incurable in mans body: that for the ſafegard of the life & the reſt of the whole bodie, it was meet the incurable member to be cut away, and not to care of the loſſe therof.
               The Spaniard agreeing in opinion with Caſtriota, thought conuenient, that the place ſhould not be forſaken; for that the dikes and Rampers of the Fortres for the moſt part were yet not beaten in ſunder, and that a meruailous vnitie of mynde was reſident in the defendours, ioyned with a liuely courage and deſire to come to hand ſtrokes with the enemie, which in manner promiſed an aſſured victorie to the defendours.
               The ſeuerall opinions of theſe three Meſſengers being throughly conſidered, it was thought good, by the moſt part of the Counſaill, that the defenders ſhould continue in their charge for certaine dayes: For that it was neuer the vſage of that order, to forſake with eaſe ſuch places, as once were committed to their gard: but rather to cōtinue in defēce of the ſame to the death;

to thend that the barbarous enemie might vnderſtand, with what kinde of men he had to doe, to the repreſſing of his temerarious arrogance and pride: Leaſt, in forſaking the place, the enemié would perhaps think it were done through feare. Whereby the courage of the enemie would encreaſe, and the auncient honour and eſtimacion of this ſacred order would abate.
               The Turks this while, minding to put in effect, whichThe laſt aſſalt giuen by the Turks to the caſtle of Saint Hermes. they before determined, the three and twentith of Iune, with their whole Armies both by land and ſea, about my dnight, aſſalted cruelly the Fortres on all ſides, erecting their ladders, bridges, and other Ingins meet for that purpoſe. Firſt vnbending at once two and thirtie great Cannons, that with the furious ſtrokes thereoff, that which remained vp of the fortificacions, were vtterly throwen downe. The Chriſtians on thother ſide manfully ſtode to theyr defence, ſome they ouerthrew into the dikes, ſome they repulſed, & ſome they ſlew, but a great deale being more couragious, to vvound & annoy the enemie than to looke to their owne ſafetie: inſomuch vvere the greateſt concourſe and thruſt of the enemie vvas, there vvere the Chriſtians euer ready to ſhew theyr force and proweſſe. The noyſe of each ſide vvas great, mixed with vehement exortations, ioies and mournings: the face & countenance of the fight vvas variable, ambiguous, incertain, horrible, and pitifull to behold. Thus it vvas foughten vnto three of the clock, vvhan yet vvas doubted to vvhat part the victorie vvould encline. And except the Turks had begun againe furiouſly to vnbend continually their great Artillerie, (vvhereby they ouertbrew all the Courtains

and Bulwarks vnto the hard Rock vvhereon the Chriſtians ſtoode:) the Chriſtians might vvell ynough haue ſuſtained for a few daies more, the furie of the enemie, but the Rock thus made naked both of the defendours and vvalls, and more than foure hundred of the garriſon ſlaine, reſted nothing vp, ſcarce that could hide the head of the Souldiour: So as none, could once mount or ſhew himſelfe, to ſtand to the defence, but immediately he vvas torne in peeces vvith the ſhot of the Canon, that neuer ſeaſed. And now Monſerrato the Generall of the Fortres, together vvith one Garas, ruler of Euboeae, vvith one bullet vvere miſerably ſlaine togethers, gentlemen of like vertue, pietie, and vvorthineſſe, vvho for this ſhort lyfe, and moſt honorable beehauiour in the ſame, haue now togethers gained eternall glorie. Neuertheleſſe, the other. that remained on liue, and that ſtoode manfully to their charge, nothing diſcouraged vvith the loſſe and ſlaughter of their compagnions, but rather as ſuch as ſeemed to haue receaued new force and ſtrength out of Heauen, they encountred the enimie moſt couragiouſly, in tearing and rending the Enſignes, vvhich the Turks had faſtened vpon the Fortres, and killing the Enſigne bearers, Captaines and others, of the chiefeſt of the enemie. So that the Chriſtians looked for none other thing than to giue vp theyr lyues, for the Religion of Chriſt, to obtaine eternall lyfe.
               Now the Sunne in his race, had aſcended the middeſt of the Heauens, vvhereby vvas ſuch raging heate, vvearineſſe, and continuall thundering of Artillerie, again the multitude of the enimie ſo great▪ that ſtill ſent

freſh men to renew the aſſalt. On the other part, the little number of our Chriſtians leſt on liue, weakened with meruailous labour, watchings, drought, & wounds. The Turkes at laſt gayned by force the fortreſſe of SaintThe Fort of Saint Hermes wonne. 
                  Hermes, but with ſuch an incredible loſſe of their ſouldiours that it was wonderfull that ſo great a multitude of the Turkes, could bee ſlaine by ſo little a number
                     •
                   of the Chriſtians: thus our Chriſtians valiauntlie fighting were euery one ſlaine.
               Heere I cannot let paſſe, to touch the vnmercifull crueltie of theſe Turkes, exerciſed againſt the knights of the order of the Ioannits, whereby one may vnderſtand, of what nature & propertie Cruelltie is of, which euer ſheweth, what will it hath ſtill to reuenge, when the death of the perſon cannot ſuffice. For after the winning of the fortres, the Turkes finding there, certaine knights of the order, beetwixt death and life, cauſed moſt cruelly their harts to be cut out of their breaſts, & their bodies inueſted with their ſcarlet caſſocks, & white croſſes (for that the knights of the order of the Ioannits, in warers doe euer weare ſcarlet, & in peace black) to bee hanged vp by the feet to the number of a thirtie of them, in the ſight of the Caſtles of Saint Angelo, & Saint Michael, but when this beaſtly crueltie ſeemed not to be inough to Muſtapha, he alſo cauſed theſe dead bodies to bee tyed togethers, and to bee hurled into the ſea, howbeit the ſea being moued as it were with greater mercie, then was in the Turks, the next day after did caſt the dead bodies fleeting into Porto Maiori, where the great Maiſter knowing who they were commanded that the corſes ſhould be taken vp, and buried honorably, with no litle lamentation made for them.
               
                  In ſuch ſort that the great Maiſter ſtraightlie commanded that from thence forth no Turkes ſhould be taken, but immediatlie to be ſlaine, whereby ſuch as alreawere taken, by and by were put to death, and their beads throwen ouer the walles. From the beeginning of the ſiege, vnto the winning of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, there were ſlaine of that garriſon, the number of a thouſand three hundred perſons of the which there were a hundred & thirtie knights of the order of the Ioannits. The great Maiſter Valet, hauing thus loſt the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, though he had (as reaſon was) a carefull hart, yet in diſſembling the ſame, hee ſhewed outwardlie a good countenaunce, to the end, that hee ſhould not diſcourage the reſt of his ſouldiours. Saying that nothing hath chanced but that almightie God hath prouided the ſame, for ſuch is the fortune of wars, and the will of God, that ſometime one, and ſometime another, may ſuffer ouerthrow. It is onely cowardneſſe and not the worthie vertue and immortall courage of theſe valiaunt ſeruiters, beeing dead, that ſhould cauſe vs to make care and mourning, nor, for all this the enimie ought ſo much to bee dreaded, conſidering his loſſe in deed, that rather it ſeemeth hee ſhould accompt himſelfe to haue receiued the ouerthrow then to bee named victorious. And as to ſuch of our chriſtians as are dead in this worthie ſeruice, let vs firmely beleeue, that they are recompenced with glory & immortallitie in the kingdome of heauen, which ought to enflame the harts of euery good man, to ſerue as they haue done, & as for himſelfe, hee had not yet laied aſide his hope of aſſured victorie to bee gotten of the reſt of the enimies,

rather by the help of almightie God, then by his owne power, and that hee ſuppoſed, all there beeing preſent, to be of like minde, and ſo to be and continue, hee required them. Theſe words beeing ſpoken, the great Maiſter being readie againſt all extremities of Fortune, departed from the reſt, and after much deuiſing with himſelfe alone, he determined with himſelfe in the end to write to Petro Meſquito generall of the citie of Malta, and to aduertiſe him, and the bretheren of the Ioannits at Meſſana, together with the Viceroy, of the loſſe of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes. The copie of whoſe letters I haue thought expedient to diſcribe to you, to the end that the meruailous prouidence of Valet the prince of this order of the Ioannits, may the more appeare vnto you, which is as followeth.
            
            
               
                  
                     DVring ſuch time as the knights of the order, abidingThe letter of the great Maiſter to Meſquito. at Meſſana, are preparing their paſſage hether, the miſerable ouerthrow and taking of the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes hath chanced, which as you ought to know, hath left vnto mee no little care, ſo I aſſuredly thinke, the 
                           •
                        ame hath fortuned, not without the ſecret permiſſion of almightie God, which I take in ſuch good part, that rather the father of Heauen, will correct vs by this loſſe, then vtterly to ſuffer vs to periſh. And albeit in mine opinion, it is not requiſit, to doubt any wiſe of his mercifull goodneſſe and mightie power. Yet I cannot but complaine that it hath ſeemed, I haue beene forſaken of thoſe, that ſhould not haue becommed them ſo to haue done, that in the ſpace of ſeauen and thirtie daies, wherin our moſt worthie Chriſtians now dead, ſuſteyned ſuch

furious charges of the enimie, (as rather a meruailous matter done by God, then man,) of our owne (who of duetie ought to haue regarded vs) wee haue beene ſuccoured with no manner of aide, which ſundry times in this ſpace, they might haue done, how beeit as I perceiue, we muſt hope no longer of mans help, conſidering that neither our letters, diligence, earneſt requeſts, admonicions, or commandements, can in any wiſe take place with them, whom duety rather ought to haue moued to obedience, then negligence to haue ſtaied them all this while. Lacke of time will not permit me, to write as I would to the Viceroy, but rather your part ſhalbe, to giue intelligence as well to his grace, as to others our bretheren there of the occurrants of this Iſland. Which our bretheren, if they had obeied our commandements as had appertained, or elſe had ſent vs any aide at all, perhaps we had not loſt the fortreſſe of Saint Hermes, about the defence wherof, ſo valiant & worthy ſeruitures as euer liued, haue loſt their liues therin. Wherefore except the Viceroy make haſt to deliuer vs, I feare hee ſhall come to late to doe vs good, chiefely if we be beſieged, before we haue the litle ſuccours, which as I dreame, are in comming to vs, & as I feare ſcarce will come in time. Neuertheleſſe we doe not miſtruſt of the loue & prouidence of almighty God towards vs, but that the deuine vertue of the Viceroy, within few houres, to be moued & ſtirred vp by the holy ghoſt, will with ſpeede deliuer vs. The meane time, the enemies hath gotten together all their nauie into the port of Muſetto, & are very dilligent in purging of the places of the fortreſſe, & reedifieng of the rampers & bulwarks which with the ſtrokes of their

artillerie they did caſt downe. Therefore vpon the ſight heereof, I require you to ſend to vs, the captaines Catharinenſis, Belcarenſis, Belmeſtio, and Zoric, with their bands, that in our neceſſities, we may vſe their faithfull and valiaunt endeauours. So requiring of God to ſend vs aide from ſome place, fare you hartely well. From the caſtle of Saint Angelo the foure and twentith day of Iune.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  MEſquita the generall of the Citie of Malta, after that hee had read the letters of the great Maiſter immediatly cauſed a foiſt to be rigged to the ſea, & in the ſame ſent one Maſio Co
                        •
                     onello, to whom hee gaue both the great Maiſters letters to him ſent, and alſo other letters of his owne of like effect directed to the knights of the order of the Ioannits remayning at Meſſana, requiring Maſio with all the haſt hee could, to paſſe into Sicilia. The meane time, Muſtapha Baſſa ſent a meſſenger to Mounſier Valet, and with him an old Spaniard, a priſoner to the which priſoner Muſtapha promiſed libertie vppon condition that he would goe to Borgo with his meſsinger, commanding them both that they ſhould practiſe with Mounſier Valet to yeeld himſelfe, and the whole Iſland vpon any reaſonable appointment. Who after they had ariued at the towne, the Turk remained without, & the chriſtian entred in & was brought to the prince, to whom he diſcloſed the charge & commandement to him giuen by Muſtapha. When Mounſier Valet heard the Spaniard once name appointment & yelding, he began to enter into ſuch a choler, that if he had not beene a chriſtian man, he had commanded him immediatly to haue ben hanged, therefore he gaue the Spaniard choiſe, whether he would tarry

ſtill among the Chriſtians in Borgo, or elſe immediatly to depart, & to tell to the Turke that came with him, except he did get him away in haſt, he would cauſe the artillerie of the caſtle to conſtraine him to ſpeed him away. The Turke with this anſwere retourned to the campe, wherewith Muſtapha fell in ſuch a rage, that hee openly ſayde that from thenceforth hee would vſe all the crueltie that hee could againſt the Chriſtians. At this time with Muſtapha
                  Philip a Turke a noble man reuolted and came to the Chriſtians. was a gentleman named Philip, diſcended of the noble familie of the Laſcares in Greece, who at ſuch time as hee was a childe, was taken by the Chriſtians, when as they wonne the towne of Patras in Achaia.
               
               During which time, that hee was a priſoner, hee was ſo curteouſly vſed by them, that euer after hee bare meruailous affection and good will, towards Chriſtians. This Philip beeing priuie to ſundry counſailes of Muſtapha, (moued as it ſeemed by deuine inſpiration from Heauen) thought that hee might meruailouſlie aide and profit the Chriſtians, if hee ſhould come to them, and therfore determined with himſelfe to paſſe to the fortres of Saint Michaell.
               
               Which as hee prooued many times to doe, ſo in the ende in the Calends of Iuly, hee did caſt himſelfe into the ſea (conſidering hee could not get to the caſtle by land) and ſo did ſwimme to the caſtle, not without great daunger of his life, for he being eſpied by the Turkes he was ſhot at, with ſundry arrowes and arquebuſes. Vpon his landing, he was immediatly brought to the great Maiſter, to whom not onely he diſcouered ſundrie counſells of the enimie, but alſo ſhewed, what ought to bee done at a corner of the fortreſſe of Saint Michaell,
                  
to the end to make fruſtrate certain deuiſes of the enemies, which they purpoſed to practiſe againſt that place, and of ſundry other things which afterward turned to much commoditie of the chriſtians. Who alſo, as oportunitie ſerued, right valiantly, after, fought againſt the Turks: So as, that after the ſiege, and Malta being deliuered, he repaired to Rome, with meruailous commendacion of the great Maiſter, where the Popes holineſſe courteouſly entertained him, and for his vertue and good ſeruice done aſwell towards thoſe of Malta, as towards vvhole Chriſtendome, he rewarded him vvith ſundry guifts. Where likewiſe, be dyd forſake his Turkiſh faith, vvherein he vvas brought vp, vtterly deteſting the ſame, and from Rome he repaired to King Philip, to vvhoſe Maieſtie he diſcouered likewiſe certaine pretences of Soliman the Emperour of the Turks. While theſe things (as aboue) vvere done, Colonello (of vvhome before, as I ſhewed you, that vvas ſent into Sicilia) ariued ſafe at Meſſana, vvher he found the Chriſtian Nauie not as yet readie, ſo that the afflicted affaires of Malta could not out of hand be ſuccoured. For neither the ſhips that ſhould come out of Spaine vvere than come, nor yet Gouianni Andrea Auria, vvith his eight & twentie Galliaceis, vvho ſtaied to enbarque foure thouſand footemen, vnder the leading of Capino Vitellio, that vvere collected in Etruria.
               
               The knights of the order at Meſſana conſidering this tedious tarieng, and vvhat perill vvould enſue vppon longer ſtaie, fully determined vvith Gods helpe, to ſuccour their bretheren of the orderin Malta. And vvith ſuch power as they had gotten togethers,

vnder the leading of two notable gentlemen, knights of the Ioannits, the one of the houſe of Meſſana, & the other of Baroleto; they purpoſed to paſſe into Malta. Albeit before their departure, they repaired to the Viceroy: & in conſulting vvith him, they required his Grace, to call to memory vvhat ſeruice the knights of the Ioannits had done, not onely for the King of Hiſpain, but for all Chriſtendome; and vvhat charges the Ioannits vvere at the other yeere, at the vvinning of Pinon de Beles, vvhere they neither ſpared victual, artillerie, or ſhips, nor yet theyr owne proper liues; vvhere theyr ſeruice might either profit the Kings highneſſe, or any part of the Chriſtian common vvealth. And beſides this, that he vvould vouchſafe to conſider vvith himſelfe, that the loſſe of the Iland Malta, not onely ſhould touch the Ioannits, but vniuerſall Italy, and chiefely the Iland of Sicilia; by reaſon it ſhould be a neighbour to ſo mightie an enimie as the Turk.
               
               For vvhich cauſes and others, that ſhortneſſe of time prohibiteth to report, they required of him foure thouſand footemen, vvith vvhome all the knights there, of the order of the Ioannits, accompanied alſo vvith ſundry noble perſonages and other voluntary ſoldiors, vvould paſſe ouer into Malta, to ſuccour their bretheren there: vvith vvhich ſupply, they ſayd they aſſuredly hoped, if at the leaſt, they could not repulſe the enimie or vvinne againe the loſt Fortres, 
                     •
                  et to ſtay the further procedings and pretences of the furious enemie, vnto ſuch tyme as the vvhole Chriſtian Nauie beeing in a redineſſe might inuade the Turkiſh Fleete, and alſo (as they truſted) vtterly to deſtroy the ſame.
               
                  Vpon theſe words, vvhile the Vice Roy, deliberated with himſelfe vvhat he ſhould doe, there came a meſſenger out of Hiſpain, but vvhat the effect of his letters vvas, vvhich he brought, though ſome iudged one vvay and ſome an other, none certainely could tell: but ſo it came to paſſe, that through his comming, the Vice Roy gaue a briefe anſwere to the Ioannits, ſaying, that he could not ſatiſfie their requeſt, conſidering the ſame vvere an vtter vveakening & diminiſhing of the force of the kings nauie. vvherby it ſhould come to paſſe in ſo doing as they requeſted; that he could not giue them ſuch ſuccors, as ſhortly he pretended to doe. Howbeit if they vvould tranſport all the Ioannits that were at Meſſana (vvith a part of the ſouldiors vvhich the Popes holineſſe ſent) into Malta, in thoſe two Galleaceis vvhich they had prepared; hee himſelfe vvould furniſh an other Galliace to bee ſent vvith them.
               The knights hauing receaued this determined anſwer, vvhan as they otherwiſe could not amend themſelues, they tooke the offer of the Vice Roy. While theſe ſhips vvere making readie to depart; the foure ſhips vvhereof before I made mencion, vvhich tranſported the 600 Soldiours, & foure ſcore knights of the Ioannits, by the ſpace of twentie dayes vvere on the Seas, toſſed vvith meruailous tempeſts, & other ſtops and ſtaies, that they could not attaine to Malta. And chiefely they had commaundement giuen them, they ſhould not land, except they knew certainly that the Fortres of Sainct Hermes, vvere ſtill in poſſeſſion of the chriſtians. But approching to Malta, they ſent their ſpiall on land, & promiſed him, to tarry on the Sea, vnto the next day for his retorne.

The meane tyme the Seas by tempeſtious vveather began ſo to grow, that the Spiall could not retourne at his appointed tyme. Wherefore the ſhippes that dyd abide him, dreaded that either he was periſhed in the tempeſt, or elſe come into the enimies hands. Whereby, they ſayled back to Pozalo, a place on the coaſt of Sicilia, to the ende to learne ſomewhat there, of the ſtate of Malta. Where, vpon their arriuall they certainely dyd know, that the Fortres of Sainct Hermes was yet vngotten by the Turks: Which whan they had learned, they departed to the ſeas againe.
               But comming within ſixe miles of Malta, wher at their place determined, they were apointed to land, they ſpied a fier from land, as a ſigne made vnto them, wherby they iudged, both that their former Eſpiall was taken by the enemie, & that ſome Ambuſh was there layed for them. Wherevpon they retourned to Pozalo againe, at which place, they learned of one of the Knights of the Ioannits, a French man, that came out of Malta, of purpoſe to them, that the forenamed fire by his commandement was made, that they being inſtructed by that ſigne, might ſafely proceede to their landing place in Malta. Vpon the vnderſtanding whereof, they all with ſpeede dyd get them to the Seas againe, and failed to Malta, where at a place called Saxa Nigra, (which is ſituated in that part of Malta, which is towards Lybia,) they landed in a quiet night, the nine and thirtith of Iune, & ſo being not ſeene of any others, marched without impediment, to the Citie of Malta, where, with incredible Ioy they were receaued, and there tarried vnto the tyme they knew the further pleaſure of the Great Maiſter.
               
                  The meane time there grew about Borgo, and the other places thereabouts ſuch a miſt, being not oft times ſeene there, that none in maner could ſee therabouts, when as a boy ſcarce of the age of twelue yeeres, lokeing out at a window of the caſtle, and all afraied, cried immediatly, that he ſaw the Turkes marching towardes the caſtle o
                     •
                   
                  Saint Michael, which being perceiued, and certaine of the knights making towards that part, in their way, they gate a certaine Grecian borne that dwelt at the citie of Malta, who being brought backe to Borgo, and ſtraitly examined of the cauſe of his departure from thence, conſidering he had no paſport, without which, it was lawfull for none, to ſtray abroad, in the end this Grecian confeſſed, that he was purpoſed to haue fled to the campe of the enimie, and to haue giuen him intelligence of the ariuall of this new ſupplie, to the end that the Turks, might in the marching of this ſupplie towards the great maiſter, ſurpriſe them by ſome ambuſh. Whervpon the Ioannits conſidering, that by ſome occaſion heereafter, this fugitiue; might worke to them no little detriment, they cauſed him to bee cut in foure peeces. Three daies after, this new ſupplie of ſouldiours that came out of Sicilia, about night ſa
                     •
                  elie came to the great maiſter, ſauing two or three lacques, that were charged with certaine armour and other fardels, who came into the hands of the enimie. It is in maner, incredible what courage was augmented in the hartes of the beeſieged Chriſtians, through the comming of this new ſupplie, and chiefely Valet, the great maiſter, ſeeing beefore his eies, aſſembled, the flower of the Ioannits, and other moſt worthie ſeruitures ſent to him by the prouidence

of Almightie God, ſaied (vvith teares in his eies for Ioy) I thank thee humbly, moſt mightie God and heauenly King, that of thy mercifull goodneſſe doeſt heare my prayers, and doeſt not forſake this pitifull flock of thine; trauailing vnder my charge, being compaſſed (as thou aſſuredly knoweſt) vvith theſe moſt raging and furious vvolfes; What ſhall I ſay more? but theſe are the works of thine onely parpetuall goodneſſe, apparant omnipotencie, and inſcrutable vviſedome.
               This new ſupply, that vvas come to the great Maiſter, vvere earneſt ſutors, that it vvould vouchſafe the great Maiſter to graunt them that benefit, that they might ſerue in the Fortres of Sainct Michael, the great Maiſter praiſing their valiant courage, did condiſcend to theyr requeſt; vvithout changing at all, there, the ancient garriſon. The next day following, ſuch of the garriſon of Sainct Michaels, as had deſire to come to hand ſtrokes vvith the enemie, iſſued forth, & meeting vvith the enemy at Saint Margarets; ſo vvorthely behaued themſelues that they killed aboue 200 of the Turks, & hurt as many of them, that none of the garriſon retourned home to the Fortres, vvithout blood drawen of the enemie; yea and vvithout loſſe of any of their company, at that time. Which vvhē 
                  Muſtapha parceued, he knew right wel that it vvas the new ſupply come to the Fortres of Saint Michael, therefore he found meruailous fault vvith thoſe that had the charge by ſea; that by their negligence, this ſupply gate landing & entrie: So as they, to vvhoſe charge the vtter parts of the Iland vvere cōmitted, came in vvonderfull ſuſpicion of Muſtapha. Whoſe ſuſpicion alſo vvas augmented through the departure of three

Gallies of Argire, that ſtole away, vvherby he had ſmall credit to the reſt of the Argirians there, and much leſſe confidence to the Renegants that vvere Chriſtians, and there ſeruing the Turke. Wherefore hee ordayned that none of thoſe perſons ſhould tarry on land out of their ſhippes vpon paine to be thruſt through on ſtakes, and to bee burnt to aſhes, and ſo in chaunging that watch, hee appointed the gallyes, of Salach the Turke, to take the cuſtody of the Iland, that no ſupply ſhould enter. And to the end that neither of his owne, nor any Chriſtian ſhould ſurpriſe theyr Nauy, he cauſed ſundry of his owne ſhippes to be ſet a longſt the breadth of the port of Muſetto, and the one to bee chayned to the other. And forſomuch as that the blody flixe and other diſeaſes had inuaded his campe, he ordained for the ſick three kindes of places, one for the wounded, at the water of Marza, vnder the gard of 2000. Turks, another on ſhipborde, for the voluntary ſouldiours, & the third vpon ſcaffolds deuiſed betwixt ſhip and ſhip for the Renegants. At which time Muſtapha made Ochial the Turk, generall ouer Tripolis in Barbaria, who paſſing thether with fiue Galliaceis ro take poſſeſſion of his charge, & after ſetting euery thing in order ther, he returned to the campe in Malta. And for the better furniture of bread for the campe, the Baſſa cauſed two ſhips frayghted with wheat to be tranſported to the towne of Leptis, and there to be made and baked beecauſe the campe of the Turkes had much neede of bread. Likewiſe Muſtapha ſent to Solyman the Emperour Zaloth the Turke, to ſhew him how he had wonne by aſſault, the fortres of Saint Hermes, and bare with him the plat of the Iland, as he found it at his entry

there, & to declare to him that he found thoſe of Malta▪
                   better prepared, & more ſtrong, then he hoped in the beginning, to haue found them. And that it his pleaſure wer, that he ſhould continue the wars ther in that Iland it were not a little requiſit, to aide him with a great ſupply of men, victuall, and more furniture of municions. Which if he ſend, he truſted to win the remnant of the fortreſſes of Malta, though not ſo ſone, as perhaps would be loked for. And in the meane time while he receiued aunſwere hee would foreſlow and protract no time, to proue by aſſalt & otherwiſe, to gaine the fortreſſes if he could. And becauſe, he ſhould ſeeme, not to haue written vaine matters to his Prince, Muſtapha had beegun his battery with ſeauentie great peeces of artillery, (among which, were three mighty Baſiliſcoes,) in foureteen ſeuerall places, inſomuch as from the Promontory of the place of execution vnto the water of Marza, and from thence vnto the fortres of Saint Hermes, where they had placed 300 Ianizaries in garryſon, they entrenched and fortefied all that compaſſe of earth right warlike, with meruaylous ſtrength. With which cruell battery, contynuing day and night, they tormented the townes of Borgo and Saint Michael, that the walles, bulwarkes and houſes were there wonderfully 
                     •
                  ndammaged, ſo as none knew well where to bee ſafe, whereby at the firſt, both women and children were meruaylouſly annoyed. And the Turkes themſelues were driuen to keepe within their fortefied campe, nor durſt iſſue abroad without great multitude, and for all that they eſcaped not home againe to their campe all free, for the horſemen of the Garriſon of the Citie of

                  Melita, now & than ſcouring the countrie, vvould charge them on the back and kill many of them.
               Whan the newes of the loſſe of the Fortres of Saint Hermes came to Rome; the Citie was repleniſhed with meruailous care and feare for the tydings: inſomuch, as ſome there, mourned to ſee that auncient glorie of the Latin Name vvas in ſuch ſort diminiſhed. An other ſort, was in no little dread that the calamitie of Malta vvould redownd to Rome.
               
               There were alſo an enuious and detracting kinde of men more liberall with carping tongues, than expert in knowledge of warres, that layed the vvhole blame of the loſſe of the Fortres vpon Mounſier Valet the great Maiſter: vvhome, both his Inuincible courage, and no leſſe the valiant and noble perſonages there accompanyeng him, than alſo this Hiſtorie making mencion of all theyr moſt vvorthie Actes, vvould parpetually deliuer him from ſuch infamy and ſclaunder. But ſuch, as care not for theyr owne eſtimacion, by lykelihood would not ſpare to defame the Renome of an other. For as Ignorance cannot Iudge well of the Pollicies and Inuencions of the learned ſort. No more can Coward Varlets rightly diſcerne of the vvorthlie Acts and valiant doeings of Couragious olde and practized Soldiours. But to retourne to the matter of our Hiſtory, before we told you how three Galiacies were in preparing, at Meſſana, and what diligence they vſed about the ſame that had the charge thereof; in ſuch ſort as the ſeuenth of Iuly, they departed out of the Port of Meſſana. There were in thoſe three ſhips beeſides the Knightes of the Ioannites, ſixe hundred

                  Spaniards, and three hundreth of the Popes Soldiours, vnder the charge of Pompeio Colona, among vvhom, wer ſome that voluntary rowed, & ſome that vver conſtrained. To the conſtrained, libertie vvas promiſed if they vvould doe their endeuours, to bring thē into the port of Borgo, they ſhould, after, be aduanced to roomes of Soldiours as the others vvere. So as not onely their purpoſe was to ſuccour thoſe that wer beſeeged, with men, but alſo vvith victuall. For vvhich cauſe, they ſhipped 250 Medimni of Wheat, beſids Gun pouder, Sall-peter, and Leade, meete for Artillerie and like vſes.
               And albeit they ſuppoſed it very difficult, to enter the Port, being ſo ſtrongly garded by the Turk: neuertheleſſe ſuch deſire reſted in the mindes in the Ioannits preſent in thoſe Shippes, that they made accompt the entrie might eaſely be brought to paſſe, both to them and thother.
               Whan they approched nigh vnto Malta, theſe ſhipps made foorth a Fragot to ſee if any ſigne from the Caſtle of Saint Angelo could be eſpied, vvherby they might vnderſtand, vvhether the ſhips might proceed to enter or retire. Whan the Fragot vpon his proceeding, parceuing a ſigne that he ſhould retourne back, retourned to the ſhipps ſhewing the ſigne of retyring: though the Turks vvhan they prouided the ſigne dyd vvhat they could to obſcure the ſigne by ſhotte of great Artyllarye at the ſame, vvhereby they replenyſhed the Skyes vvith meruailous obſcurities, as though the ſame had bene thorough darke Cloudes; vvhich the ſhippes vnderſtoode vvell enough: and ſo retourned backe into Sicilia.
               
               
                  In deede, it was not thought meet by Valet that moſt curteous prince, that ſo many worthy knights of the order, and ſo many noble perſonages and valiaunt fouldiours, beeing togethers in thoſe ſhips, ſhould bee brought in manifeſt danger, for hee did ſee apparauntly how that certaine of Turks ſhips, lay by night, at the in comming of Porto Muſetto, at a place called Arenula to enbar all entrie and iſſue, to and fro Porto Maiore, without their leaue. At which time, when as the garriſon of the citie of Malta, had intelligence what good ſucceſſe the new ſupplie had vpon their iſſue made (as before) againſt the Turkes, they taking courage thereby; made likewiſe aſalie vpon the enimie, that ſpoiled abroad in the Iland, as they wer driuing certain cattell, which they had taken, & in ſuch ſort they of the citie valiantly behaued themſelues, that after ſundry of the Turks, by them ſlaine, not onely they recouered the cattell, but draue the reſt of the Turks to their ſhippes. The campe of the Turks underſtanding the chaſe to come towardes them immediatly ſtroke a l'arme, and repairing to the pauilion of their generall Muſtapha, ſeaſed for that time, the battery. Which matter, cauſed the Prince Valet to ſuppoſe, that the Turks was marching to giue aſſalt at the breach▪ and therefore the prince fully determined with himſelfe to be ther preſent at the defence of the breach, thinking thereby that his preſence ſhould not a little encreaſe the courage and hardineſſe of the garriſon of Saint Michaels. For which purpoſe, immediatly he cauſed a bridge vpon boates to paſſe both the halfe Ilands to Saint Michaels to bee made. But knowing what the a 
                     •
                  arme ment, he returned to the caſtle of Saint Angelo.
               
               
                  There were ſome that indged this dooing of the Prince to bee meruaylous bolde & couragious, but not voyd of great daunger occupyeng ſuch a place & function, as he dyd, and therfore was worthie to be blamed for the ſame: Alleadging, that matters of great waight & importance, ought rather to be put in effect by the force of the mynde, counſail, & direct order; giuen by the Generall, than by any force of body by him to be ſhewed. Vnto which affaires, though the Generall be abſent, yet by his prudent orders eſtabliſhed, he may be preſent among his ſoldiours. For the decay of the General (which if he come to handſtrokes may eaſely happen the ruin of the reſt wherof he had charge, may likewiſe enſue: as we dayly ſee, whan the lyfe is gone, the body is dead. Other again affirmed that the prince Valet, was worthy of much commendacion, Iudging that the preſēce of the General was moſt neceſſary in perils, cō
                  ſidering that the Soule cannot rightly gouerne & direct the bodie, except it be preſent, yea, in the body: For in ſuch doeing hath but followed the examples of ye moſt prudent Generals Alexander, Themiſtocles, Caeſar, Marius, and ſundry others vſing theſe kinde of words in effect following: Ego met in agmine, in Praelio, conſultor idem & ſotius pericul
                        •
                      vobis cum adero: Me voſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in omnibus rebus iuxta geram. Both, in the Eſquadron & fight (O worthy ſoldiors) you ſhal haue mee preſent a Counſail & compagnion in all perills: Wherein, as your fortune ſhall be, the ſame ſhalbe myne.
               Who is ſo rude of witt, that if the ſame be requiſit in other things, in Peace, it is much more to be deſired in warres.
               
                  The preſence of the Maiſter oft times cauſeth his affayres, with dilligence and greater facility to haue fortunate proceedings. Nor truely the prudent Poet (diſcriuing the wars beetwixt the Latins and the Ruteli,) was of other minde, ſayeng Vrget Praeſentia Turni, the preſence of Turnus prouoked the courage of his ſouldiours, by which moſt euident reaſons it was iudged that Valet the prince of the order of the Ioannits ſhould haue done both manfully and moſt prudently according to his function, if according to his determination hee had ben preſent at the defence of the breach among his ſoldiours, if the Turks had aſſalted the ſame. The ſame time the king of Argire with ſeauen gallyes & ten other ſhips, in which were two thouſand and two hundred ſouldiours, came to the aide of the Turks army in Malta. Who ſeeming to be very ſory, that he was not there at the beginning of the warres, required of Muſtapha, to haue ſo much honour ſhewed him, that both for the declaration of his good will, for the exployt of ſome notable ſeruice & to proue what courage reſted in his owne ſouldiours he might haue the formoſt place with-his ſouldiours to aſſalt the fortres of Saint Michael, which not onely was graunted to him, but alſo Muſtapha cauſed two thouſand choſen ſoldiors of the army of the Turk, to be ioyned to him, which being granted to him, about 90 ſmall ſhips were commanded to be brought from Porto Muſetto, vnto the water of Marza, for that vpon that ſide the king of Argire purpoſed vpon the water to giue the aſſault vnto the fortres. Which when the Prince Valet did perceue, as alſo, hauing had intelligence of this the Turks preparation & deuiſe, by a certaine fugitiue that came out of the

campe to him. Immediately he called before him two of the beſt practiſed & faithfull pilots, that were in Borgo, & of them demanded by what meanes the Turks might be enbarred from the approching to the foote of the wall of the ſortreſſe. The pilots anſwered that their opinions were, if of maſts of ſhips, and other timber ioyned togethers at the ends with ringes of Iron, and thereof as it were a long chaine to be made, and the one end ther of to be ſaſtned from the corner of the caſtle of Saint Angelo, vnto the other ſide, where the enimie with their boates were determined to enter, the enimies deuiſes ſhould bee vtterly ſtopped in that behalfe. This pollicie liked the great Maiſter in ſuch ſort, that in the night following, the chaine was ended, and placed accordingly. The Turkes in the dawning of the morning, ſeeing this chaine placed to enbarre their pretences, were ſtoniſhed, not knowing how to land the ſouldiours: but while the king of Argire and his company were in this maſe, a fugitiue a Chriſtian, a man of meruailous hardineſſe, (to which kinde of perſons, raſhneſſe ſerueth for vertue, and deſperation in ſtead of conſtancy) came to the king, and promiſed that he would breake this chaine afore aid. Wherevpon (taking an axe with him) did enter into the water, after whom followed two or three others, to aide and help him, and ſo ſwimming to this chayne, this fugitiue began to ſtrike at this chayne with his axe. Which when the Chriſtians in Borgo, did perceiue, about fiue or ſixe of them with their ſwords drawen did on their part by and by ſwimme likewiſe to the deſence of the chayne, where, after killing two of that company, thoſe Chriſtians did put the other to flight.

After that, none was ſo bold to put in proofe the like againe: Neuertheleſſe, the king of Argire, dyd not leaue his purpoſe, for the xv day of Iuly, at the breake of day, he proceded to the aſſalt, both by land and vvater.
               The Chriſtians perceuing the pretence of the Argirians, had prepared the moſt part of their Artillerie to be laied towards that place vvhere the Argirians came to giue the aſſalt. So as, vpon the repaire of the Turks, the Artillerie of the Chriſtians vvere vnbended with ſuch violence by the ſpace of three houres, during the time of the aſſalt, that with the bullets of the Canon & other Artillerie, about two thouſand Turks were torne in peces & drowned, with twelue of their ſhips. Howbeit the moſt part of their ſhips approching to the Chaine, & perceauing the ſame to enbarre them to land where they purpoſed, they turned the ſhipps vpon an other part towards the Fortres of Saint Michael, but doeing nothing, they likewiſe vvere enforced to retourne. Vpon the land, likewiſe, it vvas meruailouſly fought, ſo as many Turks vvere ſlaine, and two hundred of our Chriſtians vvanting, among vvhome Frederic, the ſonne of Dom Garza, Viceroy of Sicell, vvas torne in peeces vvith an Iron Bullet, alſo one Gordio a Frenchman: Francis Senoghera, vvith his Neuew Iohn, Hiſpapaniards borne, and knights of the Ioannits, Medina, there, likewiſe was vvounded to death, vvho afterward dyed of the ſame.
               But the Prince Valet, perceauing in what perills the ſtate of vvhole Malta ſhould ſtand in, if many ſuch battailes vvere often fought, vvhan as, thoſe that were vvearie, both day and night ſhould continually haue

to doe with the freſh and new Soldiours of the Turks, and to haue no maner of ſupply of ſoldiours, ſent to ſuccour them. Therefore the ſeuententh of Iuly, he ſent a meſſenger into Sicilia, who by ſwimming paſſed from the Caſtle at the vtter bay: leading to the water of Marza, and from thence eſcaped vnknowen through the middeſt of the enemies, vnto the Cittie of Malta, and ſo from Malta taking ſhipping, came with diligence to Meſſana. To this meſſenger, Valet, gaue letters, by the which he required that he might haue thoſe two Gallies of his owne, there remaining, and the ſame to be furniſhed and ſent with thoſe number of knights of the Ioannits, as were remaining at Meſſana, and with ſo many other ſoldiours as might fill and repleniſh thoſe Gallies. And that, vpon their comming nigh to Malta, they ſhould abide a loofe before the Port, vnto ſuch time they had a conuenient ſigne made vnto them whether they might ſafely enter the Port yea or no.
               At which time that the meſſenger of Malta, came to Meſſana, there came thether a fleet of ſhips out of Spain that brought in the ſame ſundry knights of the order of Ioannits, of diuers nacions. Whan as the Viceroy purpoſed to ſend away to Malta, the two gallies written for, he firſt thought meet to write to the great Maſter certaine letters Ciphered by two ſeuerall little ſhipps, wherby he ſignified to the great Maſter, that with thoſe he ſent the two Gallies for yt which he wrote howbeit he required that the Gallies might haue aſſured ſigne made vnto them, whan they came in ſight of the Iland, whether they might enter without euident peril or no.
               
                  Theſe two litle ſhips, thus departing from Meſſana towards Malta, (whereof the one was furniſhed with ſundry ſimples and medicaments pertaining to Phiſick & Surgerie, dyd not both keepe one courſe of Sayling▪ Whereby the bote that had the Medicaments for Phiſick and Surgery, came into the hands of the Turks, as afterward vvas learned, the other arriued▪ ſafe in Malta. Neuertheleſſe becauſe, a few daies before, all the waies betwene Saint Michaels and the Citie of Malta, vvere vtterly enbarred by the Turks, and that three Chriſtians vvhich vvere vſed to goe and come betwixt thoſe places, in their paſſing vvere ſurpriſed & taken by the Turks, and moſt cruelly put to death. And beſids, the entries of the Ports vvere vigilantly garded, that none vvithout the knowledge of the Turks could vvell enter. Whereby the knights of the order, reſting at Meſſana, could not tell how to ſend ſafely the two Gallies away to Malta. Notwithſtanding conſidering that the great Maiſter ſo earneſtly vvrote to haue them, & that they thought, Vbirerum agitur ſumma, vnius particulae periculum, minus eſſe metuendum. Where the vvhole affaires reſt in daunger, the perill and loſſe but of a part & particle thereof for the conſeruacion of the reſt ought the leſſe to be regarded and feared, they determined vvith themſelues to commit the two Gallies to the guiding of Fortune; alwaies aforeſeeing, that all thoſe knights of the order, ſhould not paſſe in that hazard, but onely fortie of them ioyned vvith a good number of ſoldiours, that furniſhed vp the two Gallies. With theſe paſſed Captain Salazar, an Hiſpaniard, in a bote towed by the Gallies, into the Iland of Goza vvho after from

thence paſſed▪ into Malta to eſpie both the ſtate of the Citie, and the Turks Armie. The meane tyme, the Turks not forgetting, the great ouerthrow and repulſe that they receaued at their late aſſalt at Saint Michaels, and not a litle deſirous to reuenge the ſame, therefore they began vvith terrible ſury theyr batterie againe, againſt the Fortres of Saint Michaell, in ſuch ſort, as that ſo much as the defendours repaired vp in the night, the Turks by day by their Artillery ouerthrew and brake.
               While the enemies Artillerie, dyd their feate, the Turks deuiſed theyr bridge, vvhich they finiſhed, and dyd ſett ouer the dyke before the Sunne ryſing, the twentith of Iuly, vvhereby they might come to hand ſtrokes▪ vvith our Chriſtians. Which being perceaued by the defendours, and conſidered, vvhat detriment the bridge vvould import, if the ſame vvere ſuffered▪ Immediately ſeignior Pariſoto the great Maiſters Neuew, and Agleria, knights of the Order, vvith a good company of other ſoldiours, iſſued forth of entent to haue burned the bridge. Who in ſuch ſort vvere receaued by the Turks, that vvithout executing the matter, they came for, all thoſe that iſſued together vvith Pariſoto and Agleria, vvere vtterly ſlaine. The Turks (this ſpace) ſeaſed not to continue the ſury of their Artillery▪ in battering the walls; vntill the xxviij. day of Iuly; So as, that afternone, they couragiouſly aſſalted the For tres on ſundry parts thereof; and thriſe did ſend freſh men, to ſupply the roomes of their ſoldiours that were either vvery in the fight or ouerthrowen in the aſſalt, & ſo manfully the Turks ſtood to their mark, that they doubted not to gaine the Fortres that day.
               
                  But our Chriſtians on their part with no leſſe valyant courage reſiſted them, & with very force, what by Gunſhot, arrowes, wildefire & handſtrokes, at laſt they compelled the Turks to retire from the aſſalt, with incredible loſſe. With this victory, the harts of the defenders in ſuch manner encreaſed that they cared nothing for the malice of the enemie. And becauſe there was not ſo often ſkirmiſhing on our ſide, as was wont, and that the artillery of the Chriſtian ſide, began to ſtay from ſhoting, the Turks ſuppoſed, that there was few ſouldiours left on liue in the fortres, & that their furniture of pouder, ſhot, and other things, were ſpent. Which ſtay from ſkirmiſhing & ſhooting, was rather done of purpoſe by the counſaile and deuiſe of the Prince Valet, then for any want of thoſe matters in the fortres, & for a good cauſe, conſidering that he heard of no maner of certaine aide, at that time, & that euery day more & more the enemies fury & malice did grow the greater, hee thought it not requiſit, to conſume his garriſons & other furnitures idely & to no purpoſe. But the Turks perceyuing, that by theſe often aſſalts of theirs, theyr pretences toke litle effect, they determined with themſelues to prooue what they could by myning, and one mine they had in maner brought to paſſe, beefore our Chriſtians did perceiue the ſame, & to the end they might blinde the eyes of the defenders, they cauſed two gallyes towards the water, to aproch the wals of the towne of Saint Michael, & to beate at the ſame with theyr artillery, ſuppoſing by the ſame that the garriſon to haue forſaken their charge, & to haue aided the reſt, would haue neglected the cuſtody of the wals of the caſtle, & ſo by this mine, to haue entred into

the fortres. But the defenders, vnderſtanding the ſubtile pollicies of the Turks, by the meanes & prudence aſwell of certaine of the garriſon, as chiefely of one of the enſignebearers ther, brought vtterly to naught the mine of the enimy, by a contermine. For the enſigne bearer firſt entring the mine of the enemy, with a lanterne in hand, & caſting certain arteficial fire among the enemies in the mine, that whether the enemy would or no, hee draue them out of the mine. For which good ſeruice done, the great maſter rewarded this worthy enſigne bearer with the gift of a chaine of gold wayeng fiue pounds, & becauſe that Virtus virtutem parit, ea
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in arduo ſita eſt, one vertuous act, allureth another to do the like, though the ſame be very difficult to attaine vnto. The next day after which was the firſt of Auguſt, certaine of the garriſon of the fortres iſſued forth, & with pouder burnt to peeces the bridge which the Turks before had deuiſed & layed ouer the dike, which worthy deed ſo done, turned to the whole fortres a wonderfull commodity. For the next day after, at the Sun ſetting the Turks aſſalted agayne the fortreſſe, vpon that part which was garded by Carolo Roffo, where by the ſpace of three houres, it was valiauntly foughten on each ſide, but in the ende the Chriſtians repulſed the Turkes, leauing beehinde them three hundred ſlaine. And on the Chriſtian part remayned dead, Roffo himſelfe with one Bareſo, and certaine other ſouldiours.
               This while during the aſſalt the Turks in ſuch ſort exerciſed their great artillery with continuall ſhot, that none of the defenders durſt ſcarce ſhew his head to looke into the dike, but immediatly he was diſpatched,

but for all that, where occaſion of any worthy ſeruice was at that inſtant to be ſhewed, the ſouldiours of the fortreſſe would not ſpare his life, to execute the ſame. As well appeared in Calderonio the Hiſpaniard, who when hee doubted that the enimy was breaking that part of the wall of bulwarke, called the bulwarke of Caſtile, hee iſſued immediatly to eſpy and know the ſame, but in a moment hee was ſlaine with the bullet of an arquebuſe. Whoſe infortunity as to ſome it would haue beene a terrour and feare, ſo was the ſame not the leſſe an encouragement of the reſt, to endeauour to doe the like ſeruice. For when they perceiued that the enemy did what they could to fill vp the dike of the fortreſſe, they of the garriſon determined rather to ende their liues with honour, then to come into the handes of a moſt cruell enemy, and therfore concluded togethers to iſſue forth that night vpon the enemy, and to enbar them of their purpoſe.
               Wherevpon a hundred of the garriſon iſſued forth, part where of were Ioannits and part ſouldiours that tooke wages, and ſo worthely gaue charge vpon the enemy, that they enforced them to forſake the dikes and to flie away a pace, leauing behinde them ſlaine foureſcore Turks, and ten killed of our ſide, among whom of the Chriſtian part remayned dead two knights of the order Giouanni Cantabro, and one Macrino, whole heads the cruell Turks had cut from their bodies, and planting them vpon ſpeares, did ſet them in the valie of Saint Sauiors▪
                   to be viewed of the fortreſſe. That day at night, thoſe that were in the citie of Malta▪
                   made many bone fires, and therewith ſhot of their arquebuſes, ſhewing

thereby a great token of reioyce: Which both thoſe that were beſeged, and the Turks alſo hard very well, whereby the Turks ſuppoſed, that either the Nauie of the Chriſtians began to approch the Iland of Malta, or elſe ſuch ſupply of Chriſtians were landed, that was hable to encounter with the Turks Armie there. But it was none of thoſe two matters, and onely of purpoſe done, aſwell to ſhew their owne courages, as to make the Turkes eſtoniſhed vvith the newneſſe of the matter.
               The Turks the meane time filled the dike of the Bulwarke of Caſtile, which thing cauſed that neither the Turkes could be endamaged by the Caſemacts of the dyke being cloyed vp▪ nor yet by the Flankers from the Bulwarke of A
                        ••
                     rne. Whereby the Turks without any maner of impediment, might eaſelier enough aſſalt the breach which they with their Artillerie, before, had made. Alſo from their Mount placed vpon the right hand of Saint Sauiors, they began to beate vehemently, with two braſen peeces there planted, ſo as, that at the firſt ſtroke, they beat in at a window made for the ſhooting out of Artillerie, vvherwith the enemie vvas vvont to be encombered, of the vvhich place one Francis Caſtilia had the charge: ſo expert vvere the Canoners of the Turkes part.
               Alſo one Giouanni Barnardo Godineto a Spaniard, and knight of the Order, vvith the ſtroke of an Arquebuze ended his lyfe. That day Francis Aquila
                        •
                     es, a Spaniard, one of the Garriſon of Saint Michaell, hauing vvife and children in the Iſle of Gozo, allured by two vvicked counſaillours, that is to ſay, Feare and Hope, ſhamefully

fledde out of the Towne of Saint Michaels, vnto the Enemie, counſailing the Enemie to Aſſault the Towne againe, ſaying, that vvithout all doubt, they ſhould vvinne the Towne, if they vvould attempt the ſame againe, becauſe there vvere ſcarce foure hundred Soldiours left, and yet vvhat with extreme labors that they had ſuffered during the ſeege, and vvhat by their hurtes and vvounds, they vvere not able to endure longer, as for the reſt of the Soldiours that vvere ther, they vver vtterly conſumed & dead. Wherefore the Turks perceuing, that ſuch breaches alredy wer made, by their Artillery, in the townes of Borgo & Saint Michael, that Carts vvere able to paſſe thorough them, they purpoſed to aſſalt both thoſe townes at once, and to proue vvhether there reſted in the garriſons of thoſe two townes ſuch courage and force, as vvere able to giue them ſuch repulſe againe, as before ſo often they had receaued.
               Therefore vpon the ſeauenth of Auguſt, at one inſtant houre, the Turks aſſalted Borgo at the Bulwark of Caſtile, and the Fortres of Saint Michael, vvith ſuch a fury and multitude, that the vvhole earth thereabouts vvas couered vvith the enemie. And ſuch vvas the thunder of the great Artillerie, the haile of the Harquebuze ſhot, the noiſe of Armour, the faufare of Trū
                  pets, the ſound of Drummes, and cries of men of each ſide, that Heauen & Earth ſeemed to beate togethers.
               Which vvhan the bands of Horſemen that vvere in the citie of Malta heard by the thundering of the great Artillerie, and ſaw the Skies obſcured vvith the ſmoke of the ſame, and doubting that the Turks vvould not

leaue the aſſalts, vnto ſuch tyme they had vvonne the Townes, as they dyd, before Sainct Hermes: Immediately all the Horſemen moſt valiantly iſſued out of the Citie of Malta, and to the ende to turne the enemie from the Aſſault, they gaue charge vpon thoſe bands of Turkes that garded the ſick and vvounded perſons reſting at the vvater of Marza. Who thus being aſſailed vpon the ſodaine, fled, and our Horſemen chaſing them in killing and ouerthrowing them meruailouſly.
               The noiſe, and cryes of ſuch as fled, being perceued by thoſe Turks (vvho all this vvhile vvere occupyed in the aſſalt of Sainct Michael) they were enforced at that tyme to leaue the fight, and to come to ſuccour the reſt that fled. Thus vvere the Turks repulſed from both the Townes, leauing behinde them ſlayne, aboue 1500 Turkes beeſides thoſe that were ſlaine by the Horſemen of the Citie of Malta, before they had ſuccours from the Campe. Of the Chriſtian part of both the Townes vvere ſlaine more than an hundred, and as many wounded: both the aſſaults continued more than fiue houres.
               Heere Mounſier Valet, beeing thus deliuered that day, and many other, from ſuch euident perills, cauſed generall Prayer to bee made to Almightie GOD, and hee him ſelfe vvith the vvhole Townes men, repaired to the Church about the ſame.
               While theſe things, vvere thus in doeing, Dom Garza the Vice Roy of Sicel, had ſecret intelligence out of Calabria, that Soliman the Emperor of the Turks had cauſed certaine ſhips to be ſet in a redines at Conſtantinople
                  
which were furniſhed vvith ſoldiours, victuall, & other neceſſaries appertaining to the vvarres, to be ſent to Malta. Wherefore to meet with them, the Viceroy ſent the Lords Altamira and Gildandrada, accompanied with fiue Galleaceis: vvho departing to the Seas, and ſailing vntill they came vvithin xxx. miles of Malta, they could not ſee nor heare of the ſhips that they ſought for; but onely of a Gallie and a little Barque of the Turks. The Gallie vvas taken, and the Barque eſcaped away to the Turkes.
               
               This vvhile, Muſtapha thinkeing there vvas none ſo ſtrong, but that continuall labour and vvatching vvould in the ende breake and vveaken him vtterly, he thought conuenient, to keepe the defendours occupyed vvithout giueing them any maner of reſt, in all that he could: therfore he commaunded that the Fortres of Saint Michaell, ſhould be aſſalted againe at the breaches before made by the Artillery. But the Turks by the valiant defenders vvere quickly repulſed: vvith no litle deſtruction of the enemie.
               Theſe often aſſalts, this Baſſa dyd not make, in that he had any great hope to vvinne theſe Places, but rather to ſhew him ſelfe to execute the function and office of an expert Generall, and to ſatisfie the minde of his Prince Solimane, vvho had commaunded them, either to winne the places, or elſe there to loſſe their liues about the ſame.
               But alſo the Baſſa had diſpatched and ſent a litle Barque away vvith Letters to Solimane, by the vvhich he gaue him intelligence of the ſtate of his Nauie, vvith what meruailous inconueniēces his army was afflicted,

what ſmall hope he had to win the places of the Chriſtians, and what preparation the Chriſtians were in making to giue ſuccours to Malta, & other ſuch like things. The meane time the two gallies of Malta, departed from Meſſana, and came to Sarragoza, where they tarryed one day, while the ſhip of Salazar was ſet on ground to tallow, to make hir more ſwift of ſaile, and that the better the next day after they might paſſe togethers, the famous promontory and lands end of Sicilia, called Pachino. The next day, as they departed out of the hauen of Sarragoza, they encountred a boate that came from Pozalo, hauing in the ſame one of Malta, beeing very ſore wounded, who beeing demaunded, who had in ſuch ſort euelly entreated him anſwered that when as he & a companion of his, that other night, ariued nigh that port, and ſo required by two Sicilians, that had houſes vpon the ſhore, to come on land, and to lodge with them that night, which they did, ſodainely the night being quiet, fiue Turks landed, by whom the two Sicilians were taken, and his companion ſlaine, and he himſelfe hurt, as they did ſee, which two Sicilians that were taken alſo told thoſe Turks, that in the port were riding two gallyes, hauing in the ſame ſundry knights of the order, with other ſouldiours, to paſſe in Malta, by whoſe words the knights of the order, in thoſe two gallyes well perceiued, that theyr going into Malta, was diſcouered to the enemy, whereby they knew it was either moſt dangerous for them, to enter the port of Borgo in Malta, or elſe vtterly impoſſible. Neuertheleſſe they dread not to keepe on their courſe towards Malta, toweng at their ſternes the boate of Salazar.
               
               
                  While theſe two galleyes thus ſayled they perceiued not farre beefore them two other Gallyes, and a little Barque, who eſpying the two Gallyes of the Chriſtians to follow them, made all the haſt they could towardes Malta from them, whereby the Chriſtians thought, that without doubt, they were the Gallyes that had ſent the fiue Turkes on land, who had done thoſe hurts, which hee of Malta, beefore recounted to them.
               Howbeeit the two Chriſtian Gallyes continued theyr courſe vnto Pozalo, from whence by theyr letters they gaue intelligence to the Viceroy, of occurrants to them happened in theyr voyage. And forſomuch as they could not proceede on their courſe, in that the South and Southweſt windes, were ſo much contrarious to them, they retyred with their Gallyes to Sarragoza agayne, and ſo to proceede as the Viceroy ſhould further aduiſe them. About the which, immediatly a knight of the order, was ſent from thence to Meſſana, to the Viceroy, whoſe counſell was, that the two gallyes ſhould ſtay at Sarragoza, for the reſt of the whole Nauy, that right ſhortly would come and accompany them into Malta.
               
               But Salazar being brought to Pozalo, determined in his boate to continue forward his courſe, and albeit at the time, that hee departed from Pozalo, the ſeas were meruaylouſly troubled with windes, thunders, & other ſtormes, the other daies following wer ſo quiet & calme that within a ſhort time, Salazar ariued ſafely at the citie of Malta, and there taking apparell of a Turk vpon him, and like weed for a companion of his, that could

ſpeake the Turkiſh tongue as hee could, by night they departed thence into the Campe of the Turkes to eſpy the eſtate of the Turkiſh armie, where they eſpying that, they came for, they perceyued that the whole number of the Turkes left on liue in theyr Campe, amounted ſcarce to foureteene thouſand men, wherof many of them were 
                     ••
                  urt, and very ſicke, the reſidue, were but an vnmeete and vnwarlike company, conſidering that their former fights and aſſaults had conſumed their beſt ſouldiours, and after hauing ſecretly viewed the manner and forme of theyr encamping, Salazar vvith his companion retourned backe to the citie of Malta againe.
               The next night after, Salazar vvith one Pietro Paccio a Spaniard a gentleman of meruaylous hardineſſe and courage, repayred to a place nigh vnto the beacon or vvatch place called Maleca, vvhich place when hee had thoroughly conſidered, hee left Pietro there, and keeping in memory the ſignes and tokens of the cities of Gozo and Malta, as Pietro ſhewed him, to the ende to declare the ſame to the Viceroy.
               
               
                  Salazar taking paſſage in his owne boate againe, found fortune ſo much to bee his friend, that ſhortly after hee ariued at Meſſana, vvhere hee diſcouered to the Viceroy, vvhat hee had ſeene, amongeſt many talkes, hee ſhewed how vveake the Turkiſh Nauy remayned, how ſlender theyr Armie on land was, voyde of good ſouldiours, and weapon, that theyr whole number of Turkes were not able to encounter, with tenne thouſand Chriſtians.
               
               
                  To affirme the wordes of Salazar to bee true, at that time returned one of the two little ſhippes, wherof I told you beefore, that were ſent to bee eſpialls in Malta, bringing with him a Spaniard, and a fugitiue out of the Turks campe, beeſides, alſo retourned foure gallyes that before were ſent from Meſſana, who brought with them foureteene Turks, whom they had taken about Malta, who all approued the words of Salazar to be true, that is to ſay, that the Turks army was meruailouſly diminiſhed, and that with beatings, they could not be compelled ſcarcely to aproach to the walls, for which cauſe the Baſſa, had ſlaine ſundry of them. And the thing that made the Turks ſo affraied, was that they ſaw neuer any of them whom the Chriſtians wounded, but hee loſt his life.
               Beſides that, they ſaid, they did ſee the Chriſtians, with incredible hardineſſe defend their places, & that no peece of artillery of the Chriſtians ſide, was at any time vainely blowen of, whereſore the Turks affirmed, they had right good cauſe, to bee weary and repent & to deteſt ſuch wars, which made them to eſchew vtterly to fight, and vtterly to flie away, and chiefely ſuch as were Renegants, that had forſaken the Chriſtian faith and become Turks. For which cauſe there was right ſtrait watch ſet by the Baſſa, and commandement giuen by him, that either they ſhould winne the towne, or elſe to looſe their liues all, for ſo had Soliman their prince commaunded. Theſe words and ſuch like (which the Turks that were taken did tell to the Viceroy,) made the Viceroy to ſet forth his nauie in a readineſſe more ſoone then otherwiſe peraduenture he would. In the Fortres

of Borgo, this vvhile, vvas one Francis Giuara, a Captain, a very hardy gentleman and vvonderfull Ingenious, he a litle from that place vvhere the enemie vvith Artillerie had beaten downe a part of the vvall of the towne, builded a peece of Fortificacion, contayning in length fiftie paces, & in bredth 
                     〈…〉
                   paces, vvith two flanking Corners: vvhich being finiſhed vvithin two nights, turned afterward to a meruailous help and ayde of the defendours of that Towne.
               The enemies, the meane tyme, vnder the corner of the Dike vvhere Boninſegna the Spaniard, a vvorthie Knight of the Ioannits had his charge, began to myne, vvhich vvhan the defenders perceued, they encountred the ſame vvith an other myne, & thereby brought the myne of the enemie to none effect.
               During this tyme, vvhile a Fugitiue vvas comming from the enemie towards Borgo & ſwimming the vvater, the Turks tooke him, vvhich vvas meruailous hinderance to the Chriſtians that vvere vvonderfully deſirous to know of the eſtate of the Turks Armie, and of their Counſaills. But the enemies ſeeing the ſmall ſucceſſe of their purpoſes, vvould yet proue further deuiſes, and therefore cauſed two mynes to be made, one towards a Bulwark of Saint Michael, and the other to the Bulwark of Caſtile, into the vvhich Mynes for doeing of the feate, vvere certaine Barrells of Powder beſtowed.
               Howbeit the pretences of the Turkes could not ſo prudently be vvrought, but through the vigilances of the defendours, the ſame vvas eſpyed, and ſo came to paſſe, that theyr Mynes came to none effect, and

the Turks ſlaine in their owne Mynes, vvith loſſe alſo of ſuch barrells of Pouder, as they had layed there, vvhich the Chriſtians recouered from them.
               With theſe offences and difficulties, the hopes of Muſtapha and Pial, the Baſſas of the Turks, being vtterly ouerthrowen, they vvith the reſidue of the Captaines entred in Counſaill to know vvhether it vvere expedient to tarrie any longer, or elſe to retourne home: Whereof the moſt part, vvere of aduiſe, that they ſhould depart. But Muſtapha vvas of an other opinion, ſaying, that hee thought conuenient they ſhould tarry vntill the Gallie vvhich he ſent to Conſtantinople to Solimane their prince, vvith letters, retourned againe. Whereby they might vnderſtand vvhat the pleaſure of the Prince vvere for them to doe in ſuch behalfe: and in the meane tyme, by force or guile, to ſeeke ſome good Fortune of victorie. Which in deede the Enemies prooued and attempted more often, than that they gained thereby.
               For as they themſelues vvere vnquieted, ſo they purpoſed not to lett bee in reſt the poore Chriſtians, ſometime in exerciſing their vſuall fury vvith Artillerie, ſometyme either myning, or entrenching, or filling the dikes, or elſe aſſalting ſome breach to theyr owne loſſe: howbeit, all vvhich that they dyd, they executed the ſame vvith meruailous diligence and in ſmall time. Therefore vvhan as, Robles Maiſter of the Tents, in the night came to view the ruine and ouerthrow of a part of the vvall, he vvas ſuddenly ſmitten in the head vvith a bullet of an Harquebuze, and immediately dyed, to the great lamentacion of all ſuch

as had knowne him. For in him vvere reſident ſundrie good artes; vvith vvhich he profited much thoſe that vvere beſeeged. Wherefore the Great Maiſter ſent a notable gentleman right expert in the vvarres, that vvas Coronell of the Fautery (vvhome vnto that time he kept about him ſelfe;) to be generall of the Fortres of Saint Michaells, vvho vvith ſuch ſinguler prudence guided his charge, vvith vvatching, counſailling, and prouidence, that ſo often as the Enemies gaue attempt to that peece, they vver alwaies repulſed, vvith no litle detriment & loſſe. The meane time thoſe two gallies vvith thother ſhips of the Turks (vvhich (as before I did tell you) vvere eſpied by the two Chriſtian gallies of Malta,) arriuing among the Turks Nauie, ſhewed vnto Pial Baſſa, the Admirall, that the Chriſtian Nauy vvas in redineſſe to come to Malta, vvho dreading the ſodaine comming of that Nauie, commaunded 70. of his long ſhips to be put in a redineſſe, leauing 40. ſhips in the Port of Muſetto, being the reſidue of his Nauie, which vver vtterly out of furniture, & vnarmed both of men & tackle: the maſts of which 40. ſhips, wer cōſumed about making of bridges, & other neceſſaries, for the aſſalting of the places in Malta, & the men therof likewiſe wer ſpent with ſūdry diſeaſes, & fights wherin they ſerued: Therfore Pial, for certaine daies, abode all the day time nigh the ſhore of Malta, about a place ther called Maiaro, & in yt time he ſtaied abrode vpon the high Sea; abiding the comming of the Chriſtian nauie. But he perceuing none to come, he landed his company again: & forſomuch as that the furniture of powder began to decaie in the Turkes Campe, therfore vvas giuen that

of euery thirty barrels of Pouder, in euery ſhip twentie or fiue & twenty barrells according to the appointed porcion ſhould be taken. Whereby the Turks, vvith greater fury than euer they did before, battered the vvalles of both the Townes, vvith ſuch great peeces of Artillery as are called Baſiliſcois: vvhereof euery bullet ſhot out of the ſame waieth two hundreth pound, and in compaſſe ſeauen ſpannes. With theſe peeces of Artillerie the vvalls of the Fortres of Saint Michael, vvere throwen downe and made flat. Likewiſe at that time, Muſtapha Baſſa, in ſuch ſort at Borgo beat the Bulwark of Caſtile vvith Artillery, that in maner the ſame vvas ouerthrowen. Whan as the enemies perceaued that both the townes vvas vtterly made voide, both of their vvalls and other peeces of Fortificacion, ſo as the Turks might looke vpon the Chriſtians, and the Chriſtians on them: vvithout further tarrieng: the Turks vpon the eightenth of Auguſt, at noone tyme of the day, vvith their vniuerſal armie gaue charge vpon both the towns, at the vvhich the Enemies, vvere three times put back, and thriſe returned, and in the end the Turks were vtterly repulſed, after fiue houres fight.
               In this moſt dreadfull aſſalt, the inuincible courage of the Prince Valet, was apparant to each one, who armed with his Curace, and formidable with his Picke in hand, was ſeene beefore the reſt of the Chriſtians moſt valyantly fighting. Whoſe manfull preſence, not onely gaue courage to his ſoldiors ther, but alſo moued vp the harts of the boies & women in ſuch extremity to doe notable ſeruice. For ſo it commeth to paſſe ofttimes, Magis homines mouentur exemplis quam verbis.
                  
That men are more ſtirred forwards with examples of well doeing, then by onely doeings. Of this great number of the Turks, a part of them had gotten downe into the dikes of Borgo, and there tarried, and to the end they ſhould not bee damaged with the flankers of the bulwarke of Caſtile, they fortefied themſelues on the flanke with earth and fagot, which they accompliſhed right quickly. And for this purpoſe they did the ſame, that they might vnderminde and ſape the walls, about the which they had occupied the ſpace of fiftie yards.
               When the garriſon of Borgo vnderſtoode the pollicy of the Turks, who thus had gotten into the dike, they immediatlie cauſed certaine of the great artillery to be ſhot off, alongſt that part of the dike, wherewith & with fire alſo hurled into the dike, a great ſort of the Turkes with theyr fortyfication in the dyke, were deſtroyed. The next dey after the enemyes renewed at the ſame places, their fights agayne, euer ſupplyeng the places of their wearied ſouldiours, with freſh men. But firſt of all, enſuing theyr vſuall cuſtome, they beat at both the townes with their artillery vntill night, then about midnight, when the Moone ſhined vpon the earth, this furious aſſalt with raging cruelty and force began, which at the firſt made our Chriſtians ſomewhat afraied, who hauing yet memory of their former manhoode, & vertue, ſo behaued themſelues, with their wilde fire, ſhot, & other weapons, that the enemyes were enforced to depart right euelly handled, into their campe, after three houres fighting.
               That day, another mine of the enemyes was found made towards the fortyfication of the bulwarke of Caſtile,
                  
in the which were perceyued to bee a hundred Turks, who vvere all ſlayne, and the mine broken. Nor for all that, the day following the enemy was quiet, but ſeauen times inuaded thoſe places agayne, and ſending freſh ſouldiors, who not onely with vveapon, but alſo with bags of pouder and fire, continued their fight. At the which Boninſegna hauing his face burned, loſt an eye. Likewiſe, at that inſtant the enemy aſſalted the fortres of Saint Michael, at a place called Sperone, aſſayeng at that part, to haue entred the fort, wher Centio Aquitano, vvith an inuincible courage, mounting on the ramper, vvith his Picke moſt manfully fought to the ouerthrow of ſuch of the enemyes, as enterpriſed to aſcend the ramper, & after killing one of the enemies, to the feare of the reſt, beeing ſhot thorough one of his armes vvith the ſtroke of an harquebuze, and retyring himſelfe, vntill hee had dreſſed his wound, manfully hee retourned againe to his place, & from thence he departed not vntill ſuch time as the enemy forſooke the aſſalt, & hee remayned victorious. Thus the Turks at both the places, with meruailous loſſe of their ſouldiours were repulſed, leauing the victory to the Chriſtians, of which our Chriſtians were then ſlaine, to the number of an hundred, wherof the moſt part were torne in peeces, with the Turks artillery. Among whom at the ruine of the bulwarke of Caſtile, was ſlaine one Frago, and at the fortres of Saint Michael, Scipio Prato, Giouanni Baptiſta Soderino, Paulo Boniporto, Marino Fagiano, Ruffino, all knights of the order of the Ioannits, and ſundrie others, worthie of longer life. The Turks againe wrought an other mine, at the fortres of Saint Michael, which when the defenders perceiued,

they ſo prouided for the ſame that the mine tooke none effect.
               With ſuch and many attempts and fights, certaine of the knights, & not of the loweſt ſort of them, fearing that, which ſo often is aſſalted, at the laſt may be gotten, ſaid to the great Maſter, that they thought good that all the bookes of good learning and tables, and reliques of Saints, and other matters of religion, were meet to bee had out of the towne into the Caſtle of Saint Angelo as into the moſt ſure and ſafeſt place. The great maſter though hee knew right well, that all which they ſpake proceeded of a right good zeale & minde, neuertheleſſe nothing moued therwith, he anſwered them in this ſort, that this their aduiſe, was none other thing thē an vtter diſcouragement of the minds of all the Chriſtians ther, who vnto that time had ſhewed them ſo valiāt, a great deale aboue any mans expectation, therefore he was fully purpoſed to ſaue all, or looſe all: & to the end that none ſhould haue further confidence in the caſtle Angelo, he was fully determined to bring forth the garriſon there, to ioyne them with the reſt to fight againſt the enemy, & to leaue in he caſtle onely gunners to beat at the enemy as neede ſhould require. An aunſwere right worthy giuen of ſuch prince, & to bee commended to perpetuall memory of poſterity, for how ſhould the ſoldiours hope, when he ſeeth his generall in diſpaire, or to doe any hardie act worthy of commendacion, wher the generall is full of vaine feare. While the great maſter, thus with this anſwere, not onely made them aſhamed that gaue him this ſaid aduiſe, but alſo renewed the harts of ſome that feared, with further courage.
               
                  The Turkes determyning with themſelues that, that day (no leſſe than the other three dayes were before) ſhould not bee voyde of ſome fight, furiouſly aſſalted be times in a morning, thoſe two townes, with greater force, then hee dyd before, chiefely at the ruines of Caſtile, wher Sanromanus of Aruernia defending that quarter, loſt this britle lyfe, gayning immortality for the ſame. At Saint Michaels, Adornio, a knight of the order, with one Fagio, and ſundre others, were wounded, for the enemy tarryed not long at the aſſault, but retyred. When as immediatly the enemy began the vſuall thundering of his artillery agayne, that therewith the whole Iſland ſeemed to tremble, & the Skyes to be ſet on fire. The meane tyme Valet beeing weary with the morning fight, departed for the time, to recreat himſelfe, when ſodaynely a Spaniſh Prieſt, with his hands holding vp 
                     •
                  o heauen, ran, and met with the Prince Valet, ſayeng & cryeng out, Malta alas is loſt, for three or foure enſignes of the enemyes, are already entred the towne, in at the ruynes of Caſtile. Which when the Prince Valet heard, forthwith hee did put on his head his Burganet, & with his Picke in his hand, came among his ſouldiours ſayeng. Beeholde moſt worthy companions the houre is now come, wherein you muſt ſhew your ſelues valyant defenders of the Chriſtian religion, for if you ſtill haue with you that noble courage, which you haue alwayes hetherto ſhewed in the former aſſaults, there is no cauſe why you ſhould doubt in this extremity, for you ſee but the ſame enemy, and we haue ſtill our former God with vs, who as hetherto hee hath mercifully ſaued vs, ſo he will now defend vs. Therefore moſt worthy ſons

all, come on with mee; & let vs couragiouſly giue them the charge. With theſe words, Valet him ſelfe gaue the onſet, fighting ſtoutly wher the greatiſt peril remained, after him, manſully followed his Soldiours, yea, the towneſmen, children, women & old men, right fearſely ſtriking at the Turks that were entred. Where the fight on each ſide was exceding cruel & perillous, ſome ſtopped the enemies from further entring, ſome killed them entring, ſome gaue them the chaſe in wounding & driuing them forth againe. The Turks reſiſted meruailouſly, and thus it was couragiouſly fought on each part: within and without the grounds was couered with all ſorts of weapon, dead bodies, and blood.
               The Great Maiſter as cauſe ſerued, was alwaies preſent, prouiding euery neceſſarie: ſome he praiſed, ſome he encouraged, ſome he moniſhed, & he himſelfe right liuely fought, executing ſometime no leſſe the act of a worthie Soldiour, than alſo the function of a moſt prudent Generall. At laſt, with the Sunne ſet, this cruell conflict ended: and the Great Maiſter remained victorious, but not vvithout loſſe of two hundreth of his men. Where, of the enemies were ſlaine to the number of two thouſand, beſids thoſe that entred, vvhereof none eſcaped. Theſe vvere foure of the ſoreſt conflicts that the Chriſtians vvhich vvere beſeeged, had vvith the Turks. During this time, the Viceroy of Sicel, for ſetting forward his Nauie into Malta, ſtaied for none other maner but onely for the retourne of Giouanni Cardono, vvith his twelue long ſhippes that before vvas gone to Panhorm, to conduct and bring vvith him foure Shippes there vvith victuall.
               
                  But perceuing that he tarried too long, he ſent a Poſt to him to byd him come away vvith all the ſpeede he could, and if he could not bring away thoſe ſhips vvith victuall by towing them, for their better ſpeede, than to ſhippe theyr victualls in his owne ſhippes, and leauing the others behinde at Panerme, to make haſt away, his owne ſelfe.
               Therefore the Viceroy vvith his Nauie of 72. Gallies the xx. of Auguſt, departed from Meſſana, and came to Sarragoza, bringing vvith him in his Nauie ten thouſand choſen men, among vvhom vvere 200, and moe, of the knights of the order of the Ioannits, and about fortie knights of the new order of the Stephanits, which order of knighthood vvas lately founded by that moſt prudent Prince Coſmo Medices, Duke of Florence, in the yeere of our Lord 1561. In this they differ from the Ioannits, vvhere the Ioannits vveare the White Croſſe, the Stephanits vveare a Redde Croſſe, vvritten about vvith Gold▪ againe the Stephanit, may be once married, vvhich cannot be permitted to the Ioannit.
               
               The Iland named Ilua, anciently called Aemathia, lyeng in the Sea called Tuſcum, is the place of their reſidence, but vnto ſuch time as their new Citie called Coſmopolis, be finiſhed, being in building by the Duke of Florence, being likewiſe the Great Maiſter of the ſame, as hee is the founder thereof. The knights of the Stephanits, remaine at Piſa, a Citie in Italy, vnder the dominion of Florence. And in that they be called Stephanits, it is not that they deduct or haue their name of Saint Stephan the Prothomartyr, but of one Saint Stephan, ſometime Biſhop and Patron of Florence; Canonized

amongſt the nūber of Saints. Beſids the knights of th
                     •
                  ſe two aforenamed orders, there vver in the Chriſtian Nauy ſundry Noble men, as Aſcanius Cornia, the Marquis of Peſcaro, and his brother Annibal Eſtenſis, Hercules Veraus, Aeneas Pius, Capinus, Vincentius, of the Familie of the Vitelli
                        •
                     , and ſundry others of Noble parentage, and famous in the vvarres.
               The Chriſtian Nauy being thus arriued in the Port of Sarragoza, the Viceroy ſent immediately D'auri vvith a Gallie and a litle boate into Malta, to the end he ſhould land ſome perſon, and to ſpeake vvith Pietro Paccio vvho (as I ſhewed you before) vvas left at the Watch place of Malta in the Iland, and of him to learne vvhat he had ſpied, ſithence the departure of Salazar. From vvhome he vnderſtoode, that no ſhippe, that vvay, vvas ſeene in the Seas, ſithence Salazars departure ſauing a Foiſt vvhich the one and twentith of Auguſt in the morning made towards Gozo, and that, that day at night (as he receaued intelligence from the vvatch of Malta,) ſixteene Sales of Shippes came and rode at the rodeſted of Salinas, but vvhether after they went, he could not thorow the darknes of the night obſerue the ſame. Our Chriſtians (this vvhile, right trimly fortified themſelues nere the Ruins of Caſtile, in ſundry places thereof couched their Artillery in ſuch ſort, that both it was able to beat the enemie on the flank, & to ſcoure alſo alōgſt the rampers ioining to the bulwark of Boninſegna. The Turks, meaning again, to aſſalt both the towns of Borgo & S. Michael, they firſt deuiſed as it wer aPluteum. ſcaffold made of Timber & boards able to hold ye nūber of 30. ſoldiors, & theſe to be ſet at ye breach of S. Michael, yt
                  
thorough the Artillery that ſhould be ſhot from that ſcaffold, none of the defenders ſhould be able to ſhew or mount vp his head to defend the place. Which our Chriſtians perceuing, they thought the ſame to be intollerable, and immediately made iſſue forth, and putting to flight the Turks that garded the ſcaffold, and ſetting fire in the ſcaffold, did burne the ſame. In like maner, vvere the Turkes reiected from Borgo, that at the ruins of Caſtile, had prepared ſuch an other ſcaffold, vvhich likewiſe by the defenders there vvas burnt in peeces. The next night after, our Chriſtians that garded the ruins of Caſtile, iſſued vpon the Turks and not onely deſtroyed the enemies Fortificacions towards that part, but alſo killed thoſe that had the keeping and cuſtodie of the ſame, and vvithout loſſe of any one of the Chriſtians, ſafely retourned into their charge againe.
               And albeit that daye and others after, the enemie prooued both vvith theyr Scaffolds againe, and repairing their Fortificacions that vvere caſt downe, and other Ingins, to driue the defenders from the vvalls: yet all their pollicies and labours, through the vigilancies and vertues of the Defenders, came to nothing.
               The Chriſtians deuiſed a Myne vnder the Ruins of Caſtile; and in the ſame couched an eight barrells of Pouder, that if the enemies made attempt againe, that vvay, they vvould giue fire to the trane, and ſo blow them vp. And vvhile the Chriſtians vvere thus vvorking, the Turkes vvas likewiſe myning towardes that part: But the Chriſtians perceauing the ſame, dyd get vnto the Turkes Myne, and not onelye getting

from them certaine barrels of Pouder, and putting the enemyes to flight, but alſo deſtroyed the Turks mine, performed their owne mine. In this manner things paſſing on both ſides, Muſtapha the generall, being very famous & right expert in the art Militarie, conſidering that the moſt part of the ſommer was ſpent, and that longer he could not well abide, and that ſtifly to ſtand & continue againſt an enemie, openeth oftentimes an aſſured way vnto victory, hee determined therefore with his whole power to aſſault agayne the Fortres of Saint Michaell, wherefore he cauſed to bee brought forth the chiefe ſtanderd of Solyman his prince, vpon the top wherof was a globe of fine gold, and commanded with the ſame, the ſouldiours to giue the aſſalt, and with force to enter the towne, thorough the ruines there made. The ſouldiours of the Turks therwith gaue the charge, and the Chriſtians right couragiouſlie reſiſted, a doubtfull conflict was on both ſides. And when the Turkes were twiſe repulſed, Muſtapha in perſon came vnto the trenches, with his ſouldiours, & perceiuing them to remaine diſcouraged, he began to require & exhort them not to faile him at that extremity, for that day ſhould performe their former trauailes and victories, and not to permit his enemies, in manner ouercome, to ſpoile them of their long hoped victory, for the Chriſtians haue not a peece of fortyfication left to couer themſelues, all are caſt downe, and that neuer a good ſouldiour of them were then left on liue, ſauing a few wearyed & maimed ſort of them, that were not able to abide the ſharpe edges of their ſwords, with ſuch pertinacie and ſtifneſſe, they gat at laſt the caſtle of Saint Hermes. Then

according to the vocation of each ſouldiour, Muſtapha promiſed either mony or honours, mixing threatnings to ſome, & gentle words of deſire, to others. The Turks through Muſtaphais pretence, whether they were ſtirred vp vvith his fayre promiſes, or enforced through his threatnings, they ran freſhly againe to the aſſalt, where the conflict of each part was vvonderfull furyous, but in the end the Turks vvere enforced to retire. For our Chriſtians had made a dyke, and in the ſame had couched two field peeces, with vvhich they beate on the flanke, a ſcaffolde couered with ravv hydes againſt burning, which the enemyes had gotten in there. And at the firſt ſtroke, the ſcaffold was beaten in peeces with the artillery, and forty Turks vnder the ſcaffold vvere alſo torne in peeces, with the bullets of the ſame. And the ſame night thoſe Chriſtians that garded in Borgo, the bulwarke of Caſtile, iſſued forth vpon the Turks, and brake downe all the places of defence of the enemy, nigh vnto the bulwark, & beſides wanne a ramper from the Turks, vvhich exceeded in height any peece of fortyfication that the Chriſtians had left to defend themſelues, and from the ſame ouerthrew the Turks, and dyd put them to flyght
               By this, the Chriſtians vnderſtoode right well, that the Turks had no great will to fight, and that theyr courages deminiſhed, for at that ramper for the garde of the ſame, were left in manner three hundred Turkes, and our Chriſtians that gaue the charge vvere not aboue twenty fiue perſons, and yet thoſe three hundred as it ſeemed durſt not abide our twenty fiue. Again our Chriſtians had made a myne nygh vnto the ramper of Caſtile,
                  
and perceyuing that a certaine number of Turks vvere come to that place to reedefie the places of ſtrength vvhich the Chriſtians did before caſt downe, the Chriſtians gaue fire to the place, vvherby ſixty Turks ther being were blowen vp and ſlayne. Whyle theſe things, thus vvere in doing, Dom Garza the Viceroy of Sicel with his whole Nauy departed from Sarragoza, and hauing conuenyent windes, kept his courſe vnto the promontorie of Pachyno, whan a great ſhippe was eſpyed in the ſea, which by foule weather as afterward was learned) was brought to that place. That ſhip came out of the Iland Meninges, and was fraighted with victuall, gunpouder, and a great number of ſhot to haue beene conueyed to the Turks campe in Malta. The great ſhip eſpyeng the Chriſtian fleet, yeelded hir ſelfe. Which the Viceroy in changing hir marriners ſent backe to Sarragoza, when he with the reſt of the fleet kept forth his courſe towards Malta, but the winde changing vpon him, and blowing with ſuch a fury, he with the whole Nauy was driuen to the Iſland Aeguſa, being 220 miles towards the Weſt from Malta. Now was the firſt of September come, when the letters of the Viceroy came to the great Mayſters handes, by the vvhich hee ſignified vnto him that hee would ſhortly bee with him with his vvhole Nauy, that a Chriſtian, a priſoner, eſcaping out of the Turks ſhippes, gate in to the towne of Borgo, and told that very few Souldiours meete for any conflict was left on liue in the Turkes campe, and that the moſt part of that army, left on liue, with wounds, famine, & ſickneſſe was wonderfully weakened, & that daily innumerable of them dyed, ſaying further that the Turkes were

purpoſed to lay ſiege to the citie of Malta, and had for the ſame put in a readineſſe fiue great peeces for the battery, and for the drawing thereof thether, they had gotten firſt twelue horſes, and then foure, which ſometime pertayned to garriſon of the citie of Malta.
               
               In the meane time the Viceroy with the Nauy of the Chriſtians, which by tempeſt was put vnto Aeguſa, hauing conuenient winde to retourne, came backe againe into Sicilia to Drepano, and from thence did ſet ſaile towards Gozo. In ſayling, the two gallyes of the Ioannits eſpying two foiſts of the Turks gaue charge vpon them, and tooke them, and ſo the fifth day of September came to Gozo. But the Viceroy eſpying no ſignes out of Malta, for conuenient and ſafe landing there, returned to Pozalo in Sicilia againe. After whom Auria followed, and ſhewed that he had ſeene moſt certaine ſignes, out of Malta for ſafe landing there, to whoſe vvords the Viceroy giuing credit, came the day following in the morning betimes with his whole Nauy to Gozo.
               
               That day a fugitiue a Chriſtian, ſtale out of the Turks campe, and came to Borgo, ſayeng hee came of purpoſe to bring him glad tidings, that the Turks, the day following would proue an aſſalt at Saint Michaels fortres, and if they ſped well, they would abide, and if not, to giue vp the ſiege and depart. And to the end that the Turkes ſhould haue the better courage to ſerue, hee promiſed to him, that firſt worthely would ſaſten his enſigne vpon the walls, he ſhould haue the reward of fiue talents of gold, and to promote him alſo to the higher roomes in the warres.
               The great Maſter thinking (as alwayes hee did)

that almighty God euer prouided ſuch men to giue him intelligences, he gaue moſt humble & harty thanks to God, and then cauſed euery thing to bee ſet in a readineſſe, to ouerthrow the purpoſe of the cruell enemy.
               The Turks all that day, with their great artillery, bett at the houſes in Borgo, & at the ſhips riding in the port, wherewith a great ſhip there, was ſunke. But Dom Garza, in the morning betimes departed with the Chriſtian Nauy from Gozo, and paſſing the ſtraits ariued in Malta, and there landed his Army ſercretly by point of day. And while his ſhippes ſtayed for him, he marched forward with the army about a foure furlongs, ſhewing to the Captaynes and their lieuetenaunts, what they ſhould doe, and admoniſhed them all, vnto ſuch time as they came to the great Maiſter of Malta, euery edict and commandement that generally ſhould bee made among them, to paſſe in the name of the king of Hiſpain, and than at their comming to the great Maiſter to obey him as they would doe vnto the king, if hee were in place. And in the meane time, commaunded the army to bee vnder the regiment of Aſcanio Cornia, and hee to be aduiſed as the moſt part of the counſaile there ſhould order. And ſo with exhortation of a few words, leauing the army marching towards the citie of Malta, the Viceroy about noonetide of the day came to his ſhips againe, and with the ſame ſayled towards the Eaſt part of the Iland, and ſtayed in the ſight of the Citie of Malta, beeing but three miles on the South from the ſea.
               Whom when the citie eſpied it is not to be demanded if they were ioyfull, for in an aſſured ſigne and token of

gladneſſe, they vnbended the whole artillery of the citie.
               The Viceroy agayne hearing the ſame, cauſed the gunners of the whole nauy, to anſwere the citie, with blowing of, twiſe of all the artillery in the Chriſtian fleet. That done the Viceroy returned into Sicilia, to receiue into the Nauy, the bands of the duke of Vrbine, and of certaine Spaniards, that were ſtayeng at Meſſana & Sarragoza, and with them to returne towards Malta, to follow and perſecute the Nauy of the Turks, which in manner was vnarmed. The Turkes this while, that purpoſed to aſſault the fortres of Saint Michael agayne, & ſo to proue if they could win the ſame, a few dayes before the comming of the Chriſtian nauy, had begun to packe, and gather together their neceſſaries, but vnderſtanding of the arriuall of the Chriſtian fleet, and landing of the Chriſtians army, immediately ſome ſounded the alarme, ſome crying to remoue, and ſo meruaylous fearefull, euery one ſeeking for the coūſell that was thought beſt▪ ſome began to fly away, ſome to take weapon in hand, but the moſt part of the Turks marching to the trenches retired theyr artillery, and did ſet fire in the forty fications that could bee burnt, and ſo with as much expedytion as they could they drew their artillery and the reſt of their baggage into their ſhips.
               Which when the garriſon of Borgo perceyued they manfully iſſued out, and gaue charge vpon certayne bands of Turkes that were at a place called B
                        •
                     rmola, garding a great and mighty peece of artillery.
               The Turks hauing no luſt to fight, fled away a pace leauing the great peece in the poſſeſſion of the Chriſtians,
                  
which the Chriſtians with force drew into Borgo, and if at that time, the new ſupply of the Chriſtians had beene there in a readyneſſe, and to haue giuen charge on the backe of the enemyes, while they were thus in haſting to theyr ſhippes, either they had opened to themſelues a manifeſt path way of victory ouer the Turks, or elſe to haue ſpoyled them of the moſt part of their great artillerie.
               But I thinke if the new ſupply had bene there preſent perhaps they would rather haue followed the ancient, opinion of famous men of warre ſaying, Hoſti abeunti viam ſternendam eſſe, pontem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vel argenteum faciendum, giue way to a flying enemie▪ yea and if you make for him a bridge of ſiluer. Albeit the garriſons of Borgo and Saint Michael, (by reaſon of their freſh victuall & other neceſſaries appertayning to further beſieging if neede were, which through the vnequallitie of the wayes & lacke of horſes, was verie difficultlie and with much labour on foote brought to them from the citie) thought not requiſit to trouble the flying enemie, with further ſkirmiſhes. Wherby the Turks ſhipped their carriage artillery, and the moſt part of their army, without great let or impediment. So the xi of September the Turkiſh nauy departed from Porto Muſetto, when a fugitiue a Genoua born came to the prince Valet ſaying, that 10000 Turks were landed againe, & marching towards the citie of Malta, to fight with the armie of the Chriſtians, which were comming towards Borgo. Which when the great Maiſter heard immediatly hee ſent certaine bands, to ſeaze the ſortreſſe of Saint Hermes, and there to fixe the enſigne of the ſacred order.
               
                  Who accordingly forthwith departing, tooke the poſſeſſion of the Fortres vvherein they found foure and twentie peeces of Artillerie, great & ſmall: vvhich the Turkes (hauing no further leaſure) could not take away vvith them.
               The Nauie of the Turks this vvhile departing from Porto Muſetto, paſſed vnto the Port of Sainct Paule, and there dyd ſet on land ſeuen thouſand Turkes, vnder the leading of Muſtapha, their Generall by land. Who had intelligence giuen him that the vvhole Armie of the Chriſtians vvhich newly vvere come, exceeded not the number of three thouſand ſoldiours. And therefore being the more bold to fight, by reaſon of the litle number vvhich he ſuppoſed that vve vvere of, he marched on proudly towards the Citie of Malta, and in his vvay thetherward, Muſtapha diſcouered the Armie of the Chriſtians. Who eſpyeng the Turks, and ready to fight, marched forward couragiouſly againſt them, and encountering vpon a hill, the Chriſtians valiantly gaue charge vpon the Turkes; at vvhich firſt encounter few vvere ſlaine of either ſide. But in the ende by reaſon that our number vvas both greater and our force therwith the more, the Turks gaue back and fled, the Chriſtians followed, killing and ouerthrowing them, vnto ſuch tyme the reſt vvere driuen to their ſhippes, but vvhilſt each one cluſtered to get to their nauy through to much haſt, there periſhed in the ſea about foure hundred Turkes, and a thouſand and eight hundreth ſlaine on the land. So as if our Chriſtians had bene expert of the places, and knowne the land, there needed not one of the Turkes to haue eſcaped away on liue.
               
                  The Turks beeing thus beaten into theyr ſhips, ſtayed ſtill with their Nauy in the port of Saint Paule, all the next day following, & a great part of the next night then before day in ſhoting of a warning peece being a ſigne of their departure, they ſet ſayle and departed towards Grecia, leauing the Iland of Malta, ſhamefully waſted and enpoueriſhed.
               Thus the Turks beeing driuen out of Malta, to their notable calamitie and ouerthrow, the Prince Valet made victorious with immortall glory, cauſed generall proceſſions and prayers to bee made to almightie God for his infinit benefits to them ſhewed in this carefull time, aſcrybing the chiefeſt cauſe of this victory to his inexpreſſable goodnes, then Valet diſtributed to the worthy ſeruitures, that honorably had behaued themſelues al this while, condigne rewards, in prayſing openly euery one according to his demerits with continuall thankes to them all for their great paines, and trauayles paſſed. Vnto the wounded and ſicke he had ſuch tender regard for the reſtitution of their health, as though it had ben to himſelfe. Hee lamented much the deſtruction & waſting of the country of Malta, and earneſtly deuiſed for the repayring thereof againe. Amongſt all theſe things he did not forget to learne, which way, or whether, the enemy this while paſſed, & what he pretended, which many, in the middes of theyr victory, letteth paſſe, for which cauſe euery one hath giuen this worthy Valet the name of a moſt prudent, valiaunt, and courteous prince, and as one prepared of God, to remaine on the earth, to the defence of his ſacred religion, that during his life, euery thing vnder his charge, cannot but remaine

fortunate and proſperous. About this time Soliman ſent a mightie Armie to inuade Hungarie, vvhich, the Spring time after, he himſelfe in perſon followed: thorough vvhoſe comming, vvhole Germany (as it had good cauſe▪) vvas meruailouſly afraied, and gathered themſelues together.
               The Germans of auncient tyme haue, vvith other nacions, rather for glory than their owne ſafegarde, made warres▪ But vvith the Turks rather for their owne ſafetie they haue alwaies foughten, than for any glory that they haue ſought thereby. Howbeit Maximilian the Emperour gathering together a great Army againſt Soliman, proceded and layed ſeege to a place 
                     •••
                  led Veſpe
                        •••
                     , and dyd by aſſalt vvinne the ſame from the Turks. But Soliman vpon an other part vvan
                     •••
                  om the Emperour Segeſt and Iula, being two places of no litle importance.
               Whan as the fifth of September, Anno 1566. Soliman the Emperour in the courſe and raſe of his victories ended his lyfe in the famous▪ Citie of▪ 
                  Quinque Eccleſie: vvhich of fiue Churches in the ſame is ſo called. To vvhome his ſonne Silimus ſucceeded in his Empire and dominſons▪ vvho if he were like in condicions, either to his father Soliman, or to his grand father Selymus▪
                   and Germany to continue in his Inteſtine and inward contencions and diuiſions, as it ſtill doth, it is to be much▪ f
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ed▪ but that it vvould happen to Germany 
                  
                     •
                  vvhich alredy 
                     •
                  ath▪ chaunced to the infortunate countries of Thracia, Dacia, Maeſia, and the moſt part of their vvofull and miſerable neighbour the Kingdom of Hungary.
               
               
                  For it is an aſſured and very true ſayeng that Nulla tam magna tam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      firma potentia eſt, quam diſcordia non comminuat et perdat. There is no Kingdome or Power, be it neuer ſo great and mightie, vvhich diſcord and ciuill diſcencion in it ſelfe, doth not diſtroy and bring to confuſion.
            
            The end of the third Booke.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ To the three worſhipfull brothers worthy Patrons of vertue and all good Arts, Robert Carr, William Carr, and Edward Carr, in the Countie of Lincolne Eſquiers: Raffe Carr their moſt affectionate kinſman wiſheth all content.
            
               HAuing Right worthy Gentlemen, formerly made knowne to euery of you: by ſuch ſimple remembrances as my power could aford, how much I deſire & dayly ſtudie in perticuler to ſerue & honor you: I thought it now not amiſſe, treating of one argument comd of the ſame kindred, & deriued from the general obſeruations which euery where with profit in theſe three firſt bookes are to be gathered, thus ioyntly to you all to perticipate this common good: For if the vſe which euery one ought arightly to make in the reading of Hiſtories, be grounded chiefely in the election of taking, or leauing, the better, or worſe, of ſuch things as by examples are faithfully propounded: which vpon occaſion ſhould be applied either to the well gouerning of a priuate life, or to the inabling of our vnderſtanding for counſell in our countries ſeruice: In either part I ſay I know none, (of many who haue had theſe Turkiſh affaires with the perpetuall felicitie in conſideration) to whome with more credit a man may giue beleefe, then to Hubert Folieta the Genuoys, whilſt with much wiſedome, grauitie, and diſcreation, he handleth though briefely, the cauſes of the greatneſſe of the Turkiſh Empire, to his deere friend the famous Captaine Marcus Antonius Columna. A treatiſe I ſuppoſe to euery conceauing man, or ſuch whome the care of a common good doth poſſeſſe very acceptably.

This ſame therfore for the former alleged reasōs, haue I heere annexed▪ ſo faithfully as I could perſuade the nice Italian tongue to ſpeake our proper language. To which I haue further added, (that the occaſion of this diſcourſe might the better be apparant,) the narration of the war of Ciprus, held betwixt the Turk and Venetians, ſome xxx. yeeres agoe. In which their wars, the Venetiās being excedingly ouerborne, (notwithſtanding that notable victorie obtained by them and their confederates in the Gulfe of Corinth,) made priuely their peace, without knowledge giuen therof either to the Pope, or king of ſpaine, who in theſe wars had ben their aſſociats: whilſt Marcus Antonius Columna, Pope Pius quintus general, alwaies in opinion againſt the ſame, perſuaded to his power the contrary: & that ſo worthy an occaſion of further victory, ſhould not ſo vnworthely be relinquiſhed. Of which matter imparting his mynde to his friend Folieta, it became the ſubiect of this enſuing diſcourſe: wherin Folieta not intermedling with what the Venetians had done, onely layes downe in general ſuch cauſes, (as by great reaſon may be thought) of thoſe fortunate ſucceſſes which hourely attend the Turkiſh Enſignes. To which I had rather remit you, then longer to deteine with the harſhnes of an ill pleaſing Epiſtle. And now hauing for the preſent done that due obſeruance to you all, of me long both determined, and deſired: I moſt earneſtly beſeech you to take my boldneſſe in good part, void of all ſaucie preſumption: my meaning as it is, clothed in a ſincere will alwaies to ſerue & honor you: & my requeſt as I ſhall deſerue, for euer to be preſerued in your good opinion. Wherwith if you ſhall ſo much grace me, I proteſt there can no one thing giue more fulneſſe to much of that happineſſe which in this world I affect: wherof nothing diſtruſting, though meanely deſeruing, I take my leaue and reſt.
            
               Your moſt bounden for euer
Raffe Carr.
            
         
         
            
            ¶THE NARRATION of the warres of Cyprus, held betwixt the Venetians, and the Turks, 
               
                  •
                during the yeeres. 1570. and 1571.
            
               CYprus, ſo called by reaſon of the rich Copper Mynes therein conteined, plentiefull, and abounding in excellent Wynes, Wheate, Oyle, & Suger: being in deed that true Mecarian Iſle vnder xxxv. degrees of the Poles eleuation: ſtandeth in the Gulfe Iſsicus, diſtant twentie German myles from Syria, conteining in length fiftie miles, of the ſayd German meaſure, but in breadth ten or twelue at the moſt, and in diuers places leſſe.
            
               Salamis, the Citie of Cyprus, built by Teucer Aea
                     •
                  ide: held for their Kings for many diſcents: the ſame Teucrians, of vvhich race Euagoras, and Nicocles vvere, men celebrated and made famous by Iſocrates Orations: To theſe Teucrians ſucceded the Ptolomees: to them the Romans: vnder vvhoſe gouernment, although much and grieuouſly vexed by the Saracines, they cōtinued firme and conſtant, vnto the time of Andronicus Commenus, and Henry the ſixt Emperors: For about the yeere 1190 Richard the ſonne of Henry the ſecond, King of England, ſayling towards Paleſtine, and put from landing in that Iſland, by Iſaac Commenus then the gouernour; tooke the ſame by force: vvhich afterwards he gaue to Guy of Luſignan, (ſonne in law of King Almerick, vvho had loſt the Citie of Hieruſalem) in exchange,

for the bare tytle and name to him and his poſteritie, of the ſayd Crowne of Hieruſalem.
            
            The iſſue and lyne of vvhich Guy, enioyed the ſayd Kingdome of Cyprus 250. yeeres, vntill the tyme that Peter reigned, vvho vvas taken priſoner by the Souldan of Aegipt, but afterward vpon Tributarie condicions reſtored, to vvhich Peter ſucceded Peter the ſonne, vvho at the death of his Father, being very young, vvas afterward married to Haelena Paleologa, and by hir had iſſue Carlotta, married firſt to Iohn, King of Portugall. But laſtly to Lewes, Duke of Sauoy, vvhich Lewes for a ſmall time reigned King of Cyprus.
            
            This ſecond Peter, 
               
                  •
               ad likewiſe a baſtard iſſue, called Iames, vvho by the help of the Souldan of Egipt expelled from the kingdome of Cyprus the ſayd Lewes of Sauoy. Iames tooke to vvyfe Katherin, the daughter of Marcus Cornelius, adopted by the ſtate of Venice, vvho being vvith childe by hir huſband, (and he before hir deliuerie dyeng, in the yeere 1470.) The ſaid Common vvealth, tooke to their charge, both the mother, child, and Kingdome. But ſhortly after the enfant dyed, ſuppoſed to haue bene poiſoned by the practiſe of that ſtate: vvho ſolely thereby poſſeſſing themſelues of the kingdome, reduced the ſame into the forme of a Prouince: Katherin the mother being brought back to Venice, vvho liued to the yeere 1510. Now Selymus the firſt Emperour of the Turks, after the vtter oppreſſing of the Souldans, and taking of the kingdome of Egipt, cauſed the yeerely reuenue vvhich beefore vvas accuſtomed to be paied to the ſaid Souldans by the kings of Cyprus, of all ſuch merchandiſe as were brought in or tranſported

thence, to be ſet in certaine 8000 Duckets, vpon condicion of which paimēt by way of a yeerely tribute he freely graunted to the Venetians as to his vaſſals, the poſſeſſion of the ſaid lle: which paimēt of 8000 ducats▪ the Venetians onely would ſuppoſe to be graunted as an honorable reward, or gratuitie, & in no ſort as a tribute▪
            
            But Selymus the ſecond demaunding of the ſaid Venetians by a Harrauld, the Fee & poſſeſſiō of Cyprus, which hetherto hee alleadged they had held vnder condicion of a yerely tribute, affirmed their whole right, (ſo they had any) to be extinguiſhed, & the Intreſt to be deuolued, & comd back to him, as the ſuperior & Paramont Lord: Becauſe contrary to the allegance due to the lord of the Fee, the ſaid Venetians had giuen harborough, and receit, vnto certaine Spaniſh Pirats, enemies to the ſayd Selymus, who by the licence of the Venetian Magiſtrates, had brought into Cyprus, & ther made ſale of great pillage & certain booties taken out of Cilicia:
            
            And although diuers other of the Turkiſh Emperours had tollerated the ſaid Venetians to vvith-hould vvhat vvas not their right, yet he the ſaid Selymus had in determination to haue his due: vvith vvhich if in good accord they vvould be content to depart. he vvas not in any ſort to violate their bonds of amitie, or breake the peace, but vvould endeauour in euery degree to aduance the eſtimation of that common vvealth.
            If otherwiſe, yet he the ſayd Selymus, vvas not to forgoe his right, vvoſe meaning vvas to recouer the ſame by force.
            The Venetians vpon this meſſage, although (by the ſcarcitie of prouiſion and vittailes vvhich for diuers

yeeres before they had endured, as likewiſe by the firing of their Arſenall, (wherein the yeere precedent, their whole ſea preparation had ben conſumed,) they were mightely perplexed and amated, yet with noble reſolution they returned aunſwere, that the ſayd Selymus had no iuſt cauſe why to bereaue them of their iuriſdiction in Ciprus, which now for a hundred yeeres, in right of inheritance they had peaceably poſſeſſed, and that the yeerely penſion accuſtomed to be paid to the Soldans of Egipt, was no tribute dew to him, as to the ſuperior lord, but onely an honorable gratuity, whereby the kings of Cyprus were accuſtomed to acknowledge their thankfulneſſe vnto the ſaid Souldans, as to their benefactors and friends, by whoſe help Peter ſometimes the king there had recoueted the ſame. In which their good cauſe they made no doubt of gods aſiſtance. by whoſe aide and help, they had decreed & nothing doubted with force of armes to repell the violence and iniuries of Selimus: and to defend Ciprus.
            
            This anſwere returned to Conſtantinople, all the marchants of Venice trading there, were preſently apprehended, their goods ſeaſed, and Pial Baſſa Admirall at ſea, with a nauy, Muſtapha Baſſa with an army by land, (conducted through Aſia and Cilicia) were ſent againſt Ciprus. Whilſt in the meane time at Venice, Petrus Lauredanus duke of that common wealth, by griefe and diſcontent dyed, during whoſe gouernment many heauie miſchances, and calamities, had beefallen that ſtate, others more daungerous daily enſuing. To this Lauredanus with great applauſe of the people, Lodouicus Mocinega ſucceded. The generall appointed for this war of Ciprus,
               
was Hieronimus Zanius an old man, high foureſcore yeeres of age, yet of much viuacitie and abilitie in body, who ſlowly coaſting along Iadera and Corcyra, made thereabouts, whilſt the reſt of the Nauy ſhould approch, an idle and vnprofitable aboade, but in the end houlding courſe towards Creet, hee there continued, as he had in commaund expecting the ayding forces of the Pope, the king of Spaine, & of Coſmus duke of Florence.
            
            But now whilſt theſe affayres, were in this ſort carried by them, Piall Baſſa the Turkiſh Admirall, firſt putting a ſtrong garriſon in Rhodes, aryued at Micarium in Ciprus, vpon the Calends of Iune, whether Muſtapha Baſſa had likewiſe tranſported both his foote and horſe forces, without any worlds reſiſtance. Now the Venetians a little beefore had fortified the citie of Nicoſia (diſtant from the ſea coaſt ſeauen Germain myles, and which in formerages had both ben the ſeat of theyr kings & an Archb
                  •
               ſhops ſ
                  •
               a,) with eleauen bulwarks & a garriſon of two thouſand ſoldiors, vnder the gouernment of Nich
                     •••
                  us Tond 
                     ••
                  us & Aſtor B
                     •
                  leonius. This city Muſtapha (being without impeachment maſter of the field) beſieged, erecting round about the ſame many fortes and ſconſes; which hauing by a whole month both battered & often aſſalted, was in the end taken by force, where hee repayring the ruins of the ſaid fortifications, and planting therin a garriſon, enforcing the courſe of his further victory, vpon the 16. of September, the ſame yeere he began to laie ſiege to Famagoſta.
            
            On which day, the Chriſtians who had lingered all this while about Creet, with a nauy of 200 ſhips, wholie ignorant what things had hapt at Cyprus, and now ſetting

ſayle from Heraclea Sentia, not far of encountred Lodouicus Bembus, who recounted the loſſe of Nicoſia, whervpon the generals of the fleete Hieronimus Zanius, Iohn Andreas Auria, & Marcus Antonius Columna, with others calling a counſaile of war, through different & delaying opinions, whervnto may be added the misfortune of a horrible tempeſt which diſperſed the fleet, loſt both opportunity, & the aduantage of executing any honourable attempt. In which their conſultations it was chiefely argued, that now the harueſt being far ſpent, & the winter drawing neere, the nauigation of the Pamphilian ſeas would be exceeding dangerous, beſides if ought ſhould fall out otherwiſe then well, there was no where thereabouts ſafe harborough for the ſhips. That the Turks now becomd inſolent through the ſucceſſe of their late vctiory would fight with greater courage then before, hauing beſides all the hauens & other harboroughs friend vnto them, whom it was not now poſſible by any meanes as matters were fallen forth, to expel from Ciprus. The confederates further alledging that they were ſent onely in ayde of the Venetians, not to recouer things once loſt, but to giue let leaſt ought ſhold be loſt, which occaſion ſince it could not be holden, it was thought moſt conuenient againe to returne 
                  •
               o Creet & the gulfe of Venice. Andreas Auria likewiſe alledged for himſelfe, how he had in cō
               mand from the king of Spaine his Maiſter to come back with his nauy in the end of September, wherevpon this Chriſtian captaines caſting away both hope, & counſell, of recouering Ciprus: & retyring backe were before they could recouer Creet, with great ſtormes of winde, they and their whole fleete miſerably afflicted.
            
               Now when they were ariued at Creet, Andrea Auria craued liſence to depart, that ſo he might obey his princes command, from whom hee had in charge, for the reducing of his fleet to Meſſana in Sicilia▪
                which the generall of the Venetians did not deny him. Whom Hieronimus Zanius himſelfe, within few daies followed, leauing behinde him with the charge of the army & chiefe command Sebaſtian Venerio, but the ſaid Zanius ariuing at Corcira, the ſenate of Venice, with much contempt did there abrogate his authority, and from thence ſent him to Venice priſoner.
            So this yeere thus vnprofitably ſpent, and with infinit charge waſtfully caſt away, this Chriſtian fleet furniſhed of euery thing requiſit, as ſouldiours, captaines, munityon, mony, victualls, and in deede what not, who had in admirable expectation of ſome worthy exployt drawen the eyes of all Europe, moſt by their variable, different, and deldying counſells, partly by tempeſts & the peſtilence, which in ſhort time had conſumed many numbers of gallie ſlaues, and marriners, became vtterly fruſtrate.
            When Pialis Baſſa (who by ſpyes had vnderſtoode of the departure of Auria, and the Venetians from Creet) paſſing by Rhodes, and after by the 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                Ilands, returned to Conſtantinople. But Muſtapha. Baſſa, that had taken Nicoſia, and now enforcing the courſe of his victory, had beſieged Famagoſta, hee I ſay leauing in the harborough and other parts of the Iland ſufficient ſtrength againſt incurſions, drew the reſidue of his forces to winter in other garriſons.
            Now the Venetians hauing theyr Nauy thus returned

vvithout aught vvorthelie executed: created a triumuitate Capitall, for the finding forth and puniſhing of all ſuch as arightly might be ſayd to haue bene faultie in that fleet, vvhereby that expedition had no better ſucceſſe, their vvars prouiſion to ſo ſmall purpoſe ſpent, and ſo great an ouerthrow, vvith derogation to the honor and reputation of the Venetian name, had happened.
            They likewiſe laboured to compounde a Peace vvith the Turks, for vvhich cauſe they ſent to Conſtantinople, Iacobus Ragazonus, to deale vvith Mahomet Baſſa, vvhom they vvell hoped to haue found fauorable and better inclining thervnto, then the reſt.
            But all this in vaine, therefore vvith great care and induſtrie they procure the contract of a league, or confederacie betwixt themſelues: the Pope Pius Quintus & Phillip king of Spaine: by ſundrie extraordinarie meanes they leuie huge
                  •
               ſummes of monie, and repaire vvith larger prouiſion, their vveather beaten and vnarmed Gallies of Corcyra. Committing the vvhole charge and commaund of theſe affaires to Sebaſtian Venerio, then Gouernour of Creet, vvhilſt in the meane time Pertai Baſſa made by Silimus high Admirall of all the Turkiſh forces by Sea, landith in Cyprus, a new power, and Muſtapha Baſſa, chiefe Generall of all the Armie by land, vvith much extremitie, as hardly beſeeged the Citie of Famagoſta: vvhan the vvorthie Captaines Marcus Antonius Bragadenus, Aſtor Beleonius, Lodouicus Martinigus, and Laurencius Tenpolus, moſt valiantlie for the ſaid Venetians defended.
            The Citie Famagoſta, is ſeated in the Eaſt part of that

Iſle towards the Syrian ſea, not farre from Conſtanti
                     •
                  , famous for that vvorthy Buſhop Epephanius, vvhich is ſuppoſed to be the ſame Salamis antiently inhabited of thoſe kings of Teucria. This Citie of Famagoſta, vvas built and enlarged by Henry of the Famely of Luſignana, King of Cyprus, about the yeere of Chriſt 1295. at vvhat tyme Ptolemais vvas loſt, (vvhich vvhilſt it was poſſeſſed of the Chriſtians, vvas that famous Staple vvherein the trafficke of all commodities comming either from the Eaſt or Weſt continents, vvas exerciſed.) But Famagoſta although both by Nature and Art ſtrongely fortefied, beeing beefeiged and aſſalted by this huge Armie of the Turkes, with all meanes which open vvarre, or ſecret pollicie, could deuiſe: at length after eleauen monthes defence, vveakened vvith extremities, and voyde of all hope or ayde, vvas brought to thoſe difficulties, as they vvere enforced to render the ſame to Muſtapha, vppon compoſition, that ſo their liues, goods, and the vſe of Religion to thoſe Chriſtians that would remaine ther, ſhould be free: & to the reſt not willing, paſſage might be had & ſafe cōduct to depart.
            But the perfedious Turke, (litle regarding his faith, or Soldiours aſſurance formerly giuen) vvhen the ſaid Captains and Magiſtrats, accompanied vvith a trayne of their valiant & vvarlike companions, (to whom by name he had giuen their ſafe conducts) approched his tent, gaue order all, ſhould be kild, Anthonius Bragadenus onely excepted, to whom after three ſeuerall cōmands in his preſence to haue his head cut of, yet changing his purpoſe for the greater ignomenie, permitted his noſe

onely & eares to be lopt away.
            And vvheras three hundreth beſids of the Chriſtians, vvere come forth into the Camp vpon ſecuritie of the peace, theſe as the reſt, he bid ſhould be pittifully ſlain. And for ſuch as were gone abord the ſhips in hope to haue ſailed for Creet, he cauſed them beſids the diſpoiling of their goods, to be made all Gally ſlaues. After which, Muſtapha the next day entring the Citie, Teupolus by his command was ſtrangled. And Anthonius Bragadenus ye cities gouernor thus deformed & diſmēbred in his noſe and eares, after he had by way of mockery carried in ſhow about the moſt ſpecial, & famous parts of the citie, reuiling him with all kinde of villanies, cauſed his ſkin whilſt he was yet quick, to be fleane of: the which torment Bragadenus with great conſtancie endured, calling God for witneſſe & reuenge of ſo monſtrous crueltie, and perfedious brech of faith.
            Theſe things thus executed in Cyprus, the Turkiſh nauie on purpoſe to vvith-hould the Venetians from attempting aught for the regayning of the ſayd Iſ
                  •
               e, entred the Gulfe of Venice, perſecuting all ſuch Cities on the coaſt of Dalmatia, both by ſea and land, as vvere vnder the obedience of the ſayd Venetians.
            
            Whilſt in the meane tyme the confederate Nauie of the Chriſtian Princes verie leaſurely vvere aſſembled at Sicilta▪
                The Generall whereof vvas Don Iohn de Auſtria, the baſe begot▪ ſonne of Charles the fith, and brother to Phillip King of Spaine, vvho enbarking at Barcilona, brought vvith him along to Genua, Rodolph, and Erneſtus, the ſonnes of Maximilian, the ſecond, then Emperour.
            
               From whence goeing to Naples, and thence ſailing to Meſſana in Sicilia, he there expects the reſt of the aſſociate leaguers, vvhich vvere one hundreth and eight Gallies of the Venetians, from Creet, and elſewhere, thirtie from Naples, twelue from Panormos, twelue from Genua, vnder the conduct of Andreas Auria: twelue from the Pope, vvhoſe Captaine vvas Marcus Antonius Columna, foure from Malta, vvith ſome others out of Spaine which all of them ſhould ther meete together. Where now though late, being aſſembled vpon the fourth of September, they vveyed their Ancors in Meſſana Port: and coaſting the Salentine, and Lacinian promontorie, they paſſed the Ilands of Corcyra and Cephalenia, and came to the Gulfe of Corinth, vvhere they vnderſtood that the Turkiſh fleete at the Ilands Echinadas, vvere then remayning.
            In this Turkiſh Nauie, vvere chiefe of commande: Hali Baſſa the Admirall, Pertai Baſſa, Luſalis King of Algier, Hamſam ſonne of Barbaruſſa, the Sir
                     •
                  ch of Alexandria, vvith others to vvhome the great Seignior had giuen command, that in any caſe the Chriſtian fleete ſhould not alone be fought vvith, but ouercome.
            Where ioyning in Battell vvith the Chriſtians, in the ſayde Gulfe of Corinth, vpon the Nones of October, GOD giueing vs the victorie, the Turkes vvere vvhollie diſcomfited and enforced to flye.
            Their great Admirall ſhippe taken, Haly Baſſa ſlaine, and ſome thouſands of Captiue Chriſtians vvho wer ſlaues in the Turkiſh Fleet, ſett at libertie.
            For vvhich Victorie, generallie thorough Europe there vvas thanks publickly giuen to God, vvith other

ſpectacles & ſhewes of ioy, 
                  •
               et for all that thoſe worthy captaines left no ſooting of any other memorable exploit or trophe puld from the empire of the Turkiſh ty
               
                  •
               ant, as was well ſuppoſed they might, who notwithſtanding the ſame, held no
                  •
                onely the whole Iſle of Ciprus, but many townes beſides in Dalmatia before taken, amongſt which Vlcinium and Docleum wonne by force were not the leaſt.
            In the yeere 1571 then next following the Venetians both feeling and fearing the forces of that mightie enemy, wherwith they were well nigh oppreſt, made preparation againe for all things needefull to theſe wars. But vvhilſt nevv ſtirs in the lovv countryes, and borders of France, did ſeeme to encomber king Philip: the ſuccours from the confederates long in comming, Don Iohn de Auſtria, about the Calends of September repayred to the place of appointment, and the aſſociates vvith their fleet, ſcarce ſhewing themſelues to the Turkes at Peloponeſus, without ought elſe worthie of that preparation, had retired to their places of vvintering. The Venetians I ſay, ſuppoſing themſelues forſaken, and left to themſelues, without the priuity of any other their confederates priuely made peace with Selymus.
            
            Of vvhich vvhile diuers men, diuerſly did diſpute according as affection or fancy led them, Marcus Antonius Columna Admirall of the Popes nauie (who in this expedicion vvas a companion and aſſociate to Iohn de Auſtria, the chiefe generall) amongſt others was in opinion cleere againſt and improuing the ſame peace, condoling the deed, and conſtantly affirming ſo noble a victory thus got againſt the Turks, vvas to haue beene

proſecuted with all might and mayne, which not onely in his publike and familier conferences, hee had oſten proteſted, but likewiſe had affirmed by his letters, (writ to his auncient friend Hubert Folieta of Genua,) wherevnto whilſt hee the ſaid Folieta returnes aunſwere, and his opininion withall, hee further takes occaſion therevpon, to touch ſome cauſes of the greatneſſe, of the Turkiſh Empire, with their perpetuall felicitie and good ſucceſſe in thoſe their warring affayres, the which for that it is moſt worthy to be read, as well for the excellent wit therein contayned, as for the great profit, and pleaſure which thereby may be conceyued, I thought it not vnbeefitting heereunto to haue it annexed.
         
         
            
            ¶ The cauſes of the greatneſſe of the Turkiſh Empire, vvritten by Hubert Folieta of Genua, to the famous Captaine, Mircus Antonius Columna.
            
            
               YOV write moſt worthy Columna, what great griefe you conceiue, in conſidering this peace, thus concluded betwixt the Turks and Venetians, being aſhamed as you ſay, of the condicion of vs Chriſtians, that notwithſtanding the memorable ſea victory gotten againſt them by the confederate princes, (wherein your ſelfe, with that moſt fortunate prince, Don Iohn de Auſtria was both a counſellor and companion in command,) then which ſince the ſuppreſſion of the Romain empyre, there was neuer ſeene or heard any more famous, yet notwithſtanding the great ioy, thereon conceiued is ſodaynely ſetled, the hopes from ſo happy beginnings which had enflamed good mens mindes in ſhort time vaniſhed, and the preparations of ſo high and excellent counſells comd to naught.
            For my owne part (ſir) I am in opinion, that not onely the griefe but the ſhame is to all noble mindes, as to your ſelfe in common. What the determination of the Venetians was therein, as I doe not well know, ſo if I did, it is not needefull that I ſhould detect it. For there are ſome as it is well knowen to you, vvho mightely diſalovv of vvhat is done, and are much diſcontent, that they through puſilnanimity, and ſodaine

diſpaire ſhould ſo giue vp their friends, who for theyr ſakes alone, had thruſt themſelues in the dangers and charge of thoſe wars, to which opinion I perceiue you ſpecially inclining. Others thinking otherwiſe and excuſing them doe aunſwere that the Venetians perceiuing it lay not in their power, alone to manage theſe warres with ſufficient might, and ſeeing few other of Chriſtian prouinces and princes, ought prouoked by ſo worthie and good beginnings, or happy ſucceſſe, whereby to take part either in paynes or charge, or to lay hould with the ſaid confederates of ſo ſayre an occaſion, to conioyne the forces, and to reuenge ſo many iniuryes, in all former times receaued, now eſpecially when it was ſuppoled, that the Turkes were vtterly diſpolyed and left naked, both of friends, ſhips, or ſea forces, and thereby had opportunitie to expell them, from forth whole Europe.
            But chiefely the Germaine princes fayling, whom the many attempts of the Turks, againſt their ſtate hath continually, with offenſ
                  •
               ue armes vexed, afflicted with infinite loſſes, and neareſt of all others, to the danger had beene in theſe affayres, for theyr owne ſafetie to haue giuen them furtherance. All which motiues to others, ſmally auayling the ſaid Venetians, and therefore deſtitute vtterly of hope, nor daring to ſupport themſelues, in the ſuccours of their confederates, knowing what enemy, they had in hand, they were compelled to prefer wholeſome & commodious counſell, rather then plauſible, and ſo without obſtinacy to their deſtruction, (as was ſuppoſed) to prouide for theyr piuate affayres. Thus theſe thinges in both parts, diuerſly diſputed, according

as euery man his affection or paſſion perſwades him thervnto. My ſelfe vvill leaue of vncertaine eſtimation, indifferent, to euerie mans ovvne peculier Iudgement, vvithout interpoſing myne, eſpeciallie when the matters handled are to ſmall purpoſe, the deede done not to be vndone, and that euerie expoſtulation is friuolus, vvhich is vvithout fruit.
            But rather lett mee communicate with you, my honorable friend, in that whereof your Letters giue good occaſion, and which may perhaps, bring with it to vs, both ſome profit, detecting ſuch my cogitacions, as often and long haue encombred my ſecret thoughts, and manifeſting therein my opinion, which without ſome gaine, I hope ſhall not retourne againe. For if what my conceit is herein ſhalbe allowed by you, a man of ſo great eſtimation for wiſedome, and accuſtomed to the managing of high affaires, then ſhall I think my ſelfe aſſuredly protected from the caluminations of all maligners: or if not allowed, yet ſhall I giue occaſion by my writing, wherby you may remoue the errour, which for long hath taken poſſeſſion in my minde, and ſo in both theſe parts, it ſhall draw mee aduantage.
            The effect whereof is, that as I haue alwaies houlden theſe Turkiſh affayres to be both fearefull and preiudiciall to the good eſtate of all Chriſtian Prouinces, yet now more then at any time am I driuen into a vvondefull admiration of the ſame, vvho hauing ſo great a Nauie vanquiſhed, conſiſting of a huge number of Shippes of vvarre, vvhereof part were ſounk at ſea, part taken by our men, together vvith ſo great prouiſion

of munition and all other things befitting the vvarres, deuoured by the deepes: beſides no ſmall number of vvorthie vvarriours, Captaines of famous memory, expert Nauigators, (vvhereof there is great ſcarcitie euerie vvhere) vvhich in that battell periſhed▪ all of them being ſuch things as by any accident once loſt are hardly to be recouered in many yeeres continuance, yet ſuch and ſo great is found the forces and faculties of thoſe Turkes, as notwithſtanding all theſe loſſes vvith indaunted courages, forthwith they haue fitted a nother Fleet, litle inferiour to the firſt, vvhich prouided and at all points furniſhed, againſt the beginning of the following Sommer, ſett ſayle to Sea, daring to ſhew them ſelues in ſight of our victorious Fleet, vvith ſemblance not to yeelde one foote to flight, ſo ours hadde bene ſo aduenturous to haue comd on.
            Of vvhich matters vvhilſt often I haue reaſoned vvith my ſelfe, and ſearcht vvhat vvere the cauſes of ſo much greatneſſe, vvhat artes & meanes had brought them to ſo much eſtimation, and how they could attaine ſuch excellent perfection in euery millitarie function. Together how it comes to paſſe, that ſo many of our men ſhould continually reuolt, and abiuring all Chriſtian rites, becomes affect
                  •
               rs of that impious Mahumetane ſect, vvhilſt on the other part vve finde none or very few of thoſe repayring vnto vs.
            Of theſe things I ſay, vvhilſt vvith my ſelfe▪ I often argue vvhat I conceaue, may it pleaſe you heere to ſee ſett downe,
            
               Firſt I hould that in both parts this caſe giues rather cauſe of pittie, then admiration:
            For beholding ſo manie Nations and People conioyned vvith vs in the indiſſoluble bondes of Chriſtian Charitie and Religion, vvho to our and a number of Chriſtian Princes ſhames, are dayelie borne downe vvith the heauie burthen of captiuitie, vvhilſt vvee neither vvith care enter into the conſideration of theſe things, or harbour the leaſt thought in our hartes, to make them ſuccour:
            I ſay it is to be lamented, that ſo much blindeneſſe ſhould haue thus poſſeſſed our mindes, vvhen in deed the miſeries of our oppreſt brothers, ought no leſſe moue vs to commiſſeration, then if the like daunger vvere diſcending vpon our owne heads.
            We ſee this dayly increaſing flame, catching hould of vvhatſoeuer comes next, ſtill to proceed further, no
                  •
                that the inſatiable deſire of dominion in theſe Turkes canne vvith any riches be content, or vvith the gayning of many mightie and vvealthie Kingdomes be ſo ſettled, but of vvhat is this daye gotten, to morrow they build a new ladder vvhereby to clymbe to the obteyning of ſome newer purchaſe.
            And vvhich to feare, is more fearefull. That vvheras euery bondage in it ſelfe is hatefull and far worſe in condicion then Death, yet that of the Turkes of all other is moſt crewell, moſt execrable: Who hould it not enough to bring the Prouinces in obedience, vnleſſe all be vnder, vvho either excelled in Witte, Fortune, vvealth, or honour, all the Nobilitie ſlaughtered,

or commaunded into farre diſtaunt and remote Countries, vvhome beereauing the exerciſe of euery Noble Science, ſtripping of all neceſſarie ornaments, deformed and miſhapte in all baſeneſſe, at length be brought to vvhat fulneſſe of miſerie may bee imagined.
            And for thoſe our brothers, vvhich is the ſecond point in our griefe propounded,) I know not vvhether it vvere better fitting to deplore their condicion, then to deteſt their hatefull Impietie, vvho bevvitched with the fayre ſhoe of a frayle and very ſmal good, renounce the euerlaſting and Celeſtiall riches, abiure Chriſtian Religion from Heauen diſcended, and by the ſonne of Almightie GOD, to vs men deliuered, vvhich onely all other meanes ſhut vpp, makes free paſſage, and layes open the path that leades to eternall Bleſſedneſſe, and the Kingdome of Heauen.
            Theſe things as I firſt ſayde, (deare friend) are to bee pittied, and vvherein vve are vvith all endeauour to labour, leaſt at any tyme the lyke may happe to vs, or vve brought to the ſame paſſe, then vvhich in miſerable miſerie there is neither ſtate nor place more abiect.
            Now for this much admired Turkiſh glorie, and ſo many yeeres ſuccesfull Felicitie, vvhereof vvhilſt few aright enter into conſideration, perhaps it may ſeeme vvith ſome verie ſtraunge, yet in my conceit neither are the things them ſelues vnvſuall, nor the cauſes thereof obſcure, vvhich then the better ſhall appeare, if one by one vve compare and examine

their faſhions, lawes, counſayles, and diſcipline, with thoſe other of vs Chriſtians.
            
            Firſt then none will deny me I am ſure, but that amongſt theſe cauſes, vvhich extoll kingdomes & common wealths, to great wealth, much power, and high eſtimation, religion before the reſt is to bee preferred, which religion containeth in it a double function, one is moſt excellent and deuine, and the ſame for which at firſt religion, was by heauenly prouidence, enſpired into mansminde: this (as I ſayd formerly) beeing the onely and moſt certaine guide, conducting to immortall bleſſedneſſe, then which was neuer greater gift granted to men by Almighty God, whoſe operation is ſuch, as in regard thereof it drawes our affections to eſteeme all riches, all pleaſures, kingdomes and commandes, or what may bee thought precious in this life, to bee vilde and of no valew: according to that ſaying, what ſhall it auayle mortality, to obtaine the dominion of the world, ſo in the end he make ſhipwracke of his owne ſoule.
            A ſecond function of religion is polliticall, appertayning to publike gouernment, and to contayne people in obedyence, and dew obſeruation of lawes, wherin all antiquetyes beare witneſſe, that whoſoeuer well and wiſely haue founded cityes, ſocietyes, or common wealthes, they haue alwayes had this part of religion much reſpected: which as it nothing detracts from the maieſty of religion, ſo doth it make the ſame, to bee holden in higher reuerence, whilſt the vſe and profit thereof, extends it ſelfe in each mans eye, to the gouerning of all humane affayres, and preſeruation of euery

well planted ſtate. Of that firſt and excellent part, we haue no purpoſe to ſpeake, for it little appertaines to the argument in hand, wherein it ſhall iuffice thus much alone bee ſaid, that all the lyſe of euery Chriſtian man, ought eſpecially to bee ſpent in giuing thanks, to that deuine deity, by whoſe goodneſſe we haue our ſoules illuminated, with the bryght beames of true religion, all cloudes of erronyous darkneſſe driuen away, wherewith the mindes of ſuch as are ignorant in the ſame bee hourely blinded, whereby wee may finde, how much better by infinit degrees, the condicion of Chriſtians is, rather then that of the Mahumetans, who miſled by the lyes of that wicked Impoſter, and following his damned poſitions, diuerting from the eternall path of ſaluation, are carryed headlong in theyr misbeliefe to hell torments, and euerlaſting damnation: but let the vrging of this point, be the office of deuines, and now againe to my purpoſe.
            Then let vs come to the poynt, which is proper to our queſtion, wherin it ſhall be nothing pertinent whether any profeſſed religion, bee true or falſe, (for that as beefore is ſaid, appertaynes to the ſoules ſaluation) but where of the vvhole ſubſtance vvill cenſiſt in this, that what religion ſoeuer receyued, may be ſincerely & carefully obſerued, by the ſupportacion of ſuch a religion, onely kingdomes and nations, haue gathered great wealth, and attayned to great eſtimation, power, and dignity, as may be manifeſtly proued▪ both by forceable reaſon, and many memorable examples. For whereas it was apparant, that the chiefe and beſt meanes to enlarge any Empire, is appropriate to the true knowledge

of managing armes, and the glory of millitary profeſſion, in which two thinges, are ſpecially reſpected, obedience and diſcipline, of both theſe, religion I ſay is the principall foundation, whereby it alwayes came to paſle, that euery nation aduaunced at any time to greatneſſe, haue euer beene ſtudious, and moſt carefull preſeruers of the ſame.
            In mayntayning which poſition omitting numbers, that may bee named, I will content mee with the Romaines, who farre ſurpaſſed all other people in wiſedome, as in wealth, valour, and glory.
            For theſe graue and true experienced men, finding that the conſiderations of religion, were of great force, both to beautifie their ſtate, and enlarge theyr Empire, in no one thing laboured more then the true obſeruation of the ſame, poſſeſſing theyr people ſtill with opinions of feare and reuerence towardes theyr Gods. To which alwayes ſo great beliefe was giuen, as nothing was euer executed in publike or priuate, which was not attempted, as hauing the Gods the firſt authors thereof. So as what euer of their affayres were finiſhed, what new deſignes taken in hand, what expedicion put in practiſe, what fortune of war aſſayed which was not done, the Gods firſt conſulted, nor did they labour any other thing in thoſe theyr vowing and rendring vowes, dedication of Temples, obſeruation of progedies (wherein the wiſe of that age were exceeding ceremonious) with ſacrifice and ſupplications, beſeeching the good will of the Gods, but to perſwade the people that whatſoeuer was done was all by the pleaſure & permiſſion of the ſame gods, who obſeruing

euery action of mans life, becomes ſharpe chaſtiſers of wrong and wickedneſſe, but moſt ſeuere reuengers of theyr owne neglected or contemned deitye, whereby it came to paſſe, that amongſt thoſe Romaines, no cryme was accompted ſo haynous, as that of an oth or faith plighted & broken: and of this religion how great the eſtimation was, it may perfectly appeare, by that example onely, when as the counſell, with ſo great dilligence laboured, to diſwade them from thoſe aſſemblyes of the Tribunes, determining in the fauour of the people to propound certaine lawes, againſt which the Senate in opoſition, could giue no other let, but that the conſulls ſhould proclaime, the leading forth of the legions in expedicion, from the attendance of which warfare, whilſt the people had no power to reſiſt, neither could the authoritye of the Tribunes giue any redreſſe, they before hauing in that caſe ſworne their obedyence to the conſull, and ſeeing no other meanes, how to rid them of their religious oath then by the death of the ſayd concull, conſulted amongſt themſelues to kill him: whereof they had put the practyſe in full executyon, if it had not further beene tould them, that no religon could bee diſſolued by any contryued miſchiefe: holding murder as it ſeemed, in a leſſe degree then the violatyon of theyr faith. Which one thing, euer held their ſouldiers ſo obſeruant to the will of their commanders, to whom they had once giuen the aſſurance of the ſame, that that people which in a ſetled peace, was neuer but ſtubborne and rebellious agaynſt theyr ſuperiors, the ſame in war were euer found quiet & contented, bound onely by this military oath, whereof by peace alwayes they

became diſcharged. To which againe may be ſaid, ſo great was their regard, that they would prefer the obſeruation of the ſame, before the preſeruacion of their owne liues: ſubmitting their heads euen to the block, if at any time according to the manner of thoſe wars the Conſull ſhould giue in command for any ſeruice not well executed, that a Capitall decimating amongſt them, ſhould be made, and by this it came to paſſe, that through the doubtfull daunger of death, both by the enemie and their commander propounded: their ſouldiours alwaies in vvarres vvere aſſured to doe the vtmoſt of their iudeuours to ouercome: choſing rather to dye valiantly fighting, then be vanquiſhed, leaſt in the feare of an incertaine death, vvhoſe perill they might perhaps auoide by bouldneſſe and reſolution, they might incure that certaine ſlaughter, from auoyding vvhereof, Religion cut of all hope: For vvhich cauſe, I Iudge that no vviſe man will deny mee but Religion as in euery publike deſigne, ſo eſpecially in the affaires of vvarre, is a moſt firme foundation.
            Now whether that this part of religion is either of the Turks or vs Chriſtians, not more ſincere care and ſacred conſtancie obſerued, I rather leaue it to euery mans peculiar opinion, then therin to deliuer my owne iudgement, yet ſome things I will note by the vvay: as they come into my minde. Firſt ſince that the eſpeciall parts of religion conſiſteth principally in this, that all things be referred to that ſupreme power by whoſe wil we beleeue euery humane action to be gouerned, it is vvonder how far the Turks for this point ſurpaſſe vs, hauing that opinion with ſuch firmnes ſetled in their minds &

attributing ſo much to the deuine prouidence, that ther in they ſeeme rather to exceede to much, then beleeue to little, vvhilſt neceſſarily they vvill tye vvhat euer befalls vs, vnto fate, by no humane counſells or prouiſion auoidable: For vvhich cauſe they ſuppoſe that by ye ſame fate a certaine limit of time is aſſigned euery mans lyfe, vvhich neither can be prolonged beyond the ſame, neither by any meanes of vs ſhortned, & therfore vvhē the appointed houre of death ſhall come, of neceſſitie the ſame muſt be vndergone: in vvhich houre, vve are as certaine to dye, though priuately ſhut vp in any chamber & deuided by all meanes from danger, as if a man vver conuerſant in the heat & fury of fight, vvher a thouſand vveapons vver bent againſt his boſome, vvhich death, if not by heauen decreed, there amongſt theſe vveapons of as great ſafetie may a man aſſure himſelfe, as in his owne chamber: now this opinion though it may be diſproued, in ſo much as thus it attributeth to the neceſſitie of deſtinie or fate, yet to ye matter handled, it brings this gteat good, that the Turkes become therby more cō
               fident & bould, vvhether fighting in battaill or vndertaking any other dangerous exploit, becauſe thereby the feare of death is fully bereaued thē, the certaintie wherof as they conceaue, cōſiſteth not in perills, but in their vnauoidable deſtinie. Now that all humane affaires are in the ſupreme & deuine moderation, depēding wholly vpon the power of heauen, is a moſt holy true & Chriſtian opinion, which as euerie man ought conſtantlie beleeue, ſo muſt we eſchew all cauſes that ſeeme to impech the credit thereof. And therfore vve are to conſider, leaſt by the contrarie perſwaſions of any philoſophie,

vve may be miſſed, eſpeciallie by that of the Peripatikes, whoſe opinions are now a daies in high eſtimation. The great part of whom doe ſo diſpute of the deuine nature, as though it had no humane affaires, nor could haue anie in conſideration, being a moſt damned doctrine, & vnworthie ye maieſtie of heauen, for ſo with one ſtroke they vtterlie cut of all religion: For in vaine then ſhould we praie, vow, ſacrifice, or by anie other act of grace, beſech the goodneſſe of almightie God, craue his aſſiſtance, or deſire he ſhuld behold vs in mercy, whē vve are aſſured before hand, that none of all theſe he either doth▪ or can regard: which impediment is bereaued the Turkes whilſt they are quite forbidden the ſtudie of Philoſophie, (though I am not ignorant how that wicked ſeducer Mahomet, had therin a further meaning: viz: leaſt by the knowledge therof, the great vanitie & ſmal groūd in the promulgatiō of his lawes might apeare,) ſo greatly hath this ignorance proued profitable to the Turkes, for the maintenance of their opinion in Religion. But whether the ſtudie of Philoſophie bringeth more good or hurt it is not my purpoſe here to diſpute, reſeruing it for a longer argumēt & more oportune time & place. Now this opinion thus planted in the mindes of the Turks, makes them fearful of the deuine maieſtie, and inflames thē with a reuerēd regard of religion: By which it comes to paſſe, that though this their ſeruing of God be full of error, yet ſhall wee finde euery where many excellent ſignes of their blynd deuoſion, commending their diligence to the furtherāce of the ſame: For none thē they doth with greater reuerēce repaire to their temples, proſtrate with al humility, crauing pardō of their ſins by the

aſiſtance of Gods ſpirit, holding all holy things in high veneration, wherein omitting other, they ſo much reſpect, not onely theyr owne Prieſtes, and religions, but euen thoſe of ours, as they accounted it in the higheſt degree of ſin, to iniury any one of them any way, which hath ben approued by infinit examples of pirates, of whom a number (as often it hath fallen out) hauing taken any Prieſt of ours, haue preſently ſet him at liberty, leaſt by retayning the ſeruant of God, they might therby importune the ſame God to reuenge his wrong.
            Another thing to their great cōmendation is, that none then they more carefully looke to the conſeruation of their lawes, none puniſhing the publike breach thereof in whoſoeuer, more ſeuerely. For which there is neuer heard with them, any blaſphemy agaynſt God, any adultryes committed, or ought elſe wherin ther is offence, either in the violation or negligent obſeruation of the ſame. And yet for all this, I am not Ignorant that by the ſame impious & execrable law, more haynous ſins are permitted, but that it may appeare, how ſtrickt euen the mightieſt are in preſeruing their ſaide lawes, wee haue in this age a memorable preſident teſtyfied in the perſon of the great Emperour Solyman, which I will heere recount. This Solyman amongſt thoſe number of excellent choſen women, who are kept ſpecially for the kings concubines (for it is permitted by the law of Mahumet, that euery Turke may hould ſo many concubynes as he is able to mayntayne,) calling one among the reſt more often then any other, & ſhe perceyuing therby, how the Emperour was mightely poſſeſt with hir loue, by a cunning drift ſo much effected with him, as ſhee obteyned

hir freedome, (for it is to be noted, that as well boyes as girles, ſo ſhut vp in the Seraglio, are his ſlaues,) after which beeing by Coatch ſent for as at other times to come & accompany the ſaid Emperour, made anſwere, how ſhe much admired, what reaſon the great Signeor had, who beeing a prince of ſo much maieſtie doubted nothing publikely, to enfringe the holy law of Mahumet, by which it was prouided in playne words, that no man in ſuch ſort ſhould accompany free women, & therby ſo grieuouſly to offend, euen in the view of his people, whoſe eyes were all caſt vpon him. Now the Emperour much moued with this anſwere, as likewiſe brideling for the preſent the heate of his deſire, demanded the next day, of the learned in theyr lawes, whether by law it might be admitted any man to keepe free women, for theyr concubines, whervnto when he had receaued anſwere, that it was not lawfull, and not enduring the want of that wench, whom he loued entitely, the ſayd Solyman for that reaſon married hir. Now I neede not on the contrary part to recount, how Chriſtions carry themſelues in the like caſes, leaſt I further exulcerate thoſe wounds by handling, which I am ſure by admoniſhing will not be cured.
            The next place to religion, whether eſtabling any common wealth, or inlarging a dominion, is worthely attributed to diſcipline, wherein beetwixt vs and the Turkes, the very truth is, in my opinion, that there is admitted no compariſon, whilſt diſcipline is a thing with them of high eſtimation, but with vs of little or no account, & that this is ſo, it appeares cleerely in this that euery yeere the great Emperour at certaine ſeaſons

ſends his inquiſitors abroad through all parts of his territories, to make election of the choiſe children to be found of an aſſigned age, which inquiſitors where they come, calling together all the ſayd children of the ſame place, ſelect from amongſt them, ſuch whoſe towardneſſe and inclination ſheweth itſelfe, either by the diſpoſition of the members, or countenaunce fit for their purpoſe, thoſe they take, whom bringing to the court, there by eſpeciall maiſters prouided, be they inſtructed in all manner of martiall diſcipline, by which & through much exerciſe, their bodies and mindes are confirmed to endure euery labour, nor is there any one entertayned in their warfare, but ſuch as by much exerciſe are invred to this diſcipline: whereas on the other ſide it is hourely ſeene, that our armyes for the moſt part, doe ſtand of men, both rude and vnexperienced in all martiall demeanours or diſcipline.
            This aboue named diſcipline, hath in it a triple vſe, wherof the firſt is the true knowledge of things appertayning to the warres, this drawing with it an inabling of the bodies forces: by which it falles out, as we haue often ſeene theyr ſtrength approued, that an arrow ſhot from a Turkiſh bow, hath clouen the ſhanke of a gallie oare, where the wood hath beene nine inches thicke, ſo as the head of the ſame arrow, hath ſhewed it ſelfe on the other ſide: whereas ſuch ſouldiours as wee put in pay, without conſideration, are choſen in companies ignorant of all things appertayning, & then for the moſt part learning the vſe, and art of theyr weapons, when there is more need valyantly to manage them.
            Another commoditie of diſcipline is, that it prepares

the bodye to the enduring of labour and wants, inables the minde to an inuincible reſolution, in bearing all extremities, which miſery, or the ſcarcity of things, may caſt vpon man.
            For theyr mindes accuſtomed to continuall exerciſe, cannot bee daunted with paynes, ſpare diet, or other inconueniences, wherwith it is daily acquaynted, content conſiſting, not in many, but neceſſary things: ſo as wee ſee theyr great armyes long time, often kept together with ſmall prouiſion, theyr fleetes and land preparations, executing aught with exceeding expedicyon, whilſt a huge part of baggage, ordenarily (attending other campes) giues to them no let.
            Whereas both our land and ſea forces, are ſtill encombred, with loadings of houſhould prouiſion, our ſouldyours euer faynting without the affluence of euery thing, theyr bodyes impatient of labour, and this not onely when they want not things neceſſary, but if they abound not with delycates, ſo as to our ſhame bee it ſpoken, a man may obſerue in our campes, thoſe exceſſes of feaſtings and needeleſſe fare, which euen in the plentifulneſſe of peace, myght in Cities perhaps ſeeme riotus, where amongſt other things ill beſeeming, it irkes me to thinke, that men ſhould bee brought to ſo much niceneſle, as in a fleet, to haue Snow carryed, for cooling their wine.
            The third vſe of diſcipline is the profit of obedience, thē which there is no one greater vertue in the exerciſe of armes. This as it is with the Turks more in eſtimation then euer in any age the like hath ben ſeene with other nations. So of all people in the contrary heereof wee

are deſperately diſeaſed, euen to the death, our ſouldiors being mutinous, factious, diſobedient, who faſhioned by no rules of diſcipline, conteined in dutie, by no regard o puniſhment, in their owne camps, themſelues to themſelues for the moſt part work more miſchieſe, then vvhat at any time they receaue from the weapons of the enemie: vvhich foule faults to our greater ſhame, is as common to the captaines & commanders, as the priuate ſouldiours, a number of whom ſtudyeng their perticuler reuēge, their priuate ambitiō, or (then which vvith men of vvar there is naught more odious) their ſeruyle gayne, betray their countrie, neglect their Princes command, and vvithout executing aught vvorthie their truſt and imployment, cauſe often Impediments through malitious enuie of a nothers glory, to vvhat ſoeuer might be worthely executed: Such things I ſaie, vvith vs, men dare dayly do, freed from feare of all condigne puniſhmēt, ſo as I cannot name a place in ſhame or diſhonor baſer, vvhether theſe or the like vvith euerlaſting Infamie, haue not brought vs.
            Next now enſues that I ſpeake of the Turkiſh valor and vertues, no meane cauſes or of ſmall regard in the inlarging of any Empire, vvherein if I ſhould affirme that they doe much excell vs, I might ſo both become iniurious to the Chriſtian name, and procure my ſelfe more enuie then I affect. Yet truth is truth, by vvhom foeuer deliuered, and well I may ſay that true valour is vvith the Turkes of more accompt vvhen to the valiant alone the paſſage to all militarie promotions is layd open, vvhere any ones merit towards his countrie by any manly act performed, ſhall aduance him through

all degrees of dignitie, euen to that vvhich is next the higheſt with vs, on the contrary Nobility being of greateſt reconing, ſuch for the moſt part euery vvhere commanding, who though they ſhew ſmal or no teſtimonie either of valor or vertue, yet ſupported by the greatnes of their blood, manage matters as they liſt. This being that one thing which ſo much hath exaſperated ye minds of many worthy Chriſtian ſeruitors, that flying frō thoſe enſignes wher they found no place for their vertue: repair to the Turks, who for their good parts fairely intreat them, & according to the proofe any one makes of his vvorth, doth ſo prefer him to euery roome of Honor: their condicion in that point being exceding commendable, vvho demand not vvhence the man is, but vvhat he is, neither holding that vertue and valor are guiſts of granfathers inheritance, like to riches & thoſe other of Fortune. Yet for all this, I muſt not deny but that nobilitie ought much to be eſtemed, being in it ſelfe of great might to ſtir vp the minde to honorable actions: and a rich ornament to all ſuch as haue vertue thervnto conioined. But barely to prefer nobility before valor & vertue, or for any mans gentry ſolly to commend him to the greateſt functions in a common wealth, or to commād an army, that vtterly I diſalow, as full of danger to any ſtate: I highly reuerence the kinred of kings & princes, whom to haue placed in great cōmāds, is not alone without peril, but profitable. For if authoritie be of eſtimation in all humane affaires, in thoſe of the wars eſpecially it is a moſt material point, wherin the Soule and lyfe of good gouerning, chiefly cōſiſteth: as hauing obediēce alwaies attendant, no one thing more furthering,

as I haue ſaid euery warlike deſigne; & therfore to ſuch all ſouldiors & captaines without repining, ſubmit their greatneſſe, not being ſubiect to enuie & miſreports, before whom euery man forceth himſelfe for the formoſt, becauſe the teſtimonie of their valor & vertue ſhewen in their princes preſēce cannot be cōcealed by the calumniations of any backbiter, whereby as often it happens, men doe diſpaire of a due reward. In theſe things therfore I would thus be vnderſtod, that wher ther wants a due mixture of their parts together, compounded: it is better in my cōceit by the Turkiſh preſident to prefer in cōmand a man endwed with vertue lacking thoſe exterior badges of great blood, then that any ſupported by nobilitie, ſhould bear ſway Indigent of thoſe perfectiōs which at firſt begot all true Nobilitie.
            
               Malo pater tibi ſit Thirſites, dum modo tu ſis
               Aeacide ſimilis: Vulcania
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   arma capeſſas.
               Quam te Thirſite ſemilem, producat Achilles.
            
            The laſt though not the leaſt of thoſe things which antiquitie haue attributed to the neceſſitie of the well eſtabliſhing any ſtate, ſtandeth in meaſuring arightly according to euery mans merit, reward of well doeing or puniſhmēt of it. Now in either part how far we are to the Turks inferior, it is often admired. But leaſt I giue occaſion of further offence, & procure from many that hatred which I deſire not to vndergoe, I will deſiſt frō further proſecuting this courſe, in preferring theſe Turkeſh conſiderations with ours, & onely wil ſay that as the whole ſcope of their coūſels & other proiects tends to the glory to be gotten by the vvars, ſo are all ours in an other kinde more excellent, for the maintenance of common

ſocietie & the ſtudies of peace, which vvith ſo infinit a deſire we hunt after, as all charge, all expēce of time, & mony, all care & dilligence is held both light & litle, for obteining the ſame. And this appeareth firſt by ye great numbers of Prieſts, Mounks, Freers, & other religious, poſſeſſing great power, & wealth, with large lands, and ſtately erected monaſteries, wherwith the plentiſul coū
               tries of Europe, are euery vvhere peſtered: to vvhom a great part both of Chriſtendomes reuenues & cōmodities be comd. This I doe not diſalow but much commend the pietie & wiſedome of our anceſtors, who haue bene ſo boūtiful in beſtowing to holy vſes, ſo liberal towards the maintenance of Gods ſeruice, releueing the neceſſitie of the poore, and both nouriſhing & cheriſhing the ſtudies of Arts & euery good literature. Another thing with vs is, that our ſeates of Iuſtice prolong the deciding of cauſes, with many quiddetyes, & delayes, which is the ſole reaſon that we ſee ſo many lawiers & Iudges, ſo many attorneys, ſolicitors, clarks, notaries, aduocates & proctors, to whom ſo great rewards & large fees are aſſigned, as this practiſe of ye law (lyke to that other) hath drawen with it no litle part of the welth of Chriſtendom. Againe, the Scholes of good learning are by vs vvith great charge mainteined, to which many repaire, & perceauing the accompt that learned men daily liue in, doe ſpend either all, or the greateſt part of their life in that profeſſion. Laſtly (good god) what coſt is beſtowed in euery handi craft thing, what huge foundations hourly laid, what ſtate & abundāce of publike & priuate buildings, what ſuperfluety in enſignes of honor, picturs, hāgings, & plate, what delicacy in euery houſhold prouiſiō:

What riot in feaſtings: what pride & expēce in apparell: vvith how great ſtipends are the maſters in theſe Artes maintained, all which as they greatly beutifie our Chriſtian countries, maligne the Turks in regard of vs to appeare rude & vnpoliſht: ſo are they vtterly ill fitting for martiall affaires, or enlarging of an Empire, vvhilſt they conſume & waſt a great part of that wealth which were better beſtowed in the wars.
            Now vvith the Turkes all theſe things are in proportion, ether ſmall or none. Their Preiſts & Religious are very few, their lyuing litle, ſupplyed with things onely neceſſary. Their law determinations want demurs, and delatory plees receauing ſentence at the firſt or ſecond hearing; vvithout toſſing ſo many volumes of the ciuill & Canon Codices; with their comments: ſo many yeere bookes of the common lawes courſe, wherby ſo great ſtore of counſells & aduocates, ſuch quantitie of clarks and notaries are in ſmall requeſt.
            Ther is amongſt them no orders of Monks & Freeers, no Pyles of ſtately builded Palaces; no ſumptuouſneſſe in their dayly port, but thrifty cariage, ſpare dyet, vvherein the hands of cunning cookes haue no medling: the Turkes neither caring or crauing theſe things, but ſpending vvhat they haue in theyr needfull preparations for the vvars, vvhere vvealth and rewards are peculiarly appropriate to the valiant. No marueill therfore that ſo many as I haue ſayd, of vvorthy Chriſtian ſeruitours, leaue the diſplayed Banners of IESVS, vvhere ſmall and for the moſt part, no conſideration is allotted their merits, repairing thether wher they finde riches and eſtimation the guerdon of well dooing.
            
               Now ſince the one and onely meanes, of the Turkiſh glory, doth proceede from the warlike deſignes, it is no wonder that all their endeauours, ſhould wholy bee bent to that, which thus alone drawes with it honor, riches, & power, wherby we ſee how they excell all other nations, in martiall eſtimatyon, & execution of high exployts, what great numbers of valiant ſouldiours, they continually keepe in pay, how huge forces of horſe and foote they maintaine, ſo as to all people their name is now becomd fearefull, & that alwaies they returne victors from euery war once vndertaken, for inlarging their dominion, our mens mindes on the other part by multiplicitie of knowledges and imployments, being ſo diſtraught as few can ſpare any time to follow ſuch ſeruice: through as I ſaid the innumerable ſorts of handy crafts, ſtudyeng of arts, & profeſſing of religion, things indeed that haue diuerted ye thoughts of the greater part, of able Chriſtian bodies, frō the affectation of armes, for it is the condicion of man, with greater content to follow that courſe of life, which is eaſie, ſafe, leſſe paynefull, & free from danger, then that other of the wars, proſeſſed enemy to reſt & quietneſſe: eſpecially when this firſt with pleaſure, brings neuertheleſſe the commodityes of eſtimatyon & riches, manifeſting the apparant reaſon that thus we ſee all our cities, ſo repleniſhed with marchants, craftſmen, inholders, vinteners, & ſuch like: euery place reporting the diſputations & different opinions of Philoſophers, & deuines, with continuall canuaſſing of law caſes. All which things as they mightely I ſay, adorne our peaceable part of the world, ſo doe they wholy diſable all martiall credyt, for which wee finde vpon euery

occaſion, how weake our forces are, for cauſe of the ſmall number, who follow the wars. In which, this further I dare affirme, from ſound iudgment, that of that age, whoſe bodies through Chriſtendome are fit for the wars ſeruice, the hundreth perſon ſcarce doth apply him to that profeſſion, whereas on the contrary with the Turks, the greater part alwaies doe wholy deuote themſelues, to the practiſe of armes.
            But now let vs come to the inflicting of puniſhment due to offenders, the feare wherof, of equall conteines men in compaſſe, both to the ciuell and martiall diſcipline: wholeſome lawes being with vs, as well as with the Turks, to that end eſtabliſhed. Yet the vigor & force of good lawes, ſhould not conſiſt in a poſitiue decree, but in a and ſacred inviolable obſeruation of the ſame: the rigor whereof we Chriſtians, for the moſt auoide by the cunning diſtinctions of lawyers, mitigate by the fauour of great perſonages, or breake through by our owne power. Where with the Turkes theſe thinges are otherwiſe, there being left no meanes to obtaine pardon of any offence, no hope of eſcaping puniſhment: ſo as we ſee with vs all thinges to be corrupt & diſſolute: liberty for each one to doe what he liſt. Our ſouldiours licentious & freed from feare of puniſhment, with careleſſe cariage, executing what euer is committed to their charge, ſtill mutinous, & ſedicious, reſpectleſſe of command, great doers in words, litle indeed, in ſkirmiſh making courtſie, who ſhould firſt begin, or rangd to fight, running away the firſt ſquadrons ſcarcely chargd, or before any honeſt haſard of fortune were attempted: & although we haue as cannot be denied diuers worthy captaines,

who are not impechable, of any theſe crimes, yet what ſhall thoſe few excellent men affect in re
                  •
               orming the generall corrupt conditions of time, in faith little: whoſe vertues are to feeble, to encounter the outgrown vices of this age. Againe it is well knowen, that many great commanders ther are, who caſting away their priuate counſels & conſideratiōs, prefer the publike good: yet euen theſe haue ſuch for inferiour leaders, who are no leſſe, (if not more) faulty▪ then the ordinary ſouldiour: the greater part of whom follow the ſeruice for gaine, and make a traficke of the warres. Who when a muſter of men is to paſſe, and pay to bee made, beelie their number, either borrowing, or ſubborning baſe fellowes, to fill vp ſuch roomes as are fayling, whereby it fals out that the payes bee euer ſtrong, but the companies weake.
            Now none of all theſe defaults bee conuerſant in the Turkiſh campe, where the ſouldiour is euer ſeruiceable, and at commaund, executing what they haue in charge carefully, reſeruing their heat of courage to encounter the enemy, which with high reſolution they both vndertake and maintayne: nothing diſmayed, with a firſt ouerthrow, nor diſcouraged with the enemies ſecond good ſucceſſe, whereby to leaue the field, but valiauntly fighting conteyned, more by the force of their lawes, & the puniſhment therof, then by feare of the enemy, keepe theyr aſſigned ranckes, expecting the beſt, and enduring the vtmoſt of good or bad fortunes chances, who alwaies bearing in mind, the fearefull ſpectacles of thoſe theyr barbarous chaſtiſements, as ther may be cauſed, etermine either to depart

the field as victors, or if fortune enuie theyr valour, rather there to receiue an honeſt death, from the edge of the enemies weapon, then at home to be ſtrangled, or haue his throat cut, by a hangman. Againe whilſt the valour, of the leader ſtriues with the obedience of the ſouldyour, who neuer haue their priuate counſels, deriued from the publike good, we find them to performe moſt excellent offices: in theyr ſeuerall places both towards their king and country.
            Theſe are ſuch obſeruations (true honoured Columna) as formerly I ſayde, haue long poſſeſt my minde, touching the greatneſſe of this Turkiſh Empire, which if you allow, I ſhall the better like, if otherwiſe, conceale them to your ſelfe I pray, leaſt they may chance into ſuch mens hands, as may detract from the eſtimation of my iudgement.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   