
      
         
            
            
            CHAP. 5. A cenſure vpon his fift, ſixt, and ſeuenth chapters concerning Election, Praedeſtination, and Reprobation.
            IN the argument of his fift Chapter, his words ſtand ſo as if he meant to ouerthrow the Apoſtles doctrine concerning predeſtination. But his text ſheweth, that he meaneth to diſpute againſt Gods purpoſe in chooſing ſome, and reiecting others; and to declare, that God ſaw ſome cauſe in man why he did both: holding part with Arminius, part with the Ieſuites; who make either faith or works foreſeene, or mans freewill to be cauſe of mans election, and ſaluation; and ſay, that man is not rejected, or not choſen, but for the defect of his will and workes. Which is miſliked by all ſound Diuines, not becauſe ſuch enter into Gods ſecrets, but becauſe this is diuine doctrine reuealed in the Apoſtles writings.
            
               He praetendeth to conſent with the Lutherans. But Zanchius declareth that they are a baſtard brood of Lutherans that oppugne that doctrine, which is the Apoſtles, and was lately taught, by Luther, Bucer, and other German Diuines.
            As the Pagans did attribute the cauſes of their calamities to Chriſtian Religion, ſo ſaith the Mountebanke ſome haue attributed the troubles of the Low Countries falſly, to the diſſention wrought by the Arminians. But this he ſpeaketh out of his ignorance, not knowing the danger wherein the Low Countries ſtood by the practiſes of Barneuelt, and other of that ſect. And abſurdly compareth the falſe doctrine of Arminius with the Catholicke doctrine of the Apoſtles, and Chriſtians, that miſlike the haereſies of Arminius, with Pagans blaſpheming our Chriſtian faith.
            
               Bleſſed be the peace-maker among men, ſaith the Mountebanke. But he is not the peace-maker, that troubleth the peaceable ſtate of the Church, with his intempeſtiue doctrines of Popery: nor is it a fit meanes to

make peace, to betray the truth of Religion to the publike enemies thereof. Many fall away to the Pope, but their apoſtacy maketh the diuiſion the greater, and maketh vp no rents, but renteth the vnity of the faith.
            
               There is neuer a Bible-bearing hypocriticall Puritan in the packe, ſaith he, a better Patriot then himſelfe. As if Bible-bearing were a brand of an hypocrite. By which argument, either you or your man will proue hypocrites, or Puritans when you appeare in the pulpit, which is very ſeldome. What doe, or can, profeſſed Papiſts ſay more? Such particoloured iacket-wearers, albeit they ſeeme to make a faire luſtre in the packe of cards, yet are they nothing but Canarian pedants, praiſing and pleaſing themſelues, and no man elſe. As for Bertius and Barneuelts followers, they are Apoſtates, and haue forſaken the faith, and ſo would he haue once, if mariage, and hope of preferment had not ſtaid him. His heart is with the enemy, and if any occaſion be offred, it is iuſtly to be ſuſpected, his body

will not bee long from them.
            
               John Caluin (ſaith he) came after in time. So worthy Maſter John Caluin that famous Diuine, with this biting Canarian is but plaine Iohn Caluin: and he in his lofty conceit will be called Maſter Mountebanke, and Rabbi, and that is forſooth, becauſe he teacheth Phariſaicall iuſtice, and ſuch like haereſies. But why noteth he as a defect in Caluin, that he came after Luther? Doth not he come after Arminius, and betrayeth truth, as Iudas betrayed Chriſt?
            
            He profeſſeth, he will not be more tied to Caluin, then to Luther, or to either of them, more then to Bellarmine: As if Bellarmine were aequally to bee prized with theſe two Doctors, that were great diſcouerers of the Popes Antichriſtian haereſie and policy. We ſee indeed he ſtandeth rather with Bellarmine, then with Caluin and Luther, or Cauſabon, if any way they follow his ſquint-eyed poſitions. But in wars and ſtate, if any falſe traitour be found flying to the enemy, the Marſhall, where lawes are executed, ties him vp as a fugitiue, & ſtops his

flight. Pag. 40. he telleth vs he was brought vp a member of the Church of England. But why then did he once determine to aband
                  〈…〉
               urch of England? And why doth he now in ſo many points follow rather Bellarmine and Arminius, then the Doctors of our Church?
            Explaining his aduerſaries doctrine, he ſaith they hold, that God primarily, abſolutely, and irreſpectiuely, did from all aeternity decree to make ſome veſſels of honour, and ſome of diſhonour; to bring them vnto life, or to caſt them off vnto death; to crowne them with glory, or to plunge them into deſtruction and hell fire. But if he were not aſhamed of his owne abſurd opinion, he would firſt declare what himſelfe holdeth, and then more truly report his aduerſaries doctrine. That God did not reſpect ſomewhat in himſelfe, & ſomewhat in his ends, we deny not; neither can any doubt that all the elect were praedeſtinated in Chriſt; only we ſay he reſpected not mans freewill, or faith, or workes, in chuſing ſome, and reiecting others. Secondly; we diſtinguiſh the decree of reprobation

from the execution, and deny that God did condemne and deſtroy any but for their euill deeds and deſeruings. Albeit, he loued Iacob, and hated 
                     〈…〉
                   they had done either good or euill, as the Apoſtle declareth, Rom. 9.
            Chap. 9. He inſinuateth, that Caluin taught, that God is Author of ſinne, that God made the moſt part of the world to periſh euerlaſtingly, that the reprobate are incited and prouoked to ſinne by God, that God was the Author of Iuda's treaſon. Damnable calumniations againſt that faithfull ſeruant of God, and borrowed from Papiſts, in whoſe ſteps this man doth commonly and willingly tread. I need not refute them, for that the Mountebanke durſt not affirme them. But he that will be reſolued of Caluins ſincere dealing, let him read the words as he ſetteth them downe in his owne bookes, and conſider the malice of his aduerſaries, diſtorting his words contrary to all ſenſe and true meaning.
            That Peter (being elected) could not periſh, or that Iudas (being a reprobate) could

not but periſh, is a Catholike doctrine; vnleſſe it be an errour to hold God to be vnchangeable in his decrees, and haereſie, to hold Gods decrees to bee mutable. If the Mountebanke doth maintaine the contrary, he will diſcouer himſelfe to be who he is, and what the world ſuppoſeth him to be.
            Gods abſolute decree in election and reprobation without reſpect to workes in man, the Lutherans, ſaith the Mountebanke, doe abhorre. But Zanchius de Na
                     •
                  en. Dei lib. 5. cap. 2. and in his Tract. de Praedeſt. Sanct. in Miſcellan. doth ſhew ſuch to be Pſeudolutherans, prouing that Luther and Bucer taught as he did. And that no ſuch inference can be drawne out of it, as they calumniouſly and blaſphemouſly doe make.
            That the Church of England teacheth, that election or reprobation was decreed without reſpect of mens works, or freewill well vſed, this gaggler denieth. But the declaration 
                  〈…〉
               de at Lambeth, doth manifeſtly 
                  〈…〉
                ſhameleſſe deniall. The A
                  〈…〉
               e alſo which this

Church defendeth▪ refelleth his boldneſſe. For Rom. 9. he ſheweth, that God loued Iacob and hated Eſau, before they had done good or euill, and that he hath mercy me for works foreſeene, but becauſe God hath mercy on whom▪ he will haue mercy, and hardeneth whom hee will.
            
            He addeth, that God did not call, ſaue▪ and glorifie Peter, without conſideration of his faith, obedience, and repentance▪ nor condemne Judas without reſpect to his ſinne: but this is the gaggling of a Gooſe to no purpoſe. For the quaeſtio
                  ••
               s of election and reprobation, and not of ſaluation and damnation; of which, damnation is for euill workes, and ſaluation followeth worckes, although not the merit of works. That our will and works goe not before election, the Apoſtle declareth, Rom. 9. Jt is not in him that willeth, (ſaith the Apoſtle) nor in him that runneth, but in God that ſheweth mercy. Epheſ. 1. He ſaith we are praedeſtinated in good workes; which is a plaine 
                  〈…〉
               
               ▪ that good works are the eff
                  〈…〉
               e cauſes of election.
            
               Boldly alſo the Mountebanke auoucheth, that our Church teacheth, that a man truly iuſtified & praedeſtinated may fal from grace, & proue not to be the child of God. A moſt ſhameleſſe ſlander againſt the whole Church of England, that in the ſixteenth Article by him pointed at, doth neither ſpeak of the falling away of the truly iuſtified, or of ſuch as are praedeſtinated. Nay contrary, in the ſeuenteenth Article our Church determineth, firſt, that the decree of praedeſtination, was before the foundation of the world was laid: and ſecondly, that the ſame was conſtantly decreed.
            
            
               We enter not into ſearch of Gods ſecrets, as he doth charge vs, but only learne what God hath reuealed vnto vs in his word, & what the Apoſtle teacheth all of vs. And this we may doe without danger; but to conteſt with God, and to deny what the Apoſtle teacheth, as the Mountebanke doth, is not only dangerous, but alſo impious.
            That the doctrine of Gods abſolute decree concerning praedeſtination to life, without reſpect to mens works, is deſperate;

no man that is pious and learned will affirme: for it is the doctrine of the Apoſtle, of the Church, and moſt learned Diuines: only ſuch deſperate Papiſts and Arminians, as this deſperate Mountebanke declareth himſelfe to be, deſperatly auouch vntruth. But ſhall we heare the profundity of this Mountebankes learning concerning praedeſtination? Liſten then, firſt, he ſaith whatſoeuer God willeth, commeth to paſſe. A profound piece of worke, which euery naturall man vnderſtandeth: and yet this naturall by conſequence denieth, that they are all ſaued, whom God willeth and decreeth ſhall be ſaued. He doth alſo contradict himſelfe, promiſing before that he would not meddle with the execution of Gods purpoſe.
            2. He pitcheth vpon creation, and ſaith it goeth neceſſarily before praedeſtination; a doctrine moſt falſe & impious. The Apoſtle Eph. 1. ſaith, God hath choſen vs in Chriſt, ante mundi conſtitutionem, that is, before the creation. The Church of England, likevviſe, Art. 17. ſpeaking of praedeſtination, ſaith,

               it is Gods euerlaſting purpoſe before the foundations of the world were laid. He ſhould therefore, if he caſt off all piety, yet remember his ſubſcription to the Articles of our Religion, of which he ſo oft talketh.
            Thirdly, he ſaith, that all being in the maſſe of perdition, God ſtretched out deliuerance in a Mediatour, the man Ieſus Chriſt; and drew ehem out that tooke hold of mercy, leauing them that would none of him. But firſt, the Mountebanke forgetteth what he hath in hand, that is, Gods aeternall decree before the world, of ſauing the elect: and ſpeaketh of the execution of the decree, of which formerly he made promiſe to ſay nothing. Next he maketh mans will to goe before election, and to be the cauſe of our ſaluation; and not Gods election, which is the prime cauſe of it. The foundation of God remaineth firme, and hath this ſeale ſaith the Apoſtle 2 Tim. 2. God knoweth who are his. Thirdly, he contradicteth the Apoſtle Romans 9. who maketh Gods will to be the cauſe of our election, and not our will apprehending Gods mercy. 4. He ſaith nothing of faith, obedience

and works foreſeene, which notwithſtanding, his conſorts make to be cauſes of election.
            
               This is enough, ſaith the Appellant, to free God from being the Author of ſinne. As if God by the Apoſtle were not freed frō this wicked imputation, albeit he did chuſe men before the foūdation of the world, & did elect or reiect according to the purpoſe of his wil, or men did not ſinne willingly: albeit, he did elect ſome and reiect others. Further, if God did draw out ſuch as would lay hold of his mercy, and damned the reſt; yet ſeeing he knew all things before, and decreed hovv all things ſhould be, God by the inference of this Mountebanke ſhould be the Authour of ſin and damnation for it. And if this be fate, then is the Mountebanke a teacher not only of fate, but alſo of much fatuity; making man to be the cauſe of his ovvne ſaluation, and God the Author of mans damnation, vvhich he vvould impute to others.
            
               Juſtine Martyr in his Apology, ſpeaketh againſt fate, as he ſaith, and ſo doe vve. But

if election and reprobation inferre fate, as he praetendeth, then is this fatall Mountebanke a teacher of fate, not daring to deny Gods aeternal decree of election and reprobation, according to his owne purpoſe and wil. Fulgentius ad Monimū
                ſaith, iuſtice cannot be iuſtice, if God be ſaid not to find men vniuſt, but to make them vniuſt. As if any of vs held, that God made man vniuſt, or as if this did follow of Gods decree of reprobation. He addeth that God doth praedeſtinate none to ſin. But the man hath loſt both ſhame & wit, if he ſay, that Caluin taught that man is praedeſtinated to ſinne.
            
            Going about to define fate, the Mountebanke ſaith it is this; that they that chuſe the better part, ſhould receiue worthy rewards, and that they that doe euill, ſhould receiue contrary rewards. But fate is not only in receiuing rewards, but in the diſpoſition of things by a concatenation of ineuitable cauſes. But if it be fate that men ſhould receiue rewardes according to workes, then is this talker of fate chained with the bonds of fate; teaching; as others doe, rewards to

be giuen according to works. Tortullian de ſpectac. cap. 2, denieth that God created his works to their deſtruction, and ſaith, that the cauſe of damnation, is mens peruerſe adminiſtration: which we alſo confeſſe. And yet election and reprobation is not for workes foreſeene, as the Popiſh Mountebanke would haue it. With Clement alſo of Alexandria we deny, that God is cauſe of euill: and reaſon taught heathen men ſo to ſay. And yet if this Mountebanke ſhould praeſume to ſay, that God ſet him on to make this blind Appeale, he ſhould vndoubtedly hold, that God is cauſe of euill. Eccleſiaſtes chap. 7. ſaith, God made man right, but he buſied himſelfe with many quaſtions, as this Mountebanke doth. Nazianzen orat. 42. ſaith, we were made to be well and happy: and Baſil in a certaine Homily proueth, that God is not the Author of euill: As if it were euill, that God chuſeth ſome, and not others. Againſt vs he praeuaileth no more then if he ſhould caſt feathers againſt the winde. For man originally was made right and to liue well and happily: But falling wilfully from

God, he incurred Gods wrath. Saint Paul 2 Tim. 2 ſaith▪ 
               if any man cleanſe himſelfe, hee ſhall bee made a veſſell of honour: but if the Mountebanke ſay he can clenſe himſelfe, and hath it in his power to be made a veſſell of honour, he ſhall diſhonour his Mountebankſhip, turning plaine Pelagian. Of any thing that we ſay it followeth not, that man is of neceſſity forced to be euill, as Baſil ſaith, for he ſinneth willingly. Chryſoſtome ſaith, Iudas ranne wilfully into his treaſon: ſo oftentimes blind and ignorant men run wilfully into Popery and other haereſies. To conclude, Proſper de vocat. Gent. cap. 2. ſaith God damneth no man vniuſtly. But what maketh all this long ſpeaking againſt Caluin? Doth he ſay, or can the Mountebanke conclude out of his words, that God damneth any man vniuſtly, or is cauſe of euill?
            Thus he wreſtleth againſt Caluin in vaine: But his owne wicked doctrine is quickly ouerthrowne without any great wreſtling. For if election and reprobation of men be made for the good vſe of freewill, or workes foreſeene, vvhy doth the

Apoſtle Rom. 9. ſay, that God did before they had done any workes loue Iacob and hate Eſau? And vvhy did he deny he calleth them for their vvorkes? Why doth he aſſigne no cauſe of election, but Gods purpoſe? In the ſame place he ſaith, God will haue mercy, on whom he will haue mercy: and Epheſ. 1. that God made choice of his children before the foundation of the vvorld. Saint Auſtine goeth a little further lib. 15. de ciuit. Dei c. 1. vvhen diuiding all mankind into tvvo ſocieties, he ſaith, The one is praedeſtinated to reigne eternally with God, the other to ſuſtaine eternall puniſhment with the deuill. And epiſt. 105. ad Sixt. God made ſome veſſels of wrath to deſtruction, that hee might therein ſhew his power. This is alſo the doctrine of Peter Lombard ſent. lib. 1. diſt. 41. a. of Thomas 1. q. 23 art. 2. and many Schoolemen.
            Neither is this a forraine doctrine, as is his Foppery, Popery, and Arminianiſme: but the true tenet of the domeſticals of faith yea, of the Church of England, from vvhich this runnegate doth vvilfully diſſent.

               Art. 17. The Church ſaith, predestination is Gods euerlasting decree before the foundation of the world was laid: The Mountebanke maketh praedeſtination to follovv the creation. The Church maintaineth that we are iuſtified freely: This Factor for Antichriſt teacheth iuſtification by ſomewhat inhaerent in vs. The Church alloweth the doctrine of praedeſtination to be ſweet, pleaſant, and comfortable: Deſperate Dicke holdeth it to be a deſperate doctrine.
            He refuſeth to be tied to the concluſions at Dort: So doth alſo Maſter Alder and other Papiſts. But what hath he to obiect againſt the concluſions of that reuerend Synode, wherein his Dioceſan, and diuers learned Diuines of England did ſit as iudges? Is not ſuch a blinking bayard aſhamed to controle ſuch authority? And if he can ſay ſomewhat againſt it, he will proue a profounder Arminian, then his fellowes. He praetendeth to follow the determinations of the Synode at London: yet I haue proued that he directly oppoſeth them. Further, like as Iudas betraying Chriſt, kiſſed him, ſo

this treacherous runnegate praetending to praiſe our Engliſh Diuines, that were actors in the Synode of Dort, doth ſecretly buffet them, as confirming deſperate doctrine, and falſe concluſions.
            Rayling againſt our brethren in the Low Countries, he ſaith, our Churches diſcipline in the Synode of Dort, and other Dutch Synodes is held vnlawfull: a ſhameles vntruth. For in the Synode of Dort, nothing was mentioned, that condemned our diſcipline, and other Synodes eſtabliſhed their owne orders, and ſpoke nothing of ours. But to him all are Puritans and enemies, that are not of his Popiſh cut. This is certaine, that neither our Church, nor any Orthodox congregation doth hold, that the reprobate and veſſels of diſhonour, may be purged & made veſſels of honor, as he doth p. 67. This is to rake hell, and make Gods heauenly decrees mutable.
            That Deodatus a miniſter of Geneua diſſented from the concluſions at Dort, as he affirmeth, is not probable For why then did he ſubſcribe to them? That the Church

of Geneua ſhould diſſent from Caluin and Beza her teachers, I ſhall then beleeue when the Mountebanke ſhall ſhew wherein. Let the Mountebanke ſhew, if he can, that the learned in Schooles, or the Church in Synods maintained his Arminianiſme; or oppoſed, or ſharpely reproued the Articles eſtabliſhed in a Synode at Lambeth, as he boldly, blindly, and impudently affirmeth, or elſe he hath for euer loſt his credit. And as for Doctor Whitaker of pious memory, he was a man of that ſincerity and learning, that none of his Arminian conſorts, if he were aliue, durſt encounter him in diſputation or otherwiſe. As for this Mountebanke he dares not declare all his opinions, but ſpuing forth his poiſon here and there by fragments, hideth himſelfe in the confuſion of his other diſcourſes. Returning backe to talke of iuſtification, he ſaith, a iuſtified man may become like Saul and Judas. But the Church of England teacheth not ſo, nor doth it hold that Saul and Judas were truly iuſtified: nor if he were once iuſtified, ſhould he be ſo like Saul and Judas.
            
            
               He inueigheth againſt our brethren of France, and the Low Countries, as not conformable to vs in their diſcipline: Bu
                  •
                his hatred is more to their doctrine of faith, then of diſcipline. This is only to make a diuiſion, and to ſtirre vp mens hatred againſt them, that in the end they and we may haue our throats cut for our doctrine of faith.
            
               Of ſauing by abſolute neceſsity, without relation of repentance, he talketh idlely. For albeit God ſaue ſinners, yet he ſaueth none, but ſuch as are repentant. And albeit he conferreth grace vpon men, yet he doth not grace them, but he changeth their will, and maketh them conformable to his lawes. But this is not the cauſe, either of mans election, or iuſtification; but the effect rather. Of the deſtruction of the reprobate, he diſputeth contrary to the doctrine of Saint Auſtine lib. 15 de civit. Dei, and Epiſt. 105. ad Sixtum. Yea, contrary to the doctrine of his owne Fulgentius; who ſaith, Gods aequity maketh ſome to periſh in hell. Nay, he doth not only reſiſt the

doctrine of the Fathers, but of the Apoſtle alſo; who Rom 9 ſaith God made ſome veſſels to honour, ſome to diſhonour.
            
         
         
            CHAP. 6. The cenſure paſſed vpon the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleuenth Chapters of the Mountehankes miſhapen Appeale.
            THe quaeſtion of freewill, ſaith the Mountebank is full of perplexed obſcurity. And why ſo I pray you? Forſooth, becauſe he findeth not that in praedeſtination and ſaluation God reſpecteth mans freewill, or that man hath povver to reſiſt Gods grace effectually mouing him, and ſuch like points of Popery and Pelagianiſme. But Saint Auſtine thought it no ſuch matter of difficulty. Neither doth our Church ſo thinke, determining, that man after Adams fall cannot by force of his will and workes prepare himſelfe to faith, and to call vpon God, or to doe good works. But ſaith he, to my capacity,

that is obſcure, that is ſo much entangled with contradictory diſputations. Wherein he ſheweth himſelfe to be a man of ſhallow capacity. For Papiſts againſt Scriptures, and plaine points of faith, oppoſe and diſpute: and yet will not ſay all points of faith, which we hold againſt them, are obſcure & perplexed. He addeth, that Bellarmine ſaith that concurrence of grace and freewill is a thing very difficill: the ſame he proueth out of Benius, Occham, Sa, and Caietan: Fit Authors to iuſtifie Popery, which indeed doth ſo neere touch Pelagianiſme, that it cannot be ſeparated from it. If the Mountebanke had not a mountaine of Popiſh haereſie in his braine, he would neither hold ſuch concluſions, nor offer to iuſtifie them by ſuch Authors; all the difficulty conſiſting in this, how they might vphold their errours againſt the doctrine of our Church grounded on Scriptures and Fathers.
            
               Chap. 9. pag. 1. The Gagger (he ſaith) had merited more at Gods hands, if he would haue beene more ſparing in multiplying controuerſies. And ſo he betraying the cauſe of God, and

yeelding to his enemy, for feare of multiplying controuerſies, thinketh he meriteth much at Gods hands, as if honour were to be obtained by diſhonoring and betraying the truth. If he had liued in the time of the Arrians, he would haue reconciled Catholike Chriſtians and Arrians, that hopeth to reconcile true Chriſtians, and Antichriſtian Papiſts.
            
            Speaking to Engliſh in French, he neither ſpeaketh good Engliſh, nor French. Nay, he ſpeaketh not like a true Chriſtian, denying either Arminius to be a Bontifeu, or incendiary, he ſhould ſay Boutefeu, or that himſelfe is a mouer of contention; and therefore meaneth, as he ſaith, to haue an action of the caſe againſt the informers. But while he is fitting a caſe with a cockeſcombe for his owne crowne, let him looke to follow his Appeale more cloſely. The informers feare him nothing, being alwayes ready to iuſtifie their charge, and auerring confidently, that the Mountebanke in this Church, and Arminius in the Low Countries, with their intempeſtiue contentions, about grace,

will, predeſtination, and perſeverance, & other points of refined popery haue kindled ſuch a flame, as I feare will not eaſily bee quenched. He commēdeth himſelfe much for his moderation, and diſlike of multiplying controverſies; So doe alſo other vaineglorious pedants: but his moderation is nothing but treaſon to religion, and his diſlike of controverſies a liking of Popery. Howbeit no man blameth him for his temper, or for ſaying no more, but for ſaying too much, and becauſe he could not temper himſelfe ſo, but that he ſhewed great zeale in fomenting ſeeds of Popery.
            
               The controverted particulars (about freewill) as he beleeueth, are of no ſuch great moment vpon due examination. As if he could better examine the wicked doctrine of popery, thē the Church of England, which art: 10. reſolueth, that man after his fall cannot prepare himſelfe to faith by his owne ſtrength, or doe good workes acceptable to God: both directly againſt Papiſts, whom hee ſeemeth to favour. The 2. Councell of Orange c. 1. determineth, that the liberty of
            
            
               〈1… pages missing〉
            
            
            
         
      
   