
      
         
            
            
            A GODLIE MANS GVIDE to Happinesse.
            A Manuell of necessary Motiues, holy Meditations, and godly Prayers, to stirre vp the hearts of men vnapt to pray.
            To the great Comfort of all, that with due and holy attention will practise this most godly and Christian dutie.
            Written for his owne, and published for the Comfort of them that▪ long for trv
                  •
                happinesse.
            By I. N.
            LONDON Printed by A M. for Iohn Marriott, and are to bee sold at his Shop in Saint D
                     •
                  nstons Churchyard in Fleetsheet. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HONORAble, Sir IAMES FVLLERTON, Knight, one of his Highnesse Councell of Reuenues, &c.
            
               I Know (Sir) that I shall be censured very rash, in attempting; more vnaduised, in publishing; and most improuident, in making your selfe the Patron of so weak a Pamphlet; for the first, I may excuse me,



in that I haue bin long vnwillingly idle, and loath to lose the benefit of the inforced intermission of mine accustomed former imployments, I could conceiue no fitter or better passe-time, then in this interim, to seek some inward consolation, in my outward discomforts: for the Second, I acknowledge, that imparting these weake Meditations, vnto some seeming wel affected to the best things, I was incouraged to lay them down to the pleasure of the Printer; who, not without



examination & allowance hath brought the same to publike view. And as touching the Third and last, in making choyce of your name among so many of that Honourable Societie, whom I most humbly and sincerely honour and reuerence; I cannot but acknowledge the reason, to be no other then that I haue bene longest knowen vnto your selfe; And you best know, how I haue past many yeares in Seruice and attendance, commanded by that Honorable Table.


               
These, no fained excuses may, in honourable fauour, free me from the censure of rashnesse in attempting it, of presumption in publishing it, and of neglect, or respect of persons in patronizing it: So shall I think mine idle time not altogether lost, though gaining little outward profit, whether happy or vnhappy, in gaining the one, or loosing by the other. I am so much the more doubtful to iudg, by how much I obserue, that men are heere censured happy & vnhappy (not



in respect of inward or outward qualities, bee they good or bad) but according to their present prosperitie or aduersity, glory or basenesse, riches or pouertie, which as a sea often ebbes and flowes; As variable winds blow, and waues tossed, are lifted vp, and come low: wherein some sayling with a full gale of glory, thinke themselues in highest felicity, who yet forgetting or neglecting to steere aright the huge bulke of their conceiued happinesse, rush many times vpon the



rocke of Disgrace, more grieuous then their former fortunes were glorious. He that seeketh and thinketh to finde true felicitie in the inconstant things of this life, is as happy a man as hee that dreameth that hee hath sound great store of golde, and seemeth to reioyce beyond measure in his good fortune; and when hee awakes, hee findes it a dreame: So may men dreame of happinesse here; but it is onely reserued for such as make least account of this worlds glory, who



haue their conuersations in Heauen while they liue in the earth, where yet no man can iudge of a truely happy man.
            
               At yours, and to the rest of their Honourable Commaunds euer ready. IOHN NORDEN.
            
         
         
            
            
            To as many as long for true happinesse.
            
               IT is not to be doubted, but that euery man that liueth, desireth to liue a happie life: but euery man taketh not the right course to be truly happy. For, as there is in euery man a double life, the one in this world, the other in another; the one perishing, the other permanent: so are men carnally or diuinely qualified, and accordingly bend their indeuors, to visible, or inuisible things & are commonly most affected to things visibly seene, and sencibly felt, tasted, or heard. But as for



inuisible things, few attaine to know them, much lesse to seeke them, least of all to enioy them. No, although their bodies bee ouerwhelmed with millions of maladies, & their minds, with cares, griefs, & infinite passions; which nothing can cure, or releeue; but some speciall inward spirituall working, yet seldome or neuer looke they vp aboue these earthly things; but in whatsoeuer outward, or inward hard estate they are, they seeke helpe here below, if they finde it, they ascribe it, to the visible meanes and acknowledge them happie in finding it; in sicknesse to finde a Phisition to heale them, in pouertie



to haue a friend to enrich them, is imputed happinesse: how much more happinesse were it then for a man neuer to be sicke, to be rich, to be glorious in the eyes of all men, to be reputed the wisest man in the world, and to enioy what his heart could thinke here? Would not all men admire this mans happinesse? And would not all men desire, and couet to bee in his like estate? And admit hee attaine vnto it, is this the happinesse he aymes at? No, hee must haue peace and long life to enioy it, else the very consideration of death, and to forgoe this faigned happinesse would



be vnto him as if a sword hung ouer his head by the haire of a horse taile; euerie minute readie to fall on his head. Alas, what shall a man then so much struggle and striue for the happinesse of this life, that consisteth onely of such things as the getting of them requires labour, somtimes lies; the hauing of of them, enuie; the keeping of them feare, and the losse of them sorrow? Which yet is not all: there must bee finally a redde rationem, an account; a fearefull reckoning; which, if men would dulie consider, in the time of their greatest supposed happinesse, it would make



their hearts to tremble, and their knees to knock one against another like Balteshars, for feare of the infelicitie to come. If then the greatest happinesse that man can attaine vnto in this life, be thus accompanied, where is that true happinesse, that absolute felicitie finally promised? Such a happinesse there is, but what it is, no man can declare it; for the eye hath not seene it, the eare hath not heard, neither can it enter to mans heart, what God hath prepared, for those that loue him: But by examination of the chiefe things wherein man in this life can repute himselfe most happie, and comparing them with



what things wee shall futurely enioy, it will appeare, that mans happinesse doth not onely consist in the enioying of good things, but in the freedome from euill things. The happiest man in this life hath causes of mourning, griefe and vexation of spirit, his life requireth labour, labour brings wearinesse; wearinesse couets rest, and rest presupposeth the bodies infirmitie; and consequently decay and death: And death precedeth eternall saluation, the happinesse of the soule and bodie, or damnation of both. This is the portion of all men mortall, how happie soeuer hee



seeme to liue heere, where they haue hunger; thirst; heate and cold, want of things desired: and a thousand discontents; from which wee can neuer bee freed, vntill wee come to our heauenly Country, where Christ is ready to receiue vs, where the holy Angels and Saints are euer expecting the increase of that heauēly cōpany, whose ioy and happinesse increaseth by the increase of sanctified soules, to accompanie them; where the seruitude, which in this life oppresseth vs, shall bee turned into ioyfull libertie, where we shall haue no more cause of mourning, of sorrow, or griefe;



               God himselfe will wipe away our teares, which the tribulations which we heere indure haue prouoked, death shall haue no more power ouer vs; wee shall haue there no night, nor darkenesse; we shall neede there neither sleepe, nor corporall sustinance; wee shall be free from sicknesse; we shall feare there no enuie, or malice of neighbours; wee shall neither buy nor sell; we shall neede neither gold nor siluer; wee shall want no garments, to adorne and couer our base bodies, as heere wee need; wee shall not be oppressed with the euills wherewith we are here infested; But bee replenished and made



rich in euery delightfull thing; wee shall be there imbraced of our God, as his deere Children; our happinesse shall be so vnspeakeable, as it cannot be manifested here, what and how glorious it shall be there; but we shal haue pleasure at Gods right hand for euermore: If men therefore, that now delight themselues in the multitude of their riches; in their siluer and gold▪ and boast themselues of the greatnesse & largenesse of their possessions, of their magnificent Mansions, of their rare iewels, the abundance of their plate, and sumptuous feasts, wherein they repose their felicitie and



happinesse, did duely consider the shortnesse and inconstancie of these deceiuing v
                  •
               nities, and other inferiours that delight themselues in all kindes of vices, would but call themselues to minde, what they lose by these false baytes of Sathan; they would cast their most precious things ouer-boord into the sea of contempt, as disdayning this worlds accounted best things, and their dearest sinnes, wherein they finde a kinde of counterfeit content, and felicitie, which shall bee futurely requited, with future infelicitie and horrour. Happie then shall that man bee euen heere,



(seeme he neuer so vnhappie) that for this pearle wil sell all his carnall and corporall delights, to buy such a precious purchase, and so permanent, which hee shall hold to himselfe for euer, freely without r
                  •
               nt, without feare of forfeiture, and without any other mans claime: for euery man shall haue so competent a portion, as none shall couet another mans. The purchase in respect of the value is not deere. And the Lord, of whom he shall hold it, will neuer expose his tennant, nor exact any seruile seruice at his hands, but such as shall bee vnto himselfe, more glorious and sweet,



then the most honourable attendance of the greatest Potentate of the World. Hee that hath a heart to conceiue the least portion of this vnexpressible happinesse; let him seeke it while hee hath time; let him aske Wisdome of him, that giueth it freely; let him heare, and consider what comfortable words, and serious promises are spoken of in the Scriptures, touching this happinesse by the Prophets, by CHRIST who is Truth it selfe, and by his Apostles, who beare witnesse of the same Truth; that so being ass
                  ••
               ed of the certaintie of this happinesse to



come; hee may labour to attaine it, hungering and thirsting for it, with continuall prayer to him that giues it.
            
               Yours in Christian good will, I. N.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the zealous Reader.
            
               THinke not the Prayers contained in this little Booke too ted
                  •
               o
                  •
               s, by reason of their length and pro
                  •
               ixitie: for if thy heart be well prepared, thou wilt thinke it no burden to thy tongue & lips to speak vnto God▪ Short prayers in de
                  •
               d, are most pleasing to them that vse prayers without 
                  •
               eeling, more for custome, then comfort. A truely 
                  〈…〉
                man is not onely not wearie in Prayer▪ but the longer hee prayeth, with the more fe
                  •
               uency he prayeth; and the more ferue
                  •
               t, the more pleasing vnto God. Pray therefore alwayes in all manner Prayer and Supplication in the 
                  〈◊〉
               , (as long as Gods holy Spirit 
                  〈…〉
                Spirit) and watch thereunto with all perseuerance (without wauering or wearinesse:) And so shall thy Prayers be acceptable to God, and true comfort to thy selfe.
            This is the way, walk in it.
         
      
      
         
            
            A HELPE to Happinesse.
            
               A premeditation or consultation, what are the best things, men in this life should principally ayme at, to attaine vnto highest happinesse; which are, hearing the Word, and faithfull prayer.
               
                  EVery man by nature hath in himselfe a desire of the best things, and in heart wisheth, and endeauoureth to obtaine them, wherin euery man hath his priuate and peculiar affection, according to his inward



qualification. But as Nature and Grace, mans corruption and Gods holy Spirit doe differ in euill and good so doe mens desires differ in choyce of things, yet all seem to tend to the attaining of the things they conceiue to be best, and they are such as may giue them the content they ayme at, which they account happinesse. And the most of men in stead of true happinesse, desire and seeke things not only, not best, but meerely hurtfull: things subiect 
                     •
                  o the outward senses, which are often deceiuing, taking that for best that is to bee abandoned, and reiecting that which is to bee chiefly imbraced as truest happinesse.
               The best things are such as the eye sees not, the mouth tasteth not, the handes h
                     •
                  ndle not, neither are they subiect to



natures vnderstanding: For the things wee see, touch, or taste, haue neither true goodnes, such as to giue a man best content, nor continuance to tarry with them; and therfore are but shadowes of seeming happinesse, which by experience are found fickle and vanishing Beautie, Health of the body, Riches, Honour, high Office, Long life, Delights & Carnall pleasures, Humane wisdom, and Naturall Literature, are things much esteemed. But what happinesse is there in any of these? Beautie decayes, Health impayreth, Riches vanish, Honour is enuied, Offices dangerous, Long life a burden, humane wisdome foolishnesse, naturall Learning, a puffe of vaine glory. Wee may therefore conclude, that if a man haue all the former seeming contentments, yet may



he not be happie for euery of them drawes with it, as many disasters, as variable accidents, & as many peeuish passions of the minde, which draw him into as many calamities and miseries. And therefore doth no truely wise man thinke, that these are worthy the name of happinesse, for then had many Heathens attained vnto that best. But true happinesse consisteth onely in the enioying of Gods graces, and Spirituall blessings, which carnall men, who enioy onely the former, haue not: But are possest with an erronious opinion of those things which seeme best, rather by an implicite conceit, following▪ and allowing that for happinesse whi
                     •
                  h the most hold so; and to attaine the same, they vse all meanes, labours, and endlesse trauailes



to get that, which indeed is not of the world to be had; no maruell then they finde it not, and yet perswade themselues, they haue in some measure what they desire, euery man in his peculiar affection, and well may it bee sayd in some measure, for that in what measure soeuer they haue, that they craue, yet they want the fulnesse of what they desire: And therefore can there be no full content, for where there is wanting some thing, the want of the thing desired, is a kinde of ineuitable miserie, and distraction of the minde.
               These things duely considered, a kinde of voluntarie blindenesse, or rather desperate madnesse seemeth to appeare in the most, who contrarie to the aduice of the Apostle (that willeth to vse



this world as if wee vsed it not) vse onely this world and the vaine pleasures of the same, as if they perswaded themselues, that either they shall euer remaine here, or that after this, there will be no other being whereas the contrarie is most apparent, For this world passeth away and the glorie thereof, and therefore should we so liue, as only to passe thorow it, as the Jsralites thorow the Red-sea; that we may arriue in Heauē
                  ly Canaan, the place of true Felicitie, Happinesse and absolute content in deed: for the greatest pleasures and deerest delights that this world can yeeld, are like the vnsauorie waters of Asphaltis, or the sea of Sodome, whereof who so drinketh, infatuateth or dieth instantly: And yet wee see, that hee is accounted



the happiest man that is euen drunke with this worlds vanities. Therefore doe the truely Wise passe by them, as it were disdayning to stoope to such deceiuing alurements stopping their eares with Vlisses, least these forbidden vanities should inchant them and with their seeming sweet infecting harmony, draw them to the gulfe of perdition; for the vanities of this world bewitch the mindes of carnall men, who though they reade and heare their danger, it takes no impression in their obdurate hearts: they reade seldome, and heare, and vnderstand not; they yet know too much of that wherof the practice doth shew they are not wise to saluation, which indeed is, that absolute happinesse, that the truely Wise doe onely seeke; knowing



that it auayleth them not, to gaine the whole world, and to take all the pleasures and delights of the same, & to lose their owne soules.
               The best thing then, that we are to seeke to be happy, is to be assured in this life of the Kingdome of God, and our saluation to come, and to labour for the righteousnesse thereof; for if worldly men take so much paines for the getting of the vanishing things of this world, counterfeit happinesse, it may well be imputed, not onely as a shame vnto vs, but a iudgement vpon vs, if wee neglect, the absolute best thing, the saluation of our soules. And therefore Saint Paul exhorts vs to the studie of righteousnesse and hatred of sinne, the contrary ends of both being set before vs; namely as touching sinne,



wherein the best man hath once defiled himselfe, how much more the wicked? What fruit had they in it? Onely shame, and griefe, and in the end death eternall, without repentance, therefore it behooueth vs now to cast off sinne, The vanities of the world, the lusts of the flesh, the pride of life, to which things whosoeuer is, or hath beene seruant, while he liueth therein is free from righteousnesse: but now let vs seeke to bee freed from the seruitude of sinne. and to become seruants vnto God, so shall wee haue our fruit in holinesse, and in the end euerlasting life, which is the gift of GOD through Iesus Christ, which is the greatest happinesse that we can desire or attaine vnto, either in this life, or that which is to come; for the obtayning whereof,



euery Christian is to be carefull to auoide the vanities of this world, and the seruice of sinne in the same, indeuoring to become the seruant of God, which consisteth in an holy and heauenly conuersation here, to which is required, the due and diligent hearing of God in his Word: and the true practise of the same, and faithfull prayer to him.
               By these two rules rightly obserued, a man becomes by acceptation perfect, and by imputation iust.
               To attaine vnto this degree of perfection and happinesse, it lyeth not in our owne powre; wee cannot heare without the Word preached, and none that heareth vnderstandeth; but he whose eares the Lord openeth. Carnall men may heare indeed, but



not profit by hearing, vnlesse God open also their hearts, as hee did the heart of Lydia, for both the Word, hearing, vnderstanding and practise are all the gifts of God.
               
                  Prayer also is the gift of God, so is Gods Spirit, by whom wee pray, and faith in which we pray; and the assurance, to obtaine that for which wee pray. How many men yet are there of conceit, that they can pray when they list, and how they list? as if earnest and truely cordiall prayer, were as familiar with them, as to tell a tale: Liplabour babling indeed, is as easie, as to speake any thing else. But this kinde of saying prayers, is not indeed prayer, but prattle, a mocking of God, and hee deceiueth himselfe, that so speaketh prayers. A great man would take



scorne to haue a tale told him, when hee that tells it speakes he knowes not what, his minde being vpon some other matter, will God then accept of those prayers, which onely are from the lippes, when the heart thinks of nothing lesse, then what the mouth speaketh? Their words may bee the words of holy prayer indeed, but if the heart consent not, nay, if the Minde, the Will and Affections, and the Vnderstanding agree not with the mouth, though the words bee good, the prayer is counterfeit. True and feruent, faithfull and feeling prayer, will easily bee diserned from cold and counterfeit, for whereas a man may fluently without stoppe or stagger, powre forth many and good words, either by heart or booke, thinking



that God hath enough, if hee haue many and good words, he cannot but acknowledge that he doth but flatter God, & so commits sinne, instead of a sacrifice; But the prayer that pleaseth God, and profits a mans selfe, comes from the heart to the lippes, or the heart it selfe, sighes and groanes vnto God, in such vehemencie of spirit, as if not with outward teares, yet doth the heart rent it selfe within, through the feruencie of zeale, and power of a liuely faith, which kinde of prayer is effectuall, and pleasing to God
               It behooueth therefore euery man to be warie how hee prayeth, least hee offer the sacrifice of fooles, and so instead of being heard, to his comfort, hee be reiected with shame. Prayer consisteth not



in the motion of the tongue, onely which is proper as well to the wicked as to the godly: But prayer is a diuine exercise of a sanctified heart And therefore before we presume to approch into the presence of God with our Petition, we must duely and reuerently consider, to whom we speake, what we speake, and how we speake; wherein we may not consult with our owne fantasies, and so vnsanctifiedly, to rush vpon the holy Throne of Iehouah, but with the Word of God, wherein is layde downe the persons, to whom, the manner, how, and the things for what we should pray.
               These things being vnderstood, it behooueth vs also to looke into our selues, whether this great worke of diuine prayer bee within the



compasse of our owne vnderstanding, what to pray for. Saint Paul was a man Diuinely qualified, and yet hee accounteth himselfe of the number of them that know not what to pray, as hee ought: what then? Should wee not pray at all, because wee know not how, or what to pray as we ought? God forbid, wee haue a promise that the Spirit of God shall helpe our infirmities, and shall make request for vs vnto God. How then can our prayers but bee heard and answered, seeing they proceed from Gods own Spirit, that dwelleth in vs?
               The truely faithfull in deed haue a promise, that if they open their mouthes, God will hil them And what is it but to assist them in their prayers? And therefore not euery one that seemeth to pray, prayeth



in the Spirit, yet this promise may also appertaine vnto, and in time, be felt of them that yet want him. Therefore, let euery man indeuour to be assured, that the Spirit of God is in him, which hee shall finde by the feruencie of his heart in prayer; although he be not at all times a like powerfull in vs, but retires himselfe for a time, to make vs to acknowledge the want of him, and to thirst the more eagerly for his presence againe, which euery faithfull soule exercised in this diuine dutie, apparently apprehendeth; for the Spirit by degrees, as it were, mooueth our dull spirits, and at length sheweth himselfe strong and powerfull in vs, for when we finde a will, and an inclination to pray, though wee be dull, not able to open our mouthes,



if we continue in desire, lifting vp our hearts to God; wee shall feele, and that sensibly the Spirit, to beginne to worke and to touch our hearts, that at length, we shall, not onely bee able to speake with our tongues, but the same Spirit will frame such an holy forme of words, that of our selues, wee were-neuer able to vtter: which I confesse to the praise of God, I haue found by most comfortable experience, and therfore to my more effectuall motiue, I haue framed by the ayde of the same Spirit, this Meditation and Prayer following, which may bee also vnto others, that delight in this holy exercise, some meane to suppresse their dulnesse, and to stirre vp their affections to an vnexpressible zeale.
            
            
               
               A motiue to a prayer against the tentations of Sathan, who alwaies endeauoureth the hinderance of prayer, and all other diuine and holy exercises in the children of God, wherby their happinesse may bee made certaine.
               IT is impossible that any man, be he neuer so deuout and religious, that takes any action in hand, tending either to Gods glory, or his owne soules saluation, that can p
                     •
                  rforme it; but that Sathan, that malicious enemy of mans saluation, will endeauour to peruert it, or altogether to hinder it. As when Iehoshua the high Priest was standing before the Lord to pray, Sathan stood at his right hand to resist him, Zach 3.1. And therefore shall any man thinke that though he



be strong in faith, and feruent in zeale to pray vnto God, for any holy and heauenly gift, that he shall haue no opposition by this ougly Dragon, and subtill inuisible Serpent? nay, the more faithfull, the more zealous, and the more strong a man seemeth, (or indeed is) in any holy and diuine exercise; so much the more mad and malicious is Sathan to oppose him, especially when he betaketh himselfe to holy prayer, whereof no true child of God is, or can be ignorant: he cannot but find that Sathan, thogh vnseene, standeth at his right hand, at his elbow, laying before the eye of his mind, infinite idle and vnholy thoughts, not to be nūbred or declared; either to peruert or vtterly to hinder his faith & zeale; & that sometimes with seeming (though counterfeit) diuine



thoughts. As when, in the mayd, he spake (seeming commendably) crying of Paul and other Apostles, saying, These men are the seruants of the most high God, which shew vnto you the way of saluation, Act 16.16 17. But what intended he by this his flattery? onely to hinder Paul & the rest from prayer, a worke that offends him most, and makes vs most happy. Therefore when he flattereth a man most, as perswading him that hee hath graces and holy giftes enough: hee needs seeke no more of God, he may saue his labor of praying; he may take his case and betake himselfe to his wonted worldly affaires; he needs not bee so curious in reading the Word, or hearing Sermons, he hath knowledge sufficient, and in the right way to happines, and may take more pleasure



and delight in many other things to his better content. And thus are too many ouermuch lulled asleepe by these most dangerous inchantments of Sathan, especially when he coueteth to deceiue by his crafty vndermining men, vnder his counterfet shew of being an Angell of light.
               
               Hauing then such a dangerous enemy, more malicious then the red Dragon, more wi
                  
                     •
                  y and subtill then the crooked Serpent, and more strong then the roaring Lyon. We had need to craue wisedome, to preuent his subtilties, and strength to withstand his forces: for being ignorāt of his stratagems, and weake to encounter his malice, we can neither speake vnto God in our prayers, which are the principall weapons to wound, and put backe the force of this enemy, nor



with true desire, attentiue eare, a feeling heart, constant resolution, & firme faith, heare God spea
                     •
                  e vnto vs by his holy Messengers and Ministers, the life of our soules, and truest happinesse.
               It behoueth vs therefore to labour, to haue the eyes of our minds inlightned, and to be filled with all spirituall prudence and wisdome, that wee may bee able to discouer his deceiuing intisements, to auoyd h
                     •
                  s forged 
                     •
                  la
                     •
                  teries, and to withstand his deadly tentations: let vs indeauor by continuall prayer to God, that in vs may be created and confirmed a strong and liuely faith, p
                     •
                  rfect and constant zeale to serue the liuing God, and an holy iealousie ouer our selues, lest Sathan cir
                     •
                  umuent vs with his secret and subtill intisements, in stealing away our



mindes, and estranging our thoughts from heauen and heauenly things, from God in Christ, in our holy Meditations and Prayers.
            
            
               A Prayer for Gods holy assistance, against Sathan, who indeauoureth to hinder our most godly prayers, fit to bee said in all tentations.
               O Holy, mercifull, louing, and most powerfull Lord God, who sittest in the heauens, and extendest thy power ouer all the powers in heauen & earth, who hast the rule and absolute gouernment of all thy creatures; and to whom all Principalities, Powers, Angels,



and spirits doe obey: Consider, I humbly pray thee, the malignity and malice of that reprobate infernall spirit, that falsely pretendeth dominion in the earth, and in the ayre, and how he enuieth and opposeth, as much as in him is, euery good dutie and seruice which thy dearest children owe and endeauour to performe vnto thee; and aboue all other duties, tending to thine owne glory, and mans saluation, he seeketh to hinder none, with more bitter violence, with greater enuy, & more wicked and subtill wiles, then this of diuine prayer, and endeauoreth to draw thine owne dearest children into



manifold sinnes. But Lord, as thou hast commaunded vs to call vpon thine holy Name, to pray vnto thee for faith, repentance, obedience, and other graces and blessings: So according to thine holy ordinance, I fall downe prostrate vpon the knees of mine vnfayned heart, praying thee to prepare mee to this holy dutie, thou sayest, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it. O Lord open thou my mouth, and fill it with heauenly words, furnish and fill my heart with a strong, powerful, and liuely faith, constant and firme obedience, that without wauering, and straying thoughts, I may at this time make my prayers & supplications



vnto thee, through thy Spirit. And thou, O inuincible Lyon of the Tribe of Iudah stand vp for me, against my most mortall and most malicious enemy, satan, who among his own is strong and powerfull, but where thou my Captaine Christ Iesus appearest, he is weake, he cannot enter the house where thou dwellest. O fortifie therfore, O Lord, and barre vp the doore of my soule, that hee enter not, nor preuaile against it with the fire of his tentations. Lord thou knowest, hee is enemie to thee, how much more vnto mee? Hee tempted thee, but preuayled not, but his tentations flesh and blood



cannot withstand. Therefore arme thou me against him, with heauenly weapons, and hee shall neither stoppe nor hinder mine intended prayers, as he desireth and laboureth to doe. Let my spirit, O Lord, bee strongly assisted by thy Spirit, and my prayers shall be faithfull, my heart shall entertaine no wandering, wauering, vnholy, or prophane thoughts, euill cogitations, or wicked motions, though I bee an vnholy lumpe of my selfe by nature, prompt and more ready to thinke, or doe euill then good: yet by thy Grace, Satan shall slie, sinne shall die, and thy Spirit shall be liuely in mee,



and my prayers powerfull and effectuall to thee in my mediator Christ Iesus.
               O let thy heauenly helpe, Lord, in Iesus Christ descend into all the powers and parts of my soule and body, that in speaking vnto thee, I may feele the worke and operation of thy Grace so sufficient in my heart, that I may obtaine a victorious conquest ouer satan, sinne and mine owne corruptions, and bee assured, through Christ Iesus my Sauiour, to bee either freed from his preuayling tentations, or to bee able to resist them; that all my prayers at all times may bee such, as thou maist Fatherly accept them in thy



beloued Sonnes mediation for mee, howsoeuer weake and imperfect they bee in respect of my selfe, who am full of imperfections, which I humbly pray thee to grant for his sake, who hath conquered him, that couets my finall destruction. Amen.
               Lord euermore strengthen and increase my faith in Iesus Christ.
            
            
               A meditation or motiue, when wee are dull to pray, a most necessary preparatiue, to prayer.
               AS it is my griefe, O Lord, to consider the hardnesse of my heart, my faintnesse and dulnesse to pray: So can I



not but comfort my selfe, in the consideration of thy great mercie towards mee, in often remouing my dulnesse, and in steed thereof, to giue mee thy holy Spirit, and by him power effectually, to call vpon thy holy Name, which effectuall fauour of thine, I haue oftentimes found and felt, when I haue had an inward motion, tending to a desire to pray, and yet no power or ablenesse to open my mouth, or aptnesse to mooue my tongue, which hath caused mee many times to thinke that thou my God, hast beene angry with me, and in that thou hast with-holden thy Grace so long, that thou hadst forsaken me. So that I haue bee
                     •
                  e info
                     •
                  ced oftentimes to keepe silence, when I would haue prayed, and to close my lippes, when I



would haue spoken.
               Thus good Father haue I beene many times, as I am presently troubled, and inwardly greeued, euen in my soule, at the hardnesse of my heart, and dulnesse of my spirit. And yet at length I haue felt as it were the fire of feruent zeale so inflaming my heart, as I haue suddenly spoken with my tongue, I haue prayed vnto thee, and thou hast heard me.
               This holy and heauenly worke of diuine Prayer, I finde to bee farre from mine, or the best mans owne power▪ it is the onely worke of thine owne spirit, which I haue many times formerly discerned, for when I haue beene most dull, and most vnapt to pray, thou, euen then, euen in my silent musing, and meditation hast enabled mee, to



breake forth into words, through faith, which haue pierced the very heauen of heauens, euen vnto the Throne of thy great Maiesty, where Christ my mediator stands at thy right hand, presenting in my behalfe, my weake Petitions euen in his owne name; and obtayneth mine humble desires, according to thine owne will which worketh bet
                     •
                  er things for mee, then I can wish or will.
               I am not therefore discouraged, good Father, thogh I seeme dull in spirit, and as it were cleane destitute of faith, for I know thy guifts are without repentance, and though I feele not this heauenly worke of thy holy Spirit, at all times a like in mee: yet doe I assure me, hee is in mee, and will worke againe,



the same heauenly effects, for where thy blessed Spirit hath once taken habitation; and once sanctified the soule, that soule is so effectually possessed by that 
                     •
                  pirit, and that Spirit so possesseth that soule; that he may be assured, neuer to bee absolutely dispossest of the same, howsoeuer hee may for a time seeme absent. It is but to mooue mee to seeke him, finding the want of him, to long for him.
               Though therefore deare Father, my heart bee hard by nature, and my spirit d
                     •
                  ll to euery holy and heauenly dutie, so that I cannot outwardly vtter, what I inwardly conc
                     •
                  iue and desire, with such earnestnesse and feruencie of spirit, as I would; but weakly and coldly: yet doe I assure my selfe, that thou considerest mine inward desires, and hearest



my most secret sighes, as plainely, as if I cryed vocally and aloud vnto thee.
               I cannot therefore but confidētly assure my selfe, that according to thy promise thou wilt heare and consider, that I hunger and thirst for thy Grace, that my dulnesse being remooued, I may conceiue in my heart, and frame with my lippes mine humble Petitions, which thou hast promised to heare, especially such as thine owne Spirit composeth in mee.
               Deny not therefore good Father, thy holy Spirit to me, that faithfully craue him onely to be enabled effectually to pray vnto thee: for thou hearest not the best man, nor the best ma
                     •
                  s best prayers, for his, or his prayers sake; but for thy best beloued So
                     •
                  nes sake, and such onely prayers



as proceed from thine owne Spirit. Fulfill therefore good Father, all my godly desires, through Christ Iesus. Amen.
               Let vs pray, that wee may pray.
            
            
               A Prayer to God for the helpe of his holy Spirit, and other blessings, Spirituall and Corporall; comprehending the most needfull blessings, fit at all times for all men to bee desired.
               GRacious Lord God, and most louing in Iesus Christ, thou hast of thine owne free fauour, willed all men, in all their troubles, dangers, and wants of Spirituall and



corporall things to come vnto thee, to aske in the Name of thy Sonne, and they shall receiue whatsoeuer they faithfully pray for, to seeke helpe of thee, and they shall finde it, in due and conuenient time, to knocke and they shall be admitted into thy holy presence.
               But good Father, as thou hast thus commanded me, worke in me power, truely to performe what thou commandest; to pray, I am of my selfe dull; to seeke, I am by nature blinde; & to knock, I am weake; and therefore thou seemest to command things to mee impossible to be effectually performed: say therefore



vnto mee, and performe it, namely that thy Spirit may bee a sufficient helpe vnto me.
               Thou well knowest mine insufficiencie Lord, for I cannot of my selfe thinke a good thought, how then can I of my selfe, pray and obtaine, seeke, and finde what I want, or knock, and bee heard. This sacred vertue none by nature hath, it is of thine owne free Grace, and they onely to whom thou vouchsafest thine owne Spirit, to helpe their weakenesse, such in deed can faithfully aske, such can dilligently seeke, and constantly knock, they onely obtaine what they aske, they finde what they



seeke, and they are heard and admitted into thy presence when they knock.
               Oh! admit me Lord into the number of them, to whom thou hast vouchsafed this blessed priuiledge, for they belong onely to the truely faithfull, to such as thou hast chosen of thine owne purpose, whom thou hast made fit to aske, apt to seeke, and constant to knock.
               Apt I am to aske many things, because I want manie, and I know thou art able, and willing to grant euery good thing. But I am ignorant so to aske, as I may obtaine, for I know not what to aske as I ought, and therefore



though I often aske, I receiue not, because I aske amisse; tending my prayers rather to the obtayning of carnall, then Spirituall and heauenly riches, and finde them not; because thou seest the granting of them, rather hurtfull then profitable vnto me.
               Send therefore deare Father, send downe thine holy Spirit, who onely knoweth how, and for what to pray, though I bee ignorant of, hee knoweth thy will, though I bee weake, he is powerfull; and though I be corrupt, He is holy, as thou art holy: 
                  
                     •
                  ee onely knoweth my wants, and how they may bee supplied. Therfore none but



he Lord can make my Petitions effectuall, none but he can speake for me, with me, and in me. Good Father denie him not vnto me, leaue mee not destitute of his helpe.
               
                  When he commeth, he shall teach mee all things, fit for mee to learne, hee will prompt, and tell mee what is fit for me to aske, he will prepare my heart, hee will rectifie mine affections, he will abandon my darkenesse, deadnesse and dulnesse, he will vntie my faultring tongue, and open my closed lippes, hee will inlarge my knowledge, and increase my faith.
               If I pray without the helpe of this thy blessed



Spirit, I doe but vtter a bare voyce, O Lord, which cannot come into thy presence, nor returne any comfort to mine owne soule, but speaking in and by him, I shall assuredly bee heard, for when I pray sinceerely and effectually in deed, it proceedeth not from mee, but from thine owne Spirit that speaketh in mee, and beareth the greatest burden of my prayers, though the words passe thorow my lippes, they are not mine, but his.
               Holy Father, euer louing; louing in Iesus Christ, inkindle mine inward godly desires, through the heauenly heate of that Sacred fire, touch my tongue, with



that celestiall cole from thine Alter, then shall my heart be prepared; then shall my lippes be opened, then shall I speake with my tongue, according to the meaning of thine owne Spirit; then shall mine vnderstanding be inlarged, then shall I app
                     •
                  ehend thy mercie, and fully enioy thy fauour in Christ my Redeemer; then shall I finde and feele in my heart, an assured testimony, that my prayers are come vp into thy presence, then shall my guilty conscience, burdened with sinne be eased; and all my wants spirituall and corporall, outward and inward, bee fully and timely supplied, and all my feare



bee remooued; and all things, howsoeuer seeming contrary, shall worke together, yea together, to my perpetuall peace and comfort in thee. Then shall I receiue in this corrupt and weake vessell of dust, the Image of my Redeemer; bring forth the fruits of his Kingdome, and euen here, feele and be assured, to bee sealed vp in the number of thine Elect Saints; and enioy the glorie of that future Kingdome in full, which heere I partake and know but in part, according to that measure of knowledge which it hath pleased thee, through thy holy Spirit to reueale vnto mee, in this mortality,



where yet I finde the merits of my Redeemer preuayling, to the washing away of my sinnes. I heare his voyce, and heere desire to follow him, and to obey thee in him, submitting my selfe to vndergoe whatsoeuer crosse for his sake, as hee endured the death of the Crosse for mine; euermore looking for, & longing to be dissolued, freed from this worlds vanities, and to bee partaker of the glory, which by his death, hee hath purchased, for all that in faith, and holy desire; Looke for his second comming: for which all that are guided by that thy Sacred Spirit, inwardly and dayly cry, Come



Lord Iesus, come quickly, and end these dayes of sinne.
               
               In the meane time, thou knowest louing Father, that I am inforced to bee combred about manie things of fa
                     •
                  re inferiour condition, following the things of my worldly calling, which much hinder mee in the performance of better things, and which often hinder the liuely working of thy holy Spirit in me.
               I am much and often oppressed with the strength of mine owne inherent corruption, often assayled by that my deadly enemie Satan; who seeketh by all meanes to stop the course of thy Spirit in mee. But



thy Grace is sufficient to preuent him for me.
               Thou knowest also deare Father, that I am much and often afflicted heere, and stand subiect to many and seuerall tryals, as to Sicknesse of the body, danger of the decay and losse of my Limbes, and the vertue and vse of my Senses, vnto Pouertie, Enimies, and Persecution for the constant profession of thy sincere Religion, vnder the burden and feare of these ineuitable miseries, I should faint, but that I know thee and whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ, and haue the assistance of thy blessed Spirit, testifying vnto my spirit, that thou art the whole



and sole disposer of all these, and that all things worke together for the comfort of all that loue thee, knowing and being assured of thy presence and prouidence, I will not feare whatsoeuer befall mee; for all troubles, crosses and miseries, I finde to bee but holesome medecines, tempered and gently prepared by thine owne hand for the cure and preseruation of my sicke and sinnefull soule, from eternall death.
               I humbly therfore, deare Father, pray thee, so to moderate my troubles and afflictions, as by the helpe and aide of thy holy Spirit, I may with patience and an heauenly kinde of



alacrity vndergoe them. And according to thy good pleasure continue the health of my body, the vse of my senses & limbs, peace with thee my God and with all men as becommeth mee, still guided by thy Spirit, that I abuse none of thy blessings, through 
                     〈◊〉
                   corruptions.
               And while I liue here in this earthly pilgrimage, as a stranger, vouchsafe me, with thy heauenly Spirit to giue mee a competent portion to sustaine me, and those whom thou hast cōmitted vnto my charge, both in spirituall and corporall sustinance.
               Let not too heauie tentations ouer-presse me, let



too much want, and too heauy crosses ouer-afflict me, but lay vpon mee what thou wilt, and neuer take from me thy holy spirit, so shal I be able to beare what soeuer thou thinkest fit to be laid vpon me; for by the strength of thy preuayling spirit, I shall vndergo what thou in loue (as indeed it is) shalt lay vpon me.
               By promise thou carest for me, and hast willed mee to cast my care vpon thee, which I haue done euer since it pleased thee to reueale thy selfe vnto mee in thy beloued Son: and thou hast not deceiued me; for I haue euer found thee true, in performing whatsoeuer thou hast promised, euen in



sending that Comforter, who hath euer assisted mee in reuealing thy Son, in whō thy continual fauour I haue euer found most certaine, secret, & sweet, so enabling me to speake vnto thee, as when I haue offended thee by my sinnes, I haue felt the pardon of them in my conscience by the blood of that Lambe, testified vnto mee by thy blessing and sanctifying Spirit. When I haue been sicke, thou hast healed me; I haue been in mortall danger, and thou hast preserued me; I haue had enemies, and thou hast defended mee; and often haue I been in distresse and want, and thou hast without my desire or desert plentifully



releeued mee: yea Lord, thou hast giuen when and what I haue not asked; thou camest and soughtest mee first, Lord, I sought not thee: thou aboue all shewedst thy selfe most louing vnto me, in sending me thy heauenly spirit, without whose ayd I could neither aske nor receiue, I could neither seeke nor find comfort; neither could I knock, or deserue to enter into thy fauour. By his presence I haue felt the fulnes of ioy and gladnesse: And therefore as thou hast graciously begun, Lord, so continue thy grace in mee, and thy loue towards me alwayes, in all places, among al men, in all my labours, iournies,



and lawfull and godly endeauors, for thou hast commaunded mee while I liue 
                     •
                  eere, not to rest idle, but to bee doing that which is good.
               Thou hast giuen mee a calling, wherin without thy blessing I may labour, and yet lacke; I may ayme by good intent, and yet erre, without the gracious direction of thy Spirit: I am ignorant of, and dull to performe that which may bee either well pleasing vnto thee, or truly profitable to my self. But by the blessing of thy holy spirit, I shall please thee in Christ, who pleaseth thee for mee; and then whatsoeuer I thinke, speak, or doe, shall prosper,



and yeeld mee supply in all my wants both spirituall, and corporal, and that from day to day, which by thine owne promise shall be sufficient for the day.
               O holy and heauenly Father, hold me euer in thine 
                     •
                  bedience, shelter me vnder 
                     •
                  he shaddow of thy protecting wings, stop the whole course of sinne in mee, and continue thine holy spirit euermore in me, that he being my guide in all mine actions, I may finish the course of this my pilgrimage in all sinceritie, sanctitie, and safetie, and in the end obtain the glory which thy Sonne my Sauiour hath purchased for mee by the shedding of his blood vpon



the Crosse; and that euermore while I liue, I may hunger and thirst for righteousnesse, vntill I become a perfect man in Christ Iesus, that leauing this mortall life, I may ioyfully enter into that euerlasting rest, Amen, Amen in Christ my hope, my strength, and my assured and faithfull Redeemer.
               Lord euermore increase and confirme my faith, and continue that holy spirit in mee.
            
            
               A motiue to begin the day with Prayer.
               IT is a dutie not so much required by God, for his owne sake of vs, as necessary and



profitable for our selues to begin the morning with Thanksgiuing and Prayer. The first, God requireth of vs, as due vnto him, for preseruing vs, and giuing vs rest, and sleepe, and safetie the night past. The second, namely Prayer, most necessary for our selues: for without the helpe, fauour, power, protection, and prouidence of God, wee can expect no comfort, or safetie, or good successe the day following; wherein doe lye hidden many dangers of our bodies, many bayts, allurements, and tentations of Sathan, the world, and our owne corruption, for our soules, much weaknesse and ignorance in our selues, to performe the works of our owne callings, besides ill successe in our labours without his blessing. And shall we think that God will giue a blessing to



our labours, safetie to our persons, or defence from these spirituall enemies, vnlesse we recommend our selues to him in the name of his sonne? No, no, we may not flatter our selues, that because we are lustie and strong, our senses good, & our wit and vnderstanding quick, we may goe from bed to businesse, and walke in our owne wayes vntill the euening, either forgetting or neglecting God, who with-holding his help and hand, infinite are the dangers wee are subiect vnto, both spirituall and corporall. Therefore looke vp, powre out thy p
                     •
                  ayers as a sweet morning sacrifice to God in the name of Christ; and then goe on thy lawfull occasions and prosper. And for want of thine own abilitie to discouer thine owne necessities, and to craue Gods blessings, and to declare



thy thankefulnesse, vse the helpe of the labours of such as haue framed prayer for this holy purpose. Or this, howsoeuer, weake prayer following, wherein thou mayst finde comfort, and so with inward ioy thou maist from day to day, the more cheerefully follow thy vocation.
            
            
               A Prayer fit to be vsed euery morning.
               O My God, my God, and my most louing Father, in thy best beloued Christ Iesus, I yeeld thee vnfained thankes, for thy wonderfull mercies and vndeserued fauors, vouchsafed vnto mee all my life, and especially for electing,



creating, and redeeming mee, and for all other thine vnspeakeable fauours from time to time bestowed vpon mee, touching my corporall comfort, which I neither can expresse with tongue, nor conceiue with my heart. Accept I humbly beseech the merrits of thy Sonne, and his obedience in stead of my thankfulnesse: for I am corrupt, and sinnefull, not worthy to take thy glorious Name into my mouth, nor to heare that sacred Word from thine, I am dull in hearing thee speake vnto mee, and slower in practise of the good things thou commandest, but prone and apt to doe the contrarie:



Such is my wretched condition, that what I should doe in answer of thy will, I cannot doe it. But what thou forbiddest, I cannot but doe it.
               A wretched creature, deare Father, I am by nature; yet grieued in heart, that I am thus yoked, that when I would serue thee, I finde a law in my members rebelling against thy Spirituall working in mee, and am cast downe in my Spirit, finding so strong an enemy in mine owne flesh, that still fighteth against thy Grace working in me, striuing to hinder euery good and holy motion arising of thy Spirit: So that when I would doe



good, euill is present with me: when I would pray, dulnesse and drowsinesse, nay (to my shame O Lord meere infidelity), seemeth so to possesse my heart, that I cannot open my mouth vnto thee.
               Thou giuest mee many occasions, through the infinite tokens of thy loue, to mooue mee to thankefulnesse, and yet I rest vnthankefull; I feele also in my selfe as many occasions, through mine owne corruption and wants, to hūble my selfe before thee in prayer; & yet I rest, often-times altogether mute▪ and can neither pray, nor be sufficiently thankefull.
               The comforts, which



thou daylie and hourely vouchsafest mee, I receiue and enioy: yet doe I not shew my selfe, so forward to acknowledge these thy mercies, as I am ready to receiue them. They are infinite, my selfe not worthy the least of them: And such is thy loue, and Fatherly prouidence ouer mee; that euery day and euery night, and euerie minute in them, doe testifie vnto mee, that thou art euer my mightie God in defending mee from dangers, and my most louing Father in cōtinually supplying all my wants.
               Thou mayst Lord iustly with-hold from mee my food in the day, and my rest in the night, because



in the day I neglect to serue thee, and in the night I forget to call vpon thee.
               Thou canst not but obserue, that I haue not so thought and meditated of thy louing kindenesse, and mine owne dangers this night, as to affoord the least breach of my sleepe to thanke thee. I layde me downe, I haue slept my sleepe, and by thy power risen againe. O that mine vprising from my sleepe, might through thy Grace, worke mine vprising from my sleepe in sinne.
               Gracious God and full of loue, grant me thy loue, that I may render thee loue, which I confesse deserueth



not the name of loue in comparison of thine, though for thy loue I should giue my body to be burned, yet such is thy mercie, that thou acceptest the least mite of true obedience, as a great measure of my loue, so full of humane and spirituall infirmities, which haue ouerspread as thou knowest, all-offending Adams issue.
               Holy Father, I know thee, and whom thou hast sent, Iesus Christ, hee it is that hath taken away that heauie burden of my corruption, by his most perfect Righteousnesse, and the guilt and punishment of my transgressions, by his owne al-sufficient sufferings:



Therefore, though I be slack in thankfulnesse, for thy blessings and fauours, formerly bestowed vpon mee. Let mee euen this morning, as I newly enter into the light of the day; so by thy Grace, grant Lord, that I may enter into the light of new and sincere knowledge and obedience.
               Humbly praying thee, to bee vnto mee this day following, a God to preserue, a Captaine to defend mee, a light to guide me, and a louing Father to releeue me.
               Let thy blessings bee plentifully powred vpon mee, let heauenly knowledge abound in mee, let



faith more and more increase and be strengthened in me, and the power of sin and Satan more & more be weakened in mee. So shall mine obedience towards thee my God, more and more appeare in mee, and then shall all that I take in hand this day, and at all times prosper, which grant good Father in Iesus Christ sake. Amen.
               Lord increase my saith this day and euer.
            
            
               A motiue to prayer before a man goes to bed.
               IT is commonly obserued, that hee that forgets to giue God thankes, when hee beginnes the day, for the rest



and saftie in the night past, will not be well disposed, to commend himselfe to God, when hee goes to rest in the night: yet is the night the most dangerous time, when darkenesse ouer shadowes the house, wherein wee sleepe, and when our eyes are shut vp by the drowsinesse of our spirits; what comfort can there then appeare? Though wee may lie downe in some artificiall light, wee are suddenly be cloud
                     •
                  d with naturall darkenesse, wherein all that intend wicked and secret mischiefes, are most apt to attempt most dangerous plots vpon such as are secure without God: And Satan himselfe findeth the darkenesse of the night the fittest time to present vnto our wandring thoughts some euill imaginations: our mindes,



being then at seeming quiet, free from externall obiects. And what that malignant enimie suggesteth in darkenesse, the man, not hauing faith and the feare of God, longeth for the light, to put that euill in practise, that Satan hath in the darke mooued him vnto.
               Besides, we see by dayly experience, that many haue layd themselues downe to rest in the night, in seeming safty, that could not say with Dauid, J rose againe in safetie, for the Lord sustained me, for some haue beene preu
                     •
                  nted by sudden death, some by sickenesse; So that if the Lord sustaine vs not, if hee defend vs not, if hee watch not ouer vs, if his Angels garde vs not, especially in the night; wee cannot but be subiect, to manie ineuitable perils. And how can wee thinke to enioy



quiet & rest in safty, if we cal not vpon him, that is our keeper and the giuer of rest, sleepe and health? For where God is not in the minde, there are the thoughts wandring vpon things offensiue to God, pleasing to Satan, hurtfull to our soules, and distempering the body, which in a moment, may seperate the vnprepared soule from the wretched body.
               What and how diff
                     •
                  rs the man, that lies downe to sleepe not calling vpon God, from brute creatures, which couet and take there rest and sleepe as man, and rise vp to feed?
               Should reasonable man so neerely resemble vnreasonable creatures? (who in their kinde praise God) and man to dishonour him by vsurping the benefit of rest and sleepe, without acknowledging them



his owne gifts? And how can he acknowledge them his gifts without thankesgiuing vnto him for them, and prayer to him to enioy them?
               Let no man be so stupid, sottish, and bruitish, as to goe to his rest without recommending himselfe to God, his body, his soule, and all that hee poss
                     •
                  ss
                     •
                  th: for it is hee onely that keepeth Israel, namely, all that feare him; hee is euer watchfull ouer his, for he neuer slumbreth nor sleepeth. To his power, prouidence, and protection then let vs recommend our selues, confessing our sins, and crauing pardon 
                     •
                  n the m
                     •
                  
                  rits of his Sonne: so shall we lay our selues downe in peace to rest, and rise againe in safetie, for the Lord himselfe will sustaine vs.
            
            
               
               A Prayer before a man goe to his nightly rest.
               O God, powerfull and louing in Iesus Christ, I thanke thee that thou hast safely brought mee to the end of this day, wherein I thankfully confesse I haue receiued at thy most bountiful hands, through Christ, many cōfortable blessings, not worthy of the least of them, but rather of punishment for this dayes sinnes; though committed in the light, yet are they the works of darknes. Good Father, disperse & dispell the darknesse of my sinning minde▪ as a mist, and send mee the



light of thy sauing grace, to enlighten mee now in the darknes of the night, which with thee is as the noone day, but to me it is fearefull without thee: for that in it many dangers lye hidden, to mee vnknowne; and if I knew them, vnable I am without thee, to preuent the least of them. But thou that hast made the blacke euening, hast made also the bright morning, and in both thou art a like watchfull ouer those that are thine. I doe therefore humbly recommend my selfe, my soule, and my body into thy most powerfull protection. The darknesse of the night doth as well declare thy glory, as doth the clearest



rest day. Though to mee weake creature, the night is most dangerous; but that thou art my light and my saluation, what, or whom, therefore need I to feare? Thou art the strength of my life, of whom, or of what, should I be afrayd? Thou art to mee a strong rocke, a house of saftie in the night; for weake is the strength of the strongest materiall house, vnable to preuent the dangers, which thou permittest to befall many. But Lord, I trust not in houses of clay, I trust in thee, my strength, to thee I come for succour & defence this night; withhold not thy helpe lest I perish in the darknesse: I trust in thee, let my darknesse be



turned into light, and let the light of thy sauing coū
                  tenance cheere mee in this nights darknesse: for without thy fauor I liue in darknesse in the most cleare day light; and hauing thee my light, the darknesse of the night shall bee light vnto mee.
               Lord abandon from my heart all vnholy thoughts this night, and giue mee a watchful heart, though my body sleepe, mine eyes shut vp, and all thy visible creatures, all carnall obiects be taken from my sight, let the eyes of mine vnderstanding be alwayes open, to behold to my comfort, thy brightnesse and glory. The Heauens declare thy glory, and



the Firmament sheweth the work of thine hands: these and all other thy creatures, shew thy greatnes, and the preseruation of them, sheweth thy goodnes; and mine owne continuall preseruation, I cannot but to my shame and condemnation, confesse, to thy praise and glory. Giue me therefore holy Father, a thankfull heart, for thy mercies this day past, and a fearefull heart to offend thee sleeping, by euill and corrupt dreames; or waking, by euill and vngodly thoughts, and vnholy imaginations: that sleeping and waking, I may feele the working of thy Spirit, either in holy Meditations, or faithfull



Prayers; that euen as the day requireth mee not to bee idle, in well performing my lawfull labours, so I may not spende my night-wakings in idle fantasies, but in holy thoughts. And let mee not be ouercome as Samson, with sleep, who lost his strength, least Sathan finding mee so sleeping, should depriue me of my faith in thee, which is my strength, the strength of my life: but that I may so watch, as whether I wake, I may wake to thee, or whether I sleepe, I may sleepe in thee. Lord, let me not sleepe in my sinnes▪ 
                  
                     •
                  et mee not carry the guil
                     •
                   of my transgressions past vnto my bed, but through



the merites of my Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, vouchsafe mee pardon for all my sinnes, and be thou pleased to bee reconciled vnto mee, through his Blood: So will I lay mee downe to take my rest, beseeching thee so to watch ouer mee, that I may rest in peace, and rise in peace: and let the words of my mouth, that I shall vtter this night, and the meditations of my heart, bee acceptable vnto thee, O Lord my GOD, my Strength, and my Redeemer. Amen.
               Lord increase my Faith this night, and confirme it in mee for euermore. Amen.
            
            
               
               A most comfortable incouragement, to all poore and distressed men, to vndergoe whatsoeuer trouble, with patience, by the example of most holy men, that haue been in greatest affliction: and may serue as a generall motiue, to sundry seuerall Prayers following.
               TRouble comprehendeth all the miseries that man endureth in this life, aduersitie, enemies, sicknes, pouertie, persecution, and all kindes of afflictions, and sufferings, infinite in number, grieuous in qualitie, and irksome to flesh and blood, and befalleth on men diuersly, either for the punishment of sinne past, or for the preuenting of sinne to come. God sendeth affliction vpon his owne dearest children,



to weine them from the loue of the vanities of the world, that they perish not with the world: But vnto the wicked, as the beginning of their sorrowes; and to terrifie his own from committing like sinnes by example of their punishments.
               Gods children are forewarned, that they must suffer: He that will liue godly in Christ, must suffer affliction; yet by promise, not aboue their strength: for God putteth to his hand, to make their burden light, with a promise also of future comfort; and though their troubles seeme great and grieuous, faith in God maketh them more easie to them that suffer, then they conceiue that beholde them with carnall eyes. Great indeed are the troubles of the righteous, but God deliuereth



them out of all. Sorrow & heauinesse may endure for a night, namely, during this life, but ioy commeth in the morning, after this death, and at the resurrection of the dead, glory for euermore.
               Troubles are but for a moment, and then commeth comfort; therfore doe the children of God with ioy and patience vndergoe them: But contrary, the comfort of the wicked, is here short and momentany, but th
                     •
                  ir future misery will be perp
                     •
                  tuall.
               The patient suffering of the children of God, is a manifest token of the righteous iudgement of God, as Saint Paul saith to the Thessalonians, whose patient suffering he commended, imputing it a glory vnto them, that they were accounted worthy of the kingdome of God, for which they suffered.



Whereby it appeareth, that euery suffering, euen of the godly, is not glorious such as befall them for their transgressions. But if we liue godly in Christ, and for that suffer trouble, wee may comfort our selues, and beare it with patience, by whom, or howsoeuer we are afflicted: for we may be assured, that God in his Iustice, will recompence tribulation, to them that wrongfully trouble vs; and to vs that are so wrongfully troubled, rest and peace in the end.
               
               But affliction befalls Gods children oftentimes, for seeming other causes, then for righteousnesse sake; as when the wicked mis-conceiue of their actions, & iudge of them as wicked doers, without iust caus
                     •
                  , as did Jobs friends, accusing him of hypocrisie; and as Shimei, rayling vpon Dauid;



the wicked iudges, falsly accusing Susanna: though it proceeded not from these wicked men, as of malice against them for that they were godly, but instigated by the malice of Sathan, to abuse them, because he saw their integrity, and holy conuersation towards God, therefore made hee them his instruments to afflict them: which trouble of theirs, may be also sayd to be for Christes sake, forasmuch as Sathan did what hee could to shake their faith in God, & so to fall from their holy conuersation. And thus worketh hee against the dearest children of God at this day.
               Sathan cannot endure with patience, any that liueth in the true feare of God, to passe in so holy a conuersation, but that he will endeauour to blemish them, at least, seeking all



possible meanes by afflicting them, to make them doubt, whether, by Gods permitting the wicked to afflict them, they stand in the fauor of God, or no; that if it were possible, he might draw them from their obedience to God, and their dependance vpon his prouidence, and to seeke some sinister, or vngodly means to free themselues.
               He saw that Iob serued God truly, & that God was his continuall protector and refuge: therfore did he maligne Iob, & tryed his vttermost infernall stratagems, to cause him to distrust God: he slew his dearest children, he raised the Sabeans, and others to rob him of his goods, hee brought vpon his person loathsome diseases, he drew vpon him extreame pouertie: when none of these could withdraw him from his



faith in God, hee caused his own wife to be an instrument of deepest malice against him. What greater affliction could befall a mortall man? yet in all this was not Iob vnfaithful, but depended still on God, knowing, that though God was pleased to permit Sathan to punish him in this so strāge a manner, God had his ende therein for Iobs good, contrary to Sathans purpose: for where Sathans ayme and end was, to haue confounded Iob body and soule; God, notwithstanding Sathans malice, turned Iobs miseries, into vnspeakable comfort heere, and future eternall saluation, and caused his story to be written, for our imitation of Iobs constancy and patience.
               Heere is matter of comfort for all Gods afflicted children, in what manner soeuer



they be afflicted, for this holy man Iob suffered all kindes of tryals, losse of goods, sicknesse of bodie pouerty, slander, vpbrayding, rayling on of his owne wife; and what not? By which we may learne that Satan is skilfull in the art of afflicting, if one kinde will not serue, hee hath a second, a third, and infinite: yet can hee doe no more then God permits him, who according to his promise, giues to the faithfull a comfortable issue, in all their tentations.
               It is the cognizance of Gods Children, to seeme most abiect in the world, and so they are to the world, tossed hither and thither, with the tempestuous waues of diuers tribulations.
               
                  Dauid a man chosen after Gods owne heart, how was



he vexed on all sides, inward and outward? both before he came to the Crowne by Saul and his malicious and vngodly retinue; as also after, by forraigne enemies, the Philistims, the Moabites, the Edomites, the Amonites, the Amalekites, and others; by his owne subiects, by them of his owne house: as by Achitophell, his owne priuie Counseller, and by Absolon his naturall, or rather, vnnaturall sonne. In all which troubles, he fainted not, but rested still in hope, not seeking reuenge of his enemies; but onely craued ayde of God, who neuer fayled him, nor forsooke him. God neuer forsaketh his, though for a time hee suffer them to taste a little smart, that their deliuery may be the more sweete.
               None of the dearest Children



of God, haue liued and died free from one tryall, or trouble or another, onely by Satans malice, yet to their owne good. Hee beganne first with innocent Abell, causing cursed Kayne to kill him, for the sincere worship of the liuing God. Faithfull Abraham was not free from tryals and afflictions, from doubtings and feares. Hee was commanded of GOD to offer his Sonne Isack in Sa
                     •
                  rifice, in whose seed the blessing was promised (a heauie tentation,) being affraide of his life for his wiues sake, was driuen to faire an vntruth, both to Pharaoh in Egipt, and to Abimelech in 
                     
                        ••
                     ran; hee had trouble by Lot his brother: he had griefe for the destruction of Sodom, and many other troubles befell that holy man.
               
                  
                  Izaake for feare to bee slaine for Rebekah his wife, exposed her chastetie to the will of a Heathen king: Hee was afflicted by the Philistimes, hee was crossed in his desire of preferring Esau before Iaakob; And thereat striken with great feare to obserue the prouidence of God, so to preuent his will: Iaakob was inforced to flie out of his owne Country and from his friends, and to bee a seruant in a strange Land, for feare of the wrath of Esau his brother; he was deceiued by Laban his vnkle, and hated of his neerest kinsmen Labans sonnes: he was inforc
                     •
                  d to flie from them, and was pursued, and threatned by Laban, whose purpose was to doe him violence, but GOD, the Protector of his, preuented him. Hee was incountred



by a man in the night (the Angell of God) who wrestling with him all the night, shooke him fearefully, and lamed him: hee marched on with paine of his thigh and in great feare and perplexity, with his wiues, his children, and his droues towards his offended brother Esau, Who came against him with foure hundred men. Hee was miserably tormented for the losse of Ioseph his dearest sonne, whom hee thought to be murdered: He was much and greeuously perplexed, at his sonnes murdering his neighbour Sechemites.
               
               
                  Ioseph was sold by his bretheren, for a slaue into a barbarous and prophane Nation; he was falsly accused, & wrongfully imprisoned. Yet God turned all to worke together for his good, as he doth



euen at this day for his.
               How many tryals, crosses, troubles and afflictions, had that most meekest man Moses? He was like to be slaine by the Angell of God in the Inne, for not circumcising his sonne, whom Zipporah his wife withstood, and at last circumcised him her self, and cast the foreskinne of her sonne, at Moses feete; saying, Thou art indeed a bloudy husband vnto mee. A heauie tentation, that shee that lay in his bosome, should so vpbrayde him, especially for executing the strict command of God: Besides this, how was hee troubled by the peoples Idolatry, murmuring, and rebellion? Being threatned, and in feare to bee stoned of the people: And many other crosses had he.
               Not one of Christs Apostles,



or faithfull Fathers of the Primitiue Church, no not Christ himselfe hath escaped the troubles of this mortall life, and shall wee, (we
                     •
                  e wee his dearest children) thinke, or desire to escape it, sith it is our honour to suffer with, and for Christ?
               The Scriptures themselues, besides authentike Histories abound with witnesses, that Gods Children haue beene euer most afflicted, and that God yet n
                     •
                  uer fayleth them, nor finally forsaketh them.
               Whosoeuer therefore, is strayted with any troubles, or pressed with any afflictions: Let them make vse of the examples of Gods dealing with, and his mercies shewed towards, our former afflicted faithfull Fathers. For hee is the same God still, hee hath the same power, the same prouidence,



the same loue, and the same Fatherly care of thē that trust in him, as our faithfull forefathers did; and were deliuered. And the memoriall of their faith and patience, is recorded by former holy men of God, as by Moses, by Dauid, by the Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles, to teach vs, to imitate them in holy obedience, euen vs vpon whom the ends of the world are come, that through our like patience and faith, wee might haue hope to bee likewise eased of our afflictions and troubles, as th
                     •
                  se and other holy men hoped, and were deliuered, and releeued.
               
                  Dauid that worthy King of 
                     
                        •
                     srael, penned to the prayse and glory of God, for our instruction and comfort, sundry most sweet and comfortable Psalmes, in the middest of his



greatest troubles, shewing the force of his faith to bee so strong, and his hope so assured, depending vpon Gods power, promises and prouidence, as he deemed himselfe, euen then deliuered, when he was yet in greatest perill.
               Such was the firme and constant hope of holy Dauid, that in all his troubles, sicknesse of the body, danger of enemies, yea, when his Crowne was like to be taken from his head, by his owne sonne; through patience and hope, not limiting the holy one of Jsrael, hee wayted Gods leasure, and was deliuered: teaching vs to attend Gods appointed time without grudging at our troubles.
               There is no danger so great, no tentation so strong, out of which God is not able to deliuer his. For example, was



not Daniel in a desperate danger, being cast into the hungry Lyons Denne? Did hee perish there? The three children in the seuenfold hot Furnace, were they consumed? Did not the powerfull and preuayling hand of God, the Angell of his presence, miraculously preserue them in his mercie? And did he not confound the ministers of their intended torments in his Iustice?
               Why then shall faithfull men feare or be affrayd at the 
                     •
                  alice, and furious threates of whatsoeuer roaring Tyrant? God hath power ouer their hearts and hands. And therefore sayth Dauid, full of faith, I will not feare what man can doe vnto mee, for it is the Lord that maketh mee to dwell in saftie.
               
               What, if then I bee sicke



with Hezekiah hee can apply the sweete and salutary figs of his fauour to heale mee, or will affoord mee the patience to beare it, or which is best of all, a speedie dissolution, to rest with him.
               If pouerty assaile mee, should I grudge, and repine at the wealth and prosperitie of others, euen as holy Dauid himselfe once seemed to doe, seeing himselfe in necessity, and the wicked to prosper? This he did in his haste, but vpon more holy deliberation, and consultation with the Word of God, he did acknowledge it good for him so to bee humbled; knowing that God forgetteth not the poore that call vpon him, though he supplie not our necessities in abundance, yet he neuer will faile to prouide for vs, that we perish not.
               
                  Hee may suffer vs to want some superfluous things of this world, that the wealthy haue: but instead thereof, hee will giue vs better things that the wealthy want. Though Lazarus was poore & naked, hungry and full of sores here, loathsome to the eye of men; and the rich man gloriously robed, his belly full, his body free from spott or wrinkle, which of these was the happiest? Man could not iudge, but their ends declared, which of them had the best portion, the vilest of them in mans sight, was most glorious in Gods, and contrary.
               Man often fayleth in iudgement, of mens happinesse, because hee seeth onely the case, and seeth not the Iewell within it; hee discerneth onely the outward habit, but not the inward heart, and therefore knoweth



not what end any man shall make: for whatsoeuer the outward shew bee of a happy man, beleeue it not, till thou see his end.
               What a miserable man was Iob on the dunghill? and what an vnhappy man was Joseph in prison? what ends the Lord made with them both, is manifest.
               What a happy man was Nabuchadnezzar in his glorious palace? and what a glorious Monarch was Balteshasher, who feasted one thousand of his Vassall Princes at once? What a worthy, wise, and glorious King was Herod, the son of Aristobulus, surnamed Agrippa, sitting in his royall robes, in his regall throne, at whose Oration, the people showted, crying, The voyce of God, and not of a man? Looke within a while vpon the first,



and thou shalt see him grazing with the wild beasts of the forest. Looke vpon the second, & thou shalt suddenly see him perish in his drunkennesse: and behold the third, and thou shalt see him, immediatly vpon his Deified Oration, to be deuoured with the vermine of his owne bowels.
               The estates of these kindes of men, seene with the eyes of a carnall man, are censured as they seeme: but these, and infinite other examples, prooue that the mightie and the wise men of the world, are not all glorious within, though gorgious with 
                     •
                  ut Iudge not therfore the ends of men by their outward appearance: for the most glorious beginnings of men not fearing God, come often to fearefull endes. To prooue further by Histories wee need not, wee haue seene



it with our eyes.
               But as touching the children of God, they for the most part seem base; and such as are seemly to the outward appearance, haue yet humble spirits, seeming not the wisest in the world, because they are inwardly so innocent and harmlesse, as they can shew no carnall policies, as doe the wise of the world: but the basest and seeming vilest of Gods children, that want plentie of food for their bodies, or competent clothes to couer their nakednesse, are yet, through faith, the feare of God, and humblenesse of heart, accepted of God. And although it be obserued, that at their deaths there be no pompous funerall Obsequies, yet dying the Saints of God, they haue the Angels of God attending thē, who conuey that part which



the world seeth not, into heauenly Paradise, as they did the soule of Lazarus, and leaue that seeming base part to the world, in as meane a manner to be disposed to the earth.
               If yet the vngodly poore should pretend interest in the loue and promises of God, and of his good creatures; because Dauid saieth, There is a God that careth for the poore, they deceiue themselues: for there is no promise, but to the poore fearing God, and that endeauour to liue by their lawfull labours: for no wilfully idle poor man can expect any promised comfort from God, but the godly who are made poore by Gods prouidence, to draw them to himselfe through affliction.
               God tryeth all his children, poore and rich, not after one and the same manner, but some



by enemies, as he did Dauid; some by sicknesse, as hee did Hezekiah; some by imprisonment, as he did Joseph; some with pouertie and penurie, as he did Lazarus; some by losse of children and goods, as hee did Iob: yet hee hath his time againe to release them, as hee raysed Dauid to the Crowne of Jsrael, as hee healed Hezekiah, and gaue him longer life, from the prison hee made Joseph a Prince; hee gaue Iob abundance of wealth, and tooke Lazarus from his misery in
                     •
                  o Abrahams bosome.
               When then that hath any faith or feeling of these most worthy examples of Gods humbling his Chrildren, and againe raysing them vp, will faint or feare, whatsoeuer befall them in this life? Were he persecuted, as Eliah by Jezebel, who had no visible



helpes, but a silly boy attending him; did not God send an host of heauenly Angels for his defence? God hath his Angels ministring Spirits, still ready to incampe about his: such is his care and watchfulnesse, his power and his prou
                     •
                  dence, that no Saul shall preuaile against his chosen Dauid, though hee were a mightie King with his armies against that one single man he could not hurt him: no Senacherib with his mighty Host, could not haue his will against faithfull Hezekiah. And therfore sayth Dauid full of assurance, If an Host pitched against me, my heart should not bee affrayd. So Iaakob was not dismayde at Esaus cōming against him with foure hundred men, because hee knew that God was with him.
               But admit that an Herode


                  
haue power permitted him of God, to take away Iohn Baptists head, and to kill Iames with the sword, shall we deeme it a hurt vnto them, in furthering and hastening their deliuery, from misery, to their future glorie with Christ?
               Whatsoeuer the enemies of God practise against the faithfull Children of GOD, by persecuting them, as they did by whipping Paul, by imprisoning Peter, by stoning Steuen: Doe they not make these the more glorious in their patient suffering for Christ, who hath prouided for them a Citie, a Kingdome, a Crowne? What lose then these seeming miserable men, when for their momentanie sufferings, they shall receiue a perpetuall reward?
               Gods faithfull Children,



the more they are persecuted and afflicted, the more they flourish in well doing, and the more they suffer, the more faithfull, strong, and constant they grow; And the more miseries they indure, so much the more take they hold of Gods power prouidence and promises, who hath assured them, that hee will neuer faile them, nor forsake them: But whatsoeuer, by whomsoeuer, and in what manner soeuer, they suffer, all shall worke together for their future eternall happinesse.
            
            
               A generall Prayer, in whatsoeuer troubles & afflictions, with a confession, that sinne is the cause of them.
               O Father, full of mercie, and abundant in



louing kindnesse, in Iesus Christ thy best beloued: thou hast euer a most Fatherly care of thy Children, though thou permit them often times to vndergoe heauie afflictions in this present life; by reason of which their greeuous troubles, they are commonly censured of the world: to bee euill doers, and to bee cast out of thy fauour, as was thy deare seruant Iob. And such as euer prosper and fall into no mis-fortunes, nor troubles like other men, to bee most beloued of thee, which often causeth thy dearest Children to doubt of thy loue. But Lord, I know thee to be a Father,



whose propertie is to correct those whom thou louest best, to keepe them vnder thine obedience, who else by reason of their originall corruption, the worlds vanities, and Satans malice might bee easily drawne to rebell against thee.
               I account it therefore gracious Father, an especiall token of thy fauour and loue towards me, that thou in so gentle a manner, dost remember me, and so fauourably to correct me; for I cannot but acknowledge Lord, and confesse against my selfe, that my heart within mee is so filthy, my minde so polluted, and my will and affections



so infected with sinne, that if thou shouldest seeme to winke at, and passe by mine infinite transgressions, and not in some measure to afflict me, I could not but according to mine owne corrupt condition, but runne into and commit more and more heinous sinnes, then hetherunto I haue done; which, already are more then sufficient, to cast mee cleane out of thy fauour; and consequently leaue me to mine owne vnruly will, which euermore hungreth and thirsteth after things most offensiue vnto thee.
               I doe confesse, O Lord, that pleasure and ease, and fulnesse of all carnall delights, are most sweet vnto



to my carnall minde, but much offensiue to thy most holy will. The things that I should doe I cannot doe: but the things that I should not doe, they are my chiefe delight, I loue what I should loathe, and loathe that which is life vnto my soule, whereby I heape vpon mee dayly, a most importable burden of thy wrath; And were it not that thou dost visite me with these thy Fatherly corrections, I could not but meerely forget, that euer thou createst me, that Iesus Christ came and suffered to saue mee, or that there were a Holy Ghost sent to comfort me. And therefore, good Father lay



vpon me, here what troubles or afflictions thou in thy wisdome thinkest sit to reclaime me from my euill wayes: and yet as thou knowest to an obdu
                     •
                  ate heart, afflictions, though they bee sharpe and greeuous, yet they profit not without thou with thy corrections, adde the molifying playster of thy Spirit, to make my heart appliable to thy working hand. Thou saydest vnto Paul, hauing carnall motions, that thy Spirit was sufficient to sustaine him. O let thy Spirit possesse me, then shall my stubborne heart relent, then shall my peruers will in some measure frame it selfe to thy Will;



then shall my corrupt mind now wandring after vnholy things be reclaymed, and onely seeke thee and the things more pleasing vnto thee.
               The Fathers of our flesh haue beene carefull of our corporall preseruation, and haue in loue corrected vs, for our childish faults. And shall I thinke, that it behooueth me not to subiect my selfe to thy louing care of the preseruation of my soule, who seeing, not onely the faults of my weake youth, but the grosse sinnes of my ripest age, that I should repine, at thy louing chastisements, which thou so fauourably infl
                     •
                  ctest vpon



me, not to confound mee, but to conforme mee to thine obedience. And therfore, Father, as thou well obseruest my sinnes, which either I neglect to call to minde, or which I cannot but remember; so consider what correction is fit for my reformation, for I am thine, and vnder thine owne hand: doe with mee what it shall please thee, onely strengthen my faith, that whatsoeuer thou layest vpon mee, I may still trust in thee.
               Yet Lord let not thy corrections be ouersharpe, or ouer heauie, or ouerlong for mee to beare, for I am weake. And therefore as thou increasest thy



corrections, so increase my strength to beare them. And as my sinnes by thy Grace shall diminish; so Lord, with-draw & withhold thy correcting hand: that in what measure soeuer my troubles and tryalls bee, my faith may bee so confirmed, as I may bee able to beare whatsoeuer thou shalt be pleased to lay vpon me.
               Hetherunto good Father, as I haue felt thy correcting rod, so also I haue found thy supporting hand: thou woundest, and thou healest, nay rather Lord, thou curest the wounds which my selfe haue made, for there is no sharper sword to my soule,



then mine owne sinne, and thy chastisements do abate the edge thereof.
               As thou knowest my sins Lord, so thou knowest my troubles. I am in danger, deliuer me; I am in want, relieue mee; I haue enemies, defend mee. In thee I trust; for there is none besides thee, whom I may trust.
               Thou art that mighty Iehouah, that omnipotent God of Hostes, who hast infinite meanes to helpe, releeue, comfort, and defend those that are thine, though they bee beset with a thousand miseries, with sicknes, with pouertie, with enemies, with slaunder, backbiting, enuy, malice, strife of tongues, imprisonment, and



with what else soeuer misery that Sathan can deuise against them, thou hast yet more infinite meanes to deliuer them out of all. And therfore Father, if all troubles, crosses, trialls and callamities should meete and combine in one against me, I shall not (assisted by thy grace) be ouermuch moaned or dismayd.
               Though trouble and affliction bring sorrow, and sorrow, heauines for a time, yet is my heart restored againe at length, as it were to life againe by thy grace: nay, Lord, I often find ioy in thy fauour, euen in the midst of misery: for as thou Lord, continuest not long in thine anger; so is not my



heart in continuall heauinesse. But as by thine holy aid I increase in faith: euen so decreaseth my grief and sorrow▪ and in my greatest troubles, the apprehension of thy blessed presence with mee, causeth my heart to leape for ioy within mee: though by nature I am weake, and prone to stoope and droope vnder the least affliction, yet I finde thy grace euermore ready to support and strengthen me. Therefore doe I yeeld thee all honor, praise, & thanks▪ together with my Lord and Sauiour Christ Iesus, and thy heauenly Spirit, that euermore doth comfort me, & confirm my faith in thee
               Lord euermore encrease my Faith.
            
            
               
               A Prayer for a man hindred by sicknesse, or any kind of infirmity of his body or limbes, whereby hee is disabled to follow and performe his lawfull calling: fit especially for such as cannot maintaine their poore estates, without performance of their honest labors.
               O Great, and most gracious Lord God, mercifull and louing Father in Iesus Christ; thou hast created me, formed and framed me with all compleat limbs and lineaments in the beginning, with all my senses perfect; and aboue all, with a measure of the knowledge



of thee & thy Christ: wherein, for that I haue not so walked, as becommeth a sonne of so gracious and great a father, but haue too much neglected my dutie and thankfulnesse, erring, estraying, and ranging to and fro from one vanity and sin vnto another, abusing al the parts and powers of my soule and body, contrary to that light which thou has
                     •
                   giuen me, defiling my selfe, and polluting those parts of my corrupt flesh, which thou first createdst in mee clean and free, from any of mine owne actuall pollutions. Thou in great mercy hast inflicted these infirmities vpon my corporall parts, to cure my diseased



soule, my spirituall and best part, imprisoned & inthrall
                     •
                  d in a most filthy and lothsome dungeon of dark and detestable impieties.
               Lord, I doe confesse my else worthy of greater punishments for my grieuous sinnes. But thou art so mercifull, and so commiserate a Father, that as thou knowest the qualitie of my sinns, so thou well knowest what quantity of correction may be sufficient to reforme me. And therefore, I doe wholly, and in all submission commit my selfe vnto thy mercy, knowing that thou hast power to mitigate, or totally to remoue the paine and misery, which my sinns haue iustly drawne downe vpon me.
               
                  Good Father, remember that thou hast promised, that whatsoeuer wee shall aske of thee in the name of thy beloued Sonne Christ, and wauer not, we shall receiue. Lord, I beleeue, that thou art able to cure me of whatsoeuer infirmitie; let not the weakenesse of my faith hinder thy good work vpon mee; let not my former sinns preuent thy mercy: for I constantly assure me, that thou cāst help me, such is thy power; and that thou either wilt helpe mee, or so mitigate mine infirmities, as I shall not onely bee able to beare them with patience, but in a measure sufficiently follow my vocation, such is thy mercy.
               
                  Father, I haue a Mediatour with thee, and such a mediator, as is not ignorant of, though neuer tainted or touched with any humane infirmitie, he hath taken vpon him, and satisfied for my sinnes; and for my sinns I do acknowledge this mine infirmitie is fallen vpon mee; Therefore Lord, my sinnes being once sufficiently punished in him, punish not me ouer-heauily for them againe.
               I am vnfainedly sory, for that I haue offended thee, and doe heartily repent me of my sinnes; and thou hast promised pardon to the penitent, and mercy vnto such as are truly sory for their sinnes.
               
                  This being thine owne promise, Lord, and thou knowing my faith (though weake) and my repentance, what should hinder thy mercies in forgiuing my sinns? and my sinnes being forgiuen, what should hinder that thy sweet saying▪ 
                  Be thou whole, and I shall be whole?
               Lord, as thou canst do all things by thy word, without meanes, so by blessing whatsoeuer meanes, that which thou wilt shall bee done: the very clay in the street openeth the eyes of the blinde (thou giuing a blessing vnto it) which in humane opinion should rather make blinde them that see. But such is thy great



power, and vertue of thy word, as things most contrary to humane reason, obey thee, and worke the effect wherunto thou appointest them: as the cluster of figgs, healed Hezekias, and the washing in Iordan cured Naaman the Syrian of his leprosie.
               Thou Lord art the great Phisician, curing Phisicians that cannot cure themselus, howe much lesse others, without thee. Therefore I know, that nothing can hinder thy healing of mee, but mine owne vnbeliefe & sin, which are the chiefe diseases of my soule, that thus pollute my body: so that soule and body being sicke, I come an humble patient



and petitioner, desirous only to touch the hem of thy garmēt; for I belieue Lord, that if my faith faile not, I shal draw vertue from thee, and bee either fully healed, or eased.
               Wherfore most gracious Lord God in Iesus Christ, increase and confirme my faith, and say vnto me, Be it vnto thee as thou beleeuest: then shall I be whole; for I constantly beleeue, that thou canst doe it, but that thou knowest what is best for me. In thy prouidence it befell, as a token of thy displeasure for my sins, that I might bee thereby continually put in mind, when I intend any thing offensiue vnto thee, that by my further



sinning I should feare greater punishments: for thou knowest my corrupt nature, euer inclinable to forbidden things, and therfore wilt continue thy gentle hand vpon me, lest I repenting of my repentance, should returne againe to new sinns: which, good Father, I humbly pray thee in fauour to preuent. If thou tarry long, and delay thy helpe, let not my faith falter, nor faile mee, nor my heart be discouraged; for thou knowest better what is best for mee, then I my selfe: And therefore will I wayte when, what, and how thou wilt worke for mee; nothing doubting, but that in thy fatherly prouidence,



thou wilt prouide for mee, and that thou wilt neuer faile mee, nor forsake me. Amen.
               Lord increase my faith.
            
            
               A consideration or consultation, touching the estates and conditions of seuerall men, their vocations, manners, liues lawfull and vnlawfull, punishable, and to bee cherished: seruing also as a necessary motiue to a prayer, for the blessing of God vpon the lawfull callings of men, of whatsoeuer condition: necessary for all men, that hope of any blessing vpon their labors, trauels, professions, arts, trades, or imployments.
               IT is not enough for a man to haue, or to desire a calling in the Church or Commonwealth;



but before he vndertake it, he must consider, whether it be lawfull, agreeable to the word of God, honest, or necessary for the vse and societie of men; and whether his apprehension and inclination be capable and able to manage it aright.
               It is not lawfull, though it be priuatly profitable to himselfe, if a man find himselfe not fit, neither is lawfully called thereunto, but assumes it to himselfe, neither respecting Gods glory, 
                     •
                  or the good of others, and consequently not honest; for that it proceedes only, respecting his owne corrupt ends: of which kind, may bee obserued, not a few who intrude into functions and callings, such as they cannot with a good conscience, nor with sufficient vnderstanding performe, which must rest vpon



euery mans conscience for his choyce.
               Some haue againe lawfull and laudable callings, of themselues sufficient, and yet may, and often doe erre in the execution, either for priuate profit, or forbidden ends.
               Some liue without any lawfull profession, profitable to none, no not to themselues, but are onely Ladders, to bring most plentiful mulcture to the Deuils mill, their patrimonies to Tauernes, Ale-houses, and worse places: mils that grind onely wickednesse, feeding themselues and others therewith, fat in impieties, for the shambles of Sathan.
               Of this, are some well descended Gentlemen, whose ancestors haue borne honorable & praise worthy Offices both in Church & Commonwealth, doing good to many, and to



none more hurt, thē vnto their dearest children, to whom they haue left great earthly portions, and patrimonies, and no good education or profession, to liue as men; no, not as men: for all men are borne to labour in one commendable calling or another, for the Church or Commonwealth to neither of which are many of these men profitable, but run on in their lasciuious liues, as the horse & mule, who yet in their kind haue more vnderstanding, and are more profitable then many of these men seeme yet to be.
               All parents yet are not much blame-worthy: for some are carefull, as men to prouide for their children, worldly goods, to maintaine them after their deaths. Some as Religious men, desire more the good education of their children in religious knowledge, then



desirous to make them great, they rather endeauour to make them good, which last is the worke of God, without whose grace, howsoeuer parents may instruct, and educate their children in Gods feare, and by a primary apprehension of their towardnesse in vertue; yet it falleth oftentimes out, that euen these, full of hoped towardnesse to prooue good and vertuous, and fit for laudable imployments, when their parents full estates befall them, they associate the company of such, as turne al the good they formerly learned into euill for though the father plant, the Minister waters, yet if the Spirit of God confirme it not in them, they will shew themselues to be but men, and such as feare not God, nor reuerence man, but liue as if there were no law, spending, as boastingly



they will say, but their owne. It were fault sufficient to consume it, had it bin their owne, gotten by the sweat of their owne faces: but being left vnto them by their carefull fathers, or louing friends, it is reputed by law theirs indeed, yet so as they should hold it as the free gift of God, or rather lent of him, rather to do good with it, then with the prodigall vnthrift, to consume it as these men doe vpon their lusts. And hauing spent all, as (in Gods iust iudgment) many of them doe, as daily experience sheweth, what becomes of them? doth not like experience tell vs?
               Many idle drones there are also, that haue not that, they by any colour may call their owne, and yet they spend and labour not, but are as the froth and scumme of a good Common



wealth. As touching their conuersation, it is not onely idle, in good things, but laborious in euill: they roaue and run about the citie and countrey, 
                     •
                  ilching, stealing, couzening, cheating, rioting in all kindes of wickednesse, and whose profession is only to deceiue.
               Can these men pray for a blessing vpon their vocations and labours? Nay, can they, or doe they pray at all? They may haue, and often haue the name of God, and his parts in their mouthes, but for a curse, not for a blessing; for in stead of praying vnto God, they blaspheme his name.
               It is manifestly obserued, that God is abused, and the Common wealth pestered, and priuily endangered, by the idlenesse, wickednes, and mischiefes of these men: And yet



who taketh it into consideration and endeuour to reforme it? Some are in places so eminent, as they cannot look so low; and some are in place of Office so meane, that haue a good will to put hand to helpe it, but their power is weake, and their countenance and aid small: they dare not taxe an offender in this kind, especially a Gentleman-like Roarer, that can make a whole Street, or a Hamlet to quake at his carriage, and execrable blasphemies.
               Some haue lawfull callings, but vse them not lawfully, for want of the grace of God to guide them, and the blessing of God to profite the Church, or Common-wealth by them, because they seldome or neuer pray for a blessing.
               Some are often seene to prosper in outward shew, by callings,



or rather trades vnlawfull, whereunto there can bee no lawfull calling, neither is the vse lawfull, as common professed Gamesters, combined Cheaters, and the like.
               But leauing such to their owne wicked practises, wherby they often deceiue the innocent and simple, but most of all, themselues; I wish that other men that haue lawfull callings, would consider the necessitie of Prayer to God, for a blessing vpon their labours and endeauors, not onely Mechanicks, and such as liue by their handy-labours, but from the highest to the lowest, in Church or Common-wealth.
               It is by God that Kings gouerne; therefore in imitation of Dauid and Salomon, they pray for, and obtain wisdome, rightly to gouerne their people; and where good, godly,



wise and religious Kings reigne, there the people in imitation of them, pray for their peace and safety, and that God would furnish them with wise and religious Counsellors, and that no Achitophell lurke wayting for mischiefe.
               Counsellors of State, haue an high and weighty calling, so haue Iudges of the Land, and other chiefe and eminent Magistrates, deriued mediatly from God; for, as the King is called of none, but immediatly by God to take cha
                     •
                  ge of his people: So he imparts the power of the sword, vnto his sub-ordinate Magistrats, for the execution of Iustice, functions of greater weight and moment, then is vulgarly esteemed. And therefore, though I neither presume, not neede to mooue them



when or how to pray. I only may remember them, that as they haue highest functions, they and we in their behalfes for them, may pray for the due execution of them; because their office and place is to correct the euill, and to protect the good, and that they mistake not, as by sinister information they may, and so erre vnwittingly.
               Men in authoritie, and in eminent places are chosen for their Vertues, Wisdome, Integritie and Iustice, yet are they subiect to censure, not onely of their Superiours, and equals, but often of most inferiours, wherein happie are the innocent, for GOD preserueth them, who sitteth in the Throne, that iudgeth right, to whom whosoeuer prayeth as Dauid did, shall finde that he will be a buckler



vnto him; his glorie, and the lifter vp of his head the greatest honour that man in this life can receiue.
               It may seeme needlesse, to put such in minde of this holy dutie of prayer, who haue the charge and ouersight of the Lords flocke; for their calling is so diuine, as they may not bee, but diuinely indued with heauenly gifts, abounding alwayes in the worke of the Lord, whose labours are not in vaine, blessed be God, whom we ought to reuerence, as the Ministers of God, labouring our saluation, and to pray for them.
               Yet may it not bee superfluous, to intimate to such as enter rashly into this holy function, that it is fit for them to examine their owne inward hearts, whether they came with a sincere Spirituall



deuotion to edifie Gods Church; or to make onely a carnall liuing vnder the name of a workeman in Gods haruest: If he came in regard of the first, Let him pray that God will blesse his labours, if onely of the second, Let him pray that God will enable him to discharge it, and withall that GOD remit the euill thoughts of his heart, for he entred not aright.
               Such as liue by their labours, bee they neuer so ingenious, neuer so labourious, neuer so cunning in their profession, art, or trade, they must know and acknowledge, that what they know, or howsoeuer they may performe it, it is but in part, and weake in comparison of the perfection. And that the knowledge and skill they haue is not theirs, but giuen them by



God, as hee gaue to Tubalkaine, the art of working in yron, and to Iubal, skill in musicke. Yet some, and they not of best perfection, will attribute their knowledge to their owne naturall wit and inuention, making an idol, as it were, of their owne braine, neuer giuing the prayse to the true Giuer; and that, and the want of prayer is the cause that many Artists and others faile often-times of good successe of what they vndertake to performe.
               Nothing can truely prosper without Gods blessing, which cannot bee obtayned, but by faithfull prayer. Neither will God heare their prayers, that deale vniustly in their callings, taking neuer so great paynes, rising early, taking rest late, sparing euen their food to increase



their store, it is all in vaine; Howsoeuer some may, & doe, waxe rich, by dealing vniustly, in weights, measures, false and counterfeit wares, by swearing, forswearing, and lying; the gaines they get, are but froth and silth, scraped out of the deuils dunghill▪ that will quickly returne from whence it came, and hee that so gets without repentance, shall haue his portion with his like, the Rich man, not with Lazarus.
               
               Happy therefore is he, that labou
                     •
                  s in his calling diligently, deales truely, craues Gods blessing faithfully, hee, and onely he, and his like haue rest, and peace, and plenty in their little truely gotten. Such are they that eate the labours of their hands, and art blessed.
               
               Hee therefore that will bee



happie, and prosper in his calling, let him often and faithfully call vpon the Name of the Lord, to which purpose he may vse the prayer following, or any other to the like purpose.
            
            
               A Prayer that God will blesse and prosper our labours and indeuours, in whatsoeuer calling.
               O Heauenly Father, great in Maiesty, wise of Counsell, absolute in Power, and vnsearchable in Prouidence, who of nothing hast made all things, and in thy greatest Wisdome, hast created man, whom thou guidest, gouernest



and disposest according to thine owne Will, and to whom thou hast appointed labour, and trauaile, whereby to get their reliefe; yet not all, in one manner of calling.
               Gracious Father, as I haue receiued life, and being of thee, and in thy prouidence, a calling therein, whereby to maintaine my being: So giue a blessing vnto mee, that I may haue true iudgement, and an vpright heart to performe my dutie therein, according to thy Will, that my calling may prosper vnder my hands, as thou blessedst Iaakob vnder Laban, and Ioseph in Potiphers house: So blesse me and my vocation,



that whatsoeuer I doe it may prosper.
               I confesse louing Father, that neither the most absolute art, greatest naturall knowledge, corporall or mentall diligence, can auaile any thing without thy blessing.
               By my naturall vnderstanding, I can neither apprehend in my minde, nor performe with my hands, or wit, the things that properly belong vnto my calling: But it is thy onely Wisdome, and of thine owne Fatherly fauour, that I haue beene made in some measure, capeable of that reason and iudgement, to which I haue attained, it is not in me, as of mine owne



power to performe the least part of that, which necessarily belongeth vnto my vocation, It is thine owne worke in me.
               If thou shouldest deale with mee according to my deseruings, thou mightest iustly depriue mee of that meane measure of knowledge, that by thy fauour and aide, I haue attained vnto, thou mightest weaken my senses, and the faculties of my body and minde, all which I cannot but confesse I haue abused, and without the vse of them, thou knowest I cannot performe the workes of my calling.
               I humbly therfore pray thee, good Father, rather



to increase and continue in me, that measure of knowledge, and that perfection of my body and minde, which thou hast already bestowed vpon mee, then either to depriue mee of them, or to weaken them in mee.
               I acknowledge, Gracious Lord, that there is no vocation or calling, high or low, no labour, exercise or endeuour that can bee vsefull or profitable to himselfe or others, no mans life pleasing or commendable without thine especiall direction and blessing, and that in the Name, of that blessed of all blessings, in whom as all blessednesse doth consist,



So through his most blessed mediation, and merrits, blessings vpon blessings, are powred vpon the godly labours of all them, that in whatsoeuer calling 
                     •
                  n his Name, truely seeke to be blessed.
               In him therefore Father of blessings, let thy blessing be vpon mee in all my labours, enterprises and endeuours: for without thy blessing, ayde, direction and protection, I may labour, trauaile, bee carefull solicitous, diligent, and most industrious, yet all in vaine: my paines may bee great, my rising vp to my labours earely, yet without thy blessing little profit mee: I may get much,



but I shall put it, as it were in a broken bagge, my going foorth without thy blessing cannot be but dangerous, my trauailes subiect to many perils, & in euitable inconueniences.
               Mine owne carnall corruptions accompany mee, whithersoeuer I goe, ride, or remaine: the vanities of the world euery where distract my wauering and inconstant minde: And Satan with his millions of infernall ministers, prouoking mee to sinne, pursue mee, euer plotting and practising occasions to draw mee from thee; suggesting Idlenesse and Ease, to bee sweete, and Labour and Trauaile in lawfull and



honest callings, painefull; deceite in my vocation, gainefull; iust dealing, foolish nicenesse; & negligent performance, a sufficient discharge of my dutie.
               Thus being beset, good Father, within and without with sundry tentations, I cannot without thy Grace, auoyde the committing of many sinnes, not only in abusing my calling, but in mine ordinary conuersation and course of life: and sinne committed, draweth on thy displeasure, and thy displeasure punishments, such as in thy seueritie may iustly disable mee to performe my dutie in my calling, hauing no power in, or of my selfe



to performe the least part of my duetie, either in my vocation or conuersation.
               Leaue me not therfore, deare Father, vnto mine owne weakenesse, nor to the will, and wiles of my Spirituall or corporall enemies, that hate me, and couet to hinder, or slander euery good worke in mee, reioycing when any euill befals in my life or calling.
               Preuent them, O Lord, and for thy best beloueds sake, teach mee wisdome, and giue me vnderstanding according to thy Word, that in all my wayes, I may bee watchfull; in my labours, painfull; in my carriage



and calling faithfull and iust; & that my principall & chief care may euer bee to please thee; And furnish mee so with true iudgement, in all and euerie part of my duetie, as there may bee nothing wanting in mee, which may further thy Glorie; which grant for thy blessed Sonnes sake, IESVS CHRIST, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, bee praise for euermore. Amen.
               Lord increase my faith.
            
            
               
               Hee whose calling requireth Iourneys by land or sea, may prepare himselfe by adding this Prayer following, or to vse it by it selfe.
               MOst louing and most mercifull Father in 
                     •
                  esus Christ, I acknowledg my selfe the weakest, and most ignorant of al humane creatures, hauing receiued in thy prouidence, a calling requiring continuall trauailes, iourneys, and much labour of body and mind, hauing such and so great a troupe of aduersaries, and dangers accompanying me in the execution thereof, as euermore seeke to stop the



way of my good successe therein, as well in my iourneying forth, in performing my lawfull labors abroad as also in my returning home.
               I most humbly therefore pray thee, to haue a fatherly care of mee, and to take charge of me in all my proceedings, in all places, among all men, and at all times, that all my iourneis, from, and to mine owne home, may be prosperous, and all my labors & indeauors may succeed to thine owne glory, to the faithfull discharge of my dutie in all mine imployments, to the competent supply of whatsoeuer I need.
               And forasmuch as these



my iourneys, trauailes, and labours, are and may bee much hindered through sicknes, & infirmities of my body, defects of my limbes, bodily members and senses; the perfection of which being originally thine own gif
                     •
                  s, continue my body in health, my limbs in strēgth, and all my senses perfect, vntill the time when thou shalt thinke fit to dissolue my whole bodily frame, when I shall no more trauaile, no more labour, nor feele any defect of body or mind. And grant, if it bee thy good pleasure, that neither sicknesse, death, or any other corporall infirmitie, seize vpon mee in my trauels and iourneys, submitting



my will yet vnto thy will, knowing that thou knowest what is most necessary for mee; and that who so is thine, is thine, and in thy fauour, and protection, as well abroad, as in his owne house; yea, whensoeuer, wheresoeuer, and in what manner soeuer thou art pleased to touch him with thy correcting hand, or to call him out of this mortall life.
               And forasmuch good Father, as there are many other impediments to hinder my necessary iourneys, trauels, and labours, as distemperature of the ayre, immoderate weather, difficulties of wayes, inundations of water, danger of



theeues, & euilly disposed persons, defects in the creatures, which thou vouchsafest for my vse in trauell, and many other dangers, and hinderances, infinite in number, all concealed from mee vntill they fall, yet all knowne and foreseene of thee, and all disposed and permitted by thee.
               I most humbly therefore pray thee, to watch, and spread the wings of thy power and prouidence ouer mee, and stretch foorth thy helping hand ouer me, that no euill if it please thee, befall me. But if thy will bee so, grant me wisedome and patience, not to impute it to fained Fortune, but as indeed it is to mine own sinfull



deseruings, and that I may be euer thankfull vnto thee, whatsoeuer befal me.
               Let the Angel of thy presence accompany mee, let thy heauenly spirit euer possesse me, & let my heart euermore possesse thee; let my thoughts be euermore free from sinne, and all the parts and powers of my body, my mind, affections, and will, from euery euill action, and vngodly desire.
               Giue me a holy feare, to walke, worke, trauaile, and vse mine occasions as in thy presence, knowing that thou beholdest me, mine inward inclination, and outward actions.
               Thou knowest also, good Father, that besides mine



owne wandring and wauering heart, Sathan ceaseth not to watch opportunitie to snare mee in some vaine obiect or other, in my silent and solitary trauailes, and iourneys, laying before the eyes of my corrupt minde, infinite bayts to allure mee to sin against thee, that so I may offend thee; that by offending thee, thou in thy displeasure mayest inflict some crosse or hinderance vnto my trauels, and so to preuent the good successe of mine endeauors.
               But grant good Father in Iesus Christ, that neither sin, Sathan, nor mine owne corrupt desires, hinder thy blessings vpon my trauels, but that I may constantly



continue in thine obedience, and thy loue towards mee, not onely in these my trauailes, but vnto my liues end. Amen.
               Lord increase my faith, and prosper my Iourney.
            
            
               A motiue to a Prayer for patience in godly Parents, that are afflicted in minde for the disobedience, and vngodly liues of their children; whom if good counsell cannot reforme, prayer is to bee made to God for them; if that will not preuaile, to leaue them to God, and the Lawes.
               IT is not the least crosse that can befall godly and religious parents, to see and obserue their owne flesh & blood, their owne dearest children, to bee



disobedient & rebellious, and by their lewd liues, to become scandalous in themselues, and a shame and slander vnto their parents and friends. A griefe it is of all griefes, especially vnto such parents as haue had, not onely, a fatherly, but a religious care of their holy education: And their griefe cannot but bee so much the more, by how much the world condemnes the parents, censuring them euill, by obseruing the vngodly liues of their children. A great temptation to a carefull father, that hath done his vttermost godly endeauor to educate his children in the feare of God; wherin the wise, indifferent, and impartiall obseruer, cannot but spare his condemnation, finding this corrupt world so fraught with multitudes of wicked youth, whose examples abroad, doe



worke more euill in children, then the wisest and most godly father can worke good in them at home by their best counsell. It is no maruel then, that a good man may haue euill children, who though hee propagate their bodies, cannot infuse grace and goodnes into their hearts; he can not frame their inclinations to vertue, further the
                     •
                   God by his diuine Spirit, doth second his good endeauors. The Husbandman may soyle his land with the best Marle, he may be carefull in plowing, circumspect in sowing, painefull in harrowing, & as much as in him lieth, preuent the vermin that might deuoure the seed sowen: Yet it is not his labour, diligence, or best skil that can forme the blade, nor infuse the graine in the eare. A good and godly father may infuse his best coū
                  sell



into the eares of a refractory sonne, and harrowe him with sharp threats, to preuent venemous vices, that deuoure best counsell: But hee cannot imprint grace in his heart, nor work the practise of godlinesse in him; he cannot driue away Sathan, and his wicked instruments, from deuouring the good seed sowne in his sonne. Euill examples, and wicked counsell preuaile more with corrupt flesh, then most diuine perswasions, or disswasions. It is a vaine thing to sowe good corne vpon a stony rocke, it will take no root: so to giue best counsell to a stubburne, and an obdurate heart, can not fructifie; yet must not parents therfore giue ouer, but againe and againe, early and late, endeauor to encourage his children in ve
                     •
                  tue and goodnesse, and to reclaime them from sin,



according to the counsell of the Preacher in Ecclesiastes, Jn the morning sow thy seed, and in the euening let not thine hand rest, for thou knowest not whether shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall bee a like good. So should parents bee alike instant, at all times to instruct their children with holy counsell: for they know not, whether God haue appointed this or that time, or this or that aduice, to conuert them from euill to good: for as one drop often falling, descends at last to moisten the root of the tree: So time, and timely counsell, may mollifie the hardest heart, and reforme the peruersest mind: for as the wind bloweth when and where it listeth, and no man knoweth from whence it commeth; so may the Spirit of God come into the heart, when man thinketh least of it:



therfore ought parents to pray earnestly, and often for godly liues of their Children; in whom, then if God haue any share, it will in time preuaile.
               The reason why the world is so ful of loose lasciuious & vnbrideled youth, is much in the euill examples of Parents, the want of the feare, & neglect of the seruice of God; for the example of a father may something alter the nature of a son in good, or euill. For there is a kinde of ineuitable imitation in the son, of the fathers qualities; If they be good, nature rebelleth against them, in the son, because it is corrupt; & if they be euill, nature it selfe teacheth the son, without further documēt, how to resemble the father in euill. And nothing can help the one, or bridle the other, but grace, which cannot be obtayned, but by prayer.
               
                  Another maine cause of Childrens lewdnesse, is too much lenitie in Parents, and too much libertie in Children, wherein idle doting and foolish mothers, are commonly most guilty, who because they haue giuen their Children suck of their breasts, when th
                     •
                  y were young, they giue them leaue when they become able to sinne, to suck their pu
                     •
                  ses, to feede them fat in vices; in haunting Tauernes, idle, and vngodly companies, drinking, gaming, and which is not the least, pampering them in pride, the beginning of their fall; wherein many silly fathers, are as guilty in winking at the mothers folly, or, not hauing the wit or spirit to redresse it, vntill their children, become so farre plunged in impieties; as when they would, they cannot



not reclaime them, and so in fine, are inforced, to see them, to their vnspeakeable griefe, come either to publike shame and obloquie, or to vntimely and fearefull ends, which may befall the vngodly Children of most godly Parents. What then? Shall the Parents beare the shame of their Children that kick against all good counsell, and will obstinately run to their owne ruine? No. But if Parents be totally remisse in wholesome counsell, & erre in their example, in the eye of their Children, no maruell if they taste of the shame, and griefe, of, and for their Children.
               But least good men, men fearing God, hauing vngodly Children, to whom they haue done their best duties in their youth to teach them,



the way of godlinesse, and they depart from it, should be too much deiected, and cast downe through griefe conceiued for the wickednesse of their Children, let them consider, that as they cannot make one haire black, that is white, no more can they make him good, that is euill: neither can they keepe them in awe that are wilfully rebellious, nor preuent them of confusion, that voluntarily seeke it. Foolishly vnaduised, then are they that will taxe a good Father of an euill Childe (comming into shame, and deepest danger) with the error of his sonne, when as good Children are the gifts God in mercie to the Parents, and wicked ones a punishment, not so much to the Parents, as to themselues. Though euery man would



willingly haue good Children, yet the best men haue had▪ and oft haue wicked Children. Adam, the first man had wicked Caine. Abraham had an Ismael, Izaake an Esau, Dauid a rebellious Absolom, and an incestious Ammon, good Eli had two wicked sonnes, Hophnie and Phineas. Infinite are the examples, yet no doubt, these good men gaue good instructions to these their erronious issues, whereby it appeareth, that it is not in good men to beget good Children, neither doth it follow, that wicked men alwayes propagate wicked Children, God frames both in the wombe, giues them life and frames their hearts, wills and affections.
               It resteth onely then for Parents of vngodly Children, to pray for their reformation,



and to leaue them to God, in whose counsell it is determined, what shall be the ends of such as feare not him, nor reuerence man.
            
            
               A Prayer for the reformation of vngodly and disobedient Children, and for patience in Parents, not ouermuch to afflict themselues, for their irreconciliable stubbornenesse and disobedience.
               HEare the words of my mouth, O Lord, and consider the meditations, and sorrowes of my heart; for my spirit is full of heauinesse, I am vexed and sore greeued, for that



they whom thou gauest mee for a blessing, are turned to my griefe, sorrow, and shame. I confesse, that mine owne sinnes haue prouoked thee to anger against mee; and thy displeasure appeareth, in that they, whom I receiued as a comfort from thee, are become, not onely disobedient to mee, but as it were rebellious against thee, and thy counsell.
               Thou art a God that louest not wickednesse, and thou hatest iniquity; and it cannot be hid from thee, what I haue done; my neglect in trayning my Children in thy feare thou mayst lay vnto my charge, yet thou knowest I haue



laboured to winne them vnto thee, if it haue beene in vaine, thou hast wisdome and power to supply in them, what is defectiue in me, to giue them.
               I haue endeuoured, to make them to know thee, and to walke in thy wayes, but they haue contemned mine instructions, and cast my counsells behinde their backs, they will not bee reclaymed from their vanities. They forget thee, the God of power to punish them, and the God of mercie, to receiue & comfort such as returne from their sinnes to thee.
               Lord it is onely in thee to reclaime them, as thou diddest the prodigall son,



whom thou vouchsafest to receiue vnto mercie, after his long going astray; no man erreth so farre, whom thou canst not recall. Oh recall these that erre, reduce them back to the sheepe-fold of thy Saints.
               They are the worke of thine owne hands, though I wretched man begate them in corruption, and their mother conceiued them in sinne, and bare them in misery, these are no hindrance vnto the worke of thy Grace in them, for what is, or hath beene the man that hath not had the like beginning (thine owne begotten Sonne excepted) Enoch that walked vprightly before



thee. Abraham the Father of the faithfull, Eliah and Iohn Baptist, and all thine elect vessels, came by nature of the same corrupt seed: yet thou wert pleased to sanctifie them; haddest thou left them vnto their owne original nature, they had bin as one of these that lift vp their heeles against (not me but) thee.
               Lord giue them Grace, Wisdome and Vnderstanding, Faith and Obedience, they are onely thine to giue: I may bee as the hand to giue them, as from thee, food for their bodies wherby by thy blessing, they grow; and I may sow the seeds of my best knowledge of thy worke in their



outward eares; but vnlesse thou plow vp the fallow ground of their hearts, that it may take roote, it cannot fructifie.
               Consider, gracious Father, that they are of the polluted seede of Adam, yet be thou pleased, to accept them as thine, admit them into thy fauour, and guide them by thy Grace, in a religious conuersation, that they may cease to doe euill, cleaue vnto that which is good, and walke before thee, & be vpright. Thē shal they serue thee, & I shall prayse thee, for their reformation and saluation Let neither their sinnes nor mine, any more prouoke thee to anger, lest thy



seuere iudgements should fall vpon them, & shame & grief vpon vs their parents. But their repentance Lord shall bee our comfort, and wee shall reioyce in their conuersion, and not onely wee, but all the godly shall reioyce at their returne into the Spirituall societie of thy Saints. Grant it gracious Lord, for thy Christs sake, whose righteousnes, make theirs, and his merrits a sufficient satisfaction for theirs, and for the sins of all that haue erred as they haue done. Amen.
               Lord increase in them, the holy feare of thy Name, Faith, & Obedience vnto thee, & giue me grace, with patience, to waite their holy reformation.
            
            
               
               A Christian incouragement, to all that feare God, not to bee daunted at the threats, power and policies, of whatsoeuer enemies, be they neuer so many in multitude, or seeming strong in armes, fit vpon occasion; to be taken into consideration, to which is added a prayer, for Gods holy protection and defence of his, in whatsoeuer danger.
               
                  THey that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, that can neuer be mooued, but remaine fast for euer. And as the mountaines are about Ierusalem, so is the Lord about them, that trust in him, from generation to generation. Wherof holy Dauid, had good experience, who through the assurance of Gods presence,



with him, his loue towards him, and power ouer him, could say with a bould and vndaunted spirit. If an Host pitched against mee, my heart should not be affrayd.
               
               He alwayes found the redie helpe, wherewith God euer assisted him, and the true performance of Gods promises at all times, in all his dangers; and therefore assured himselfe, that if tenne thousand of the people, did rise against him and bese
                        •
                      him round about, he would not be affrayde. He was in many dangers, and wonderfull his deliuerances were as appeareth by diuine History.
               God is not the God of Dauid onely, because hee was a King, and a man chosen after Gods owne heart, but the God of all them, that fa
                     •
                  thfully trust in him, of good kings &



godly subiects, through all generations to the end of the world, whereof no nation hath had more manifest proofe (though vnworthy) then wee: And therefore bee our dangers neuer so great, or many, God sheweth himselfe to haue euer as many meanes to deliuer vs. Saluation belongeth to him alone, and his blessings are vpon them that call faithfully vpon him.
               
                  Hezekiah sore terrified at the threats & blasphemies of Tartan Rabsaries, and Rabsakeh, the seruants of Senacherib, who by his blasphemous letters reuiled, not Hezekiah onely, but high Iehouah himselfe. Hezekiah therefore prayed vnto the GOD of Hostes, who sent his Angell, and that night destroyed in Senacheribs campe, one hundred fourescore and fiue



thousand men.
               Thus God can deale with the enemies of his faithfull people, hee can destroy them without their helpe, as wee our selues haue found by memorable experience; to shew that it is not alwayes the multitude of armed souldiers that are the absolute meanes of victorie, it is the meere hand of God to declare himselfe, to be in deed the GOD of Hosts, against whom no power, pollicie, or humane wisdome can preuaile. And therefore admitteth not the arme of flesh (though a necessary meane) to haue the glorie of the distruction of his enemies, he will confound.
               When Joshua, was to goe against Jericho, a Citie whom God would destroy, though hee was accompanied with a multitude of armed souldiers:



yet the Lord would not haue the ouerthrow ascribed vnto battery, and engines of warre, violent instruments; But at Gods command they blew with Rams-hornes onely about the wals, with a shoute, and the walls fell downe. God by weake meanes can doe wonderfull things for his.
               Fiue mighty kings combined their forces together against Ioshua, and though God permitted Ioshua to haue the victory and slaughter of some of them, yet God himselfe had the prayse, who slew more with hayl stones from heauen then Ioshua slew with the sword.
               Thus, doth God manifest his power, that all men may see, that they that haue God on their side, neede not feare, though kings combine, and people rage, as if they would



deuoure Gods people at their pleasures, casting their accounts, and disposing of their pray before the victorie.
               
                  Benadab, that mighty Aramite king, threatned Ahab king of Israel, to depriue him of all that he had, His siluer and his gold, his women and his faire children. But God gaue Ahab the victorie, both on the Mountaines and the Vallies; Because they obiected against God, that he was God in the Mountaines, not in the Vallies, as if we should say he were God at Land, but not at Sea, or to impute good or ill successe, in these weighty occasions, to false and contrary causes; as is commonly seen, and obserued to ignorance, or negligence of some Commanders, or to this or that omission, ouer-sight or rashnesse which indeed may bee



blame-worthy; yet for that wee attribute not good successe to God, but to humane power, wisdome, or pollicie, and ill euents and issues, to our owne sinnefull deseruings, and wa
                     •
                  t of calling vp on God for a blessing. God many times permits his owne children to suffer violence, when they forget to serue him.
               The Israelites committing wickednesse in the sight of the Lord, God gaue them ouer into the hands of their enemies, the Midianites, for seuen yeares; yet vpon their repentance and returning to God, hee raysed vp Deborah and Barak to deliuer them.
               Sinne is the cause that God permitteth a mighty multitude to bee ouer-throwne by a few: foure hundred thousand Israelites, for one sinne were



ouercome, twice by sixe and twentie thousand Beniamits.
               
               If God for one sinne, suffered his people to bee thus slaine by a few, what will hee not permit to bee done vnto a nation, that commits infinite sinnes? For one seeming small sinn of one man Achan, the children of Israel were chased and put to flight by a few; to shew, that where sinne raigneth, there is no strength in the people to withstand their enemies.
               God is a righteous God, perseruing and punishing, as hee findeth men faithfull or sinnefull, not sparing his dearest children, when they rebell against him, but as long as they truely obay him, no enemie shall preuaile against them. Let Pharoh pursue Gods children, with purpose to consume them, let them



but call vpon God, let them bee faithfull, and they shall see the saluation of God, the confusion of their enemies, by the immediate hand of God, without the helpe or hand of man.
               An hoste of men cannot hurt one man, whom God will protect; and yet permits sometimes one of his to preuaile against many, as Samson, who slewe one thousand men with the iaw-bone of an asse: and Shamgar, with an Oxe goad slew six hundred men, to shew that God is not tyed to multitudes, to auenge him of the enemies of his children; and that a multitude to him is but as one man, and as easie to bee ouercome. And yet he many times permitteth the wicked to take away the liues of the most righteous and innocent: as Kain to kill Abel, Herod to



kill Iohn Baptist, James, &c. he permits bloody massacres, and suffers his d
                     •
                  arest children to be martyred after many fearefull meanes, not that he is not able to deliuer them, but that his owne name by their patient suffrings may be glorified.
               On the other side, if it please him, and that it stand for the good of his, hee can and will defend them; hee can send an hoste of Angels to defend thē, and fire from h
                     •
                  auen, to consume the adu
                     ••
                  saries of them, that take him for their strēgth. But not according to naturall mans reuengefull desire; As when his disciples willed him to call for fire from heauen, to consume their enemies; he answered them, Yee know not of what spirit yee are. And therefore although he in his iustice in former times hath, and yet is in his power to execute his



seuere iudgments with fearefull fire, as vpon Sodome, vpon Nadab and Abihu, and vpon the fifties, which came to apprehend Eliah: yet ought we to be farre from desire, to haue like iudgements inflicted vp
                     •
                  on our most mortall enemies, vpon such as would euen eate vs vp: but rather as wee are instructed, first to pray for their reformation, and serious reconciliation, and refer the issue to God, though it may be we cannot as properly say of some malicious aduersaries, as Stephen sometimes said of his, Lord lay not this (his death) vnto their charge, for they know not what they doe. No, our most malicious enemies are not ignorant, that their malice towards vs, is sinne against God, to whose iudgement we are in charitie to leaue them: for to him, not to vs, belongeth reuenge,



who being wise in his vnderstanding, and iust in his iudgements, is also mercifull and patient in punishing, and in all things, both to them and vs, will do that which is equal & right; and will reward tyranous oppressors, & malicious persecuters of his faithful children, in his time, & according to his owne will, and for his owne, he will neuer leaue, nor forsake them.
               Although our enemies may pretend Religion the cause of their malice, and couer their inward hatred vnder a counterfeit pretence to worke our reformation therein; and with many seeming sweet insinuations, worke themselues into our thoughts, it behooueth vs to be wise, lest that in conceiuing they seek our good, they get not our goods, which are our obedience to God, faith in



him, and perseuerance.
               True it is, that Religion is the cause of many both priuat and publike controuersies and quarrels; but that Religion that is increased, and maintained by the sword, let my soule neuer imbrace.
               Though true Religion haue it foundation from the Blood of Christ, it is no true Religion that maintaines it selfe by the shedding of the blood of Gods Saints.
               If therfore any shall pretend themselues religious, and seek in shew to gaine vs, and draw vs to their societie by blowes, shall we think they come from God? who willeth his, to shew their Faith and Religion, by meeknes and loue.
               But admit they should offer the sword of offence; it is lawfull for Gods children to vse the sword of defence: and we



haue the same & no other God, then Dauid and Hezekiah had, who will assuredly defend vs, and maintaine his owne cause for vs.
               The experience of Gods protection and prouidence in former dangers, cannot but incourage vs against whatsoeuer like dangers, wherein he deliuered vs to the wonder of the world, & nothing but our sinnes and vnthankfulnes can shorten his hand, or weaken his power towards vs, but that he will stretch foorth his hand still to defend vs.
               We are now, thankes be to God, seeming secure, there is no apparent dangers threatened; but wee must remember when wee say and see peace, peace, who knoweth, but that our sinnes may not call for troubles: if they come, not looked for, they will bee the



more dangerous.
               If therfore we would abandon our sinnes, if wee would timely returne vnto God with humble and repentant hearts, God would returne vnto vs, & saue vs; he would as he hath hitherto done, deliuer vs, and euer sustaine vs; hee will send from heauen & deliuer vs from them that would oppresse vs.
               Let vs not forget that our soules are among lions, though we liue among the children of men: they are not all of one family, they are not all of one mind, they are not all the children of God; some are as it were set on fire against vs; some haue their teeth as spears some haue their tongus as swords, yet oyle in their mouthes: yet let vs depend on him that seeth their hearts and ours; He
                        •
                      knoweth who are his, and seeth his and our aduersaries



afar off. He hath his time and the meanes to deliuer his: The Lord of hosts is with vs, let vs not feare what man can doe vnto vs.
               Though an hoste of men armed should assaile vs▪ we need not be afraid, for the Lord is with vs, who is of more might and power, then all the potentates of the world can resist: Let vs therefore euermore lift vp the eyes of our faithfull hearts, vnto him; he is the hill from whence commeth our help and deliuerance in all our dangers: from the Lord of hostes commeth our help, who hath made heauen and earth, who taketh charge of his, and will neuer leaue vs, faile vs, or forsake vs, in him let vs trust.
            
            
               
               A Prayer to God that he will defend vs from our strongest enemies, and most malicious, with thanks to God for his former deliuerances.
               O Lord our God, whose Habitation are the heauens, and whose footstoole is the earth, thou gouernest all things in heauen aboue, and in the earth beneath, thou directest and protectest those that feare thy name; so as they neede not feare the powre or malice, of whatsoeuer furious enemies: For saluation belongeth vnto thee, and thy blessing is euermore vpon thy people.
               
               
                  Wee, euen we thy feeble and vnworthy creatures, haue had experience of thy former fauour and defence in our troubles, and of thy deliuerance out of our desperate dangers, when men haue said, There was no help for vs, no, not in thee. But we haue found them lyers, deceitfull, and wicked men; acknowledging thee, most faithfull, most louing; of greatest wisdome and power, shewing thy selfe our Buckler, our Castle, and our strong defence: euen when our Aduersaries sought our confusion, thou shewedst thy self our God, and the maintainer of our cause, when our enemies rose against vs, in greatest



multitudes, malice and madnesse.
               Thou gauest vs courage and boldnesse, euen when our enemies seemed most to insult and triumph ouer vs: euen then, Lord, didst thou fight for vs, and turnedst their glory into shame their strength into weakenesse, and their multitudes into a handfull of men.
               Shorten not, O Lord, thy helping hand toward vs, in whatsoeuer time, or manner of our danger; for thou knowest, what our enemies cānot performe with force, they seeke to effect by secret mischiefes, which thou hast discouered, and prouidently preuented: The S
                        •
                     are was broken and we deliuered;



not for any merit or worthynesse of ours, but euen of thy free and aboundant mercies; for thine owne glory, and our safetie: and without our shame wee cannot but acknowledge our vnthankfulnesse, for thy manifold deliuerances from them that hate vs; who yet waite opportunity to betray vs, if thou preuent vs not.
               And therefore, gracious Father, leade and guide vs, euer in thy righteousnesse, because of our enemies, make thy way plaine before vs, lest we in offending thee giue our aduersaries occasion, to say, thou hast forsaken vs.
               It is in thy power, Lord,



                  
                     •
                  o reconcile them vnto vs in the band of Christian loue; by opening their eyes, that they may see, and now at last consider, their owne errors, wherein they haue kicked against thy truth; so should we reioice in their perfect vnion. If they continue in the hardnesse of their hearts, continue in vs perfect knowledge; and howsoeuer they hate vs, giue vs loue vnto them: leauing them vnto thy wil, to deale with them as thou wilt.
               Giue vs, gratious God, and louing Father, a liuely apprehention of thy truth, faith and obedience vnto it; howsoeuer our enemies may hate vs for the same,



we know that thou art God all-sufficient, able to deliuer vs from their greatest tyranny, as thou hast done: and we cannot but remember thy merueilous workes, which thy very enemies, cannot but acknowledge to proceede of thy meere loue, vnto the continuall practise and profession of thy sincere Word, which thou hast maintained hitherunto through all ages, by thine owne power, and for thine own names sake.
               And therefore when our enemies rose vp against vs, or rather, against thee, in vs, thou causedst them to stumble and fall, still maintaining thine owne cause; Who sittest in thy throne,



and gouernest all things, and iudgest according to equitie.
               They therefore, that know thy power, and thy loue, and thy promises, and thy righteous dealing, will trust in thee; for thou hast neuer fayled to bee a sure defence to them, in whatsoeuer perils.
               Vp therfore, Lord, disappoint al our irreconciliable enemies of their hope, lest they say, We haue preuailed, our own policies haue brought our desired enterprises and desires to passe.
               
               Lord, stay our steps, guide vs euer in thy pathes, lest our feet slip, and our enemies that watch oportunitie to betray vs, take aduan
                     •
                  tage



by our sinful liues, and so preuaile.
               They lay their heads together, and take counsell how they may circumuent vs, and to blow vs vp, neuer to recouer our hope againe in thee.
               Keepe vs therefore as the apple of thine eye, Lord, hold vs euer vnder the shadowe of thy wings, from them that seeke to oppresse vs: For by thee alone. Lord, shall wee bee able to breake through an hoste of enemies: And though we seeme, by reason of the number of our aduersaries, to walke, as it were, thorow the valley of the shadow of death, yet will we not feare them: for thou



art with vs, a strong rocke, and a house of defence to saue vs.
               Thou redeemest the soules of thy seruants: for, when we were euen ready to be swallowed vp with a mercilesse multitude, thou by the powre of thy strength, didst deliuer vs. To thee be praise and glory for euer. Amen.
               Lord increase our faith in thee for euermore.
            
            
               
               A necessary motiue to stirre vs vp to a holy desire to resort to the Temple of God, to pray vnto him with the Congregation, and to heare his word the knowledge and practise wherof, is truest happinesse; and he that is ignorant or negligent of this holy dutie, bee he neuer so carnally wise, or worldly glorious; is a most vnhappy man.
               WHat difference doth christian experience find between a carnall worldling, and a man truely fearing God? It can hardly be answered to the vnderstanding of the meere naturall man, that hath as many desires, as are pleasing delights offered to his senses▪ and euery sense as many delights, as the heart hath fantasies, which are not



to bee numbred, and the fulnesse of euery delight esteemed a kinde of happinesse; yet if each sense had as many pleasures, as it could entertaine, the desire were not satisfied: And if all the senses had what they couet
                     •
                  d, were it not a heauy burthen to the heart, which ingrosseth them all? And yet the more it apprehendeth, the more desire increaseth: for, the eye is neuer satisfied with seeing, nor the eare with hearing things of delight. And thus with all the senses, and yet but one thing necessarie.
               This one thing, Mary the sister of Martha made choyce of, the hearing Christ preach; a thing most needfull, approued by Christ; and that Mary 
                  
                     •
                  n hearing Christ, chose the best part, which neuer could be taken from her.
               
               
                  
                  Dauid desired this one thing, namely, That hee might dwell in the house of the Lord all the dayes of his life: onely that hee might pray to God with the Congregation, and heare God speake vnto him by the Prophets, and men of God, whom whosoeuer heareth attentiuely, and profitably, heareth God himselfe, which is a sure token that he is of God, For hee that is of God, heareth Gods word.
               
               The hearing of God speake vnto vs in his familiar word, is the sweetest Musicke that the eare of the heart of a spirituall man can heare, and acceptable also to God himselfe, Jf yee will heare my voyce indeed, saith God, and keepe my Couenant, then shall yee bee my chiefe treasure aboue all people. Is not this chiefest happinesse to bee accepted of God



as h
                     •
                  s onely Treasure?
               No maruell then that Dauid d
                     •
                  sired onely this one thing, a farre better request, then Bathsheba his wise, the mother of Salomon, desired of her son, which hee promised her to graunt, but performed it not. But Dauid the father of Salomon, desired this one thing, the thing most needefull, of a King greater then Salomon, and a matter of farre more moment, then was Bathshebaes, yet she was reiected, and his request accepted. Both their desires seemed to proceed of loue: yet the one procured hatred and death, the other life and happinesse. Shee made her request to man, in whome to put confidence, is vaine. The other in God, the Holy one of Jsrael, who is truth it selfe, and neuer deceiueth.
               But Dauids petition might



seeme strange, being a King, to desire to dwell better then in a Kings palace, where hee might sport at his pleasure, take what delights hee would, hauing a Kingdome to supply whatsoeuer hee desired. But in these delights he found not the happinesse hee sought for; it consisted in his loue to God, and Gods fauour towardes him: and therefore desired, rather to bee one day in his Courts, then a thousand in the Court of Saul, or in his owne Court, among his gallant Courtiers; nay, hee would choose rather to bee a Doore-keeper in the House of God, then to command an earthly kingdome.
               It is in d
                     •
                  ede a glorious thing to bee a King, but that glory hath no long continuance, many discontents & distractions accompany worldly greatnesse. But the glory



that Dauid desired, (though seeming base) was such as commonly greatest men desire last and least; and yet desire as Balaam did, To dye the death of the righteous, (seldome yet remembred) but practise not the life of the righteous.
               Yet fewe or none, doubtlesse, are so irreligious, or barbarous in shew, but they will loo
                     •
                  e into the House of God, peraduenture once, it may bee, twice in a Sabbath, and peraduenture thinke it long; they would bee loath to spare their pleasures, delights, and vanities, to liue a whole day in hearing God speake vnto them, and praying vnto God; nay, but one required houre: but to liue all the dayes of their liues, as Anna did, and as Dauid desired, in the Temple of God, they would thin
                     •
                   it as hard as taske, as the bondage



of Egypt, or the captiuitie of Babylon.
               
               But th
                     •
                  re are no doubt diuers, and some as high in Office, as Dauid, that haue both Dauids desire, and are comfortably conuer
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  t in the House of God, and doe finde that in his presence is the fulnesse of ioy and happinesse.
               This is that chiefe happinesse and delight, that great men should desire and ayme at, to the ende they might be examples vnto their inferiors, going before them in well doing, especially in Gods seruice: For it is commonly found by experience, that example doeth more good or euill, then documents, or dehortations.
               The godly, and religious life of a great man, is as a towre seene a farre off: And



many, especially his fol
                     •
                  owers, will indeuour to immitate his steppes, at least in shew; and euen that shew of a godly life is a good motiue to others, to liue godly in deed: and as a good lif
                     •
                   giues comfort and incouragement to othe
                     •
                  s to bee good; So the president of euill, makes many euill.
               If greatnesse and goodnesse goe together, it is the sweetest harmonie that man can make in this life. And the contrarie, as h
                     ••
                  sh and hellish.
               This holy desire of Dauid was not for a day, for hee speakes of the time past. J desired, which implyes a continuall inward petition. So, our desire of well doing, should not be but for a moment, and then vanish like Ionahs Gourd, that quickly grew vp, and suddenly withered, and like



the seede sowne in stonie ground, we must be constant heires, and humble petitioners, not wauering like waues; but as we once desire to heare and practise, we must continue therein with a godly and religious perseuerance, still desirous, according to oportunity, to visite Gods Church, not yet to thinke that there is no place to serue God in, but the materiall Temple, but wheresoeuer wee are, whatsoeuer wee doe, wee are to haue our hearts exercised in godly meditation of the Word, and inward prayer
               
                  Bethel the house of God, is euery where, where the truly godly are; Dauid found it euen in the wildernesse of Ziph, in the holds of Engedi, in M
                        •
                     an, and Gath. Hee found the Lord in these desolate places: though hee were



hated and persecuted, driuen from place to place through the malice of his enemies, he was neuer out of the presence of God, in the Temple, or in the field; for where God is present, there is his Temple; In the Lyons Denne, Daniel found him; In the Furnace, the three Children; In the Dungion, Ieremy; In the Prison, Peter; vnder the stones, Stephen; yea, euen in sinnefull Sodom, Lot; and Noah, in the Floud.
               Euery true Childe of God, is alwayes in Gods house, where Dauid desired Spiritually to dwell, finding it true that God was with him euery wh
                     •
                  re, yet had hee an earnest desire to bee conuersant in that Temple, where the Children of God did assemble, to heare GOD speake, and to speak vnto God. He was their king, yet did hee thinke it the



greatest part of his dutie, nay, of his glorie and happinesse, to accompany his subiects, in the holy exercises of religion, to goe before them, to incourage them to call vpon, and to serue the liuing God with them; whereof being preuented by the malice and furie of his enemies, he complayneth, that he was left as a Pellican in the wildernesse, and as an Owle in the Desert, and thought the Sparrow more happie then hee, because that silly bird, could at all times resort vnto that holy place, to which he could not come.
               It is our dutie to frequent the materiall Temple, to accompanie the congregation, in p
                     •
                  aying vnto, and praysing of God, and attentiuely to heare his Word: yet are not wee to hold it a necessitie, to pray onely in the Temple, as



if God could, or would not heare our prayers, but in the Temple made with hands; wherein God himselfe sayth he dwelleth not, his dwelling is in the heauens, and his footstoole is the earth; and as long as wee are pilgrimes in the earth, wee must seeke, and we shall finde God in the earth by his presence and power.
               Therefore as Moses put off his shooes, when hee came into the presence of God, because the place was holy whereon hee stood. So must we put off all our vngodly affections, and vnholy desires, before we enter into his holy presence.
               He teacheth vs by his Prophet Ieremy, what it is to come prepared into the presence of God, whether into the materiall Temple with the congregation, to heare



him speake vnto vs by his Word, or to speake vnto him in publike, or in any conuenient place in our priuate prayers, Wee must amend and redresse our wayes & our works, then he will admit vs, and entertaine vs into his holy presence. It is not enough, saith h
                     •
                  , to crie and say, The Temple, the Temple of God, this is the Temple of the Lord, 
                        〈◊〉
                      amend our wayes and our works▪ to execute iudgement, betweene a man and this neighbour, not to oppresse the poore, nor the stranger, the fatherlesse, nor the widdow, not to shed innocent bloud, nor to walke after other gods.
               
               T
                     •
                  is is the condition which God makes with them that shall dwell in his house, that shall see his beau
                     •
                  ie, and that are admitted into his presence, and truely to visite his holy Temple: but bars



all those that trust in lying miracles, and vaine words, and vanities that cannot profit: they that steale, murder, commit adultery, idolatrie, such as sweare fasty; the coueteous oppressors, vniust, enuious, malicious, drunkards and the like; if these stand in this house, the materiall Temple; God will haue no respect vnto their prayers, finding them hypocrites, that worke wickednesse in secret, coueting to couer it with a forged shew of cunning with the congregation into the Temple of God, which by their presence make it a denne of theeues. For what are Hypocrites, but theeues, shewing themselues to bee religious, and are not; obedient, and are not; than
                     •
                  efull, and are not; faithfull, and are not?
               These are they that rather



cōmit sacriledge, thē offer acceptable Sacrifice, they visite not the Temple, but rather defile it with their coūterfeit holines, in shew, seeming saints, in deed, enemies to Christ and Christians. They can crie the Temple of God, the Temple of God, They can say Preach, Preach, and seeme neuer satisfied with Sermons. The desire is good, if the heart bee good, for a true and sincere desire of the heart, to heare the Word, cannot but please God; for such are approoued to be of the family and house of God: Such shall dwell in his Tabernacle, and rest vpon his Holy Hill▪ for they are of the generation of the righteous.
               
               But, there is a generation, saith Salomon, that are pure in their owne conceits, and yet are not washed from their filthinesse, They follow the deuices of



their their owne hearts: and assume vnto themselues a peculiar manner of seruing of God, not according to the sincere truth: These mens sacrifices God abhorreth; but he that hath innocent hands, and a pure heart, that hath not lift vp his hand vnto vanitie, nor sworne deceitfully, he comming into the house of God in priuate, or in publike petitions, shall receiue a blessing from the Lord, vnderstanding by hearing, God speake vnto him, and bee heard speaking vnto God: it is contrary with the hypocrites, they may heare and not vnderstand, they may pray, but GOD will not heare them. They cryed, sayth Dauid, but there was none to 
                     •
                  aue them, euē vnto the Lord; 
                     •
                  ut he answered them not. God heareth not hypocrites, 
                     •
                  hough they come neere him



with their lips, in a counterfeit zeale, when yet their hearts are prophane.
               To come into the marteriall Temple, is required of all to accompanie the congregation, in the diuine seruice of the liuing God, Princes and greatest persons: As Dauid a King, who was glad and reioyced, when the people sayd vnto him, Come, let vs goe into the house of the Lord, where in deed his owne desire wa
                     •
                   to dwell.
               To dwell, is not to come for a spirt and away, but hi
                     •
                   desire was to make there h
                     ••
                   continuall abode all the daie
                     •
                   of his life.
               It may bee conceiued by 
                     •
                   naturall man, and one th
                     ••
                   builds his happinesse vpo
                     •
                   the pleasures of this life, th
                     ••
                   it was not wisdome in Daui
                        •
                     
                   to desire to dwell in the me
                     •
                  lancholy



Temple continually: but it may be sayd vnto that carnallist, Thou deemest it to bee a place of sadnesse and melancholly, which administreth to the true Children of God the most absolute ioy, mirth, gladnesse, and consolation, and finally truest happinesse.
               Carnall men in deed delight in vaine aspects, and shewes, moouing to sinne in Stages, Theaters and the like, and thinke them therewith much cheered, and in short time therewith wearied: But the Temple of God, the heauenly Theatre, that is most glorious by the Diuine presence, onely seene by the sanctified minde, neuer wearieth the soules of such as delight in the liuing God; whose beautie Dauid saw, as neuer satisfied with the contemplation



of the glorious Maiestie o
                     •
                   
                  Iehouah, whose beautie the more the Spirituall minde beholdeth in his word, his workes, his fauour, power and prouidence, the more is hee mooued with desire, to see more and more. And thinkes no happinesse comparable, to the happinesse of a heauenly life.
               Much were the Disciples mooued at the sight of Christs transfiguration, in so much as they desired to haue built there Tabernacles, to haue enioyed that blessed sight. Still to desirous was Dauid, still to behold the beautie of the Lord, and to visite his holy Temple.
               Where God is truely heard, and duly called vpon by a holy congregation, nay, by one particular faithfull Christian, there appeareth the



glorie of God. There is the Arke of the Lord the presence of the mightie God of Iaakob, whose glorie filleth the Temple, which onely the Spirituall man seeth with a supernaturall eye. Though the carnall man bodily present, apprehendeth it not. Paul at his conuersion saw Gods glorie but they that were with him, heard onely a voyce, but saw it not.
               Such beautie shineth in the hearts of the deere Children of God, by the operation, and illumination of the Holy Ghost, by whom Stephen saw the glorie of God, in the heauens, and Christ sitting at his right-hand, which none 
                     〈◊〉
                   can see, but such onely a
                     •
                  are inlightened, who take such surpassing sweet delight, in the beholding the face of God, not onely in the Word,



wherein hee is in part seene, but especially through faith, that their soules are euen rauished, and as it were transchanged, by the splender therof, as it were into the Image of the glorie of the onely begotten Sonne of the Father. 
                     
                        •
                     od commanding the light to shine out of darkenesse, shineth in our hearts, to giue light of the knowledge of the Glorie of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
               
               Let vs therefore indeuour to exercise our selues in puritie and sanctitie, clensing our consciences from all counterfeit sincerity, and labour to become in deed, such as wee would seeme to bee; And not to neglect the visiting of the materiall Temple, to heare the Word of GOD, and to pray vnto him, if wee hope to be happie; for there is none happie, but they



whom GOD loueth, and who loue GOD; if wee loue God, wee will delight in him, to heare him often for our instruction, and confirmation of our faith; and to seeke him by our prayers, for he is ready to bee found of all them that are true of heart, who shall heere behold his beautie, and hereafter enioy his glorie.
            
            
               A Prayer vnto God, that he will prepare our hearts to the visiting of his holy Temple, to heare his Word, to pray vnto him, and to prayse him.
               GRant O most gracious Lord God, according



to the riches of thy grace- that I may bee strengthened by thy Spirit, in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in my heart by faith, and so my whole spirit, soule and bodie may bee kept blamelesse, to the comming of the Lord Iesus, for thou Lord knowest what I am by nature, a man vnworthy to take thine holy Name into my mouth, or to come into thy presence, being inclynable to no good dutie, but apt to euery vanity.
               I come therefore vnto thee heauenly Father, in the Name of Iesus Christ thy Sonne, in whom thou hast promised to receiue them, that sincerely seeke



thee, heare the voyce of my petitions, O Lord, when I crie vnto thee, and when I lift vp my hands towards the mercies seat of thy holy Temple, reiect me not; vnto thee O Lord, I lift vp my soule, crauing pardon for my sinnes, and that thou wilt admit me into the holy societie of thy Saints, and that I may delight to dwell in thy holy Temple, vnder the shadow of thy protecting wings for euer.
               Let my heart bee euer vpright in thy Statutes, and faithfull euer before thee, for thou hast pleasure in righteousnesse, and hee is blessed in whose heart are thy wayes; knit my heart vnto thee, that I may



feare thy Name; giue me a holy desire to seeke thee, and to walke euer vprightly as in thy presence.
               Indue me with thy Spirituall knowledge, & leade me by thy right hand, to thine holy Temple; shew mee thy glorie, and thy beauty, that I may be comforted through thy presence. Open mine eares, that I may heare thee, and thy Word by thy holy Ministrie; and prepare my heart to receiue knowledge and vnderstanding, and open my mouth, and fill it with thy prayses, and let my prayers in thy Sons Name bee acceptable vnto thee.
               Shew me thy way, and



giue mee vnderstanding, that I may learn thy Commandements, and walke in them.
               My hearts desire, Lord is to dwell with thee, to haue the full & free fruition of thine house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth, that I may serue thee with a pure affection, and giue thee prayse in the congregation of thy Saints.
               Turne thy face vnto me, O Lord, that I may see the beautie of thy countenance, and bee changed into the same Image, by thy Spirit, and in the same Spirit, bee admitted to visite thine holy Temple, with faith and assurance of



thy presence, wherein I know is libertie and life, protection and plentie of all good things.
               Make my heart stable & vnblameable before thee in holinesse, that I may serue thee with a sincere and pure conscience, and vndefiled, that I may not come into thine house only to bee seene, and to seeme seruiceable, or dutifull vnto thee; but may inwardly hunger & thirst for thy Word, the food of my soule, the bread of life, and imprint the same so effectually in my soule, that it may prooue fruitfull in 
                     •
                  ee, and that I may sh
                     •
                  w it in my 
                     〈◊〉
                   holy conuersation to thy Glorie,



that being filled with the comforts proceeding from the beautie of thy countenance; I may euer pos
                     •
                  sesse my soule in that peace which passeth all vnderstanding, euer-more reuerencing thy glorious Mai
                     •
                  stie, that euer-more fille
                     •
                  h both the heauens and the earth; fill my heart, O Lord, with thy Spirit, that I may draw neere vnto thee, and to thy Holy place, my strong Rocke, to thee will I alwayes resort.
               Make mee to heare ioy and gladnesse, and that I may more abound in hope, and be strengthened to euery good work, through the power of the holy Ghost,



by Iesus Christ, my Lord and onely Sauiour.
               
                  Lord increase my faith.
               
            
            
               The Conclusion.
               A Prayer for true happinesse, which shall bee consummate onely in heauen.
               O Lord, what am I, the son of dust and ashes, that I should presume to come into thy presence, to seeke and desire felicity and happinesse, here in this wildernesse of so many vanities, miseries, and troubles, as are among the children of men? As for me, Lord, thou knowest wherof I am



made; thou remembrest that I am but dust, what happinesse therfore, Lord, can I look to obtaine here, where sinne dwelleth in my mortall body; and by sinne I offend, and displease thee, and in thy displeasure is death?
               O preuent me Lord, therfore, from sinfull feeding my foolish mind with false felicitie, as to repose my happinesse in the things of this life, in health, riches, honour, beautie, carnall friends, worldly wisdome, pleasures, delights, & ease, which are not worthy, in respect of true happinesse in deed, to bee the least esteemed.
               Giue me therefore here,



O Lord, euen in this life, an entrance into true happinesse; send foorth thy Spirit, and breath life into my dead soule; transforme me into thine own image, from glory to glory, by thy Spirit; withdraw me from delight in the vanities of this life: for as long as I delight in the pleasing things of this world, I am farre from happinesse; and it lies not in my power to restrain my heart from that which naturally I affect: I cannot subdue the corruption of mine owne nature; but that which is impossible to mee, is possible with thee, declare therefore thy great power in mercy vpon me.
               I am by nature wretched,



& miserable, and poore, and naked, a most vnhappy man; yet such is my blindnesse, that I see it not: I feele not mine owne vnhappinesse, Lord remooue that darknesse from me, and graunt, that seeing, I may see mine owne errour; and in hearing I may vnderstand, and take the right way to felicitie; work faith in my heart, that I may taste how gracious thou art, in working in me a new heart, a new mind, and new affections, holy and heauenly, the beginning here of happinesse to come.
               Make mee to feele the peace of a good conscience; let my faith be seen through obedience vnto thee; let me



feele in my soule through faith the merits of thy Son, working the assurance of the remission of my sinnes, and assured hope of the enioying of my finall felicity, and endlesse happinesse in heauen.
               None are truly happy or blessed, but such as thou dost chuse, & cause to come vnto thee; for none can come vnto thee, but whom thou callest, and they onely are iustified; & whom thou iustifiest, them wilt thou glorifie; and whom thou glorifiest, are, and none else, truly happy.
               Carry me therefore, gracious Lord, carry me by the wings of thy mercy, and by the strength of thy fauour



in Christ my Sauiour, into that heauenly Canaan, the inheritance of them that are in Christ Iesus, elected to saluation.
               Let me, euen here in this base outward forme of an vnhappy man, behold thee through faith in thy word; let mee behold thy face in righteousnesse: for in the liuely beholding of thee, is the fulnes of ioy, and highest happinesse in this life.
               O that the time would therefore speedily come, wherein I being dissolued, may see thee my Sauiour face to face, when this my mortall body shall be quickened, and made like vnto thy glorious body: for I know, thou wilt keepe vnto



the end, that which I haue committed vnto thee, both my soule and body to bee glorified and made happie, though I yet see not what I shall be: and therfore when thou wilt, I will willingly lay down my life, and commit my soule vnto thee, my God, through Iesus Christ, as vnto my most faithfull Creator, and louing Redeemer; to whom with the holy Ghost bee all glory for euer. Amen.
               
               
                  
                  The consummation, and full perfection of our happinesse, shall be
                  When wee shall bee made partakers of the diuine Nature, 2. Pet. 
                     
                        •
                     . v. 4.
                  When Christ shall tran
                        •
                     forme our base bodies, that they may bee like the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3. v. 21.
                  When she shall perfectly enioy those things, which eye hath not seen, nor the eare heard, nor euer entred into the heart of man to co
                        •
                     ceiue, which God hath prepared, for them that loue him. 1. Cor. 2 11.9.
               
               
                  Who then, or what shall seperate vs from the loue of Christ, in and by whom wee haue firme hope to attaine vnto this so great happinesse? neither tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakednesse, nor perill, nor the sword, Romanes 8. verse. 35. Which God, for his Christes sake graunt, to whome with the Holy Ghost be ascribed all glory for euer. Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The principall things contained in this Booke.
            
               
                  A Meditation, or Consultation, what are the best things that men in this life should principally ayme at, to attaine vnto highest happinesse, &c. Fol. 1.
               
               A motiue to Prayer against the temptations of Sathan, &c. 18
               
               A Prayer for Gods holy assistance against Sathan. 23.
               
               A Meditation, to stirre vs vp, when wee are vnapt to pray. 29.
               
               A Prayer to God, for the helpe of his holy Spirit, and other blessings spirituall, and corporall,



&c. 35.
               
               A motiue, to begin the day with Prayer. 54.
               
               A Prayer fit to bee vsed euery morning. 57.
               
               A motiue to Prayer, before a man 
                     〈…〉
                  . 65.
               
               A Prayer for a man, before hee goes to hi
                     •
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ghtly rest. 70.
               
               A most comfortable incouragement to all poore and distressed men to vndergoe whatsoeuer trouble with patience, &c. and may serue as a motiue to some prayers that follow, viz. 77.
               
               A generall Prayer, in whatsoeuer troubles and affections, with a conf
                     •
                  ssion, that sinne is the cause of them. 103
               
               A Prayer for a man hindred by 
                     〈…〉
                   kind of 
                     〈…〉
                   lawfull takings, &c. 114
               
               
                  A consideration, or consultation, touching the estates and conditions of seuerall men, &c. necessary for all men that hope of any blessing vpon their labors, Trauels, Professions, Artes, Trades, or Jmployments. 124
               
               A Prayer, that God will blesse and prosper our labours and endeauors in whatsoeuer calling. 139
               
               A Prayer for a man whose Calling requireth Journeyes by land, or sea. 149
               
               A motiue to a Prayer for patience in godly Parents, that are aff
                     •
                  icted in minde for the disobedience▪ and vngodly liues of their children, &c. 150
               
               A Prayer for the reformation of vngodly and disobedient children, and for patience in Parents, &c. 166
               
               A Christian incouragement, to all that feare God, act to bee 
                     〈◊〉
                   at the threats, 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,



and policies, of whatsoeuer enemies, &c. To which is added a Prayer for Gods holy protection and defence of his, in whatsoeuer danger. 173
               
               A Prayer to God, that hee will defend vs from our strongest enemies, with Thankesgiuing to God for our former deliuerances. 189
               
               A necessary motiue to stirre vs vp to a holy desire to resort to the Temple of God, to pray vnto him with the Congregation, and to heare his VVord. &c. 198
               
               A Prayer to God, that hee will prepare our hearts to the visiting of his holy Temple, to heare his Word, to pray vnto him, and to praise him. 219
               
               A Prayer for true happinesse▪ which shall be consummate only in heauen. 226
               
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
   