
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
            THE LANDGRAVE of Hessen his princelie receiuing of her Maiesties Embassador.
            Imprinted at London by Robert Robinson. 1596.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honorable Ladie the Ladie Marie, Countesse of Warwicke.
            RIght Honorable, gessing at your La. acquaintance with the Princesse, and this (blast) beeing a matter of pleasure, fit for a spare hower in an afternoone, yet for the manner of it, worth the writing done in so good order, and greatlie to hir Maiesties honor by the Landgraue, I haue presumed (vnder correction) to put out and present your Ho. the relation of our entertainement in Germanie. Hoping by your La. protectiue, fauourable acceptation of it (to walke betweene these two hils whose perfections and excellencies I cannot highthen, but discouer, in the vale of my lownesse, and obscuritie if without thankes, for my labour, yet for my good meaning, without blame. Readie to be sacrificed



for her seruice to whom of duetie we owe our selues and all our endeuors. Desirous to honour him to whom of loue it is due hauing honoured her Highnesse her Embassador and his companie so much, and to performe all good offices to your Ladiship.
            
               Your Honours euer to commaund. Edward Monings.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            HIs Lordshippe came to Brunswick the 16. of August, where the next day in the morning, met vs a gentleman called (Iohan 
               1. Res. 
               von der Bruck sent from the Landgraue to attend and 2 Personae entertaine him. This shew ed good intelligence, and 3. Actio nes. care had of his comming, for the 17. day he was with vs betimes, commanded if he mette not the Lo. Ordo. Embassadour there, to go to Breme. We gaue him entertainement, and when his Lordship was readie and called for him, he came and deliuered his message in french to this effect. That the Landgrane (his master) giuing him his titles, had sent him to meet, and in his name to welcome his Honour into his country, declaring howe long desired, and therefore verie acceptable Mauritius dei gratia Langr: Hassiae Co. Cattzaenelaenbogend Diests, Sigenhau Nidda. his coming was, and therein howe deepely he stoode bounde vnto her excellent Maiestie, that it pleased her Highnes, so gratiously to send vn to him, and greatlie beholding to my Lord Embassadour, that in regard of the length and danger of the iourney, had passed so greate a trauaile for his sake, with many other ceremonious and gratulatory speaches, till he came to the pointe, that vpon very vrgent and necessarie occasion, the childe was Christenned, telling the time of her birth, the 7. of Aprill, and baptisme the 27 of Iulie, with the giuing hir the name of Elizabeth by the Landgraue Ludowicke of Marpurg the Princes vnckle and eldest of his house who was appointed Debuty at the Christening,



but that the solemnitie was reserued till his Honours comming, and therfore diuers Princes, Lordes, Ladies, and gentlemen, inuited and commaunded to attend at the Court, and waite vpon him.
            And because the Prince his master had beene giuen to vnderstande, of his Lordshippes hastening (as he did, and that with the venture of his health in the seruice) he besought him, to take such easie and conuenient iourneys as might be best for his honours prouisions by the way, and to that ende had sent him, to doe his Lordshippe all seruice and attendance. To which my Lo. making a regratulatory answere, after hauing giuen him good woordes, made him good cheere, and the next day we went fiue leagues to Heldeshem the 19. fiueleagues to Hamel (through the mountainous and pleasant woodie parte of the Duke of Brunswicks and the Bishoppe of Padenborge their lands, & so we came to Hixtunne in the Stift of Corui.
            
            
               At Hixtunne met vs another ancient graue Gentle-man called Rauen von Aina luxen a dweller in those parts, and who came with no message, but was sent to bring my Lorde to a castle of the Princes called Zappenburch.
            
            This Castle is seated out of common passage, built vpon a hill, in a greate forrest, whither by a craggie and vnbeaten way we came late by mooneshine. My Lord Embassador, was receiued with all honor and expectation who through the souldiers ranked on both sids (as they be very cerimonious) went in with his Coaches to the inner Court, where he alighted, Master Mezenburgh Steward of the Princes house,



& before sent Embassador into England, with a troupe of gentlemē of the Landgraues, met him at the staire foote, caried him vp by torchlight to his lodging & in the greate Chamber, made a long saluting, welcomming, excusing, reioycing, and thankfull oration in the Princes behalfe, which in few words was fully answered, and so we went to supper. The Princes Officers and gentlemen were appointed to waite, onlie Master Mezenburgh sat with my Lord & his companie to gouerne the table. His Lordshippe was serued with three courses after our fashion very pletifully & so were all his seruants to the meanest, with distinction of diet & great regard was had. And this action was in all things as honorably, as wisely, orderlie and exactly well performed, as was possible, for what the country did aford his Lordship had, or they could deuise by art, and order discreetlie was donne to honour him, insomuch that his entertainement as honorably as passed measure, as his bountie wisely kept proportion.
            Heere his Lordship staied three daies, which was so apointted for his better disposition & refreshing, the first day he rested, & the second was the day of rest, & a latine sermon was made him: in the morning vppon Monday the weather brake vp, and for after dinner a hunting was appointed.
            From the Castle we passed a league downe the forrest, into an open vallie, where the length of halfe an english mile, the Toyles were sette vp on both sides to keepe in the game: the pleasure of the place, was as much as the sport, for we were in sight of diuers Towns & villages, as Quiddelburge, Rottam, Kellam, &c.


               
& from the hil Schoneberg (a faire hil) out of the wood, fell the game downe into the vallie, where in the middest, was a greene tent of cloth, set vp for my Lord Embassador with a rewe of bowes, to shaddowe the companie, hide their dogges and losen them at the deere as they passed by, the country was vp on both sides of toyles vpon waggens, with their broade bore speares and doggs: in halfe an howre, six stags & two wild swine, which were the more spared for being out of season, were cruelly murdered & so the slaughter ceased & master Mezēburgh taking his leaue went to prouide, at Cassel. Thus loue & bounty still went before vs in preparation and the next day we followed.
            The Princes owne coach couered ouer with a large carpet of blacke veluet, and laid with long cuishions drawen with 6 horse, driuen by two Coachers suted in greene, after the maner of the Princes of Germanie, was prepared for my Lo. & his own english Coach to follow with 6. horse empty, except his Lord apointed any to go in it, six besides were made ready for his cō panie, and thus prouided with waggans for our cariadges, readie set forward, the Princes gentlemen tooke their horse, being gallantlie mounted, and with conuoy of the souldiers in the Castell, whome my Lord had rewarded, we were caried through a parke adioyning, a league out of the forrest, where with a volly of shotte they tooke their leaues, and so went backe to Zappenburch.
            
            We had 3 leagues to Cassell, & within one, the way was strowed at our cōming with horsemen, that put forward to meete my Lord Embassador, and still our companie increased, who went the neerest way ouer



meadowes, the ditches leuealed and cut downe for the purpose, great expectation there was on both sides, and we were not frustrated, for within an English mile off the towne, vpon a rising ground piked out, going vp the hill, we discouered first a straunge fellow mounted vpon a Cammell, with the manner of a herald before him, this was a blackmoore of the Princes, sent a little on the one side before, to discouer our comming, and appointed to looke backe for a watchwoord, which when he had done, and kneeled downe a farre off, to my Lord Embassador with his beast, like to a cloud rising aboue the sunneafter her set, betweene the light and vs, appeared a troupe of horsemen comming vp the hill, who in a statelie manner trotted toward vs.
            They were thus marshaled, threescore swarte Ritters three and three in a ranke sternely came before, there followed sixe trumpets in the Princes colours white and red, after came a gallant sort of gentlemen euery way well and richlie appointed with iewels, and most of them chains of gold, there followed his emptie horses of honour and maintenance, belonging to his fendatorie Graffchafftes, caparisonned with white and red tafetie, with plumes and all their furniture sutable, after these six hincshmen two and two suted alike with chaines, helmets and iauelins in their handes: then came the Princes and the nobles and Master Dorstetell (going before the Dukes of Hostein and Luneberg, who were sent to meete the Lorde Embassador,) staied the troupes, which had passed along sidewise of vs, till these Princes met, who alighting, my Lord went out of his coach, and this Master Dorstetell came and made his speach in Latin,



full of receit, loue, and curtesie, shewing that these Dukes were sent to meete and entertaine his Lo. by the way and to accompany him to the Princes house, which his Excellencie desired him to vse for his beeing there as his owne, for which my Lord thanked the Prince verie kindlie, and after hauing embraced the yoong Dukes, he was intreated to take horse, and they set forward, the great ordinaunce discharged, &c. and with all pettie complements and ceremonies such as Princes vse for ornament, and to make (as their persons are, so their actions to be more estimable to the common world) we entered with as manie hitters behinde as before, the whole number being neere 300. horse, into the towne of Cassell.
            
            They were vp in armes, the captaines & cōpanies of the town stāding in order on both sides of the streets, stoutelie picke and gunne, euen to the Princes Castell. this his troup dismounted and gon in, my Lord was brought to a statelie vpper hall, where at the doore the Landgraue Maurice met and embraced my Lord Embassador. And in this honorable assemblie he deliuered his Embassage and his letters, to whome the Prince spake Latin, and after gratious entertainementes giuen, caried him to his lodgings, putting my Lord before him, where after all behauiour becomming so great a person, and wherein he had verie extraordinarie grace and facilitie he left his Lordshippe.
            His lodgings were fiue rowmes, which tooke vp one end of his house, being a goodlie quadrangle, somewhat more in length then in breadth, and like the Loner at Paris, hie and statelie, he had two dining chambers, two drawing, and betweene these two, his



bed chamber, for his more priuate and quiet being. His Lord. owne dining chamber was a very curious roome, made no doubt of purpose, to entertaine strange Princes, all of marble, the doores, the flower, the sides, windowes, roofe, and all things pertinent being of carued gray marble, and for the rarenesse, I will more particularly describe it.
            The doores are bordered about with timber to keepe the stone together, and comming in, the flower euen and smoothly paued, the chamber iust square, the sides made like a wentscot, with crestings, indentments, and Italian piller woorke, and heereby deuided into 27 panes of carued Imagerie, to the halfe proportion of a man, bearing vpon their shoulder points, escouchons with the blasoned armes of his signories, the electors count of Palatine Duke of Saxonie, Mararquish of Brandenburgh, and other houses of his friends and allies of the protestant part, ouer these an other course of indented doors and carued hollow woorkes distinct with pillers, and in this compasse next the roofe, on the fower sides fower stories carued, of the creation, the passion, the resurrection, and iudgement verie cunningly done, in length about two yardes, compassed in with a frame of marble, as though they hung loose, the roofe is wrought with knot worke, and thus to see to being in the chamber nothing but marble, whereof he hath the mine in his country, the trouble of his rowme is great in winter when to keepe the stone from cracking and loosening, the stone is continually kept hotte.
            The next rowme to this was a faire square chamber hung with tapestery, where the gentlemen dined, for commonly at the marble table, where the Dukes of Holstein, and Luneburgh, or the Granes of Nassaw, and of



               Zolmes, with Sir Richard Fines, Master Brakenburie, and others as it pleased his Lo. to appoint.
            The third was a faire drawing chamber, seated round about, and couered with scarlet, aboue the seates hung round, with a rich smale wrought tapesterie of an ell broade, of Embleme worke, and verses written vnderneath, ouer this vpon a ledge of wentscot were diuers large tables of sundrie deuises well painted with their posies to garnish the chamber, and among al, that was the best which had this Motto (Maior autem horum est charitas, for it waxed cold. The roofe was likewise flourished with painting & deuises, these rowmes had the through light of fower faire windowes, and in this chamber were two square tables, one richlie couered with a carpet of cloath of gold, and the seate laide rounde with fower long cushions of the same, which was extraordinarelie couered morning and euening for breakefast and banquet, two of the Princes groomes appointed alwaies to be heere and waite, and heere they sat somtimes in conference and counsell.
            Next to this was my Lords bedchamber, with two fair damaske field beds, prepared for my Lorde and master Edwarde Clinton his sonne, the pariture of this rowme, was a painted tree that grewe vp at the doore, the bodie bulking out very naturally of stone painted barkelike, and the braunches spreading all ouer the seeling of the chamber, full of fruite, and hanged downe vpon the walles, with other pictures to fill vp emptie places. The storie taken out of Daniell. There his: Lo. had at a little fide table, delicate preserues and conserues set and couered ouer with a vaile of laune wrought with gold and silke, and all thinges for his chamber verie fitlie.
            

               
Beyond these fower was there a faire drawng chamber hung with arras, which parted his honours lodging from the other side of the house, that so he might not any way be disturbed. And now I speake of lodgings, I wil discribe the manner, the strength, and conuenience of the Princes whole lodging, being a thing worthe noting & then returne vnto his entertainment.
            His Castell standing vpon the riuer of Fuld betwene the two sides of Casse ioyned with a bridge of stone generrally commaundeth the towne & countrie, and is particularly fortified for his owne dwellinge, for the first. A parcell of grounde of som 100 yeardes broad he hath inclosed, on both sides, which compasseth the towne & yet is impropriat any pleasure or vse of his owne, As for his walks, orchards, laying in his prouisi ons of wood, &c. vpon the cuntrie, this is storngly fortifi ed, moated, countermured, mounted, bulwarkt, flanke red, and withal possible fortification made so strong, as he is there by easily able to preuaile against the seige of any outward enimie, and beat them from the fielde, vpon the towne, onlie shut vp with a single wall, to keepe it priuate from the townes-men, that they may entende their streetes houses and trades, standing more vpon the credit of their good seruice, then their libertie: Within this place, he hath a goodly armorie not much inferiour to the Duke of Saxonie where his ordinance, armor, weapons, and munition, are kept in greate good order and readinesse vpon any occasion, all stratagemicall engines and deuises which belong to offensiue or defensiue exploites. Sucha kinde of forteresse as this hath the Duke of Saxonie at Dresden. The Duke of Brunswicke at Woll fenbuttel and the Duke of Werkenberg at Stugord aboue his castle, for these I haue seene diuers



other Princes of Germanie which will be absolute, for they haue greate reason as the Graue of Embden knows by late experience, to be diffident of their subiectes that dwell in their greate townes.
            For his priuate dwelling, his Castle is deepe and broade moated, to countergarde his house within the towne, where vpon the rampers twentie and fower are appointed to keepe continual sentinel in order, his gates ar kept with a double garde, and two bridges, drawne vp euery night and garded, the inward part as I saide a square long court, paued and vated rounde aboute with a large greate vaute vnder grounde, which is vsed for his sellerage, full of vessell twentie, fortie and some of an hundred tunne, the lower rowmes are the Offices; on the right hand a common large great hall, and other common roemes and lodgings; on the left, the middle storie was vpon our side the vpper hall where his excellencie met my Lord Embassador, on the right side a verie goodly greate Chamber & on the left a gallerie answerable, which William the Landgraues father addorned with the pictures of all the Princes of Christendome from Anno 60. vnto 88. the number of 140.
            The third storie are faire lodging Chambers rounde about the vpper end from the top to the bottom bebeing the Princes owne priuate lodgings ioyning vpon the Chappell. The fourth and fifth stories for gentlemen seruants, &c.
            On the backe side he hath faire tilt yards places for the Quintine, the running at the ring, rideing, and other exercises for his pleasure, gardens, with banqueting houses, artificiall fountaines, and water workes, fish ponds &c. With his housed gardens of



range trees, lemons, pomgranets, and diuers outlandish fruites, & simples, after the custome of the Germane Princes who in all outward things are very glorious and apparent.
            But to his intertainement where I left, my Lord after an hower resting in his Chamber, the Prince sente two principall of his Counsell, to salute him and to know his Lor. pleasure, where hee woulde suppe, wishing rather if it pleased him, to keepe his chamber, after his trauaile then otherwise, and to appoint what hower he would for sermon the next day, which he did at nine.
            In the morning master Brackenburie appointed the ordering of the chappell for the solemnitie, and Doctor Gregorius Schonfelt Concionator anlicus Cassellanus, who suceeds master Eartholomaeus Meyer in his supreme perintendencie preached, his sermon was brought ouer.
            At the solemnitie my Lord was very richlie and well appointed, as became him, to her Maiesties honour, and his owne, and their admiration, sitting alone on the right side of the Chappell, in a place prepared for him within a trauesse of the Queenes, the row me hung with crimosin tafetie, with chaires and cushions of crimosin veluet, ouer against him satt the Prince, with the Dukes of Holstein, Lune, Burg, and the Graues of Zolmes, Nassaw and others, who did him all the sermon time greate reuerence by much standing, His Lor. performed it gratiously and master Brackenburie her Maiesties Gentel manusher stoode all the sermon time at the turning vp of the trauesse, and with alowe reuerence gaue him first his praier booke which master Cotton of the warderobe had readie, after sermon they proceeded to the solemnitie, and first came master Edward Clinton taught by



the Gentleman vsher what to doe, with a goodlie rich cup of gold set with stone, wherein were comfits & with three reuerences they went both and presented it vnto her Maiesties deputie who tooke a tast, after they presented it, vnto the Landgraue and the Dukes who did the like, then came Sir Richard Fines in the same manner with a cuppe of wine, and last they went both, one held the basen, while the other gaue water, and the third the towel. When this was performed in the middest of the chappell, vpon a little pause, my Lord Embassador accompanied with this honorable traine, went towardes the Princesse her chamber to present the gift, whither before we came: we first passed through (in an vtter chamber) a garden of faire yoong ladies and gentlewomen clad in colours, who stoode like the rainebow, and they cōpassed the one halfe of the roume by which we passed into the Princes her bed chāber, where were none but Ladies, & a solemn presence. First stood three of the Landgraues sisters, the Ladie Anna Maria, holding the princes little sonne Otto by the finger. The ladie Hedwig and the ladie Sophia, the other sisters Elizabeth her maiesties goddaughter Christina & Sabina being dead, there was the ladie Anna countesse of Nassaw and manie of the Graues wiues, of the Landgraues countrie that waited on the Princesse. And she her selfe as Horace saith of Iulium Sidus stood by her bed side, Velut inter ignes luna minores with her Maiesties goddaughter set vppon the middest of a feeld bed of greene cloath of tissue, with white and greene plumes all verie richlie embrodered. The prince went with my Lord Embassador toward this fayre Ladie, and by master VVroth had speach with her touching her Maiesties good will towardes her, and the gratifying her with a present &c. which master Mezenburge an



answered, & while this was doing the presct was brought in, and set vpon the Cubbart, this doone the Prince, and my Lorde Embass. tooke their leaues, and left this sober companie of Ladies, and gentelwoemen, as they founde them in their chambers, he brought my Lord to his loging and so they parted. Within halfe an hower The pres. a rich cubbert of plate. after he sent him worde, it was his pleasure and desue, that his Lo. shoulde dine with him in his greate chamber and sit in state, which my Lord with some straining of curtesie tooke vpon him, he was set alone at the bordes end, the Landgraue and his Ladie sitting beneath him about two yeardes with the young Dukes of Hollnn. and the Graues of Nassaw, Iohn, Phillipe, Willelns and Ludowick, the Graue Phillip of Zolmes of whittenstein, and others, at the bordes ende, there waited on my Lord Sir Richard Fines as cupbearer who in this iourney did her Maiestie great honour and seruice at the Paltzgraues, as he went to Venice, he gaue the cup with three cursies and essay, there waited with him Maister Brackenburie, and thus was there a royall feast continued, in great solemnitie and varietie of excellent musike, and in the middest of Dinner, the Prince began a health vnto her Maiestie whome he often reuerently termed, mother, this health went round and while it was a drinking, there was a deuise of a castell (serued vpon the table in a charger, which had a warer running about it, with fish swimming in it (verie artificially donne which shott of, of it selfe is blowes as big as petronell, and all besmoked the roome with gunpowder, which with sweet perfumes burnte was soone avoided, after this roy all dinner, the Ladies first withdrewe, and then the prince brought my Lord againe vnto his chamber, giuing him place, and honoring the person whom he represented,



the most effectually, & affecttionately he could. He staid not there an hower, but Barriers were in hand, which being set crosse the courte, all these states were at windows to see them aboue, and when the Iudges were set below, there came in two ensignes of pikes and shotte, that compassed them round, to keepe the peace, then came 15 to 15 Knights the one side in gilt armour, the other in siluer, who taking vp their ends, the herauld red their orders, and they went to their sporte, first with the speare, then the sworde, after pele mele and brake a maruelous deale of Iron worke, and while these hott Knights were swetting in their harnesse issues such a furious Ambuscado of crackers that flewe out of the barre painted ouer greene to hide the treason, that it parted them. This quarrell ended without bloudshed, & iudgements giuen, the Herauld proclamed triumphs for the day following, & the companie full of the pleasure, loue and honour of this solemne meeting dissolued, the Prince withdrewe, and my Lo. was priuate.
            The next day the Prince sent my Lord by the High-marshall M. Benneberge his good morowe, as hee did alwayes sometimes by one sometimes by an other greete him with honourable salutations twice or thrice a day, & the Graue of Zip was appoynted to accompany my Lo. who being a fat corpulent man, had little to doe at their actiuities, after dinner his Lo. was caried to the Tiltyard, but without the Prince, hee was so busie about his sports, marshaling other men, and putting him selfe in order, beeing an actor in them the more to honor her Maiestie and the day. The first Triumphes were the running at the ring, wherein they had extraor-dinarie deuise of three circles wrought the one within the other with a Crosse parting them, and making differences of hitting,



aboue or below, on the right side or on the left, that in the middest being the compasse of a french. Crowne which was the best for wagers, no man might runne: for vnder ten nor for aboue a hundred dolors, marie they might run a trust, ther were iudges appoynted to decide, these great matters who disposed of prises and the Lords and Ladies being placed in a open place builte for the purpose the Triumphes began. There came in first with sixe staffers and sixe Trumpets masked with their deuise the two Chalengers Mastrr Deuet a verie proper horse-man and Master Dorstetell a Councellour, who ranne with all the rest and last one with another for the prise, then came there seauen Companies, which made seuerall entrances: first with musicke then with deuises, their Launce bearers and them selues following, and last their seruants and their emptie trapped and Caparisoned horse.
            The Duke of Luneburgh brought in the Seauen deadlie Sinnes, and hee placed pride (indeed he vsed vs somewhat strangely) then came in an other compaeie with the Sciences, and another with the Nine Muses, one came in Post two masked like the Sunne and the Moone whose deuise was the Seasons of the Yeare but of all the Vnbekent ritter, came in like a Prince with his musicke of Sackbotes & Cornets clade in greene Tafetie to the ground sixe before and sixe behinde, with the most harmonious noyse that could be, answering one another like an Eccho. This kinde of musike had a princely ayre, his deuise was or might be fitlie, the fowre Cardinall vertues, carying the globe of the earth and sphere of heauen among them, & Consulting who after came himselfe masked like Ioue, ri ding all in white crowned, and with a tripertite sworde in his hand vnder a Crimosin Canopie borne ouer him, whereon was written at the two endes Pramia bonie, &


               
               Bona malis on the one side Virtute & Consilio and one the other the Embleme of a fagottewith Concordia fimul manet. After the lanciers came & his emptie horse, this vnknowen knight after hauing runne six courses whereof he missed, but one, came vp to the Princesse, andkept my Lord Embassadour companie.
            The Landgraue in his triumphes as in all thinges else kept so good decorum, that the best was reserued for the last, wherein the Princes her brother representing Casar 
               Albert Octo Gr. of Zal
                  
                     •
                  is. came in for his deuise with the fower Kings of America, Africa, Asia, Europa, so naturally sette out, euerie countrie in his kinde, for musike, attires of going caried before him in their seuerall fashions of coches and state as coulde be deuised, the credit of the Princes triumphs, was that they were costly all things being made newe for this meeting, that they were manie full of varietie, performed in season and good order.
            After supper as their manner is vpon a triumph day there was a daunse, in the gallerie I spake of. The prince and my Lord Embassadour being set at the vpper end the Duke of Hotstein began with the Princesse, and the Duk of Luneburgh with the Ladie Anna Maria and so the rest of the Lordes and ladies in their order with drum and trumpet for their musick.
            After the first setting in, there was a summonning of Knights that were to receiue fauours of their Ladies, either for their good runninge or their deuises that day. And when they had first been thanked, with commendations of their doing and exhortation with inioyment giuen them that as they had donne that by way of exercise and pastimes, to honour the Prince and Ladies, so they shoulde be ready indeed vpon iust occasion to shewe their manhoode in the defence of



them both and of their countrie, after they receiued some reward, and with a cranse with their Ladies gaue daunses with them, when these honours were donne the well deseruers this day, the triumphs for the next day were published, but to auoide satietie they were discreetely referred to the day after, a day of pause was put in betweene both, wherein they mett in councell. Thus entergreabley the time was passed and vpon Saterday the twentie seauen of August the principall deuise and triumph was performed.
            There came in the morning an Embassadoure from the countie Palatine, Dereon Sehenberg who came to inuite the Landgraue to be godfather to the Paltzgraue sonne and heire, there came in the afternoone in the middest of their sportes the Paltzgraue of Zueienburch with his Ladie and his little sonne but their comming was, onelie to see the Lord Embassadour.
            Without the towne there was a castell: builte, and the water drawne from the riuer to moate it about so broade that it bore a boate to and fro, the place for standings and perfourming of this sporte was railed in and made conuenient, and the substance of the matter was, of an enchaunter that had forsooth dwelte there long, and by two or three giants in his castell taken diuers prisoners Knightes and Ladies, and by his doings much endammaged his countrie, wherevpon the Knightes of Hessen put them selues in armes and apointed a day for the incountering of the giants and the rasing of the castell, and the giuing libertie to a faire Ladie that was prisoner there, nowe for their defence they kept open tent and hunge out the Flagge of defiance to all knights that passed, who if disposed might by the sounding of



a horne first come in, and trie their valours and their fortunes, for by both these this Ladie was to be deliuered, and not otherwise, for triall of their dexteritie and valour there were fower thinges to doe, first to runne at the Quintin. Next the turney. Then the tilte without a pale: and last the sword and target wherein if the knight were at any ouercome he was prisoner, and for their triall there were Iudges, if he went through, yet had he a pointe of destinie to proue, whether it were his fate forsoth to drawe the enchaunted sworde out of a piller that stoode by the castell.
            The Knights of Hesse came at their daie appointed, not to make deuises but to shewe their manhood, they were many and verie gallantlie armed and kepte in such order as (which graced the triumpth) there was alwaies a continued sporte, without intermission or losse of time and three or fower actions to be sene at once. The places were deuided with railes and as one thing was donne, there were wilde fellowes that losened the chiane of the outer gate and let them by degrees vnto the but castel, the fats had apointed it for the Dukes of Luneburgh who drewe out the sworde, deliuered the Ladie, and brought out a straunge vgly companie from the castell which being gone the fire workes began for straungenesse and admirable deuice exceeding all the rest, some for mounting, some burnning in the water, som for their straunge tearing of the aire vpright, some turning heere and there after an hundred fashions, brustinge out into such noyses and spectacles, as though heauen and earth had gone together. These and the rest were surely princely vanities, but betwixt iest and earnest there were two coronets of horsemen set to keepe the feelde, while these things were a doing, for it was late and night



before they ended.
            Thus full of entertainment it was time for my Lord (as he did wiselie) to speake of parting & not to put this royally minded Prince to too great trouble, who was within fewe daies to goe to Amberg and to meete the Paltzgrane. There shoulde haue been a daunse this night as before, but being late it was performed in like manner as I tolde the next day being Sunday when the Prince, my Lord, the other Embassador, the Paltzgraue of Zueinburch, and his Ladie dined together in the Landgraues great chamber after a priuate & domestical manner, for by this time the extraordinarie cōpany was retired, the Landgraue supped with him in the Marble chamber wher he told him as it was giuen out before, that the next day morning he ment to ride abroade a hunting with his Lordshidpe.
            Before they set out the Landgraue rode with him about his fortresse, shewed him the secret places of it, with his armorie appointing dinner to be serued in the garden at the banquettinge house, after in a barge we crossed the water, where were coches ready and the Prince went that night tewo leagues to Milsungen, wher he reioyced and was exceeding merrie full of state and grace in speach and beheauiour, his answere vnto my Lord I noted who saying to him vpon occasion that the Prince of Hessen was not there and therefore woulde he be the bolder. No my Lord quoth the Landgraue (in english) the prince of Hessen is not heere but the greate Hunts-master. The next day he caried vs to his towne of Rotenberg which is so called of the red moulde of



the hils yet betwene them runs a verie rich vale where this towne is situated. Heer we stayed two dais, & had a freshe fitte of entertainment with huntings greater then the first but in that kinde.
            The Prince hath heere a goodlie house, where are one of the fiue choice things of Germanie which are the Armorie and Stabell at Dresden, the banquetinge house at Stutgart the hunts kammer of Munchen and the hall of Rottenberg. Heere called he to his The desc. of the Land. councells his lieftenaunt Baltazar Gedel a worthy graue wise gentelman, and whom the imployed vpon the borders of the Abbacye of fuld, which is the Emperours. But to speake at length after a timely obseruation of this noble Prince whose rare giftes and vertues and discretion in the cariadge of himselfe, and mannaging affaires sufficiently discouer him, he His bodie. is a perfect man (in my opinion) and a most perfect Prince.
            First a goodly personage, of stature tall & straght, for his proportion, of a good presence and a gallant countenaunce, manly visaged, with a faire big blacke eie, deepe aburne haire, comlie in behauiour, gratious and presuasiue in speach. And this bodie hath a minde sutable vnto yt.
            For his giftes of nature are great, sharpe to apprehend, and sound in iudgment, mingling his grauitie with pleasure, his courtesie with state, and honor, loue with stoutnes, thereby winning the affection of His minde. straungers, and keeping his subiectes in a louely feare, Master of his affections, temperat, bounded, not to change, in whom the vpper partes commaund the neather.
            

               
His education prince-like, generally knowen in all things, & excellēt in many, seasoning his graue & mor important studies for ability in iudgment, with studies of pastime for retiring, as in poetrie, musike, and the Mathemitikes, and for ornament in discourse in the languages, French, Italian & English, wherein he is expert reading much, conferring and writting much he is a full man, a readie man, an exact man, and so excellent a Prince that a man may say of him without flatterie as Tullie did of Pompey, vnus in quo summa sunt omnia, and for my priuate opinion I thinke there are but fewe such men in the world.
            His experience in all good courses greater then his yeares, though for the inconstancies, aduantages, and courses of the bad world, it increase with time in all men. For art doth perfect nature & is perfected by experience. In his gouernment wise, in himselfe absolutely ruling vehement yet louing & beloued of his sub iectes, void of crueltie or exaction, gentell, gratious, not gouerned by one nor distracted by many but aduised. And as Traiane the Emperour was called paterpatrie by the Romanes, so hath this Prince a terme among his people of their (Goodnesse without end.) For his exercise giuen much to hormanship, and to his lawfull pleasures, in the vaine of his age, more giuen to spend then to gather, and whereas his Grandfather aduanced his house by matching with Sophia Duchesse of saxonie, & his father with sabina Dutchesse of Wurteynberg, he hath married vertue and beautie, folowing rather the contentment of his mind like a great Prince, then the filling of his purse, or his greater aduancement chusing so vertuous and so beautifull



as his countese by whom he had first a sonne named Otto, and nowe her Maiesties God daughter Elizabeth: his waies may prosper for they are right, and his counsels take effect, for they tend to pietie.
            After his entertainmentes here at Rotenberg, he would gladly haue caried my Lord Embassador to his best house at Smalecole, for as he is goodnes without end vnto his subiectes, so shewed he loue without end to her Maiestie, but his iourney of Amberg, woulde not permit it, therefore we returned back by Spauengberg from whence he suddainly went from vs before, where at we maruailed but coming to Cassel he met my Lo. Embassador extraordinarily gallant, and receiued him so freshly as though he had but now begun his entertainment. This iudgment and discretion he vsed to the last, embracing this fauoure of her Maiestie, in the most estimable and kinde manner, that was possible, and shewing greater parts then of a duchman. Vpon parting he presented my Lord with Princely giftes, as cuppes of Iuorie, Amber & Christal, & to fit his humor with turkes & Ginnets, furnished verie richly, whiat other secret giftes were giuen betweene them, I knowe not: but after mutuall presents, and gratuities, dispatching of letters, and preparing for our Iourney to Breme the Prince sent one Master Branch for Frence, who went with vs, dined with the Embassador he and the Dukes of Luneberg and Holsteine, who after dinner in all termes of honour and of courtisie bad my Lord farewell. And so these Princes parted.
         
         
            
            His Lordshippes entertainment in the Lowe Countries.
            
            I Cannot but in gratitude insert to this discourse a word or two of my Lordes bountifull and louing entertainment going and coming through the lowe Countries.
            Wherein this good people shewed their gratefull minds vnto her Maiestie, as by whose, Soueraigne Counsel & asistance (to say truly) they liue in that peaceable libertie wealthie and very florishing estate that now they are in, which is no little honour to her sacred personne, throughout the world. That this kingdom which was wont to suffer, and be ledde by others, is in her time become Actiue so farforth, as through Christendome to be principal, for the setting vppe and maintenance of the truth, not onelie in her Maiesties owne dominions but abroade, in spite of the world and the Deuil, Etiam rumpant ur vt Ilia Codre. God Continue her, for his Christ es sake.
            The last of Iuly my Lord embarqued from Year-month in a shippe of the Queenes & landed at the Brill where by the Ho. the Lord Burroughs appointment



Captaine Turner his Honoures deputies Gouernour in the Garison, preuented the Burghmaisters, in my Lordes entertainment, who were verie sorie for it desiring his Lo. to returne that way.
            We crossed the water to Maidensluse and wente by scute to Delst where her Maiesties Agent Maister Gilpin with Captaine I axley and some other gentlemen, met with my Lord and returned with him presently to the Hague.
            The Princes were in seruice and at Hulst, but fiue of the states generall, one for Gelderland, one for Frizeland, two for Holland Delft and Leadon and one for Ouerissel came and entertained my Lorde, feasting and accompanying him, de fraying all manner of charges and sent further letters of Commendations vnto other townes to doe the like taking order by one Captaine Corbet that when his Lo. came to Delphzill he should for his Honours safe conduct procure either a shippe of warre, or fiftie souldier.
            My Lord was at the Hague saluted further by the Countie Edgment and the French Embassador & being desirous to fee her, went and saluted the Princesse of Orange with her young sonne.
            From thence we went to Leaden, where my Lorde was feasted likewise, and so at Harle and at Amsterdam it cost them two & three hundred guldens at a meale, for there was no spare, and for the most part they defrayed, his Lo. wagons and his cariages.
            From Amsterdam we sailed to Enchusen whither comming late, we came vnlooked for, and betimes



in the morning went to Harli
                     ••••
                  
                and the same day to Lewarden.
            
            His Honours entertainement in this Prouince passed all the rest, for they can better skil of it, Frizeland being the more noble, though Holland be as honest
            At Lewarden Maister Docomartin the Here Suasenburch and others gaue my Lord Embassador courtly and gratious entertainement, besides the cost they bestowed of him which for his supper came to twentie pounde.
            From hence we went to the territorie of Grominoen where the states, keepe in continuall garisonne eight companies, whereof the one halfe falied out at my Lords comming, and caried him into the towne in greate triumph, the Trumpet and a Coronet of hormen going before him to his lodging on the market place, where aboue all that I haue yet spoken of in these partes, he was entertained and feasted.
            In the morning the Seargent Maior caried him about the fortresse, and shewed him of the siege, and manner of taking it by Graue Maurace & after dinner foure or fiue of the principal accompanied him towardes Delphzil appointing Captaine Gorbet to goe with him, where my Lo. was likewise receiue at the watch-masters house.
            From hence after hauing seene the sconse next morning we crossed the water to Embden where my Lord staying for answere from the Graue, for his conuoy, he was put to cost and so at Leere Oldenborge and Breme, where he staied not, but wente to Forden Cel, and so to Brunswicke trauailed at greate



charge vntil he came to Zapponbunch, and so likewise from Cassel till he came backe to Lewarden.
            
            At our returne from Cassell we came downe the wessel by Munden Nuneburg Minden, Breme, where my Lord mette a man of warre of Frizeland and with him coasting and crossing the Ilands, came first to the schonse of Northmer Horne, and went from thence to Dockum.
            
            At Lewarden againe they did him curtesie & defrayed his charges where he hoped to haue met Graue Willelm but he was at Groningen, we came the same way we went to Amsterdam, where were the states of Holland at their prouinciall Councel, there being a generall meeting within fewe daies after at Lewarden.
            
            From thence his Lordship went to Vtrecht, where he had marueilous entertainement: it were a storie alone to report it.
            From Vtrecht we crossed ouer againe to the Hague where Graue Maurice inuited his Lo. to dinner, here were the Duke of Bullone, the Graues of Hollac Emden, Egmont and many gallants; returning through we came to Rotterdam where he was entertained, and from thence to Dordred where likewise he was receiued verie bountifullie.
            At Dordrech my Lord tooke shippe for Middelburgh hauing appointed to conuoy him two men of warre where through Zeland by the townes of Der Go
                     ••
                  e Zerricher Campb
                     •
                  re and Arnhem, we 'arriued and at the English house my Lordes charges was borne by the Burger-maisters: we hastenned from the sicknes to Flushing where the Lorde Gouernour Sir Robet Sidney


               
mette and receiued my Lorde into the towne accompanied with manie gallante Captaines and Gentlemen, being by, and prouided him of shipping and all thinges necessary for our passage imbarked the sixt of October and with a prosperous wind the seauenth ariued in England.
            FINIS.
         
      
   