
      
         
            
            
               A Gagg for the new GOSPELL? NO: A NEW GAGG FOR An OLD GOOSE.
            VVho would needes vndertake to ſtop all PROTESTANTS mouths for euer, with 276. places out of their owne Engliſh BIBLES.
            
               OR AN ANSVVERE to a late Abridger of Controuerſies, and Belyar of the PROTESTANTS Doctrine.
            By Richard Mountagu.
            
            Publiſhed by AVTHORITIE.
            
               LONDON.
            
            Printed by Thomas Snodham for Matthew Lown
                     ••
                  
                and William Barret. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            To the READER.
            
            
               PROTESTANT or Papiſt, Engliſh or Romiſh Catholique, Chriſtian if thou be, though to all or any, I intend what I write, yet I will not preſſe thee 
                  
                     •
                  o peruſe the Treatiſe enſuing, for I am indifferent whether thou doe or no. Nor would I haue ſo much as troubled thy Patience with a Preface, it being not tanti, which the Gagger hath grated vpon, but that being put vpon such a copeſmate, I was of conueniency to acquaint thee firſt with three things: My vndertaking: then my performing: and the motiue of the Second, his deſeruing. What moued mee to meddle with this Gagger: In what ſort I thought fit to arreſt him: wherefore I haue dealt with him in ſuch ſort. And firſt for the firſt, be pleaſed to know
            That I coped not with him voluntarily: nor thruſt my ſelf forward of my own accord, out of a deſire to be doing. I haue other employments, of much more behoof, to better purpoſe, & my greater benefit euery way; or, if I had none, pater ā has h
                     •
                  r as non ſic per dere, I profeſſe, I would neuer be ſo idle, but could more pleaſingly

and profitably ſpend my time, then in catching or killing of Flyes. But be pleaſed to heare a ſtory, Reader, which put me on this poſture, and performing. And thus it was.
            About ſome two yeares ſince, as I remember, ſome of our Catholique Limitors, had beene roming and rambling in the Countrey, and brake into my pale ſecretly, at my Pariſh of Standford-Riuers in Eſſex: and according as commonly their cuſtome is, (that you may know of what companions Saint Paul entended, his Leading ſilly women captiues) fell in with ſome, one at leaſt, of the ſubordinate and weaker ſexe: indeauouring to make Proſelytes of my neighbours wiues. Now you know their ordinary onſets, with great Out-cries of Damned Heretickes, out of the Church. No Seruice: no Sacraments: no Miniſtery: no Faith: no Chriſt: no Saluation. Terrible Shawe-fowles to skarre poore Soules, that haue not the facultie of diſcerning Cheeſe from Chalk. Horrible affrights and mormolyceues, to put young children out of their wits, that cannot diſtinguiſh a viſnomie indeed from a viſour.
            So it fell out, that a neighbour of mine, with whom in this ſort they had beene tampering, became not a little diſmayed, and perplexed with theſe bug-beares of great names and thunderings in her eares; till it came at length vnto my knowledge what was done. I let her know, they were but ſcarr-crowes: meere words and wind, bragges and boaſtings, and ſo ſetled her diſquieted thoughts againe. But yet it ſeemeth, they left not ſo. The Diuell hath a name, Belzebub, the God of flyes, expreſſing his nature, like a flye, inſolent,

importune, preſſing on; though he fall off to day, hee will re-enforcce to morrow, though he faile to day, he will aſſay to morrow, and ſtill hope to preuaile at laſt. So Theſe, as He, came on againe, though euer by owlelight. For they came to ſteale, and therefore feared blaunchers. I could not come to God-ſpeed, nor to confront them.
            But this I did: When next you meete with theſe Romiſh Rangers, commend me to them, ſaid I vnto my neighbour. Tell them, I much deſire to bee acquainted with them. I was borne, & bred, and brought vp, & profeſſed in the Religion of the Church of England: which I hitherto haue thought to be the truth: held and taught as the truth: if I haue beene deceiued, and haue deceiued others, I am ſorry for it: my deſire is to know and profeſſe the Truth, to waue hereſie, to quit error, to goe out of ſchiſme, to finde out the true Church of Chriſt, and become a member of it; and ſo conſequently, by all poſſible meanes to ſaue my Soule. If then their intention be ſuch ſincerely, as they pretend it is, To ſaue Soules; they may doe a meritorious deed to come and ſaue mine, the rather, becauſe they may goe compendiouſly to worke, in gaining mee to the ſide, who am like enough to draw you, my Pariſhioners, with me, at leaſt to make you more ſeaſable, then otherwiſe you would be for them.
            But it ſeemed canebam ſur dis, & I beleeue, if the relation was made, as I think it was, they gaue no great credit to my words, or had leſſe hope of their performance. For the truth is, the moſt of theſe Limitors are but poore Ignaroes: take them out of their beaten paths,

they cannot hold pace.) Wherefore, ſeeing I could not tell where to finde them, and they would not finde me, where they might haue me: I thought to ſend after them to know their mindes, to vnderſtand their opinions, and ſee what they would ſay, to winne mee vnto their Catholiqne faith. So I tooke pen and paper, and wrote, as I thought fit, three Propoſitions, promiſing conformity vpon reſolution, to this effect, and I ſuppoſe, in theſe tearmes.
            1 If any Papiſt lining, or all the Papiſts liuing, can proue vnto me, that the preſent Roman Church, is eyther the Catholique Church, or a ſound member of the Catholique Church, I will ſubſcribe.
            
            2 If any Papiſt liuing, or all the Papiſts liuing, can proue vnto me, that the preſent Church of England is not a true member of the Catholique Church, I will ſubſcribe.
            
            3 If any Papiſt, &c. can proue vnto mee, that all thoſe points, or any one of thoſe points which the Church of Rome maintaineth againſt the Church of England, were or was, the perpetuall Doctrine of the Catholique Church: the concluded Doctrine of the repreſentatine Church in any generall Councell, or Nationall approued by a Generall: or the dogmaticall reſolution of any one Father, for 500. yeares after Chriſt, I will ſubſcribe.
            
            And to theſe ſeuerally I ſet my name, which I did to try their ſufficiencies: or abate their inſolencies: and to ſettle the wauering vpon thoſe goodly pretenſes of Antiquity, Vniuerſality, and Conformity. I am ſure I come home to them, and touch them in their freehold, as they

claime it: I giue them ſcope enough to inſiſt vpon. If they can performe this, I will not eate my words. I make it now publicke, which I then ſaid in priuate, let them performe it, I will ſubſcribe.
            
            Theſe three Propoſitions, thus conceiued, & ſigned, I then deliuered vnto my neighbour, the partie that ſhould haue beene proſelyted: intreating her, to deliuer them vnto thoſe her perſwaders, if they came again, as ſhe thought they would. This ſhe promiſed, and at their next meeting, accordingly performed, within few dayes. I expected, I confeſſe, ſome great vndertaker, and ſome mighty oppoſition, to purpoſe, in points of that Nature, which touched them ſo neere, and came vp to the head of their Catholique cauſe; and ſo began to compoſe my ſelfe againſt expected aduerſaries of ſome performance at leaſt. But many weekes, many months paſſed, eighteene at leaſt, and I heard no noiſe of thoſe Hereticke-quellers, my great Maſters, who ceaſe not yet to call for diſputation. At length, after much expectation, vpon the fifth of October laſt, the ſame partie premiſed, preſenteth mee at once with two ſeuerall preſents. The one, two ſheets of Paper, written in haſte, not fully out, with two ſeuerall hands. The Scribe was ſome puny-nouice in euery point of Scrib-ſhip. For neither could hee tell how to vſe or diſpoſe his points: nor yet how to ſpell his words. I haue the Originall by mee, to ſhew. Any man that readeth it, will many times be to ſeeke, to make ſenſe, or Engliſh of it. The Dictator, (if yet the Author and writer were diuided) ſubſcribed himſelfe yours in Chriſt Ieſus, A. P. a ſilly man God knoweth as euer talked

idly of the Catholique Church: the head of the Church: the Maſſe, Confeſſion, and Purgatory. For his diſcourſe (beſide ſome 
                  ••
               urrility without wit or 
                  •
               artneſſe, of my Worſhip, Doctorſhip, &c.) ſmattered a little, but very poorely, and at randome, vpon theſe points: but concerning, or vnto, my Propoſitions; 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   my quidem Lucilianum? the Innocent meant mee no hurt, therefore, he bit not.
            Marry he had a cleanly put-off for that, thus. Hee deſireth me at my going to London, to repaire vnto Maſter May his houſe (theſe are my friend A. P. s own words) in Holburne, in Partridge-alley. A man, that I neuer knew, nor ſaw, nor heard of, albus an ater, I cold not tell, nor happily ſhould haue knowne in haſt, but by his relation. From him I haue it: that, Hee was not long ſince a Miniſter, but is now become a Catholique. In good time: through diſcontent perhaps, or ambition; or ſome ſuch ordinarie motiue of ſuch Turne-coates. My imployment thither, was for Satisfaction: if yet I had beene ſure thereof. For I had ſome cauſe of doubt, in that which followeth. If hee will not ſatisfie you, at leaſt he will procure ſome body elſe. If he will not: but what if he cannot? Then from Partridge-ally, I might happily bee poſted to Woodcocke-walke: and thence fluſhed to Fooles-wharfe: and ſo returne home, as wiſe as I went out.
            But ſecondly, to preuent or ſupply the worſt, beſide, and with his two ſheets of Paper, my good friend A. Pe. out of Curtefie, addreſſed vnto me, for my better Edification, a pretty little whip-iacke, of leſſe then ordinary aſſiſe, in a blew iacket; marked in the fore-head, with A Gagge, for the new Goſpell: whoſe worſhip, vntill

then, was as little knowne to me de nomine, as was Maſter M
                     ••
                  . He was ſent with this Elogium and Inuitation at leaſt: If you pleaſe to anſwere this little booke, and ſo explicate all the places of Scriptures and Fathers; which are cited in it, it will be a good worke fit for a Doctor of Diuinity (here my friend ſhot at rouers, I am not the man; for Doctor of Diuinity I am none.) And I doubt not but by ſearching out of theſe points, you wil be of another minde, as many of your coate haue beene, when they went ſincerely, and for the loue of God, and their own ſoules (adde, and ſomewhat elſe) vnto their ſtudies. So hee, in his miſſi
                  •
               es of October, vnto me.
            Thus briefly, as I could, I haue related the occaſion of my engagement, in this gagling, with the Gagger. Thoſe Papers I anſwered preſently as I thought fit, and left the anſwere to be returned vnto A. P. who promiſed to call for it within three dayes; but came not within threeſcore, as I am informed, & if yet he haue come for it, I cannot tell. The Gagge I tooke to taske, vpon my returne vnto my bookes, at Windſor: as meere a gaggler as euer graſed vpon a greene. Many idle Pamphlets in this very kinde, haue I ſeene in my dayes; but a verrier idiota ſaw I neuer any. With a ſtrange opinion of their owne worth, are theſe Catholicks poſſeſſed. This poore ſilly Creature thought Himſelfe ſomebody, and his Performings no ordinary Aduenture: elſe ſure hee would not ſo haue proscribed his pamphlet, the Gagge of the new Goſpell: which neceſſarily implyeth thus much, Hee hath ſtopped the months of all Proteſtants for euer: the proudeſt of them dare not hiſcere hereafter againſt Himſelfe, or any one of his Lagg: but, as geeſe, when they goe in at a barne dore, or are driuen

on by night, a long ſtaffe or pole being held ouer them, goe without noiſe or reluctancy, holding downe their heads: ſo the appalled Proteſtants, being creſtfallen, and caſt downe for euer, muſt goe as this Gagger will diſpoſe of them. My friend A. P. ſic mulus mulum ſcabit, was well perſwaded of this mans performance, and irreſiſtable ability, when hee ſent him to me to conuert me, being aſſured I could ſay little to him, no not ſo much as bough to a Gooſe, as for, Anſwere him, it went beyond my poſſibility. For this, set the iury conſider: but for Conuerſion, no ſuch matter I aſſure him: his aſſurance hath failed here. I am more confirmed, then euer I was in my Proteſtant profeſſion, through his inſufficiency. Nay, had I not been a Proteſtant, he would haue made me one through his poore performing of what he had vndertooke, vpon view.
            
               Whatſoeuer he intended, whatſoeuer he hath ſaid, was by Him, and His, addreſſed, not againſt Iohn a Noke, and Iohn a Style, this man and that man of the Proteſtant partie: not againſt priuate tenents, and peculiar opinions. For what hath the world to doe to take publique notice of them? as they are ſingular, ſo let them ſtand or fall: Salus Eccleſtae, non vertitur in iſtis, the Church will ſtand and ſubſiſt without them: but hee driued directly at the Church of England, that moate in the eyes of Romiſh Prieſts and Ieſuites. For though he ſet his booke to ſaile, with generall commendations, A briefe abridgement of the errors of the Proteſtants of our times: and ſo may ſeeme to encloſe our neighbours abroad: yet his drift was directly againſt vs at home: againſt the Doctrine and Diſcipline of o
                  ••
                
               Church. Therfore

he wrote in the Engliſh tongue alone. Therefore his addreſſe is to The Proteſtants that are in England onely. Therefore he talketh of our Engliſh tranſlations, and in preciſe words inſtituteth his Refutation, by Expreſſe words of our owne Engliſh Bibles: which confine his Gagge to vs alone, that are of that Church for, Engliſh Bibles, belong to Engliſh men: Strangers haue their owne, in their owne Mothers tongue: they vnderſtand not ours, which concerne them not at all.
            Now in point of carriage againſt the Church of England: in his Refutation of our Churches errors: in gagging vp our mouthes for defence thereof for euer; ſee the ſmall honeſty, little ſincerity, and petty performing of this Gagler. In all Churches that are, or haue beene vnder heauen: euen in the Chutch of Rome it ſelfe at this day, notwithſtanding the concluſions of the Councell of Trent: the Deciſions and Edicts of Popes: the inquiſitors of Hereſie, and ſuch like inhibitions to the contrary. There are publique Reſolutions held of all, and priuate opinions maintained by ſome, by men particular in their owne Conceits: and Societies in a more generall agreement in things indifferent, not de fide, or if yet of a looſer and lower tye, and alloy. As thoſe are propoſed, reſolued, maintained, tendred and commanded: So the other are free, and diſputed and queſtioned, not enioyned as de fide, or Subſcribed, becauſe Problematicall, and no more. If a man ſhould collect the priuate opinions of priuate men, which are differences in Schooles among Schollers: nay, of the Maſter of Controuerſies, or of ſentences, and impute them vnto the Church of Rome, the Faith of Rome, this Gagger (if hee know what to doe) and his gagle,
               
would refuſe them, diſclaime them, thinke themſelues wronged, proclaime themſelues belied, as Bellarmine doth often in the like caſe. Ex aequo & bono, and more maiorum, we may doe the like. Yet ſee the honeſty of this Impoſter againſt vs in this his poore pamphlet.
            He hath collected together, out of C. W. B. and ſuch companions: and diſpoſed as it hapned, without order or method xlvii. ſeuerall propoſitions. All pretended errours of the Church of England: becauſe all contrary to expreſſe words of our owne Bibles: and repugnant to Antiquity, in the Writings of the Fathers: ſo to faſten Noueltie, and Hereſie, and Impietie vpon our Church. Of theſe xlvii. onely viii. or ix. are the Doctrines of our Church. 6. 13. 15. 18. 30. 36. 42. 44. and yet not all theſe, as they are by him abuſed, embeaſted, confounded, and circumſcribed. The reſt are partly left at libertie by the Church: not determined for doctrines either way. Many impoſed by him on the Church, are directly diſclaimed, abandoned, oppugned by the Church, and the flat contrary to them commended and commanded. And accordingly belieued, practiſed, and maintained againſt oppugners. A maior part are the meere opinions, priuate fancies, peculiar propoſitions of priuate men: many of them diſclaimed by the very Authors: ſome falſely imputed to their Authors: ſome raked together out of the lay-ſtals of deepeſt Puritaniſme, as much oppoſing the Church of England, as the Church of Rome. So that whatſoeuer is in this Gagger, is, or childiſhly fancied, or ridiculouſly miſtaken, or wilfully peruerted, or ſlanderouſly imputed, or maliciouſly propoſed, or ambiguouſly conceiued, or not iuſtified any way: as may

euidently appeare in the particulars in my anſwere enſuing: In which,
            Whatſoeuer is to be owned by the Church; as reſolued, and tendred, and ſubſcribed in the authoriſed Doctrine or Practiſe thereof, is by mee iuſtified fully againſt him, and ſhall be maintained againſt his betters, as not contrary to Antiquitie, in the Tradition of the Church, much leſſe vnto Scriptures in our owne Bibles. What is inuolued by him malitiouſly, to procure enuy to the ſide, is explicated and aſſerted to the proper tenents, and termes, it is ſhewed how farre the Church of England reſolueth, where, and what things are left free and vndetermined, for men to hold with them or againſt them. Priuate opinions, are left vnto their Authors, and Abettors, olde enough, and able enough to ſpeake for themſelues: In a publique cauſe (as is, the Faith of Gods Church) peculiar intereſts, that I know, haue no ſuch ſhare, at leaſt ouer-awing, as to commaund vndertaking againſt opponents.
            In anſwering of whom, to come vnto my courſe obſerued with him, which I thought fit in conueniency to let the Reader vnderſtand, for my owne excuſe, and iuſtification, I haue gone along with him, cap apee, and point per point: firſt, for his Scriptures, both expreſſe and to be ſeene; then, for his Fathers, that affirme the ſame, that is nothing to purpoſe, as little as his Scriptures did, as I could finde them quoted, or could gueſſe at them, by imagining where they mought be probably ſpoken withall, or where I could remember to haue ſome time left them. For our Catholiques Romiſh, ſecure no queſtion of the goodnes of their cauſe, or rather relying vpon the tractableneſſe of their patient

Proſelytes, ſo they can make a dumbe ſhew with ſcoring vp Fathers, doe not much trouble themſelues with caring, where or what they ſay. So this Gagger ſtood affected it is more than apparant. For I was often left to goe blowe the ſeeke, for his Fathers. For, poore man, he tooke them vp as hee could finde them by tale, without weight or triall. Some few peraduenture, in the country abroad: but the maior part by farre, out of C. W. B. What he is, I cannot tell: and as hee hath them, truely or falſly quoted, rightly regiſtred, or miſtaken, ſo in euery poynt are they in the Gagge, vnleſſe worſe. Such ſupine negligence, ſecure diſcourſing, childiſh diſputing in ſuch a Maſter in Iſrael. Such infant-like performance in ſuch a Goliah, vpon whoſe head the Philiſtines haue ſet vp their reſt (I ſpeake no more in effect, than I haue heard of him ſince I vndertooke him) who can beare? Beſide the ſcurrilous fellow, according to his breeding, and education it ſeemeth, ſure I am fitting enough his diſpoſition commeth in with Coblers, and Bakers, and Tinkers, and Tapſters: and Hoſts and Hoſteſſes, and bottles, and bottle-ale. Inſulteth vpon poore Proteſtants, Out of their wits, ſicke in their wits. Prateth of Horſes and Aſſes praying, and ſuch like ſtuffe, out of his Coblersſhop, or Hoſteſſes ale-bench no doubt. And who is able to poſſeſſe his Soule, or containe his pen in patience: that hath to doe with ſuch Impoſtors, Mountebankes, and Buffones? ſuch rake-ſhames, and rakehels, as theſe ramblers are? I confeſſe, that ſubiects of this nature, ſhould, aboue all, be moderately, calmely, and quietly handled: but ſo, if wee meete with moderate men, with quiet men, with temperate, honeſt, and

diſcreet men: with men not proiected, proſtituted, and giuen ouer, vnto lying, calumniating, traducing of all that concurre not with them; as this companion, and his comerades are: who haue no intent to make vp any ruines or decayed places in the Church: to heale the ſores, cure the wounds, mollifie the ſwellings, cleanſe out the empoſtumations in the myſticall body of Chriſt: that ayme not at peace, nor would procure vnity, nor any way indeauour that thoſe who profeſſe Gods holy name, may agree in the truth of his holy word, and liue in vnity and godly loue, but make their 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , their whole indeauour their ſpeciall ſtudy day and night, by all kinde of iniquity, to keepe a faction on foot, and maintaine oppoſition, euen where it needeth not. Such are to be curryed in their kinde: and to be rubbed as they deſerue: in no caſe to be ſmoothed or ſleeked ouer, leſt they pleaſe themſelues too well in their impiety.
            It was euer held lawfull to call a ſpade a ſpade. Saint Paul gaue not Elimas any gentle termes: nor did Saint Peter ſpeake butter and hony vnto Simon Magus. Our Sauiour himſelfe, that man of meekeneſſe, called Herod a Fox, and Iudas a Deuil, when they deſerued it. I confeſſe, I haue dealt with this man, as I would not haue dealt with euery one, nor ſo as happely, my perſon and calling would in ſome mens opinion require: but ſure, as he, and ſuch as he deſerue to be dealt withall. For ſhall I ſuffer him, to rayle vpon to blaſpheme, to calumniate, to belye ſo impudently the Church of England, as he doth, beſide his Tapſter-like phraſes of Ale, and Hoſteſſes, and not make him heare of it on both his eares, but guild him ouer with good language?

               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Let himſelfe, or his companions, or any Papiſt in the packe, goe honeſtly, ſincerely, ſoberly, ſcholler-like to worke: Let him ſet affection, faction, partiallity, ſiniſter ends apart: Let him come home to the poynts controuerted, without rowling, rambling, rauing: ioyne iſſue inſtantly with the Queſtion where it lyeth. I am for him, no man more ready, more willing, more ſubmiſſe, more deſirous to goe calmely and ſedate to worke, for Gods glory, the Churches tranquilitie, the good and benefit of my ſelfe and others. To learne, to heare, to be aduiſed, to yeeld to euidence, and conuicting proofe, out of Scriptures, out of Fathers, the totall Tradition of the Church: No otherwiſe willing to deale with moderate men, then I haue and doe, with that worthie Baronius, in his kinde. But for this man, thoſe that thinke otherwiſe muſt pardon me; As a wiſe man is to be heard with attention, ſo a foole muſt be anſwered according to his folly. And ſo haue I anſwered this goodly Gagger.
            
            Thus Curteous Reader, hauing giuen thee an account of my comming vpon this employment, and ſecondly of my carriage of it, with the reaſon of my demeanure in it, I come to the Gagger, to cope with him, leauing thee to the Protection of the Almighty.
            
               Windſor, December 28.
               
               Thine in Chriſts ſeruice
RI: MOVNTAGV.
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE, anſwering that of the Gagger's to his Catholike Reader.
            
               
                  IAm not, nor would you haue 
               Curteous Reader, before I preſſe thee to peruſe this treatiſe, haue, I pray thee, ſo much patience, as to permit me, to giue thee my aduice concerning some certaine po
                     •
                  nts very neceſſary for th
                     •
                  e, the 
                     •
                  ett
                     ••
                   to ſ
                     •
                  me thy ſelfe th
                     ••
                  of with fruit and p
                     •
                  ofit. 
               me, it ſeemeth by your inſcription Sir Gagger, much intereſſed in this your Preface. For you will not, I ſuppoſe, admit me
                     •
                   for one of your Curteous Readers: and I profeſſe, I am none of your Catholike Readers: that is, as you intend it, according to the Romancutt. Your inſcription, is onely to the Catholike Reader: your addreſſe alone vnto the Cu
                     ••
                  eous Reader. And ſure I am, you neede both the one and other: Catholike and Curteous, or none at all, to ouerview your pure Naturalls. Indeed, becauſe Catholike, beleeuing any thing: therefore ſo curteous, admitting,

admiring any thing. You are ſure of a Curteous one, without more adoe, if he be a Catholike one that readeth it. Such Readers you leade in a ſtring by the noſe: you neede not pray them their patience: ſpare that paines and engagement, you are ſure enough of ſo much patience, as heart can wiſh, though, otherwiſe affected, or but indifferent Readers, would count it a preſſure, to peruſe ſuch idle treatiſes, as you permit your ſelues leaue to ſend amongſt them. But Sir, what incongruity is this, which your Gagger-ſhip preſenteth vs with, at the firſt Gaping? It was intended by you, and accordingly fitted, to choke vp the new Goſpell, and Goſpellers for euer. The very title doth challenge that opinion, and threaten that performance, and yet ſee your vnaduiſedneſſe, you would not haue it put into their mouths at all. Catholikes alone, are addreſſed and inuited to it: that is, Biddengape to begagged. They onely are to reade it, and to receiue aduice in what ſort to vſe it: that is, to ſerue themſelues thereof with fruit and profit. Whereas in all Eriſticall diſcourſes, thoſe ad oppoſitum are to be Readers, if not onely, yet principally: as men to be conuerted or confounded, of that which is written againſt them. For my part, I deſire not, nor would I willingly maske vnder a Catholike cloake at all, yet as ſome Proteſtants ſometime, out of a deſire, to be Eye-witneſſes of your Antique trickes there, doe couertly repaire vnto your Maſſes: ſo for once I care not if I take vpon me the ſtile of a Curteous and Catholike Reader, to heare your aduice concerning thoſe ſame points which are ſo very neceſſary for your Catholikes in peruſing this treatiſe, the better to ſerue

themſelues thereof with fruit and profit; in all, and in 
               The firſt point is, that in the inſcription thereof, it doth not tell thee out of which Engliſh Bible, the alleadged p
                     •
                  ſtages are extracted. For as much, as this were mecrely in vaine: ſith that England hath brought forth within theſe few years paſt, to the number of 20. seueral
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  orts of Bibles, farre different one from another, ſo that the Proteſtants haue not all one ſort of Bible Notwithſtanding know this for certainty, that they are faithfully taken forth of the B
                     ••
                  le in quarto Printed at London by Robert Barker, Anno, 1615. 
               the ſeuerall points, no doubt, of great and much behoouefull obſeruance.
            
            
               The firſt point is, an excuſe of ſome negligence, or at leaſt ouerſight in the very title of the Pamphlet. For whereas the refutation of the errors of the Proteſtants, ſo vaunted of, was vndertaken to be out of expreſſe texts of their owne Bibles: this indetermined generality may amuſe and puzle the Reader, who will be to ſeeke without all queſtion, out of which Engliſh Bible, the alleaged paſſages are extracted. Well thought vpon, and to purpoſe. Bonum factum, had hee beene ſo punctuall and preciſe in his Texts of Fathers, to bee ſeene for affirming, God knoweth what oftentimes: in none of which, the editions are ſpecified; being many, diuers, and different. In many of which, no place deſigned: or but at rouers and randon, or els falſly, and not to purpoſe. Some aduice would haue beene thought vpon here: Bibles are of more ſpeciall care, I grant. Therefore as this was neceſſarily done: ſo in diſcretion that ſhould not haue beene left vndone.
            
            
               And yet, what ſuch necesſsity; to tell the Reader, out of which Engliſh Bible they were alleadged? Great doubtleſſe: For Qui bené diſtinguit bene docet. England hath brought forth within theſe few yeares paſt, to the number of twenty ſeuerall Bibles. I grant that, perchance to the number of twenty, and twenty thouſand, in many ſeuerall impreſsions, and editions, in folio: in quarto: in octauo: as many hath Rome, and Lions, and Antwerpe, and Paris, and other places, nay farre moe, brought forth ſeuerall ſorts of the vulgar

Latine, and ſent them abroad into the world. It was very vnaduiſedly therefore done of Bellarmine, Valentia, Vaſquez, and the reſt of our Controuerſors, not to giue vs a ſpeciall direction vnto that preciſe Edition which they followed, as you haue done for yours, of 1615. in quarto, by Robert Barker: that we might addreſſe our ſelues, in peruſing Controuerſies, vnto the Edition by them followed, the time, place, and quantity thereof. Surely a materiall and moſt remarkeable aduice, Catholikes could neuer haue peruſed this treatiſe with profit; without this.
            
            
               Oh but the Proteſtants ſorts of Bibles, are ſarre different one from another. Meane you in forme? So are yours: but then you enlarge beyond art and skill. There are but fiue ſeuerall forms of Bibles at the moſt. You mean in matter: For the tranſlations differing one from an other. Then in plaine Engliſh, you lye. Name me ten of this twenty if you can. Some different Tranſlations there haue beene of late, but authorized I know but two: The Biſhops as they call it, and this laſt which hath perchance beene printed in ſeuerall formes, twenty and twenty times, but without diuerſity in the Tranſlation. So that you might as well haue directed your Catholike Reader to 1614. 1616, or any other yeare, as well as 1619. by Robert Barker.
            
               But admit there had beene amongſt vt twenty ſeuerall Tranſlations, (as you belye vs:) ſo long as authority gaue not countenance vnto them, what can we be taxed for more then the Church of Rome may? not ſo much as the ancient Catholike Church might. For beſide eight or nine ſeuerall tranſlations into the Greeke
               
               tongue; Saint Auguſtine is punctuall, Lib. 2. cap. 11. de doct. Chriſt. that the ſeuerall Latine Tranſlations in his time, could not be numbred: and Hierome in his preface vpon Ioſua ſaith, there were Tot exemplaria quod codices: as many Tranſlations as Copies. Which variety he miſliked, but S. Auguſtine doth well like. And in the Church of Rome at this day, are moe ſeuerall Tranſlations extant of the Scriptures into Latine, then are in England into Engliſh: beſide the corrections of the Lovaniſts, of Sixtus 5. and Clemens Octavus, contrary, repugnant to one the other. Beſides the infinite variety of the vulgar Edition, not one copy almoſt like vnto another. It cannot be obiected with ſuch good reaſon vnto vs, what edition doe you follow? as it may be vnto you with reproofe enough. Doe you follow Sixtus or Clemens in your quotations? For we affix
                     •
                   no infallibility vnto any Tranſlator, as you doe to their Holineſſe, that haue thwarted and croſſed ſhins with one the other. And if you tye your men in publique paſſages vnto your authorized Edition: ſo doe we our men in publike Liturgies, in like ſort. Iam ſumus, ergo pares. And you may turne your finger home vpon your selfe, before you point it out to vs; ſo that wee Papiſts haue not all one ſort of Bible.
            
               One, or many: if it had beene ſo materiall, or ſo neceſſary for the Curteous Catholike Reader to know, which Edition it was you followed, but that you are meerely a vaine man, the inſcription might haue told vs which you followed: without any great adoe, or incumbring of the Page, thus; After, Engliſh Bibles, you might haue added, in quarto, by Robert Barker, 1615.

               and not made ſo much adoe about plaine nothing: but then you could not haue had this fling at ſo neceſſary a Point, the great variety of our tranſlations: and ſuch an opportunity was not to bee ſlipped, for giuing the Proteſtants a wipe with a meere lye, of the multiplicity of Bibles differing one from another.
            
               Seconded with another of like nature: For know for certaine; Reader, whatſoeuer thou art, there is no ſuch 
               If any one ſhall ſhew vnto thee ſome other Bible, wherein they are not ſo written, word for word, as here they are, yet reſt aſſured, and out of doubt, that thou ſhalt finde thē written as they are here alleadged, at the leaſt in this of Robert Barkers.
                
               faithfulneſſe in theſe citations as this man pretendeth. For neither are all citations word for word expreſſed in the Gagger, according to our Bibles of any Tranſlation, but ſometime the ſenſe onely: ſometime not that: and ſometime expreſſe conſequence and no more. Contrary to promiſe and vndertaking: euen ſo, when the ſenſe is not differing from the ſuppoſall: For by promiſe he was bound vnto expreſſe and direct words. And yet pardon him this falſe aſſeueration, that they are not ſo written, as he pretended, not in that Edition of Robert Barker. As for inſtance, Luc. 24. 27. & 8. 13. Math. 9. 3. 3. 8. and 3. 5. 6. and 19. 12. Act. 15. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 14. 32. 2 Cor. 11. 2. and 2 Cor. 5. 10. Philip. 2. 30. Eſay 49. 21. And haply other places beſide theſe. This is the firſt point, Reader, to ſerue thee for thy profit and togather fruit thereout.
            
            
               A ſecond is, touching the ſplendour of Truth: which 
               The ſecond point is, that thou admire the ſplendour of Truth, and accordingly to ſtand as ſtoutly and as immooueably in the maintenance and defence thereof. 
               indeed is admirable and attractiue. Falſhood, and fraud are corner-creepers, but 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Truth is euer with a cheerefull countenance: and as the verticall ſunne at noone: which hauing diſpelled both the darkneſſe of the night, and fogges of the day, ſhineth forth in brighteſt glory. But there are ſhadowes

as well as ſubſtances: et notâ maior imago, moſt an end in courſe of kind, the ſhadow is of greater aſpect then the ſubſtance. Truth is, appearing, as well as Being. The diuell will ſeeme an Angell of light. Not the verieſt Theeſe that euer tooke purſe, but will ſay of his fellow, and ſweare for himſelf, we are honeſt men, Change but the tearmes, the caſe is yours Sir Gagger. The truth is your owne, is it not? Oh take it as granted: though nothing more queſtioned or ſo queſtionable, yet the Truth is onyour ſide; there is no 
                     •
                  ay. You may ſpeake it boldly, and ſtand to it ſtoutly, to your Catholike Readers. For if you want Knights of the poſt, themſelues will ſupply the place, and ſweare it. That notwithſtanding the Proteſtant Miniſters haue endeauoured to obſerue (you would ſay obſcure) the same by ſo many varieties of tranſlations, and by ſuch an infinite number of corruptions and falſifications, yet neuertheleſſe their condemnation is ſo expreſly ſet downe, in their own Bible, and is ſo cleare to al the world, that nothing more needs hereto, but only that thou know to reade, and to haue thine eyes in thy head, at the opening of this their booke. Euen as you put the words into their mouths, as a witneſſe at large, in caſe of Tithes once did ſweare in my owne hearing, he knew the place, Tithable, for 300. yeares, and yet was aged but 99. yeares. This man ſpake with a good will to the cauſe; So will your Catholikes if you aske them; touching Proteſtant Miniſters, their Tranſlations, Corruptions, and Falſifications beleeue you, foreſtall you, proteſt and ſweare for you, accordingly. Can you deſire greater Curteſie then ſo? Some variety of Tranſlation betwixt ours and yours

your ſelfe haue taken the paines to obſerue: in theſe Propoſitions: 7. 14. 15. twice. 25. 29. 38. 46. and happily ſome others. Are theſe Corruptions or Falſifications of the text? you charge them not ſo: you cannot: you dare not doe. Variety of Tranſlations, for all your enlarging, there are not many. As many or moe in the Church of Rome. If ſo: not authoriſed, you will ſay. Why no more are ours. The Councel of Trent hath authoriſed yours: and the Church of England repreſentatiue, ours. Neither one nor other, this or that, for Authenticall variety of Tranſlation, there may be ſome, if this make Corruptions, or Falſifications, your Authenticall Latine is in a poore caſe: or rather a ſhop of Corruptions, to depraue and obſcure the ſplendour of Truth, which is ſuch and ſo paſſing bright notwithſtanding that it ſhineth forth aboue, and againſt them all. For if a man can but reade and haue his eyes in his head: at the very opening of the booke, he ſhall finde your Bibles infinitely full of ſuch varieties: which no man will deny, per aduenture not your ſelfe, who yet may claime to weare 
               Yet neuerthelesse their condemnation is ſo expreſly ſet downe, in their owne Bibles, and is ſo cleare to all the world, that nothing more needs hereto, but onely that thou know to reade and haue thy eyes in thy head at the opening of this their booke. 
               a Liuery, as one of Belzebubs attendants in this kind. And for Corruptions and Falſifications, if they be ſo infinite and ſo cleere, it had beene honeſty to haue named halfe a ſcore, halfe a dozen, one at leaſt, to haue acquitted your toung of Lying and ſlandering: as it is, Calumnia eſt, non accuſatio. There are quoted by you in your Abridgement, 276 ſeuerall places of Scripture, or thereabout. It ſeemeth ſtrange vnto me that not one of theſe ſhould fall foule vpon that infinite number of corruptions and falſifications which you talke ſo freely and loudly of vnto your Catholike Reader. Had there

beene any ſuch thing to be diſcouered, your charity wee know is no way ſo Tranſcendent, as to conceale it: wee ſhould haue heard thereof on both eares to a purpoſe. He can doe little that can not belye his aduerſary in groſſe, though put him to proofe, and he prooueth recreant. Do this, I challenge your Gagſhip if you can or dare; or prooue your ſelfe a Gagler and a Gooſe for euer. For variety of reading, deprauation, corruption, falſification, here I offer to charge and prooue, your moſt Sacroſanct Authenticall edition of Trent, in the beſt and moſt corrected copy you can chooſe, is as guilty of at and euery one of theſe particulars, as you or your betters can proue our Bibles to be. When you will, or when you dare, vndertaken it ſhall be.
            
            
               And 
               This in my mind cannot chooſe but be an exceeding comfort vnto a Catholike. Yea, rather a great ſigne of ſecurity and aſſurance concerning the truth and vprightneſſe of his cauſe in ſhewing himſelfe content to be tried by their owne Bibles. The tranſlations whereof doth in a number of places, and particularly in thoſe that are now in controuerſie, ſwarue and differ notoriouſly from the Authenticall Latin and that to the incredible diſparagement, darkning and obſcuring of the Catholike verity. 
               this in my mind is but a cold comfort vnto a Catholike, who opineth, poore deceiued ſoule, that hee may be ſecure, and build his ſaluation vpon the facing impudency of euery light-skirt mountebanck, and ſhaued empoſter. You do well to ſeale vp the truth and vprightneſſe of this forlorne cauſe of yours, with ſecurity, and aſſurance, that is, to captiuate their vnderſtanding with implicite faith. For you know, and I can make it good, that let the Truth you talke of, come to ſcanning, Lucians true Hiſtory will be as warrantable. It is true, I deny not, our tranſlations all, and ſingular, and ſo your owne, done by your owne men, differ both amongſt themſelues, as alſo from the Authenticall Latin, as you call it, notoriouſly: your Authenticall Latin, differeth from it ſelfe: Is this to the diſparagement, darkning, and obſcuring of the Catholike verity? Looke you to that. I can rid my hands of it well enough, and cleere both our

Church a
                     •
                  d Bibles, of all ſuch imputation, or impeachment of Catholike verity any way. If it bring ſuch diſparagement, the reaſon is, in my conceit, you ſwarued euen from the Councell of Trent, which neuer intended ſuch a royal prerogatiue vnto your Latin edition, as the Ieſuits and Ieſuited faction giue vnto it. I ſpeake not this to diſparage it. I profeſſe, I reſpect it, as much as any Tranſlation extant, and to quite your kindneſſe, in being content to be tryed by our Bibles, I will be tryed in any point the Church of England maintaineth this day againſt the Church of Rome, by no other but your owne Authenticall Latin. Eate your words Goodman Gagger: 
               Neuer did, nor neuer dare our aduerſaries offer themſelues to giue the like aduantage to vs, as to be tryed by our own tranſlations. 
               I am your aduerſary I profeſſe my ſelfe: I will and dare offer my ſelfe to giue what aduantage you can make thereof, to be tryed by your owne Tranſlation: and to deſerue your loue the more, may happily ere long Gagge your mouth in this very kind of putting you to it with your owne tranſlation. In the interim, put mee to it when you pleaſe, I will not waue your ſo Authenticall Latin, in maintaining the aſsertions of our Church. And ſo much for your ſecond point of aduice vnto your Reader.
            
            
               Thirdly, you aduiſe him ſomewhat farther off, for generall affronting the Proteſtant in any point whatſoeuer, 
               The third is, that when thou shalt vrge, or alleadge, any paſſage in fauour of thine owne faith, if any one returne the change, be it either in recrimination
                     •
                   and blaming of the Roman Church; or be it in alleadging ſome obſcure text, and ill vnderſtood to counterpoint thine. Shew, &c. 
               as I can conceiue it in briefe thus. The manner of the Proteſtant is in conference of controuerted points, when he is vrged with text of Scripture, plaine and euidens, to beate backe the argument, or as you phraſe the thing, to Counterpoint it, with ſome other text of Scripture. For inſtance, when you bring thoſe euident few words, This is my body, they vſe to rebutt it with
               
Iohn 6. 63. The fleſh profiteth nothing, the words that I ſpeake vnto you, they are ſpirit, and they are life: and by this allegation, ſuppoſe they haue put by the point of your weapon, or giuen you a great ouerthrow; as you ſpeake. In ſuch a caſe, your aduice is, to ſhew the party amiably; that this is not to proceede by order, and that he dealeth not with thee as he ought, nor ſincerely, in oppoſing a paſſage darke and obſcure, to confound a paſſage that is moſt cleere. A man may take good counſell of his enemy, though againſt his will: and ſo haue no cauſe to thanke him for it. Sir Gagger, of your ſelfe and your owne gagle, this aduice we meane to make vſe of, and put it home to your ſelues, as we haue occaſion, frequent enough. I know no men guilty of this blameable carriage, at leaſt, ſo guilty, as your ſelues be: I haue rubbed your memory with it ſometime, as it fell out. But here, hauing ſo iuſt cauſe, you can not blame me if I gagge you with your owne gagge. Miſticall paſſages are not argumentatiue. What ſo myſticall as the Reuelation? In which are, tot Sacramenta, as many darke paſſages as there by words. And yet we want not proofes of plainer particulars, from myſticall ſigning in the forehead. The number of the beaſt. Power giuen to the Saints ouer nations. What more abſurd then to prooue ordinary oeconomy in Gods diſpoſition, by extraordinary diſpenſation? This you haue done, out of Math. 17. 3. Math. 27. 52. or points of faith, as you would haue them, out of a dreame. 2 Mac. 15. 12. Prayer vnto Saints, is defined in your Creed. Your proofes for that againſt euident ſcripture, Pſal. 51. 15. are Luk. 16. 24. Iob 5. 1. Without Purgatory, Popery cannot ſtand.

The 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , two pillars of Purgatory, are thoſe two places of S. Paul. 1 Cor. 3. 13. 1 Cor. 5. 29. then which there are not two more obſcure places in all the ſcripture. Adde to them a third, though of a baſer alloy, that intricate and depraued place of 2. Mach. 12. 44. I could goe further, and gagge you Doper, out of your owne practiſe: Who if you had not ſo much honeſty, as to forbeare belying of your oppoſites, ſhould haue had ſo much diſcretion, as not to obiect that vnto another, which, had you that good ſigne of a bad cauſe in you, Bluſhing, might aſhame you, being by recrimination retorted vpon your ſelfe.
            
            
               I ſay belye: for it is not better, nor worſe, but euen ſo. For Tranſubſtantiation, that monſter of monſters, you haue neuer done with, This is my body. Which we deny not, either in words or ſenſe. The very body of Chriſt really receiued in the Sacrament of the Altar, is warranted by thoſe formall words of Inſtitution, This is my body: but not per modum Con, or Trans, or any other like. It is not ſaid, This is my body corporally; eaten orally; there carnally; conceiued of groſſely. This cannot be, ſay the Proteſtants: and for proofe thereof, that the thing being granted, the manner cannot be ſo conceiued, proceedeth thus: That which one Scripture propoſeth cannot bee contraried by another: But this carnall ſenſe of thoſe words, This is my body, is contraried by another: an inſtance. In Iohn 6. 63. The fleſh profiteth nothing: as plaine a text againſt carnall eating of Chriſts fleſh as can be. Our Sauiour had formerly diſcourſed of eating his fleſh, and

drinking his blood. His very Diſciples, ſuppoſing as you doe, that he meant they ſhould eate his Fleſh, as they did the Fiſhes, or vſed to eate the Paſchall Lambe, were here it offended. Our Sauiour vnderſtanding this their ſcandall, replyeth in theſe words, according to your Latin Authenticall edition, Hoe vos ſcandaliſat? ſpiritus eſt, qui viuificat, caro non prodeſt quicquam: verba, quae ego locotus ſum vobis, ſpiritus, & vitaſunt. You remember an allegation you brought out of S. Paul? If theſe things be hidden, they are hidden vnto thoſe that periſh. I put it to you, if this be obſcure, it is obſcure to him that will not ſee, or to him who iuſtly God hath abandoned and giuen ouer. Nothing can be more direct and plaine, then that our Sauiour telleth them, his ſpeech of eating his fleſh, was Sacramentall: not carnally but ſpiritually to be vnderſtood. This is it, ſaith Chryſoſtome, which he meaneth: You muſt conceiue of me ſpiritually: For he that taketh this carnally, is not benefitted thereby, nor getteth any good therewith. It was a carnall thought to make a doubt, in what ſort he came downe from heauen: And to ſuppoſe him the ſonne of Ioſeph: And to diſpute, how can he giue vs his fleſh to eate? All theſe were carnall thoughts: which muſt be myſtically and ſpiritually vnderſtood. The words that I ſpeake vnto you, are ſpirit and life; that is, are diuine and ſpirituall, hauing nothing carnall, not any inference or conſequence naturall: But are freed from all ſuch neceſsity as this, ſurpaſsing legal tyes and conditions below; conteining another ſenſe, and meaning, then is literally ſet downe. If this be not an important paſſage, goe gagge Saint Chryſoſtome, and other ancient

Fathers that put this ſaying into the Proteſtants mouths: as plaine a text of Scripture as, in the beginning God made heauen and earth. Plaine or obſcure, yet to no purpoſe. For, it affirmeth nothing leſſe then that which they pretend to prooue thereby. And what is that? are you aware of it? That the fleſh of Chriſt profiteth nothing. It is plaine the fleſh profiteth nothing. It is plaine, the paſſage is of Chriſts fleſh: Therefore the fleſh of Chriſt profiteth nothing. This you ſay is abſurd. And ſo ſay I: nay I adde, this is impious. For, his Fleſh is life; and giueth life, and therefore nothing profiteth ſo much as that. If the paſſage be not of Chriſts fleſh, of what is it, can you tell? I beleeue you cannot. But your inſtructors can tell you, they would haue it taken, that Carnalis intelligentia non prodeſt. Good: And ſo ſay I. But Intelligentia cuius? of a certaine indiuiduum vagum, abſtrahendo from all ſubiect, or obiect whatſoeuer? Idle, and abſurd. But Carnalis intelligentia of that which muſt bee taken ſpiritually. And ſo of this place: and principally, and primarily of this place, as giuing occaſion vnto this Axiome of our Sauiour: The fleſh profiteth not. This is not vrged by Peter Martyr, or any Proteſtant, againſt Hoc eſt corpus meum, This is my body: but againſt This is my body by this means; This way, that is, by Tranſubſtantiation. Which is carnally to take that, which was ſpoken and intended ſpiritually onely.
            
            
               It is eaſily granted you by the Proteſtant, and you might haue made your friends of this aduice that way. That it is doubtleſſe better to explicate an obſcure paſſage by one that is cleere, then one that is cleere by a

paſſage obſcure. For reaſon it ſelfe, and commonſenſe will dictate this, that the proofe muſt be more euident then the thing prooued. The epexegeſis, more manifeſt then that which is explaned. The Proteſtants obſerue this courſe they ſay. You in this ſo ſmall a Pamphlet, as I haue let you ſee, are culpable that way more then once. It is much more cleere and euident what our Sauiour meaneth by Fleſh and Spirit: Then how; This can be my body. Sic etiamſi carnem ait nihil prodeſſe ex materia, dicti dirigendus eſt ſenſus. Nam quia durum & intolerabilem exiſtimauerunt ſermonem eius, quaſi verè carnem ſuam, illis edendam determinaſſet, vt in ſpiritu diſponeret ſtatum ſalutis, praemiſit, ſpiritus eſt, qui viuificat. Atque ita ſubiunxit, caro nihil prodeſt ad viuificandum ſcilicet. Tertul. de Reſur. cap. 37. Intanglements and obſcurities in this place, if there be any, proceede from your gloſſes, not the places, nor yet the Reſolutions of antiquity. Were your rule 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , That one text ſhold giue place to many, rather then many vnto one or fewer, yet apply that rule you may, where it will or neede be fitted, here no neede of any ſuch aduiſe at all, where, Alterius ſic alter poſcit opem locus, & conſpirat amicé.
            
               The fourth will hardly come vnder the title of aduice, 
               The fourthis, that they reiect ſome one of the paſſages, which thou produceſt, pretending it to be Apocrypha, though it be not true. 
               it is rather a vaunt, at moſt and beſt an Information, what is obſerued in the Gagge, concerning texts out of Scriptures Apocryphall, to make good the aſſertions againſt the Proteſtants. The man ſuppoſed exception would ſometime be put in againſt ſome of his witneſſes (though for my part, I haue paſſed them all, without putting backe any, as homines legales, to ſay what they could) for he knew well enough they were exceptiue, and

not paſſeable in ſtrict tearmes and iuſt exception. Therfore to preuent what he feared, their credit is ſalued as 
               That to preuent this obiection, no ſuch ſcriptures as they call Apocryphall are there produced, but ſtill there goe accompanied with them others alſo that are Canonical. 
               much as may be, that is, they are brought in as o in cypher, to enhaunce the number onely, ſo as they with others may make vp a tallie. Others beſide them paſſe currant and with weight. They without others carry no credit. Know, ſaith he, that to preuent this obiection (viz. that the teſtimonies are authenticall) no ſuch ſcriptures as they call (and haue prooued, and will maintaine to be Apocrypha) are here produced, but ſtill they goe accompanyed with others that are Canonicall, by their owne confeſsion. Which I grant is obſerued, for the moſt part at leaſt. Nor will we refuſe a teſtimony of Ariſtotle, or Demoſthenes, that agreeth with, and commeth in with ſubordinate dependance vpon Scripture. Where Scripture is apparant, and conſent incident, and manifeſt. But non feremus, as in the point of Purgatory is obtruded, a plainer and more obuious place of Toby to interlope betwixt two Canonicall Texts, the hardeſt two in Saint Paul, and all agree in one as well as harpe and harrow: nor any correſpondency in the vinculo communi, as is pretended, to make vtraque vnum: and all ſpeake for that which is farre enough from all, or any ſtate of Purgatory after death.
            
            
               The ſecond branch of your fourth point I miſlike not at all for the matter of it. Scripture is not in the words, but in the ſenſe and meaning of the words, that is, in the notions 
               But if they ſhall contend with thee not about the words themſelues, as being both cleere and Canonicall, but about the ſenſe, or meaning of thē know this that for ſuch places as may bee ſubiect to ſuch cauill thou haſt here the warrant and authority of the holy fathers which haue vnderſtood theſe places, in the ſelfe-ſame ſenſe that Catholickes doe. A thing which they can neuer do in their defence. 
               and intents of the Spirit of the higheſt, intimated vnder the couert of words. There are moe things then words to expreſſe thoſe things by. Hence doubts and ambiguities doe ariſe about the meaning of things expreſſed

by thoſe words. There is none at all, or little contention about the words of Scripture. All is about the ſenſe & meaning of the Scripture: & how we may grow vnto reſolution, where doubts and ambiguities do intervene. I will not goe with you about the buſh. I come home, vp to your own deſire; The warrant & authority of the holy Fathers, that is, the practiſe and tradition of the Church, ſhall regulate, I promiſe you, my reſolution, and ſettle my iudgement in things that are huius controuerſi. I will not put in exceptionem fori. For I am aſſured I need not, I appeale vnto antiquity and will follow you where you dare aduenture to call me. I know your performance that way: I laugh at your vanity in braging of Fathers that haue vnderſtood theſe places, in the ſelfe ſame ſenſe that Catholikes doe. What Fathers haue ſaid for you in Gagging our mouths I haue examine 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , euery one. Their anſwers to the queſtions propoſed to them: their reſolution for the points remembred, he that will know may finde, and as he findeth, ſo pronounce. What we can doe in our defence may appeare when we come to be defendants. This I will promiſe, out of my ownepoore reading I will droppe Fathers with a better read man then you are in them point per point, And what reaſon were it then to preferre the priuate interpretation of a Cobler before S. Chryſoſtome, of a Baker before S. Baſil? of a Tinker before Tertullian? and ſo of others. 
               and if I ſay not more for my cauſe, that is for iuſtifying the Church of England, then you haue done for calumniating of it: or can ſay for iuſtifying your Popiſh faith, I will be reconciled to Pope Vrbans faction: For vnto the Church I neede none. We vſe not Sir ſcurility to conſult with Coblers, or Bakers, or Tinkers, they and their Trulls may meet at their ſtawling kenns with ſuch clapperdogeons as your ſelfe. Little better are thoſe Patrons

of your forlorne cauſe, Abdias, Amphilochius, Martialis, and others: and thoſe Tararagmales, the Decretall Epiſtles of the Popes ſcullen-boyes making: or the outcaſts of ſome groomes of his ſtable. Tertullian, Baſill, Chryſoſtome, and the reſt of the worthies of their times, we neither geld, nor delumbate for ſpeaking too plaine nor vſe them like you; as merchants doe their counters, ſometimes for a que, ſometime for a thouſand pound. Euer in their place we heare them ſpeake, riſe vp with reuerence, at their aſſeuerations yeeld vnto their dogmaticall concluſions. Take not this as an enlargement, or braggadochianiſme. I that ſay it will performe it: Put me to it as you can or dare, if I flye from antiquity, hiſſe at me for euer. I could haue played the foole in alliteration, and hunted the letter as you haue done. But I ſpeake plaine Engliſh, without a Cobler for Chryſoſt. a Tinker for Tertullian, a Baker for Baſill. Then Tertullian, Baſill, Chryſoſtome, and the reſt of their compeeres I deſire no better dayesman, or Diribitores betwixt you and me. Therefore ſet your heart at reſt, ſet out when you will, I will walke along with you to the Fathers houſes; and ſtand to their award whatſoeuer.
            
            
               But the fift and laſt is any thing rather then aduice: indeed, vox, and praeterea nihil, pure Popiſh Catholiciſme, that is, inſolent triumphing before victory, nay before ſtroke ſtriken in the field, diuiding of the ſpoiles of poore Proteſtants, men of no action or performance at all; men that will looke before they leape, and goe warily and wiſely to worke, neuer ſell the skinne before the beare is ſlaine. It may be ſome one, nay any one Proteſtant, that hath but beene at Rama, and ſaluted the ſchoole of the

Prophets, can diſcerne Saul amongſt them, a fellow that as idly taketh God to witneſſe, as Saul bound Iſraell fooliſhly with an oath, which in concluſion might haue coſt him deare. The man was afraid he ſhould hardly finde 
               I here proteſt in the preſence of God, whom I call vpon in this behalfe. 
               credit vpon his word (being happely knowne for one amongſt his people, that will ſpeake when he cannot doe, or meaneth not to make performance) therefore he putteth forward with an oath, and proteſteth in the preſence of God more then he is able (beleeue me Reader) to make good; That it is not in the power of all the Proteſtants in England to finde in their owne Bibles, one onely expreſſe text; what to doe? by which they can poſſibly prooue one onely point of the falſe doctrine. I might ſay he doth aequiuocate in falſe doctrine, and intendeth a refuge, when he is ſhamed, viz. That falſe doctrine is not prooued by our Bibles. But I cauill not at words, I take his meaning. He ſuppeſeth all our doctrine is falſe, and not to be iuſtified out of Scripture. Which if it be not, I will grant it falſe, and am ready to diſclaime and to abiure it.
            
            
               It is our doctrine, he ſaith, No man can forgiue ſinnes but God. If it be, there is expreſſe text for it, and that alſo excluſiue, Luc. 5. 21. Who can forgiue ſinnes but God onely? An interrogation, in your owne learning, is equivalent to a Negatiue. None but God can forgiue ſinnes. Here is, neither adding, nor diminiſhing, nor changing ought. Your owne Authenticke Latin hath it ſo, Quis poteſt dimittere peccata, niſi ſolus Deus? It is our doctrine, he ſaith. No man hath ſeene God at any time. If it be ſo, it is expreſſe words of our, and your Bibles. No man hath ſeene God at any time. Deum

nemo vidit vnquam. Iohan. 1. 18. Here are two texts, that is more then one onely; in their Bibles alſo, not onely in our owne, expreſſe as may be, without adding, diminiſhing, or changing, to prooue two points of our doctrine imputed vnto vs by himſelfe, collected out of his obſeruations: and yet the braſen face, and leaden heart, is not aſhamed to bragge it ſo Catholikely, and call God to record of an apparent lye. It is our doctrine that ſome things are hard in diuine Scripture. Saint Peter 2. 3. 16. ſaith as much. It is our doctrine, ſome things are eaſie. Heb. 2. 2. Write the viſion and make it plaine vpon tables, that he who runneth may reade it. Deut. 30. 11. This commandement which I cōmand thee this day is not hid frō thee: neither is it farre off. It were eaſie to paſſe through all points of controuerted opinions and ſhew the vanity of this vaunt: the confident impudency of this Ignaro. But extra oleus: this is no place for that purpoſe. I may happely finde him more worke this way then he can handſomely cleere his hands of in haſt: without adding art, diminiſhing, changing, or ſuch like practiſes of litting Law, the Architectonicall ſcience of our Popiſh Catholickes. Ex animi tui ſententia Gagger. Who are more likely to play ſuch trickes of legerdemaine, thoſe that neuer vſed to pare, prune, ſhaue, gold, or correct Authours, but plainely ſend them foorth in puris naturalibus, as they finde them: or thoſe that make a trade and profeſſion of it, and bluſh not to publiſh vnto the world, that all Writers, old or new, ſacred and prophane, muſt ſpeake as our Maſters will haue them ſpeake, or hold their peace for euer. This you nor can, nor do deny. To this day you put it in practiſe. For according to ſuch directions from higher powers. The Bibliotheca Saint Patrum,

               was laſt yeare printed at Cullen. Shameleſſe Mountebancks that obiect that to others, whereof themſelues are notoriouſly guilty. But it ſeemeth this man did, as the tale is; a wench once gaue her mother counſell to doe. A brace of neighbours, women by ſex, ſcolds by profeſsion, falling out, after they had paſſed ſome ordinary language, ſaith a daughter of one of them to her mother; Oh Mother, call her where firſt, leaſt ſhe call you ſo, and prooue it. Haue you heard of this good counſell? I am ſure ye follow it to an heire. It is your profeſsion, to adde, diminiſh, alter, change, to aequiuocate your ſelues, and teach your Authours ſo to doe notoriouſly. For feare wee ſhould iuſtly lay it to your charge, you preuent vs, and caſt it in our teeth. But play the honeſt man once in your dayes: name where, when, how, by whom this hath beene done.
            
            
               I name your ſelfe guilty of this couſening trick; and name for falſe and ridiculous interpretation, the 1. of Saint Luk. 8. 9. and Leuit. 16. 17. in the ſixt Propoſition. For adding to Math. 9 8 in the eleuenth Propoſition. For diminiſhing Phil. 2. 30. in the fourteene Propoſition. Tria are not omnia: but enough to ſhame you if you be not paſt grace and ſhame. In briefe your whole booke is compacted by this art. For 39. of theſe Propoſitions, are no doctrines of the Church of England; thoſe that are, are vnfaithfully handled. By ambiguity, by adding to, taking from, peruerting of ſenſe and meaning, this little Pamphlet is meerely made. Detract theſe particulars, not ſo much will remaine, as with a whole impreſsion to ſtop one muſtard pot. I ſhall not need actum agere here, I haue diſcouered your falſe play in particulars hereafter.
            
            
               This is to imploy I 
                     •
                  rowe, mans wilineſſe if not wiſedome

to ſerue the diuell: both are bad, but yet better it were 
               Which yet ſhould be to alter the text, and to imploy mans wiſdome in ſtead of the word. 
               to employ mans wiſedome in ſtead of the word. For true wiſedome is of God whereſoeuer or howſoeuer, Lying is, you haue heard from whom: the father of lyes, that graund Paedagogue in the Ieſuite ſchooles brought you vp a good Proficient in this faculty: you may ſing a ſong of degrees there in medio chori: according to your progreſſe from our twenty ſeuerall Bibles, and their manifold varieties, to their more Corruptions and Falſifications, to darken and obſcure the truth: and yet thoſe alſo handled ſophiſtically, and contrary to the mind of all antiquity: nor only ſo, but neuer produced without ſome tricke of adding, diminiſhing, or 
               A thing by their owne confeſſion forbidden them they proteſting, &c. 
               changing by interpretation: that the old ſaying may take hold vpon the Gagger, Qui ſemel verecundiae fines eſt tranſgreſſus, eum grauiter oportet eſſe impudentem. Sir know this. Our profeſsion is not ſuch as yours is: our practiſe anſwerable to our profeſsion. We proteſt you ſay, and we doe ſo indeed, that, The word of God containeth all that is neceſſary to ſaluation. Your ſarcaſticall irony ſhal not beate vs from it. And therein we ſay no more then Saint Paul in that well knowne place of 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. The whole Scripture is giuen by inſpiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to inſtruct in righteouſneſſe, that the man of God may bee abſolute being made perfect vnto all good workes. For to know God in Chriſt is life eternall. Ioh. 17. 3. That is the way vnto, and meanes whereby to attaine eternall life. The abſolute direction for that way is Ioh. 20. 31. Theſe things are written that you might beleeue that Ieſus is Chriſt, the Sonne of God, and that in beleeuing yee might haue life through his name. Theſe are moe texts

then one, and without adding, diminiſhing or changing ought by interpretation, as expreſſe as words can make them: that all things neceſſary vnto ſaluation, are conteyned in the Scripture. Yet farther to be inforced by this reaſon. Saluation is the end of reueiled knowledge from God: If that knowledge be not ſufficient, God is defectiue in proportioning the meanes vnto the end intended: which auouch, if you can, without blaſphemy. If man adde any thing to it as defectiue: or detract from it in the materialls, or alter and change it againſt minde and meaning, we may well enquire, quo warranto he doth it, and condemne his preſumption as enormious. An Embaſſadour hath commiſsion and inſtructions from his penne, according to them he muſt proceede. Differ hee muſt not vpon life: nor change the ſtate and tearmes of his direction ſo farre, as to come ſhort of, to exceede vpon, to be thwart vnto, and againſt the maine of the buſines negotiated. Explane he may, adde, detract in words: alter phraſes, or occurrences according as occaſions are, ſo he hold the maine, and keepe cloſe to the meaning, and direct vnto the end of his negotiating ſtill; Circumſtances ſometime may alter much, this point diſcretion muſt regulate as it may: but ſubſtances altered, make a maine change, indeed aliud, and aliud, not aliter If we ſay it is not lawfull for men nor Angels, to adde, diminiſh, or alter ought thereof, we meane for the maine and ſubſtance of the Goſpell, we intend not ſuch a preciſe obſeruance, as not to ſay, Rites, for ceremonies: ſtatutes for ordinances: Church for congregation, and ſuch like, or vice versâ. And therein we ſay no more then Saint Paul himſelfe hath ſaid in ſo many words (an other expreſſe

text, for another point of our falſe doctrine) Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angell from heauen, preach vnto you otherwiſe, then that which we haue preached vnto you, let him be accurſed. Otherwiſe, ſo as 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , thereby to corrupt and aboliſh the Goſpell. Now this is not onely when they preach contrary, and amoliſh the whole. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , if they alter and change ſome ſmall obuious thing, ſaith Chryſoſtome: and his reaſon is, The Scriptures were commended to vs by God, the Lord of all: Men and Angells are but ſeruants, whoſe commendation is, to doe his will.
            
            
               This preciſe obedience hath that warrant yet further: It is better to obey God then man. If men ſtand ad oppoſitum to God. But we are not thus perſwaded of Antiquity: We nor vſe them ſo: nor ſpeake ſo of them. We command not our followers vtterly to renounce all antiquity, cuſtomes, multitude, humane wiſedome, iudgements, decrees, edicts, or councells. The Councels of Trent, of Florence, of Laterane, are not all Councels. We refuſe them as factious, as baſtards, as partiaries, as hauing nothing but the names of Councels. You refuſe moe Councels then we doe: in the foure firſt ſo highly commended by your owne Gregory, you preſume to preſcribe, you reiect, and retaine what you pleaſe. We accept them abſolutely ſans exception. We may as well preſſe you with the Sinods of Gapp and Dort, as you vs with Trent, and diuers others. Edicts, and Decrees, and Imginents, what meane you by them? of whom? where? when? vpon what grounds? why? a rambling logodiarrhe without wit or reaſon. Edicta Principum. Decreta Synodorum. And iudicia pro tribunali, are

of large extent, of different alotment: For, againſt God, Equity, Truth and Honeſty: what an idle diſcourſe is it thus to ſhoote your bolts as boyes doe ſtones, to make Duckes and Drakes vpon the ſurface of the water, to glide ſmoothly for two or three grasings, and then ſinke to the bottome without any more adoe. Adde quantity to iudgements, Decrees, Edicts, wee ſhall know what you would ſay, and ſo anſwere. As for humane wiſedome, that helpe on our right hand; haue you ſuch cauſe to boaſt, we haue no ſenſe nor reaſon? I thinke you doe not find vs ſuch arrant fooles, as vtterly deſtitute of humane indowments: If you doe, the better for you: You may cary the cauſe againſt vs without more adoe. Cuſtomes we haue many, of the better ſort: not all your anticke fits, and geſticulations. You haue not all antiquity had, you haue many they neuer ſaw. Silly man, know you not moſt cuſtomes doe and may vary? keepe your owne if you pleaſe: we are not ſo wedded to them, nor to all ours, but vpon reaſon, we haue, will, and may change by better warrant then you can auoide. As for multitude, we dare drip Siders with you, old and late: but theſe are meere flaſhes of your Catholike vanity, I haue ſaid it often, I repeate it in the cloſe, that you may remember it the better, at leaſt, you ſhall find, that is my ſelfe, that will ioyne iſſue with you when you dare, to maintaine the doctrine of the Church of England, and oppoſe the doctrine of the Romiſh Church by all of theſe or any of theſe, Antiquitie, Cuſtome, Multitude, humane wiſedome, Iudgements, Decrees, Edicts, and Councels. If I haue not for me in all or euery one as good and better ſhare and intereſt, for my confeſsion, thē you for yours, I wil yeeld. As for Miracles,

Viſions, and ſuch hobgoblin-ſtuffe, I am contented you appropriate to your owne. So did the Gentiles brag of the like as Chryſoſtome obſerueth, Orat. 1. in Iudai ſantes pag. 34. Edit. Heſhe
                  •
               . So did the Donatiſts as S. Auguſtine reporteth, de notis Eccleſiae, ca. 19. Their miracles were then, as yours now, Figmenta mendacium hominum, aut portenta fallacium ſpirituum. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : is a prouerbiall ſpeech in Athenaeus. Fooles may be frighted with Hagges, and Fairies, men of vnderſtanding know it is but knauery: At Lauretto, Sichem, Annuntiada, or whereſoeuer we haue the like puppet playes amongſt our Catholike neighbours: Cachinnantibus daemonijs, at ſuch iugling tricks for their aduantage. And yet take me not ſo, as if I caſt off all miracles: I admit, I admire them, that were true, for a true end, the ratificatiou of Truth, vnto the ſoule, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . That ſuch as would not yeeld vnto the word preached, might yet be conuicted by that miraculous power, ſaith Clemens in his Conſtituions. This was that the world might beleeue, but yet ſince and euer Chryſoſtome ſaid true. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ? One faith and beleefe is to be regulated, not by miracles, but by the Scripture, which on good foundation, we defend containes all that is Neceſſary 
               Farewell my deare Reader, ſeeing I haue now ſaid all that vnto thee which I desired. 
               for our ſaluation. You haue done with your Reader, and I with you, till we meet againe at the next turne: till then farewell.
            
         
         
            
            A liſt of the ſeuerall errors imputed to the PROTESTANTS by this Gagger, being ſo many Lyes.
            
               
                  I. THey maintaine in the firſt place, that the Scriptures are eaſie to be vnderſtood.
               
                  II. That in matters of Faith, wee muſt not relye vpon the iudgement of the Church, and of her Pastors, but onely vpon the written Word.
               
                  III. That Apoſtolicall Traditions and ancient Cuſtomes of the holy Church, are not to be receiued, nor doe oblige vs.
               
                  IIII. That the Church can erre.
               
                  V. That the Church hath beene hidden and inuiſible.
               
                  VI. That it is forbidden in holy Scripture, the publike ſeruice of the Church, to be in a Tongue not vnderſtood by all the Aſsiſtants.
               
                  VII. That Saint Peter was not the firſt, or chiefe among the

Apoſtles: and that none was greater or leſſe among the twelue.
               
                  VIII. That Saint Peters faith hath failed.
               
                  IX. That a Woman may bee ſupreame Gouerneſſe of the Church, in all cauſes as well Eccleſiaſticall as Temporall, as Queene Elizabeth was.
               
                  X. That Antichriſt ſhall not be a particular man, and that the Pope is Antichriſt.
               
                  XI. That none but God can forgiue, or retaine ſinnes.
               
                  XII. That we muſt not confeſſe our ſinnes but onely to God.
               
                  XIII. That Pardons and Indulgences were not in vse in the Apoſtles times.
               
                  XIIII. That the Actions and Paſsions of the Saints doe ſerue for nothing vnto the Church.
               
                  XV. That no man can doe workes of Superer
                     •
                  gation.
               
                  XVI. That by the fall of Adam, we haue all loſt our free-will, and that it is not in our owne power either to chooſe good or e
                     •
                  ill.
               
                  XVII. That it is impoſsible to keepe the Commandements of GOD, though aſsiſted with his Grace, and the holy Ghost.
               
                  
                  XVIII. That onely Faith iuſtifieth: and that good workes are not abſolutely neceſſary to Saluation.
               
                  XIX. That no good workes are meritorious.
               
                  XX. That Faith once had, cannot be loſt.
               
                  XXI. That God by his will and ineuitable decree, hath ordained from all eternity, who ſhall be damned, and who ſaued.
               
                  XXII. That euery man ought infallibly to aſſure himſelfe of his ſaluation; and to hold that hee is of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   her of the praedeſtinate.
               
                  XXIII. That euery one hath not his Angell keeper.
               
                  XXIIII. That the holy Angels pray not for vs.
               
                  XXV. That we may not pray vnto them.
               
                  XXVI. That the Angels cannot helpe us.
               
                  XXVII. That no Saint departed, hath afterward appeared to any vpon Earth.
               
                  XXVIII. That Saints deceaſed, know not what paſſeth in the Earth.
               
                  XXIX. That they pray not for vs.
               
                  
                  XXX. That we may not pray to them.
               
                  XXXI. That the bones or reliques of Saints are not to be kept, no vertue proceedeth from them after they be dead.
               
                  XXXII. That Creatures cannot be ſanctified, or made more holy then they are already by their owne Nature.
               
                  XXXIII. That Children may bee ſaued by their Parents faith, without Baptiſme.
               
                  XXXIV. That impoſition of hands vpon the people, (called by Catholikes Confirmation) is not neceſſary, nor to be vſed.
               
                  XXXV. That the bread of the Supper, is but a figure of the body of Chriſt, not his body.
               
                  XXXVI. That wee ought to receiue vnder both kindes, and that one alone ſufficeth not.
               
                  XXXVII. That ſacramentall vnction is not to bee vsed to the Sicke.
               
                  XXXVIII. That no interior grace is giuen by the impoſition of hands, in the Sacrament of holy Orders.
               
                  
                  XXXIX. That Prieſts and other religious perſons, or any others, who haue vowed their chaſtity vnto God, may freely marry, notwithſtanding their vowes.
               
                  XL. That faſting and abſtinence from meates, is not grounded on holy Scripture, nor cauſeth any ſpirituall good.
               
                  XLI. That Ieſus Chriſt deſcended not into hell, nor deliuered thence the Soules of the Fathers.
               
                  XLII. That there is no Purgatory fire, or other priſon wherein ſinnes may be ſatisfied for after this life.
               
                  XLIII. That it is not lawfull to make, or to haue Images.
               
                  XLIIII. That no man hath at any time ſeene GOD, and that therefore his picture or Image cannot be made.
               
                  XLV. That it is not lawfull to worſhip Images, nor to giue any honour to any dead, or inſenſible thing.
               
                  XLVI. That bleſsing, or ſigning vpon the fore-head, is not founded on the Scripture.
               
                  XLVII. That it is both ſuperfluous, and ſuperſtitious, to repeate one and the ſame Prayer ſundry times.
            
            
               
Theſe XLVII. ſeuerall poſitions, are ſaid to be Contrary to the expreſſe words of our owne Bibles, whereof ſome are cited litterally; others wee are ſent to ſee, with this Item, See more; and ſuppoſed farther to bee contrary to the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, vnto whom we are addreſſed often, not euer, with See Fathers that affirme the ſame.
            
            Whatſoeuer Text, or quotation is in the Gagge, the Reader ſhall finde it in the Margine of this Anſwere, or ſometimes in a different Character, in the Corps of the Anſwere. So that no neede ſhall be of the Gagge, vnto the Reader, nothing being omitted, in this Anſwere that is in the Gagge.
            
         
         
            The Erratues that by reaſon of the Authors abſence haue happened, the Reader muſt be intreated to amend thus.
            
               In the Preface.
               Pag. 10. lin. 27. vrged. p. 
                     •
                  1. l. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . deeper. p. 12. l. 12. whom. p. 1
                     •
                  . l. 9. iuris. p. 18. l. 17. 
                     
                        •••
                     as. p. 19. l. 
                     •
                  5. gn
                        •
                     uiter. p. 20. l 14. Prince. p. 21. l. 27. iudgements. p. 2
                     •
                  . l. 20. dropp writers. l. 24. finde one, that is. p. 22 l. 22. Our.
               
            
            
               In the Anſwere.
               Pag. 15. lin. 8. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : p. 43. l. 3. to be conuerted. p. 57. l. 7. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      out. l. 
                     •
                  8. went the. p. 59. l. 19. vpon him. p. 66. l. 1. not ſo much. p. 67. l. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that w
                        •
                     
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 83 l. 
                     •
                  0. 
                     
                        •••
                     is poſ
                        〈…〉
                     i p. 90. l. 10. what then. p. 120. l. 20. is poſſible. p. 14
                     •
                  . l. 
                     •
                  2. vrged.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN ANSVVERE TO THE LATE GAGGER of PROTESTANTS.
            
               I.
               
                  They maintaine in the firſt place, that Gag. 
                     The Scriptures are eaſie to be vnderſtood.
                  
               
               
                  WHat hope can wee haue of honeſt and ſquare dealing with this Catholick-copeſ
                        •
                     mate, who beginneth ſo captiouſly and deceitfully, as, to play at faſt and looſe in ambiguities? For no Proteſtant liuing, affirmeth that all Scripture is eaſie. No Papiſt liuing, will, or dareth ſay, that no Scripture is eaſie. If ſome Scripture be eaſie: and ſome be hard, this Generall Propoſition, The Scriptures are eaſie, is true, and this Generall Propoſition, The Scriptures are not eaſie, is alſo true, viz. Some Scripture is: and ſome is not ſo. This is eaſie: that is hard.
               
                  
That which the Proteſtants maintaine, is it expreſly 
                  Contrary to the expreſſe words of their owne Bible. againſt Scripture? Yes ſaith this gagger, Contrary to the expreſſe words of their owne bible, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Where Saint Peter ſpeaking of Saint Pauls Epiſtles, ſaith. In which are ſome things hard to be vnderſtood. Saint Peter ſaith, but ſome things; by this fellowes own confeſſion: he doth not ſay, All things in Saint Pauls Epiſtles are hard: or, All Saint Pauls Epiſtles are hard, nor indiffinitely, Saint Pauls Epiſtles are hard, but onely, ſome things, in his Epiſtles, are hard. That ſome things are, it was euer granted, that all Scripture, all things in Scripture, are eaſie, it was neuer ſo much as dreamed. So what contrariety of the Proteſtants doctrine, is there vnto their owne bible? No honeſty in this fellow, nor his director C. W. B. thus to peruert the ſtate of the Queſtion, and faſten a lye vpon the Proteſtants, I am ſure.
               That place of Eſay not vnderſtood by the Eunuch, Acts 8. 30. 31. is not to purpoſe againſt the Proteſtants; Againſt Acts 8. 30. &c. 
                  And Philip ſaid vnto the Eunuch, vnderſtandeſt thou what thou readeſt? and hee ſaid, How can I, except ſome man ſhould guide mee? therefore, &c. This is but one particular place, and proueth no more, but one obſcurity in one place of Scripture. It is alſo a Prophecy: and Prophecies are aſſiſed at obſcurity. The euents of Prophecies are obſcure, before they fall: and being accompliſhed, not ſtraight-way diſcerned. The Eunuch did know what was ſaid, but he could not tell of whom it was ſpoken. The difficulty was but in one point: and the hardneſſe not generall neither, but in part. That partiall hardneſſe, but in one particular. That particular, but for a time. Iudge, Reader, how many inſufficiencies are

in this allegation to proue that, all Scripture is hard, becauſe one place, a particular caſe, in one point, at that time, was hard. What honeſty in that Propoſer, this Gaggers good Goſſip C. W. B. who hath it thus, The Eunuch could not vnderſtand the Scriptures; who could not vnderſtand but one thing in the Scripture, that we know.
               
                  Chriſt called two of his owne diſciples fooles, and beginning 
                  Againſt Luk. 24. 15. 
                  at Moſes, and all the Prophets, hee expounded vnto them all the ſcriptures, the things concerning himſelfe, before that they could vnderſtand them: Firſt, the anſwere is the ſame which ſerued for the former, that the things which they vnderſtood not, were but ſome Scriptures. Now it followeth not, that all are hard, becauſe ſome were. Secondly, they were Prophecies, and ſo obſcure till their accompliſhments. Thirdly, Prophecies of one ſubiect, all; the Meſſias. Fourthly, the Caſe is altered with them now: they are now eaſie that were then hard, and our Queſtion is of Scripture at this day to men now adayes, not of ſcripture then, to men then liuing. I adde farther, they are fooled for their ſlowneſſe of heart: that is, not ſo much for a diſ-ability to vnderſtand thoſe things there ſpoken of, as for diſ-proportion in their affection; or diſ-attention rather vnto thoſe things, not ſo obſcure or difficult of themſelues, eſpecially conſidering the times then: The Shepheard being ſmitten: the ſheepe ſcattered; and meeting with thoſe occurrences which they looked not for, in the fulfilling of their Hopes: wee hoped it was he, that ſhould haue reſtored the kingdome of Iſrael, ſo that a cloud of humane darkeneſſe and diſheartnings were at that time caſt vpon their affections and vnderſtandings. And if at ſome

time I be ill-diſpoſed to any buſineſſe, it is no argument I am ſo alway; or ſhould totally be excluded from medling therewith. And laſtly this their ſlowneſſe, was but partiall: to vnderſtand ſomething, of one particular perſon. Which obſcurity, if in the Subiect it ſelfe, is nothing to obſcurity vniuerſall.
               But yet further to this point: This fellow came forth to quarrell, not to plead for naked and bare truth: elſe would he haue dealt ſincerely and ingenuouſly, not onely in propounding what the Proteſtants hold, which he doth not: but alſo in not belying the text, as hee doth. For is it found in our Bibles, or in any Bible, Hee expounded vnto them all the Scriptures? or, Hee expounded vnto them, in all the Scriptures, the things that concerned himſelfe? Thus I finde it, and not otherwiſe. For in this there is a ſenſe: in that other there is none. So that the Holy ghoſt is made to ſpeake plaine nonſenſe, to fit a turne for a Catholique cauſe. This may ſtand, and yet the Proteſtants aſſerſion be not infeebled, He expounded vnto them in all the ſcriptures, the things concerning himſelfe. For they doe not deny, but that ſome things are hard. That other cannot ſtand. For it implieth, that all things are hard. So we haue obſeruable, a pretty niggling tricke of a falſe knaue: a ſmall word, (In) left out, to marre all. For with In the text is for this, and no more, Some things in Scripture needed expoſition, and therefore were hard. But without In, though there be no Senſe (but what ſimple Proſelyte attendeth to that?) the implication is, All Scriptures need Interpretation, and ſo are all hard; which the good Catholique beleeueth not himſelfe; dareth not auouch; yet faine would haue his nouice take it ſo, to traduce

the tenent of the Proteſtants, that ſome Scriptures are open and eaſie. Thus in the very in-ſteppe of his ſtolen pamphlet, he belyeth the Proteſtant for his opinion: abuſeth the Scripture to bolſter his Forgery: and yet for all that, fighteth onely with his owne fancy, as dogges by moone-light barke at their owne ſhadowes.
               To your queſtion then inferred vpon the premiſes, I How then are Scriptures ſo eaſie to be vnderſtood of the vnlearned, when the Diſciples themſelues vnderſtood them not, till firſt they were expounded vnto them? anſwere, firſt, As eaſie to be vnderſtood of the vnlearned now, as of them then, who were none of the Learned ones at that time: and had incident impediments at that time. Secondly, ſcriptures, hard then, vnto them, may be, and are eaſie now, without any ſuch Interpretation. For one Day teacheth another: and eſpecially in Predictions, as theſe all were; that is, after eaſie, which at firſt was hard. If now they be not eaſie, there is no explicite faith: implicite faith muſt ſaue all. Sir Gagger, whoſoeuer you are, know that Scripture is not all of one height, depth, or alloy. Some was hard, that now is eaſie. Some eaſie now, and euer. Some yet hard, but not for euer. To be vnderſtood, but not in the way: only in viſione faciei, when wee ſhall ſee face to face, and know God as we are knowne, and ſome points, at leaſt explicitely, not now to bee vnderſtood, nor yet then. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . it was a ſecret, a myſtery, ſaith Baſil of Seleucia; at the beginning, & ſhall neuer ceaſe to be a myſtery; In ſome point or other, the worke of our Redemption in Chriſt, he meaneth.
               See more who liſt, they ſhall ſee nothing to purpoſe. See more, 2 Pet. 1. 20. 
                  No Scripture, ſaith Saint Peter, is of priuate motion, or Interpretation, as you will. Ergo what? All Scripture is hard? Teach me this Conſequence, and I will thanke you for my New-Logicke. This I doe ſee: where the

Scripture is hard, and needeth interpretation, there that Spirit which dictated it at firſt, muſt direct in the vnderſtanding it at laſt. For man is permitted to expound himſelfe, and beſt can giue his owne meaning. So this Text is not to proue, that Scripture is hard; but to proue that in Caſe there be a Doubt, we are not to addreſſe vnto priuate Fancies, or peculiar opinions, but to the Direction of Gods Spirit, and that in the Church. I ſubſcribe, Math. 13. 11. 36. it is remembred, that Chriſt, taught the People in Parables. Well: what if he did? Why a Parable is a darke kinde of ſpeech, ſo that there is obſcurity in the Scriptures. I anſwer: No man denyeth but there is obſcurity. No man denieth but Parables are obſcure. Some, not all. In ſome things, not in all. Thoſe Parables were obſcure; admit it, that are remembred there: but they are not all the Parables that are in Scripture. Nor are Parables the hundreth part of Scripture, and many of them are of eaſie vnderſtanding, and many are expounded where propoſed: and when vnderſtood, beſt remembred, moſt beneficiall to the Hearer.
               
               
                  Luke 24. 45. Then opened hee their vnderstandings, that they might vnderstand the Scripture: which act of our Sauiour vnto, and vpon his Diſciples, at that time ſlow of heart; may rather excite vnto, then detar from the Reading of the Scriptures. For that which hee did to them perſonally, he will doe vnto all mediately; and doth it vnto the ſimpleſt actually, of thoſe that are intereſſed in him, though but by a generall tye. For the pooreſt member of the Church, doth now vnderſtand that which he taught them; that he was the Meſsiah; the Promiſed ſeede; according vnto Prophecies, and Predictions

of old; then hard, now eaſie. 1 Cor. 12. 8. Saint Paul ſpeaking of diuerſity of guifts, ſaith; To one is giuen by the ſpirit, the word of wiſdome, to another the word of knowledge, by the ſame ſpirit: which words are as much againſt vnderſtanding Scriptures, hard, by interpretation: as Scriptures eaſie with interpretation. For thoſe that haue it, haue it by guift: immediate by God, without helpe or inſtruction. Thoſe that haue it not, by warrant of this place, and goe no further, cannot haue it at all, becauſe theſe things remembred were all of Infuſion: of extraordinary indowment: and ſo, ſingular and peculiar. Againe, admit it in common courſe; yet it is rather a warrant for facility of Scripture, becauſe there are deſigned Expoſitors, or if for difficulty, becauſe expoſitors are needfull; yet this difficulty is but in ſome, to ſome, not vniuerſall, of which we muſt be vnderſtood, and of no other, if wee be rightly taken.
               
                  Luke 18. 34. The Diſciples vnderſtood none of thoſe things. Doth it follow they vnderſtood not any thing in the Law or Prophets, which were the Scriptures of thoſe times? If you cannot read a letter in Cipher, can you not read a plaine letter in Italique hand? Thoſe things, beſide that they were not then written, and ſo no part of Scripture; and ſo not to purpoſe; were particular, and perſonall, and not performed. Now they are performed; now they are in Scripture, now eaſie to be vnderſtood of all, without Expoſitors, the Sufferings of our Sauiour at Ieruſalem. To them then, they were hidden: are they now to you Catholikes? Doe you not know Chriſt ſuffered at Ieruſalem? If you doe not, I grant Scripture is hard, and hidden; but hidden vnto thoſe, that periſh onely, becauſe they will hud-winke themſelues,

and not ſee. Not a Lixa, Calo, or Agaſo, not a ſhepheard or muleter but doth, or elſe may know this now, which then was a ſecret not knowen vnto many: many particulars, not vnto the bleſſed Virgin her ſelfe: ſuch difference there is in things wrought by time; ſo little wiſdome to take things at all times alike; and to conclude alike.
               Indeed, the ſame: that is, the thing in queſtion, as little 
                     Gag. See Fathers which affirme the ſame, Iren. lib. 2. cap. 47. as thoſe Texts doe, and to as little purpoſe as thoſe texts doe. Irenaeus Lib. 2. 47. Hauing inſiſted vpon, and inſtanced in obſcurity in Gods word in Nature, he proceedeth vnto Gods word in Scripture thus. Si ergo & in rebus creaturae, quaedam quidem eorum adiacent Deo, quaedam autem & in noſtram venerunt ſcientiam, quid mali eſt, si et eorum, quae in ſcripturis requiruntur, vniuerſis ſcripturis ſpiritualibus, exiſtentibus, quaedam quidem abſoluamus ſecundum gratiam Dei, quaedam ante commendemus Deo? If ſo be in the workes of Creation, ſome keepe cloſe vnto God in ſecret, ſome are apprehended and vnderſtood by vs: what hurt or inconuenience is it, if in Scripture, all Scripture being ſpirituall, there be ſomething contayned, which through aſsiſtance of Gods grace, we can goe through with, and againe, ſome thing that we muſt leaue vnto God? Iuſt the doctrine of the Proteſtants; that ſome things may bee vnderſtood, ſome things paſt our vnderſtanding. Non ſolum in hoc ſaeculo, ſo it followeth there, ſed et in futuro. Not onely in this world; but that to come, that God may euer teach, man euer learne of God. The waters of Silo, ſome where runne pleaſantly, and may be paſſed: in other ſome places not foordable. Origen lib. 7. cont. Celſum.
               
               
                  Origen ſingeth the ſame Proteſtant ſong, and that

in moe places then one of his bookes againſt Celſus, as lib. 5. twiſe, hom. 14. vpon Exodus, and other where. The place you meane, lib. 7. contra Celſum, I thinke is this: (For you could not tell whereabout, or what it was, becauſe your good founder C. W. B. failed you,) Celſus being a Pagan, and an Epicure, as happily you are, made the ſame obiection, I am ſure, which you doe now, pag. 345. edit. Graec-Lat. that the Scripture was obſcure and vncertaine: the ſenſe and meaning not to be found out by wiſe men: ſo that the ignorant and indiſcreet, abuſed it at pleaſure. More then which no liuing Ieſuite could haue ſaid: No Proteſtant would anſwere a Ieſuite otherwiſe then Origen doth, vnto that Pagan Celſus. Certe ipſi Prophetae, quicquid erat opus mox ab Auditoribus intelligi; et quicquid ad corrigendos mores faciebat, abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vllis involucris propoſuerunt ijs, ita vt Deus voluit. The Prophets themſelues expounded to their Auditors anon, whatſoeuer was for them to be vnderſtood, and whatſoeuer ſerued to make them good men, that they propoſed vnto them, as Gods will was they ſhould, plainly without obſcurity at al. Had the Proteſtants feed him, hee could not haue ſpoken more fully, and to purpoſe, in their cauſe; and yet he proceedeth to declare, why Figures, Parables, and Allegories are vſed therein, a long diſcourſe to purpoſe, pag. 345. See him that will.
               It is not denied, Saint Ambroſe Ep. 44. to Conſtantius, 
                  Ambr. Ep. 44 ad Conſtant calleth it a Sea, a depth of Propheticall riddles. compareth the holy ſcriptures vnto a Sea: and calleth them a depth of Propheticall riddles, Mare eſt ſcriptura diuina habens in ſe ſenſus profundos, altitudinem Propheticorum aenigmatum: in quod mare plurima introierunt flumina. But not all ſcripture in his

opinion is that Sea: onely Propheticall riddles, are that Sea; beſide which, diuerſa ſunt ſcripturarū fluenta: as he addeth, diuers ſtreames, brooks, ſhallowes, and currents be in the ſcripture. Habes quod primū bibas, habes quod ſecundum: habes quod poſtremum. Scripture fitted to euery capacity: I know no Proteſtant that wil aske more.
               Saint Hierome is next, who out of Bellarmines obſeruations could haue afforded vs three places moe, and Saint Hier in praefat. commen. in Eph. more materiall, from whence this mans director tooke his ſtore, and rather ſhould he haue taken any teſtimony then this, if he vnderſtood the credit of his witneſſe. For the commentaries vpon the Epiſtles, extant vnder Saint Hicromes name, be none of his, but are the Collections of Pelagius the Hereticke; as not Proteſtants ſay, but Papiſts of name and note: Catharme, Senenſis, Pererius, Bellarmine and Victorius Marianus: Such an aduocate we neede not enuie our aduerſary; Much good may Pelagius the Heretickes teſtimony doe him. But let him paſſe for Saint Hierome, there is not any thing to purpoſe ſpoken by him. That which he ſaith is this: He had ſtudied the Scriptures much and long, had conference with diuers learned men all his time, about the ſenſe thereof, and had purpoſely vndertaken a iourney vnto Didymus at Alexandria, vt ab eo in ſcripturis omnibus quae habebam dubia ſciſcitarer: Therefore, what? Firſt this: Didymus, at leaſt, vnderſtood all ſcripture; or how could he reſolue all the doubts of ſcripture? what needed Hierome to haue gone ſo long a iourney vnto him? therfore, ſcripture, al of it, is to be vnderſtood. Secondly, vnto Hierome, all ſcripture was not hard: he propoſed vnto him the doubts he had: which implyeth, they were not infinite, not all ſcripture obſcure

or doubted of: therefore thirdly, this proueth the Proteſtant opinion true, that the Scriptures are ſome of them eaſie enough to be vnderſtood
               Saint Auguſt. Ep. 119. cap. 21. ſaith ſomewhat Saint Aug. Ep. 119. cap. 21. ſaith, The things, &c. more: For he deſcendeth vnto Compariſon, and ſaith, The things of holy ſcripture which I know not, are many moe then thoſe which I know. Such was his humility, to ſay ſo; like vnto Saint Paul in the ſame caſe: who knew nothing, and yet your ſelfe Sir, a man of leſſe skill then Saint Auguſtine, not to be named the ſame day with him, if you ſhould goe and make a liſt of the particular verſes in the ſcripture, which you vnderſtand, and of thoſe you vnderſtand not, I doe not doubt but thoſe would be more then theſe: and yet further, theſe being ſo, he might iuſtly and truely ſay ſo of all almoſt. For of one and the ſame place there may be moe ſenſes then one: yea, euen literall ſenſes, and intended by the holy Ghoſt: ſo that knowing one ſenſe, perhaps primary and naturall, he may be ignorant of the other: and thus all Scripture may be hard.
               Saint Auguſt. opinion was indeed no other then our opinion is, as appeareth in Ep. 100. to Voluſianus, Tanta eſt Chriſtianarum profunditas literarū
                   &c. Such and ſo great is the depth of Chriſtian ſcriptures, that I might ſtill euery day learne and profit by them, informe my ſelfe of that I know not before, if ſo bee that at moſt leyſure, with my vtmoſt paines and trauell, indowed with as good a wit as any man can haue, I ſhould ſet my ſelfe to learne them, and them alone, from my very infancy to decrepite age. Hitherto Saint Auguſt. in appearance for the Papiſt: now inſueth for the Proteſtant. Not ſ
                        •
                     , but that the things abſolutely neceſſary to Saluation, are

compaſſed with much loſſe, difficulty, and vnderſtood. But when a man hath once reſolued his Faith in them, without which no man can liue well and godlily, thoſe men that will goe forward with greater proficiency, ſhall meete with ſo many things in ſuch wiſe ſhadowed with myſticall meanings: ſo great proofe and depth of wiſedome therein couched, not onely in the words which ſet forth the things vnto vs; and to our vnderſtanding: but alſo in the things vnderſtood. Inſomuch as that auncient ſtudents, of pregnant wit, of vnwearied pains, doe find it verrified in themſelues here, which the ſame ſcripture hath in a certaine place, Sirac. 18. 7. When a man hath done, then is he to beginne. So truly doth Saint Auguſt. reſolue, for either oppoſite part, who haue ſhared the Truth betwixt them.
               This was the doctrine once euen of the Roman Church: For Saint Gregory vpon the 6. of Ezechiel, 
                  Saint Gregorie hom. 6. in Ezech, and many others confeſſe the ſame. ſaid, If the vnderſtanding of holy ſcripture were playne to all men, it would come in time to bee of no reckoning. Where hee giueth a reaſon of that obſcurity that is in it. Who yet vpon the 6. of Iob, more atfull interpreteth his owne meaning thus. Sacra ſcriptura, cibus eſt in locis obſcurioribus, quia quaſi exponendo frangitur et mandendo glutitur. Potus vero eſt in locis apertioribus, quià ita ſorbetur ſicut invenitur. The holy Scripture is Meate in the more obſcure places, becauſe in the expounding thereof it is broken as it were, and in chewing ſwallowed. Drinke it is in the more perſpicuous places, becauſe it is as eaſily ſwallowed downe, as it is found. Thus the doctrine and beliefe of the Roman Church was ſometime, Scripture in ſome places, is hard, in ſome places eaſie. Hath that Church now forſaken her former faith? if

not, we differ not: for we maintaine the eaſineſſe of holy Scripture, no otherwiſe then Saint Gregory the Pope did. This Gooſe may fit the Gagge for his Ganders mouth, the Goſpell will ſoone enough be rid of it.
            
            
               II.
               
                  That in matters of faith, wee muſt not relye vpon the iudgement of the Church, and of her Paſtors, but onely vpon the written Word.
               
               
                  I Know no ſuch tenent excluſiuely. I know no ſuch Aſſertion negatiuely, the Church of England hath no ſuch faith as this. You ſet vp a Shawfoule for a marke, and ſhoot your bolt at it your ſelfe alone. In our 11. Article, (put on your ſpectacles and ſee if you can reade it) we profeſſe, The Church hath authority in controuerſies of Faith.
               
               The written word of God is the Rule of Faith with vs. And hath beene ſo with all our Fathers of old. Vnto the Law, and vnto the Prophets, was a direction of a perpetuall Morallity, and is continued in that of our Sauiour, Ioh. 5. Search the Scriptures: for in them you hope to haue eternall life. A rule abſolute in it ſelfe, a rule moſt ſufficient vnto vs, for that end entended, To make the man of God perfect in euery good worke. Sufficiunt ſanctae et diuinitus inſpiratae ſcripturae, ſaith Athanaſius, ad omnem inſtitutionem veritatis.
               
               Truth is of two ſorts amongſt men, manifeſt, and confeſſed truth, or more obſcure, and inuolued truth. In his quae aperte poſita ſunt in ſcripturis, inveni
                        •
                     ntur

illa omnia quae continent fidem moreſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viuendi ſpem ſcilicet & charitatem. Plainely deliuered in Scripture are all thoſe poynts which belong vnto Faith and manners, Hope, and Charity to wit. And accordingly I doe know no obſcurity vpon theſe; I know none of theſe controuerted inter partes: the Articles of our Creede are confeſſed on both ſides, and held plaine enough.
               The controuerted poynts are of a larger and an inferiour alloy: of them a man may be ignorant, without any danger of his ſoule at all. A man may reſolue or oppoſe this way, or that way, without perill of periſhing for euer. Now if a queſtion be moued iuris controuerſi, in controuerted matters, who ſhall decide and ſettle the doubt? you ſay, The Church, and ſo ſay I: nay ſo ſay we. You ſay wee ſay the Scriptures; but without the Church: that is, each priuate mans opinion and interpretation of the Scriptures, euen againſt the Church. No ſuch thing Sir: you miſtake vs. We ſay the Church muſt doe it, explaining, declaring, reſoluing the Scriptures, as the direction is from God himſelfe, to purpoſe, Deut. 17. 8. and as your Texts and Fathers doe pretend it, and no otherwiſe.
               And yet the Scripture may well be called iudge. As the Law determineth Controuerſies betwixt man and man: In plaine caſes iuris poſitiui, no deciding Iudge or legall proceeding ſhall neede. But ſuch as are iuris ambigui & controuerſi, muſt be determined by the Court, by the Iudge, according vnto Law. So is it in Scripture, according to the Proteſtants opinion. In points of Faith, they diſclaime not the iudgement of the Church, nor yet appeale to Scripture alone, vnderſtood by themſelues without a iudge, but referre it vnto

the Church. And they haue reaſon for it enough, ſeeing Gods Word and the ancient practiſe of the Catholike Church, that is both Law and Iudge, are both for them: In the name of the Church of England, I will be tried thereby, and maintaine it againſt all Papiſts liuing. Take one for all, Cyril of Hieruſalem in his fourth Catechiſme ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , In any poynt concerning the diuine and holy myſteries of our Faith, not any, the leaſt thing, muſt be tendred without warrant of diuine Scripture. And he addeth, Belieue mee not that ſpeake and deliuer theſe things vnto you, vnleſſe for proofe of them I doe bring plaine and euident demonſtration out of diuine Writ. Was this man a Proteſtant or a Papiſt? Thoſe Bibles he had then which we haue now: and it ſeemeth that addreſſing his owne beliefe and doctrine accordingly, varied not in iudgement any whit from vs, who make Scripture the rule of our beliefe. And in doubtfull poynts that require determination, appeale vnto the Catholique Church for iudgement in that Rule.
               This is not contrary to any deduction from, much Contrary to the expreſſe words of their owne Bible. Math. 23. 2. leſſe to the expreſſe words of our owne Bible, Matt. 23. 2. The Scribes & Phariſes ſit in Moſes Chaire, all therfore whatſoeuer they bid you obſerue, that obserue and doe. Therefore, &c. Doe you finde, eyther Faith or Iudgement, Paſtors or Church, expreſly named in this text? Looke once more, and looke back vpon your vndertaking. Their refutation by expreſſe words of their owne bible. For words expreſſe you faile, vndertaking more than you can performe: an ordinary tricke of Catholike Braggadochioes. Let vs ſee if Conſequents will hold the tewghing any better.
               
                  
Thoſe that anſwere the Church and her Paſtors in your Theſis, are the Scribes & Pharises, in your proofe: who whole and ſome, head and taile, be Doctors and Pastors of the Church with you. But of the Church of Rome it muſt be ſuppoſed, for wee diſclaime any Conformation at all with them. And doe you ſuppoſe that our Sauiour approued them ſo well, as that hee would haue had the Iewes in matters of Faith to relye vpon them and their deciſions, as Paſtors of the Church in points of Faith? If this were his meaning, what meant he then to giue warning elſewhere, Take heede of the leauen of the Phariſes? that is, as the holy Ghoſt expoundeth it, Of their doctrine. If the queſtion had bin put, Art thou the Chriſt? would he haue ſent them vnto the Scribes or Phariſes for reſolution? or aduiſed the people to belieue on them? we finde it not practiſed: the contrary we doe. What then is this text, in conſequence vnto the poynt? Surely hee meant no more but this: and in that hee will declare himſelfe a Proteſtant; Whatſoeuer they bid you obſerue out of Moſes, obſerue; that is, ſo long as they teach but Scripture, they muſt he heard: if there they faile, then heare them not. Verba legis proferendo, in the opinion of Saint Auguſtine, ſo long as they ſpeake Law. This is not our Hereſie but Catholique Doctrine. De legis ac Moſis doctrinâ loquitur perindè enim eſt acſi dicat, Omnia quae Lex & Moyſes vobis dixerint, Scribis & Phariſaeis recitantibus ſeruate; ſaith Maldonate, no friend nor fauourer of Proteſtants. And after him Barradas another Ieſuite, in this reſolution a very Proteſtant, Hoc eſt, ſaith he, omnia quae legi Dei & mandatis non repugnāt. Ergo, bound in the text with this reſtriction, as

you muſt, and it is a plaine Gagge to the Goſpel.
               
                  Luke 10. 16. He that heareth you, heareth me: and he 
                  2. 
                  that deſpiſeth you, deſpiſeth me: and hee that deſpiſeth me, deſpiſeth him that ſent me: Therfore, &c. You know not what you ſay. All this we conſtantly beleeue. But firſt I anſwere, this is a text indeede to purpoſe, to vindicate authority to the Church and her Paſtors: but not expreſſely, which is your vndertaking; by neceſſary conſequence, and indenied it is, but you haue tied your ſelfe, foole as you were, vnto expreſſe words: and expreſſe words are not here extant. Secondly, perhaps it is not ſo pat as you imagine, becauſe the men intended there and then were of another making, faſhion and account than euer were any ſince or before: and therefore their priuiledges more peculiar, of greater extent: inſomuch as that all were not to be heard ſo reſpectiuely as they were: they without Scripture or allegation of Scripture, hauing miſſion immediate from the Sonne himſelfe, which none euer had but they. But thirdly I anſwere, take it with Saint Cyprian, Epiſt. 96. and others, in a larger extent, ad omnes praepoſitos qui Apoſtolis vicariâ ordinatione ſuccedunt, vnto the Gouernours in the Church, who ſucceede the Apoſtles in the Churches gouernement, by impoſition of hands and ordination, and goe and anſwere your ſelfe out of Saint Bernard, thus, Be the commandement tendred by God or man, as Gods agent, it is to be receiued with like reuerence; Vbi tamen Deo contraria non praecipit homo; As farre as man doth not gain-ſay the will and commandement of the moſt high. A flat Proteſtant in his aſſertion; and vpon reaſon: For a Nuntio muſt goe to his Commiſſion.
               
                  
                  Matth. 16. 19. I will giue vnto thee the Keyes of the Kingdome of Heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt 
                  3. 
                  binde on earth ſhall be bound in Heauen: whatſoeuer thou ſhalt looſe in earth ſhall be looſed in heauen. Which text hath no ſuch mention of relying vpon Church or Paſtors in matters of faith, expreſſed. Nor hitherto perhaps any ſuch meaning. Your Compeeres were wont to cry vs downe with this text, For Saint Peters iuriſdiction ouer all, and the Popes vniuerſall power in claue poteſtatis. You now waue that power, it ſeemeth, and caſt aſide that key, and lay hold vpon that other key of knowledge. Shall wee belieue your Puniſhip or them? This cannot be good Catholique vnitie, in ſo fundamentall a poynt of your Faith, except for neere alliance betwixt Saint Peter and his Spouſe the Church, whatſouer is remembred of the one, muſt be likewiſe true of the other.
               But out with your Table-bookes, you that haue them amongſt you, and Note here, that he doth not ſay whoſoeuer, but whatſoeuer: giuing vs thereby to vnderſtand that not onely the bonds of ſinne, but as well all other knots and difficulties in matters of ſaith and manners, are to be looſed by Saint Peter, and by the Paſtors that ſucceed him in the Church. 
                  Note: the man will giue you ſomething worth the noting: that is, our Sauiour doth not ſay whomſoeuer, but whatſoeuer. We take it, and note it, and meane to make good vſe of it: inferring thereupon through your owne confeſſion, that therefore St. Peter by Chriſts commiſſion, muſt in caſe of binding and looſing, and executing the power of the Keyes (which whether it be all one with binding and loſing, you are not agreed amongſt your ſelues) let whomſoeuer alone for euer; and betake himſelfe vnto whatſoeuer: that is, not meddle any more with Kings and Princes: with cantoning of their Kingdomes and eſtates: but content himſelfe with whatſoeuer matters

of fact inferiour: matters of Faith, and the like deciſions, at leaſt with Cauſes and Perſons within his owne Verge, indeede Cauſes, that is, knots and difficulties, for Perſons are none of that combination.
               So, to ſhake hands with your memorable obſeruation; Therefore in matters of faith euen by their owne Bible, wee muſt not relye vpon the written word onely; but vpon whatſoeuer Saint Peter ſhall tie or vntie: which we in this caſe are contented to doe, and to ſay with that Councell of which he was a part (you ſay Preſident) viſum eſt ſpiritui ſancto & nobis, the deciſion of the Catholique Church, wee receiue as the dictate of the holy Spirit: but be you ſure it is the iudgment of the Church, for you are good Proficients in equiuocation, and preſent vs the Church vpon no better termes, then if you ſhould tender vs a man of ſtraw for a perfect man: or a ſhadow for a ſubſtance.
               Indeede to this effect, that is to as little purpoſe as See more to this effect, Deut. 17. 8. that which went before. In caſes of controuerſies and of doubts, in matters of fact or ciuill cogniſance, which could not be determined by ordinary courſe of Law, in the ſeuerall Counties as it were, or Places of iudicature, the Parties plaintife and defendants were to referre it, to the Leuits, Prieſts, and Iudge, in theſe daies: that is, to the Church and to the Pope, you dreame: and let your dreame goe once for truth: and they muſt heare it, determine it, definitiuely, It was capitall to refuſe, or to appeale. Good: but yet this commeth not home: for they muſt determine it according vnto Law, to which ſupreameſt deciſion, both concurre:

the Rule of right, and determiner of right according to that rule. In our conſtruction to our preſent queſtion, the iudgement of the Church according vnto Scripture, the ſelfe-ſame that the Proteſtant maintaineth.
               In this text I graunt more is to be ſeene then in all the reſt, viz. when the word of the Lord came vnto 
                  See Aggee the 2. and 11. Agge the Prophet. Which thing how it ſorteth with the preſent poſition, I cannot tell: ſpeake thoſe that can. But the word that then came vnto him was this, in the 12. verſe, Aske the Prieſts concerning the Lawe. And the Prieſts anſwered according vnto Law, thus and thus. And this is reſoluing of a doubt by the Prieſts: but the doubt reſolued according vnto Law: ſo the written word is relyed vpon. Not I my ſelfe, the word onely, Quis enim reſpondet? Did euer any man deny that the Church and her Paſtors, are not to be heard ſpeaking out of, or elſe according vnto Scriptures? Shew this, and take it, elſe Nihil ad rhombum.
               
               That of 2 Chron. 19. 8. is all one with Deuter. 17. 8. an exemplification of that rule: a practice according 2 Chron. 19. 8. vnto that direction there: ſomewhat more. For hereby it appeareth that the Precept was not for Tell the Church: and heare her Paſtors: but goe take the ordinary courſe appointed, the iudgement of a ſtanding court, mixt of Clergie, and of the Laitie: as it were our court of high Commiſſion; or indeede the Starre-chamber, conſiſting of both robes; Eccleſiaſticall and ciuill: not any thing to purpoſe for Church or for her Paſtors propounded.
               
                  
The laſt out of 2 Theſſal. 2. 15. was wont to paſſe currant for vnwritten verities: now it commeth in limping for Church and Paſtors: reſolue where it ſhall ſtand, and then we will ranke it in degree and deſert.
               So I would, could I tell where to finde them: they See Fathers which affirme the ſame. walke in tenebris: I cannot ſpeake with them by cleare day-light. In briefe, what they affirme, I profeſſe I cannot tell. I know many things which they affirme in thoſe remembred bookes and paſſages: but what the man here meaneth, I can but gueſſe at, ſo diſſolute and at randome are his quotations, as if to name and muſter vp ſome Fathers were enough: as I can coniecture, ſo come I to them: if I miſſe, I muſt haue better information hereafter.
               
                  Gregorie Nazianz. in Oratione excuſat. ſaith ſomewhat S. Gregor. Nazian. in Oratione excuſat. I reſolue of, and to ſome purpoſe, but what I certainely doe not know: nor yet which Oration is by him intended. For I finde not any vnder that title in Billius whom theſe men follow, vnleſſe it be one of his Apologies. In the former of which two, I finde ſomewhat that may looke that way: this, In Ecclesijs conſtituit vt alij paſcantur & pareant, quibus videlicet, id conducit, ac cum ſermone tum opere ad officium diriguntur: alij autem ad Eccleſiae perfectionem Paſtores, ac magiſtri ſunt, qui virtute, coniunctione
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ac apud Deum familiaritate vulgo ſublimiores ſunt, rationem animae ad corpus, aut mentis, ad animam obtinentes. A thing reaſonable, profitable, and of abſolute neceſſitie for the being of a Church, to haue a diſtinction of Paſtors and People: ſome to teach, ſome to

be taught: to leade, to be led: to rule, to obey: a thing eſtabliſhed, practiſed, and defended in England, no otherwiſe then was in the Primitiue Church, and is in the Church of Rome at this day. Vnleſſe wee can ſee more ſhewed vs in Gregory Nazianzene, we haue ſeene but little vnto any purpoſe yet: and other thing then this I know not.
               
                  Tertullian next to be ſeene, againſt Heretickes preſcribeth Tertul. lib. de praeſcrip, Haeret. the rule of Faith, ſo doe we: appealeth to the firſt inſtitution of the Catholicke Church of Chriſt in his Apoſtles, and to their Doctrine then taught and deliuered: and ſo doe wee aboue all, primerily thereto he deſcendeth vnto Succeſſion: ſo will we. Not any preſcription inſiſted vpon by Tertullian, but I embrace it, and dare appeale vnto it, and ſtand to the award thereof: Ex fide perſonas approbantes, non ex perſonis fidem. Is this that which he would haue with Tertul. out of Chapter 21. What Chriſt reuealed vnto his Apostles to be preached, I will preſcribe, that it ought to be proued no otherwiſe, then by teſtimony of thoſe Churches which were firſt founded by the Apoſtles in their preaching; partly by word of mouth, and partly afterward by writing? If this be the place of Tertullian, meant by the Gagger; then Currat a Gods name, we accept the Condition, and ioyne iſſue, and come on with Tertullian, as it inſueth, Si haec ita ſunt; If this be ſo; it muſt needs be, that all Doctrine which concordeth with thoſe Apoſtolicall, mother, and originall Churches, is true, as being that ſelfe-ſame which the Churches receiued from the Apoſtles: they from Chriſt, Chriſt from God. Whatſoeuer other Doctrine is beſide

this, is falſe, againſt the truth of the Apoſtles, Chriſt, and God. Thus he, thus we. I deſire no other Iudge, or better triall, ioyne iſſue when you will, or when you dare. I accept the Condition, for any point controuerted betwixt the Church of England and Rome at this day, for 500. yeeres after Chriſt at leaſt.
               
                  Diſcipulus magiſtrum. Cyprian commeth next to S. Cyprian Lib. 1. Epi. 3. be ſeene, in his 55. Epiſtle, or as your Authors ſuggeſt it, Lib. 1. Epiſt. 3. In which Epiſtle, I cou'd pitch vpon places, moe then one, that happily you may entend, for they looke this way: but that which is purpoſed I ſuppoſe is this, in the ſecond ſect. Actum eſt de Epiſcopatus vigore, & de Eccleſiae gubernandae ſublimi ac divinâ poteſtate: The rather becauſe the Texts of Scripture here cited, are by Pamelius the Roman Scholiaſt, there applyed, though to no purpoſe. For it is the receiued Doctrine of the Church of England, that in the office of a Biſhop, there ſhould be that vigor as he calleth it, and that the Calling it ſelfe is Diuine, and an high calling. Nor doth any Papiſt liuing more reſpect and approue that ſaying of Saint Cyprian in the ſame Epiſtle, Sect. 19. then our Church of England doth. Non eſt ad hoc deponenda Catholicae Eccleſiae dignitas, &c. The honor and the dignity of the Catholick Church, is not to be abaſed ſo farre: nor the vnſpotted maieſty of the Flocke of Chriſt: or Prieſtlike power and authority to be ſo deiected, that men conſiſting out of the Church ſhould dare profeſſe they will paſſe cenſure vpon a Biſhop of the Church. That Heretickes ſhould preſume to cenſure Chriſtians: wounded men, iudge the ſound: lapſed men, thoſe that neuer fell, guilty perſons iudge

the Iudge: Impious Sacrilegiſts, the Prieſts. This you approue: ſo doe we. To what end doe you will vs ſee Saint Cyprian?
               
               Or Saint Auguſtine againſt Creſconius the Donatiſt, 
                  S. Aug. lib. 1. cont. Creſ. cap. 33. & lib. cont. epiſt. Fund. ca. 5. if yet wee could tell where in ſpeciall and what to ſee, is this that which you meane, Cap. 33. We vphold the truth of Scripture, when we doe that which the vniverſall Church commandeth, recommended by authority of the Scriptures, ſo farre as that becauſe the Scripture cannot deceiue a man, that would not willingly erre in this queſtion obſcure, ſhould goe and enquire what the Church ſaith of it? If this be the place, as in all likelihood it is, we ſubſcribe vnto it with all our hearts. For in Diuinity Queſtions, Controuerſi Iuris, there muſt bee a Iudge to determine: that wee ſay is the Church, whether part contending hath Law & right: that is, conſent of Scripture vpon his ſide, and we profeſſe with the ſame Saint Auguſt. in his 118. Diſputare contra id, quod vniuerſa Eccleſià ſentit, inſolentiſsimae eſt inſaniae. A moſt in ſolent franticke foole were he, that would diſpute againſt the tenent of the vniuerſall Church. Sir, bring vs to the triall, and gagge vs if you can, with this reſolution of Saint Auguſtine; belye vs not for our opinions, againſt your knowledge.
               But all this while wee haue ſeene in the Fathers what wee could finde or imagine, yet wee neuer ſaw cleerely till the cloſe. Drinke was your arrand, but draffe would you haue: your plea hath beene for the Church, and Paſtors; your intent was meerely for the Pope: for ſo Saint Anſelme, Lib. de Incarnat: cap. 1. written vnto Pope Vrban, ſaith vnto him; Vnto no other

is more rightly referred to be corrected whatſoeuer ariſeth in the Church againſt the Catholicke Faith. What is this ſaying of S. Anſelme vnto vs? in matters of faith wee muſt relye vpon the iudgement of the Church, and her Paſtors. There be moe Paſtors in the Church then the Pope; though he be granted firſt, he is not all. There be moe Churches then his Church; what hath Pope Vrban, one man, to doe with Paſtors? with the Church, but that, which wee know well enough, by Paſtors, and Church, in concluſion you meane the Pope. I could interpret Saint Anſelme well enough; as that, if a Controuerſie were referred by the Church, or an Hereſie to be corrected in the Church, which touched the caſe of the Catholicke Church, it could not be put ouer more fitly to any one man by the Church repreſentatiue in a Councel, then vnto the Pope, firſt Biſhop of Chriſtendome: of greatest, not abſolute power amongſt Biſhops. But I know your Saint Anſelme well enough. This was not his meaning: he was partiall: poſt natus: not fit to ſpeake in this cauſe, nor amongſt the Fathers. A great Biſhop I grant him: He was Archbiſhop of Canterbury, no great Doctor, but reſpectiuely conſidering the barbarous times in which hee liued: farre from being one of the ancient Fathers, or their grand-child. He liued in the dayes of Whether now wilt thou beleeue ſo great a Biſhop as S. Anſelme, or ſome other Hoſt, or Hoſteſſe, that ſell bottle-ale? King Henry the firſt, and was a factioniſt for Pope Vrban, his good Lord and Maſter. So aske my fellow if I be a thiefe: your bottle-ale Hoſteſſe, where you vſe, it ſeemeth, to meete, in Partridge alley with your goſſips, is well enough acquainted with theſe paſſages, and can tell you as much as Saint Anſelme could; if an Heretick

aske her who is Supreame ale-canner on Earth, ſhee will anſwer, no doubt, why who but his holineſſe? In this caſe I beleeue them both alike; as good reaſon for one as for other. Sure yours are no better then thoſe Corkes with which your Hoſteſſe vſeth to ſtop her bottles: but agree as you can, you and your Hoſteſſe; we proceede to the next Propoſition.
            
            
               III.
               
                  That Apostolicall traditions and ancient cuſtomes of the holy Catholique Church, are not to be receiued, nor doe oblige vs:
               
               
                  THis is alſo contrary to the expreſſe words of 
                  Contrary to expreſs words of their owne Bible. 
                  our owne Bibles? How? wherefore? we ſhal ſee when we can: In the interim, thus wee draw on. Traditions are of two Sorts in the writings of Antiquity, as the word is ambiguous, of two ſignifications. There are Traditions writtē, improperly ſo called, and there are Traditions vnwritten, deliuered from hand to hand. The name is ſometime applyed to the one, and ſometime attributed to the other: you meane not here Traditions written, I know it; no more doe we: we agree to take it of vnwritten Traditions, in oppoſition vnto Scripture: as where Tertullian ſpeaketh in his Book de coronâ militis thus, Scripturam nullam invenies, Traditio tibi praetenditur euictrix: Scripture for this you can finde none, the originall came from Tradition.
               
               
                  
                  Traditions are conſidered Originally in their Authors: Chriſt; the Apoſtles: the Church priuatemen: which haue their authority more or leſſe, anſwerable to the worth of their Originals. Againe, they are considered materially, in regard of what they treat of, what they containe, whereof they are; of Orders, Rights, practices, opinions, in common vſe and cuſtome amongſt men.
               Traditions inſtituted by our Sauiour, euen in points of beliefe & Faith, haue Diuine authority as his written word hath. Traditions deriued from the Apoſtles, haue equall authority with their Preachings and their writings. I approue that proceſſe of the Controuerſor, The authority of Gods Word, is not becauſe it is written, but becauſe it commeth from God. Traditions of the Church haue ſuch authority as the Church hath: all binde and oblige, as they were intended; and as their extent is. For they muſt be conſidered not onely from the Author, but from the End: Some were intended to be Permanent; others onely to be tranſient: for a Time onely, or elſe for euer. Some vniuerſall, ſome onely Partiall: for the Catholique, or elſe a priuate Church. Such variety and difference is in Traditions, which this Hudler confoundeth, to deceiue his Nouice with indiſtinctions.
               Now the queſtion is not whether there be Traditions, or haue beene heretofore, we doe grant it in euery kinde, that either there are, or haue beene Traditions of Chriſt, his Apoſtles, the Church, priuate men. The queſtion is not of what authority they are: we grant their authority is from, and as the Authors: but the

queſtion is of their Credit and Extent. Firſt, whether the pretended Traditions of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, were indeed ſo ordained or deriued, as they are pretended; or rather counterſeits and ſuppoſitions. Proue them true, vndoubted, and we riſe vp vnto them. Secondly, to what ends they were inſtituted, whether to laſt and indure euer, or for a time: whether to ſupply the defects of Scripture, not elſe ſufficient for the end. This we denye: for it is our Poſition, that the written Word of God, without vnwritten Traditions, is perfect, and abſolute, and ſufficient for the end whereto it was intended; To make the man of God abſolute in euery good worke.
               
               Abuſe not your ſelues, nor your Proſelites here: ſlander not, nor belye vs: giue vs any Tradition of Chriſt, or his Apoſtles: giue vs good euidence for what you ſay: goe proue it conuincingly to haue come from them, by Scripture, Fathers, conſent of Antiquity; can you aske any more? and we receiue it with both our armes, as Gods holy Word and Inſtitution. Quae vniuerſa tenet Eccleſia, ab Apoſtolis praecepta benè traduntur; quanquam ſcripta non reperiantur: Though I finde it not vpon record in Scripture, yet I receiue it as proceeding from the Apoſtles, if the vniuerſall Church imbrace it; ſaid Saint Auguſtine, and I ſubſcribe vnto it: bring vs any ſuch Tradition ſo accepted, ſo receiued, ſo commended, and you ſhall ſee wee will reuerence it as much as you, or more: but if you giue me copper in ſtead of gold, pardon me if I beleeue you not, nor receiue it for pay. Eccleſiaſticall conſtitutions are moe, more certaine; of the ſame authority

with the Churches written Lawes: which binde generally, if made for generall obligation: or elſe particularly, if they haue but locall and confined limitation, omni modo, bind they doe vnto obedience, ſo long, in ſuch ſort, ſo farre forth, as the authors did intend: till the ſame authority diſa
                     •
                  ow them, which gaue vnto them being at the firſt. In the 34. Article to this purpoſe wee reade of and concerning Eccleſiaſticall Traditions.
               
                  It is not neceſſary that Traditions and ceremonies be 
                  1. 
                  in all places one, or vtterly like, for that at all times they haue beene diuers, and may be changed according to diuerſities of Countries, times, and mens manners. So that nothing be ordained againſt Gods word. Your Catholique cares be they round or long, cannot be offended with this poſition, I thinke.
               
                  Whoſoeuer through his priuate iudgement, willingly 
                  2. 
                  and purpoſely doth openly breake the Traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnant vnto the word of God, and be ordained, and approued by common authoritie, ought to be rebuked openly, that others may feare to doe the like, as hee that offendeth againſt the common order of the Church, hurteth the authoritie of the magiſtrate, and woundeth the conſciences of the weake. Loe Traditions not onely auowed, but maintained: the infringers cenſured. So that, but reade ouer your Poſition againe, That Apoſtolicall traditions, and auncient cuſtomes of the holy Church, are not to be receiued, nor doe oblige vs: compare that with this deciſion, and then giue your Catholike honeſty the lye.
               
                  
                  Euery particular or national Church, hath authority to ordaine, to change, and aboliſh ceremonies or Rites 
                  3. 
                  of the Church ordained onely by mans authoritie, ſo that all things be done vnto edification. Nor is this againſt your Catholique Doctrine or practiſe, and yet this is all that our Church deliuereth touching traditions, in their publique authoriſed, receiued, conſtitutions. Priuate opinions, if there be any, tye vs no more then they doe you. Nay we deale more ſincerely, and poſitiuely than you doe, diſtinguiſhing Traditions for plaineneſſe ſake, whereas your Fathers of Trent giue this onely in commaund, That Traditions be receiued as the Scripture: playing faſt and looſe in ambigiuous termes, not differencing humane, diuine, Apoſtolicall, Apotacticall, Chriſtian, Paganiſh, generall, particular; free, of neceſſity, temporary or permanent Traditions. Can you or any Papiſt defend this?
               The Popiſh Doctrine thus deliuered, is not onely contrary to expreſſe words of your owne Bibles, but to pietie and religion, to ſenſe and reaſon: that any idle, fantaſticke, fooliſh, impious, prophane, humane inuention, for your words runne generally, and extend to all, ſhould be receiued as Holy Scripture: but the proteſtant doctrine declared, as before, is not contrary to expreſſe words of our Bibles.
               
               
                  2 Theſſal. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren ſtand faſt, and hold the traditions which yee haue receiued, whether by word or by our Epiſtle. Therefore, &c. Wee deny not obedience vnto this exhortation, but indeauour to ſtand faſt in the word of truth: and hold faſt all

thoſe Traditions which Saint Paul deliuered either by word or writing. All Proteſtants giue due reſpect to ſuch diuine authority. Shew any that doth not, and you ſay ſomewhat. But, good Sir Gagger, Hee that refuſeth thoſe manifold botcheries, and brokerages of your Romiſh Church, and caſteth them off as impious and ridiculous, doth not ſtreight tranſgreſſe this Apoſtolicall direction: no more than he, that reiecteth a counterfeit Paſſe, made by ſome jarkman vnder an hedge for a Rogue, doth reſiſt lawfull authority. Proue your Tradition ſuch as you pretend, then ſee what we will ſay vnto you.
               
                  2 Theſſal. 3. 6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that you withdraw you ſelues from euery brother that walketh diſorderly, and not after the Tradition he receiued of vs. Which we receiue and obey: But Tradition may runne for Example here: in effect, not according to our example. And ſo Saint Chryſoſtome vpon the place: or it may be ſomething extant alſo in writing: or order preſcribed them by the Apoſtle temporary and occaſionall; or of morall diſpenſation. If you can name it, wee will not refuſe, for our concluſion differerh not from yours, Traditions are to be receiued, and doe oblige vs: but you muſt let vs know them, and their credite firſt.
               
                  1 Cor. 11. 2. I praiſe you brethren, ſaith the Apoſtle, that you remember mee in all things, and keepe the Traditions as I haue deliuered them vnto you. So hee would vs, were hee now liuing: ſo would hee not you, that haue broken them: for that which hee deliuered

vnto them, that, hee receiued of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and that which hee receiued was touching the whole intire communion, the Cups, as well as the Bread, you haue broken this Tradition through your 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and preſumptions. But can you reſolue mee what Tradition hee meaneth heere? perhaps they were Temporall, and not intended for vs. If ſuch, your owne rule is, They oblige not. It may be no vnwritten Traditions, but the written word, at leaſt ſuch things as be written now. Howſoeuer, the allegation is not to purpoſe; for it doth not proue what the Proteſtants deny: and that which it proueth, they deny not; That Traditions are to be kept.
               
               
                  2 Timoth. 2. 2. Where there is no expreſſe mention Thas Traditions are to be receiued, ſee more. of Traditions, but onely of things receiued from Saint Paul: by which Traditions, peraduenture, not written, are meant: and peraduenture things written; who can tell whether theſe or thoſe? ſhew them, and we refuſe them not.
               
                  Iohn 20. 30. and 21 25. are both to one purpoſe: Tradition is in neither text expreſſed: nor to be collected from either: for neither text is for Tradition: both one & other, intimate no more, but that all which Chriſt did or ſaid, is not recorded in the Goſpels. Doth any ideot belieue the contrary? This fellow might begge vs, if wee ſaid or taught, that Chriſt did nor ſaid any thing but that is written. Till then, himſelfe may be begged for a foole, that would put vpon vs this vnhandſome beliefe, All that Chriſt did or ſaid is not written: therefore any thing muſt be receiued that is pretended to be Tradition Apoſtolicall or Diuine.
               
                  
                  1 Cor. 11. 34. Paul ſaith, The reſt I will ſet in order 
                  Shall then the ſaying of ſome vnlearned Baker, ouer beare great Saint Basil?
                   
                  when I come. Therefore you may goe learne to bake a batch of Bread; or goe drinke an health to the Vicar of St. Fooles with your Hoſt of Holborne. The inference is, Saint Paul had not ordered all, till hee came: when hee came, hee made good his promiſe, and ſet all things in order at Corinth: therefore any thing, though neuer ſo abſurd, which Papiſts pretend, as Tradition, muſt be receiued as Gods word.
               
                  1 Timoth. 6. 2. Saint Paul ſaith nothing of Tradition; except theſe words will beare out Tradition, Theſe things teach and exhort: which things are written, not vnwritten. For, Theſe things, doe deſigne things there remembred.
               Saint Iohn 2. Epiſt. 12. ſaith, He had many things to write vnto them, which hee would not commit to paper, but come himſelfe, and teach them by word of mouth: which hee repeateth, Ep. 3. verſ. 13. Therefore hee wrote not all things vnto them: And who ſaith hee did? therefore, what? our Gagger is a gooſe; no other ſequell: and ſo hee muſt ſtand vntill hee ſhew, that ſome of his Romiſh Traditions, were part of that which Saint Iohn would not write vnto them, but teach them by word of mouth.
               
                  Act. 16. 4. and 15. 28. Wee reade of no Traditions: wee doe of Decrees, ordayned in the Councell at Ieruſalem; but the miſchiefe is, they are written: and yet ſo, our Gagger, and his Comerades keepe them not. For tell mee, did you neuer eate a Gooſe, or her pudding, Capon, Hen, or Chickens, at your Bottle-Ale houſe in Partridge-Ally? if not there nor

otherwhere, I haue nothing to ſay to you. But if ſo I returne it to your teethe, you belie vs in that which you doe your ſelues. The Traditions Apoſtolicall, and auncient cuſtomes of the holy Church oblige you not: For among theſe Decrees, or, as you will, Traditions, Act. 16. 4. this is one, Act. 15. 29. To abſtaine from bloud and ſtrangled. Exempt ſuch diſhes ſpecified, from ſuch dreſſing, & haue with you to Maſſe to Mr. Mayes, as I am inuited by Sir A. P
                        •
                     . peraduenture your ſelfe.
               
                  2 Tim. 1. 13. We finde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the forme of wholeſome words, in our Bibles: And if this be Traditions vnwritten, iudge you good Catholiques: and ſet not ſo high a price vpon this arrant blunderer; then whom, a verier Gooſe neuer handled Gooſequill. And ſo goe ſee, if your leaſure will ſerue, Fathers See Fathers that affirme the ſame. that affirme, ſomewhat, not what they ſhould.
               The firſt you muſt ſee if you pleaſe, is Irenaeus, Lib. 3. cap. 4. for he will not trouble your ſeeing with Clemens, Ignatius, Dionyſius, Areopagita, Polycarpus, Egeſippus, Iuſtinus Martyr; all elder than Irenaeus, and vaunted of by his good maſters: and no doubt, as much to poynt as Irenaeus, who yet is held to be reſolute and irrefrageable in that place. Propter quod oportet deuitare quidem illos, quae autem ſunt Eccleſiae, cum ſummâ diligentia deligere, & apprehendere veritatis Traditionem: For which cauſe wee muſt ſhun and eſchew them, but with all poſsible diligence make choyce of the things belonging to the Church, and lay hold vpon the Tradition of truth. Which Tradition is no other thing, but the rule of our faith, The holy Scripture: nothing vnwritten, vncertaine, beſide

much leſſe againſt Scripture. This is ſomewhat, in your opinion, but that which is the thing intended indeede, is this which followeth in Irenaeus: Et ſi quibus de aliquâ modicâ quaeſtione diſceptatio eſſet, nonne oporteret in antiquiſsimas recurrere Eccleſias, in quibus Apoſtoli conuerſati ſunt, & ab ijs de praeſenti quaeſtione ſumere quod certum & re liquidum eſt? Thus hee queſtioneth: I anſwere affirmatiuely, yes. No doubt we ought for reſolution in poynts of doubtfull controuerſie, relye vpon that deciſion of the eldeſt Churches. Doe we refuſe this triall good Sir Gagger? Where you will, in what poynt you will, I vndertake thus to iuſtifie the Church of England, name you the Controuerſie, one or moe; and maintaine the contrary if you can or dare. The queſtion is not with Irenaeus, what muſt be Law, but how the Law is to be expounded and interpreted. Scripture the Law, and Tradition the Interpretation: that is, the perpetuall praxis of the Church, to expound the doubtfull texts of Scripture.
               But Irenaeus proceedeth farther than ſo, it will be ſaid: For, What if the Apoſtles had left vs no writing at all? Nonne oportet ordinem ſequi Traditionis, quam tradiderunt ijs, quibus committebant Eccleſias? Farther indeede, but to no purpose; this is vpon ſuppoſition: If it had been ſo; which is not ſo, nor could be ſo. Secondly, it followeth not, that becauſe if God had not giuen Iſraei a Law, it is probable hee would haue continued his former courſe with Abraham, Iſaac, and the Patriarchs: therefore, when he had giuen them his Law, they were ſtill to looke for immediate,

or Angelicall Reuelations, as before. No more is it conſequent to reaſon, pietie, or Irenaeus intent, that albeit, if no Scripture had beene written, onely Tradition muſt haue beene followed: therefore, Scripture being written, wee ſhould, as otherwiſe addreſſe our ſelues vnto Tradition. But thirdly, wee come home to poynt: Shew vs any thing tendred by thoſe Eccleſiae antiquiſsimae, to be belieued, and obſerued, and ſee if wee reſpect it not as well, and as much as you. Till you ſhew vs ſuch Traditions, leaue your prating idlely at randome, touching worth and weight, and vſe, and authoritie of Traditions. Your Traditions tendred in theſe dayes, are onely in name, as Simon Magus was, and Simon Peter, the ſame: no more of credite, than hee of pietie: both alike.
               
                  Origen is next to be ſeene in cap. 6. ad Roman. Hee calleth Baptiſme of Infants, a Tradition; and let it be ſo. It is the vniuerſall iudgement, and moſt ancient practiſe of the Catholique Church, deduced, at leaſt from Scripture, if not proued in Scripture, as the controuerſor himſelfe confeſſeth. Be it a Tradition, it is more for our aduantage than otherwiſe: For we admit, receiue, defend, and practiſe it, which muſt needes giue the lye vnto your propoſition, That, according to the Doctrine of the Proteſtants, Apoſtolicall traditions, & ancient cuſtomes of the holy Church, are not to be receiued, nor doe oblige: For the World knoweth, your brazen face will bluſh to deny it, wee receiue it, practiſe it, are obliged by it.
               
                  S. Damaſcen may ſtand by, vnleſſe you meane to make your friends with him: a childe in yeares, of

yeſterdayes birth, in reſpect of thoſe old Heroes of the Primitiue times. Not that he ſaith any thing, Lib. 4. cap. 17. more than an other: or more effectuall and to purpoſe, but becauſe he is not of that deſert or eſteeme to be ranked with the Fathers of the Primitiue times: being long poſt natus, and a Partian many wayes: for which cauſe I anſwere him not.
               
                  S. Chryſoſtome is peremptory and through for Traditions: In 2. ad Theſſal. 2. verſ. 16. he ſaith, Hence it is plaine and apparant, that the Apoſtles deliuered not all in writing, but very many things without booke. Thus hee; but to what end? For no Proteſtant liuing in his right wits will deny this, That the Apoſtles ſpake much more then is written: And whatſoeuer they ſpake, as Apoſtles, in execution of their Miniſtery, is of equall authority with that which they wrote: For inke and paper conferre no authoritie or validity, beyond the ſubiect and author of the writing. Therefore the Tradition of the Apoſtles, and of the Church, is, without all queſtion of good credite and eſteeme; and ſo much wee profeſſe, Art. 34. I graunt it hath diſpleaſed ſome which is ſaid, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , It is Tradition which auoweth it, ſeeke no further. I ſee no reaſon why any ſhould be ſo diſpleaſed therewith: For if it be a Tradition of the Catholique Church, (and ſuch Traditions onely hee meaneth) Chryſostome ſaith there no more than hee may. No more than Auguſtine and Tertullian haue ſaid, It is Tradition, I goe no further. No more will
                     •
                   in any thing, for my part, I promiſe you, that is controuerted betwixt you and vs, at this day. Make that

appeare, which you propoſe, to haue been a Tradition of the Catholique Church, and you and I ſhall ſoone agree; ſhake hands, and no more adoe.
               Saint Baſil you haue kept for the cloſe, it ſeemeth, S. Baſil. lib. de ſpirit. Sanct. ca. 27. ſaith, that ſome things we haue from Tradition of the Apoſtles, both which haue force alike, vnto godlineſſe. and for the vpſhot of all; and he indeed is, in the place remembred, very much for all Traditions vnwritten; deriued to the Church from the Apoſtles. I know ſome Proteſtants, eſpecially of preciſer cut, doe diſcredit the Author, as a Counterfeit; onely vpon Eraſmus bare word, who ſauoured ſome diſcongruity, which I could neuer finde, of ſtile: I am not of that, or their minde. Others being at a ſtand, becauſe of their owne priuate fancies, oppoſe Saint Baſil, vnto Saint Baſil. For my part, I beleeue no ſuch allegation, nor will I oppoſe him vnto himſelfe. Thirdly, ſome goe to it with downe-right reprehenſion, that he gaue too much vnto Traditions, and therein erred; which cenſure and taxation is too ſurly. I like not that the ancient Fathers ſhould ſo be philipped off, and ſent away like ſchoole-boyes with ſnips; that moſt learned, religious, and moſt iudicious Writer, ſaith no more then is iuſtifiable touching Traditions. For thus he: The Doctrine of the Church, is two wayes deliuered vnto vs: Firſt, by writing; then by Tradition from hand to hand: both 
                  Some things wee haue from Scripture: other things from the Apoſtles Traditions: both which haue like force vnto godlineſſe. 
                  are of like value vnto piety. And this is true, if certainly both come from the ſame Author, to the ſame intent and purpoſe: for writing and ſpeaking doe not vnder, or ouer-value a thing. In Edicts, and Precepts, and Proclamations from a Prince, ſome haue his minde, his words, his hand-writing; other his minde, and words; all his hand: others his minde onely, and no

more, being conceiued, and penned by a Secretary of State, according to directions: yet are all the Acts of his Maieſty, not of a Seruant, or a Subiect.
               To this Baſil addeth, which ſome miſtake, and therefore miſlike 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. If wee venture or preſume to taxe and reproue vnwritten Customes, as not much to be reſpected, wee may vnwittingly and vnwillingly preiudice, and that in points of moment and conſequence, the very Goſpell of Chriſt, and bring Preaching to be but a bare name: which cenſure, I ſee no ſuch cauſe to cenſure. For Saint Baſil ſaith not, Take away Tradition, and the Goſpell is nothing: as if the credit, and weight, and authority of the Goſpell, were meerely from Tradition: but, that the Goſpell will receiue preiudice thereby. Meaning, that through Tradition, that is, the vniuerſall conſent of the Catholike Church, wee are aſſured, that the Goſpels of Saint Marke, and Saint Luke, are diuine, and true; and that the Goſpels of Saint Thomas, Saint Bartholmew, and others, are forged: though theſe were Apoſtles, thoſe but Diſciples. But 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to what purpoſe is this, for Popiſh Traditions? Is there any of them ſo commended vnto vs, as the Goſpell of Saint Luke, or Saint Marke, is by Tradition? Saint Baſil ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. that is, not ſome things, as you perfidiouſly relate it; but, of the Doctrine, and Diſcipline, heretofore, and yet obſerued in the Church; part we haue from written inſtruction, and part from the Tradition of the Apostles we haue receiued: which hath beene tranſmitted vnto vs couertly. Both which haue the ſame force, vnto piety.
                  
We admit this ſaying, and profeſſe as much; let it be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a perpetuall practice of the Catholique Church of Chriſt, and ſee what wee will ſay vnto it. Saint Baſils firſt inſtance in the point is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſigne vs with the ſigne of the Croſſe: you know wee commend it, we practice it, we command it, we propugne it. Euery Baker could haue told you ſo much, that euer had Shall then the ſaying of ſome vnlearned Baker, ouer-beare great Saint Baſil?
                   Childe Chriſtened in our Church: Aske your acquaintance; I make no doubt but you are intereſſed in ſome Bakers basket for a toſte, or a new loafe: Bakers and Bottle-ale are ſo much in your mouth. But leaue we you to your Bottle-ale, and Baker: great Saint Baſil, that patronizeth you ſuppoſe, ſo much your Traditions, in his Morals, Reg. 12. cap. 2. giueth you this Item; remember it well, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Wee ought not to follow the Procepts of men, ſo farre, as to ſet by the Commandement of God. Hold you here, and haue along with you; in your Traditions as you will: faile here, Baſil and we leaue to gang alone.
            
            
               IIII.
               
                  That the Church can erre.
               
               
                  FAſt and looſe, Sir Iugler: For why expreſſe you not plainly, what Church you meane, when you ſay, that the Church cannot erre? or in what things, and how far the Church cannot erre? Particular, and Topicall Churches haue

erred, (ſuch may then, and can, euen in Fundamentals) and ſo ceaſed to be any more Churches; as thoſe of Galathia, Epheſus, Philippi, Coloſſae, Theſſalonica. Thoſe vnto whom Saint Iohn ſent his Reuelation; glorious and goodly in their time: but now, Cages for vncleane Birds. But as touching the Catholique Church, take it thus from me: The Catholique title includeth two things; vniuerſality of Time and Place both, or vniuerſality of Place onely. In the former acception take the Church, and that Caetus euocatus, which hath beene heretofore, and which is now, make it vp. The Apoſtles, their Diſciples, all their Succeſſors, are included: And ſo the Catholique Church, hath not, did not, cannot erre; either in Factor Faith: Fundamentall, or leſſe Fundamentall. In the ſecond acception, according vnto vniuerſality of Place: The Catholike Church of Chriſt is twofold, Diffuſiue, or Repreſentatiue; in euery part and member, in euery place: In ſome ſpeciall parts, in one place, a generall Councell for the whole, or all particulars that make vp the whole. The Catholique Church at this day cannot erre, in all her parts, nor in faciendis, matter of fact: nor credendis, points of beliefe, dangerouſly. The Church Repreſentatiue, true, and lawfull, neuer yet erred in Fundamentals; and therefore I ſee no cauſe but to vouch, ſhee cannot erre in Fundamentals. Firmitas enim Fundamenti, cui totius Eccleſiae ſuperstruitur altitudo, nullâ incumbentis ſibi templi mole laſſeſsit: Soliditas enim illius fidei, quae in Principe Apostolorum eſt laudata perpetua eſt. Et ſicut permanet quod in Christo Petrus credidit, ita permanet, quod in Petro Christus inſtituit: as well ſaith Leo, Ser. 2.

                  de Aſſump. ſua. If this be your opinion, looke you: Let vs ſee, if our Bibles be expreſſe againſt this.
               
                  Eſay 40. 21. My ſpirit that is vpon thee, and my words which I haue put into thy mouth, ſhall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy ſeede, nor out of the mouth of thy ſeeds ſeede, ſaith the Lord, from henceforth, and for euer. In which words, if we did defend the Theſis, as it is propoſed, that the Church could erre; we might anſwer, this Text doth not perplex vs. For where doe we finde, Church, or not erre, in the Prophet? it is but by illation at the moſt: The man bragged of expreſſe words; and can performe no more but And conſequently cannot erre. 
                  conſequence: And that not neceſſary. For may not it be ſaid; This is but a Precept, not a Promiſe; as where it was ſaid vnto Ioſua, and in him, vnto the Princes and Rulers of the People: The volume of the Law ſhall not depart from them; they ſhall meditate therein day and night. This was an iniunction what they ought to doe, not a promiſe what they ſhould performe; or at leaſt but Temporary and Conditionall: for they departed from the Law, and the Law from them. I
                     •
                   ſo, what aſſurance of not erring? Thirdly, Gods promiſes haue a Condition, annexed or implyed euer, to be performed by man; which if he performe, God is bound: if hee breake, God is free. My words ſhall not depart, is Gods promiſe: Mans promiſe reciprocall is, I will not depart from them. If I depart, that is, if man faile; They may and ſhall depart, God is then free: Now this ſuppoſed, what aſſurance is there for, my words ſhall not depart, &c? So your firſt Text is miſtaken peraduenture in the meaning, but without peraduenture in the allegation:

It is Eſay 5
                     •
                  . 21. not as you tender it from your aduiſers, 49. 21. And laſtly, it is to be vnderſtood of the Church of the Iewes in particular conuerted vnto Chriſt, as it ſeemeth by Saint Paul, Rom. 11. 26. and not of the Church of the Chriſtians already conuerted; and ſo you miſapply, as well as miſtake. But more ridiculouſly in your ſecond Text, Iohn 14. 16. For haue you read or heard, that euer any Proteſtant maintained, That the holy Ghoſt can erre? I ſuppoſe not. I beleeue you are not ſo much paſt ſhame, to ſay ſo, and yet your concluſion is ſo: The ſpirit of truth cannot erre. For, hauing recited the Text of the Goſpell, your illation is; Therefore the ſpirit of truth hath aboade for euer, and ſhall abide for euer with the Church: and conſequently, cannot erre. What Sir, cannot erre? To my vnderſtanding, The Spirit of Truth cannot erre; can you vnderſtand it otherwiſe? But let your barbariſmes goe by: to the point I anſwer firſt, you faile, and that confeſſedly, in your vndertakings. It is but conſequently, the Church cannot erre; therefore confeſſed, not expreſly. Secondly, I anſwer out of the Text it ſelfe. This promiſe is for comfort, not inſtruction; The Comforter ſhall abide for euer: for Chriſt there ſpake of affliction, which ſhould enſue. Thirdly, were it punctually for direction, we might reioyne: It was a temporary promiſe, a perſonall priuiledge to the Apoſtles; you thought wee would ſay ſo, belike ſuppoſing wee had no other ſhift; ſilly men like your ſelfe: therefore you come in with, by way of preuention, But the Apoſtles themſelues could not abide for euer: poore foole, that knoweſt not, there is duplex aeternum, frequent in Scripture; Gods euer, and mans

                  euer. That, for euerlaſting, as God is. This for the terme of his being: ſo for euer is thus; no more, then while you are: all the dayes of your life. But we ſeeke no aduantage; we will not take it: we grant Gods Spirit eternally aſſiſtant to the Catholique Church, then repreſented in the Apoſtles: and therefore we admit that you belye vs in your Propoſition; The Church, can erre; to be vnderſtood of the Catholique Church, as is expreſſed.
               The third Text in order, Eſay 35. 8. is ſo farre from expreſſing the not erring of the Church, that it is a queſtion, though ſuch a Nouice as you, know it not, whether it be to be taken of the Church at all. Hierome in his Comments expoundeth it of Chriſt, who ſaith of himſelfe, Iohn 14. I am the way, the truth, the life: An high way ſhall be there, and a way, and it ſhall be called the way of holineſſe; the vncleane ſhall not paſſe ouer it, but it ſhall be for thoſe. The way faring men, though fooles ſhall not erre therein. Who told you that this way was the Church? why not the Scripture? which is alſo a way: and called a way, as to my remembrance, the Church is not. Ibi erit ſemita, & via mundiſsima, quae ſancta vocabitur, &c. There ſhall be a path, ſaith Hierome, and a moſt cleane way, which ſhall be called Holy; and which ſaith of himſelfe; I am the way: by which way, the polluted cannot paſſe: where alſo we reade it ſpoken in the Pſalme; Bleſſed are the vndefiled in the way: And this way, that is, our God, ſhall be vnto vs, ſo direct, ſo plaine, ſo open, and champion, that no wandring ſhall be there. Fooles, and ſilly men may walke therein, vnto whom in the Prouerbs wiſdome ſpeaketh thus: If there be any little ones, let them come vnto me, and ſhee

hath ſpoken vnto the Fooles, Come you, and eate of my bread. Thus Hierome vpon the place. Tertullian in 4. againſt Marcion, is indifferent, for Chriſt the head of the Church: or Faith in Chriſt the life of the Church. Your Worſhip, Sir Gagger, out of your authoritie, caſt it meerely vpon the Church. Satis pro Imperio, if you can out-beare it. Howſoeuer, it is not expreſſe, as it ſhould be. Not to purpoſe, if it were expreſſe: our queſtion is not, whether fooles can erre, but whether the Church can erre. The Church hath often beene compared to a Ship: and now at laſt by you made a Ship of Fooles. Content, ſo you be Pilot in that Ship, Sir Foole.
               
               Once at length you rightly bid vs goe ſee more. 
                  See more Iohn 16. 13. For the Text of Iohn 16. 13. is more expreſſe than all the former, He ſhall leade you into all truth. But what if this text concerne not truth vpon Earth but Truth in Heauen? What becommeth then of your Not erring? Auguſtine, and Bede, encline that way. What if it be perſonall, vnto the Apoſtles alone, not to the Church, or their ſucceſſours? Hee will ſhew you the things to come: and I haue many things to ſay vnto you, but you cannot beare them now: theſe & ſuch like paſſages, doe more than ſeeme to conclude it vnto them. What if he meant but All things that were neceſſary and conuenient for them to know? ſo Theophylact, Euthymius, and others▪ In this ſort the Church is eternally directed: ſo the Church directed cannot erre.
               
                  Matth. 18. 17. It is commaunded by authoritie: Tell the Church: and heare the Church. No good

proofe, the Church cannot erre. For the Scribes and Phariſes were to be heard, and obeyed: yet had no aſſurance of infallibility. Kings and Princes are to be obeyed: yet haue they fallen into great enormities, Epheſ. 5. 27. the Church is ſaid to be glorious without ſpot or wrinckle, or blame: which is to be vnderſtood, de to
                        •
                     o integrato, of the parts in Heauen and earth: Of the time to come, rather than preſent. Without blame, yet not without wrinckle, euen here: for error may be where blame is none, Eſay 9. 7. the Kingdome of Chriſt is to be eſtabliſhed with iudgement and with iuſtice for euer: and yet, I know no ſuch priuiledge annexed to iudgement or iuſtice, of infallibility. No more then Ezech. 37. 26. to a Couenant of peace; an Euerlaſting couenant: to multiplying of them: or placing Gods Sanctuary amongſt them for euer.
               
               
                  Luk. 22. 32. and Matth. 23. 3. What correſpondency haue they one with another; not to ſpeake of reference vnto the poynt? In the former, Peters faith was prayed for that it might not faile: and yet Peter denied Chriſt Ieſus. If Peter were not the Church: what maketh this Text amongſt the rabb
                     •
                  e? If Peter were, the Church may erre; as Peter fayled: though not eternally, one or other. In the latter, the Phariſes muſt be heard: And therefore will you ſay, they erred not? If they erred, as doubtleſſe they did, then, to what purpoſe are they pretended for not erring of the Church? Much good may the Phariſes doe your Church, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The Church is ſtyled, a choſen generation, a royall Prieſthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: glorious titles: but nothing to this, They

cannot erre. Iohn 17. 17. Gods word is truth. I graunt. But is Gods Word euer in the mouth of man? The Apoſtles were ſanctified, and that in Gods truth, according vnto Chriſts Prayer. Yet after this Prayer, Peter went not right when Saint Paul reproued him: he fell, and that foulely in denying Chriſt. That which is ſanctified is accepted, not euer ſo ſanctified as without ſpot. As for 1 Cor. 11. 25. if the Inſtitution, or rather Commemoration of the inſtitution of the holy Communion, be a proofe ſufficient that the Church cannot erre, wee yeeld the cauſe: if nothing to purpoſe; what meant this idle pate to range it heere? What the man would ſay in Pſalm. 101. 23. 20. or whether hee would ſend vs, after miſtaking there, I cannot tell: and till then, I cannot anſwere. For not ſo much as neere thereabout, is ought to purpoſe of not erring.
               
                  Epheſ. 2. 20. Wee reade that they were built vpon the foundation of the Apoſtles and Prophets. And what then? Could they not erre? Dare you ſay ſo? They could: for they haue; and are ſhaken off from that foundation: but ſo long as they ſtood on, faſt, they erred not; holding one Faith, one Lord, one Baptiſme, Eph. 4. 5. which if you and we doe, at this day, by your owne argument, (auoid it if you can) we erre not. As for one heart, and one ſoule, of the belieuers, Act. 4. 32. it is in reference of loue one to another: not in vnity of Doctrine all with one another. And yet there were differences in that vnion: for example ſake, inter Paul, and Barnabas; and might be diſproportion in their Doctrine: as diſſimilitude in

the habitude and condition of thoſe ſheepe in one ſheepe-fold, vnder one Shepheard: and yet all heare the Shepheards voyce, Iohn 10. 16. and hee that will not heare ſome of thoſe Sheepe, Luc. 10. 16. be taxed for not regarding the Shepheard: when as yet for all that, ſome of thoſe Sheepe be gone aſtray.
               To conclude. The Church cannot erre, neither collectiue, nor repreſentatiue. Thus your Maſters diſtinguiſh the termes of this queſtion, that goe workmanlike, and not like you, clutteringly to worke. So they: ſo wee. In the largeſt extent, not erre at all. Secondly, not erre in poynts of Faith. For in matters of fact, they confeſſe errour. Faith is fundamentall or acceſſory. There none is: here error may accrew. Fathers to be ſeene, you afford vs none. Not becauſe there are none: but becauſe your reading could ſupply none. Who take vp all vpon retaile and credit, hauing ſo ſmall ſtore at home. The Church cannot erre, is moſt true: and the Church may erre, is as true: each part conſidered as it ought.
            
            
               V.
               
                  That the Church hath beene hidden and inuisible.
               
               
                  IT may be ſome priuate opinions haue runne vpon inuifibility of the Church, which are no doctrinall deciſions: nor to be imputed vnto the reſolued Doctrine of the Proteſtants, that are of another minde. Nunquam eſt quod

nuſquam videtur. That which cannot be ſeene, if it be ſeeable, is no where at all, nor in being. For as Saint Auguſtine well ſaid, Quo modo confidimus, ex diuinis liter is accepiſſe nos Chriſtum manifeſtum, ſi non accepimus & Eccleſiam manifeſtam? How is it poſsible wee ſhould hope to haue Chriſt manifeſt in Scripture, except wee haue likewiſe the Church manifeſt? Therefore on all hands it is reſolued, the Church hath euer beene viſible, ſince there was a Church. In England eſpecially how can this fellow impute inuiſibility to vs, who claime and proue a ſucceſſion, and therefore needes a viſibilitie from the time of the Apoſtles? If any doe thinke otherwiſe, or cannot doe this, we vndertake no patronage at all of them.
               
                  The Church is a City, ſeated on a Hill, which is naturally viſible: though in a fogge, or miſt, not diſcerned. There euer was and will be a Church vnto whom complaints may be made; though the Church doth not euer heare complaints. Thoſe that haue fell vpon an inuiſibility, may perhaps be tollerated, if well interpreted and vnderſtood. For euen the viſible Church in her more noble parts, may be ſaid to be inuiſible: Firſt, the Saints triumphant, and now regnant with Chriſt, are parts of the Church in largeſt extent. Who being in Heauen, are vnknowne; their perſons, proprieties, and indowments. The Saints militant, her more excellent parts on Earth, according to her more royall indowments, the Elect according vnto purpoſe of Grace, are knowne onely vnto God alone, the ſearcher of ſecrets, and decipherer of thoughts. Such as be ſecret, & occultò intus: are there not viſible vnto man.
               
                  
In this ſence, in regard of theſe parts, the Church is, and is eſteemed inuiſible: and ſo held euen of the Papiſts themſelues. Otherwiſe then ſo, wee doe not ſpeake of inuiſibility: So that the man muſt fall foule with his owne part; or be at warre with his owne wits. Moderate men on both ſides confeſſe, this controuerſie may ceaſe. Et quamuis praeſens haec Eccleſia Romana, non parum in morum & diſciplinae integritate, adde etiam in doctrinae ſinceritate, ab antiquâ illâ, vnde orta & deriuata eſt, diſceſſerit, tamen eodem fundamento doctrinae, & ſacramentorum à Deo inſtitutorum firma ſemper conſtitit: & communionem cum antiquâ illâ & indubitatâ Chriſti Eccleſiâ agnoſcit, & colit. Quare alia, & diuerſa ab illâ eſſe non poteſt, tametſi multis in rebus diſsimulis ſit. Manet enim Chriſti Eccleſia & ſponſa, quamuis multis erroribus, & vitijs ſponſum ſuum irritauerit, quamdiu à Chriſto ſuo ſponſo non repudietur, tametſi multis f
                        •
                     agellis ab ipſo caſtigetur. As for our Gagger, hee is intereſſed happely otherwiſe. In ſtandeth him in hand to vphold and foment a faction: leſt for inſufficiency otherwiſe, hee turne Hoſt, and ſell Bottle-Ale. That muſtie obiection, as hee calleth it, of Elias, may doe him ſome pleaſure at that time. I adde no more touching this propoſition, becauſe it is but loſt labour.
            
            
               
               VI.
               
                  That it is forbidden in holy Scripture, the publique ſeruice of the Church to be in a tongue not vnderſtood of all the Aſsiſtants.
               
               
                  NO doubt Contrary to our owne Bibles: in ſuch ſort, that if the Proteſtants be not gagged now, their mouthes are wider than Gargantuaes: and their lips ſomewhat like to Germans, that were nine mile aſunder. Certes neuer ſo foyled by texts of Scripture, ſince Luther went out, to this day. Therefore expedite tabulas Chryſippei ſophi: For heere you haue a ſingular piece of worke indeede.
               The Church of England, directed, not onely by the light of Iſrael, the Word of God, but alſo perſwaded by common ſenſe and reaſon, hath, and hath had her Seruice, the publique prayers and Liturgie of the Church, in a knowne tongue, vnderſtood of all that are preſent there ordinarily. This is contrary to their owne Bibles: nay to the expreſſe words thereof, nedum conſequents and deductions, ſaith this phantaſtique pamphleter, if wee will belieue him.
               For why: marke expreſſe words, Luke 1. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 9. 10. Thus wee reade in our Engliſh Bibles. It came to paſſe, that while hee (Zachary) executed the Prieſts office before God, in the order of his courſe, according to the cuſtome of the Prieſts office, his lot was to burne Incenſe in the Temple of the Lord: and the

whole multitude of people, were praying without, at the time of Incenſe: This is a Text of the Proteſtants Bible: true: and expreſſely contrary to their owne doctrine. In what? Doe the Proteſtants teach that Zachary did no ſuch thing? or that there was no ſuch cuſtome of executing the Prieſts office? or that the multitude were not then without? or not at Prayer at the time of Incenſe? If they teach or preach, or belieue, or thinke all theſe, or any one of theſe, then they are contrary to their owne Bibles. Thus they doe not: thus they are not charged to doe. What then? why they are charged to teach, that Diuine Seruice ought to be in a tongue vnderſtood of the aſſiſtants at the Seruice: and this Text is contrary to that their opinion: For by this Text, it is expreſſe that publique Seruice ought to be in an vnknowne tongue peraduenture, becauſe there is no mention of any tongue at all: of nothing there ſpoken or ſaide by the Prieſt at all: of the vſe of his tongue taken away from him: or becauſe Zachary offered Incenſe in his courſe, and incenſe was prayers in an vnknowne tongue: or becauſe the people were praying without when hee was offering Incenſe within: which they neuer did but in an vnknowne tongue.
               Laugh Proteſtants, and lye downe, if you be not gagged. Qui riſiſtis & nunc ridete, & qui nunquam riſiſtis nunc ridete: This fellow meaneth to make you merry; was neuer heard ſuch a giddy gooſe gagler. In other Texts of Scripture, for other points, there is ſome face, or reſemblance of a proofe. Here, nec vola nec veſtigium: And if there were any, it would put for Hebrew,
                  
or Syriacke, their mother tongue. For, the People were praying: not the Prieſt, and the People; at leaſt, moſt of them ſpake but their mothers Language: vnleſſe the fellow can proue, that the Iewes had their ſeruice in a ſtrange tongue. So that our deuout Catholikes by this Doctrine, muſt either pray in Engliſh their Mothers Tongue, or in Hebrew, wherein the People prayed then, and there: The Latine is irregular, becauſe then not vſed by the People, or Zachary. For Zachary vſed no Language at all: They prayed for ought we know, in the Tongue they ſpake, as we doe in Engliſh in our Seruice. This they could pray in, and did without doubt: nor is it gaine-ſaid; Hee could not pray in any Tongue anon, his ſpeech being taken from him.
               How ſhall we come at laſt to ſee how contrary this is to our Bibles? why, out with your Table-bookes, and Note; he biddeth you: If you doe aske what you ſhall Note. Firſt, Note that this was the cuſtome. This What? Of good fellowſhip tell vs, that we may note it. Was it the cuſtome for the People to pray? we doubt not of it: but to pray in what Tongue? in Hebrew? out vpon it; take heede of that: this Cuſtome will cut the throat of Latin Seruice. For it was in a knowen Tongue: But to execute the Prieſts Office, was, The Cuſtome. What is that to Seruice in an vnknowen Tongue? It is now a part of the Prieſts Office to ſay Seruice; it was not then, but to offer Incenſe, or Sacrifice. They had a cuſtome. Speake man; what to doe? what was their Cuſtome? We haue many, ſo haue you. Becauſe the Iewes had a Cuſtome, to doe, I cannot tell what: muſt you needes haue a Cuſtome to haue Latin Seruice? and to

impoſe that Cuſtome vpon vs? Muſt their Cuſtome to doe, God knoweth what, put a Cuſtome on vs to haue our Seruice in Latin? What Baker would not bake that Codſhead in his Ouen? or what Hoſteſſe not beate the pot about his eares, that in diſcourſing with her of ſcoring, ſhould reaſon, He would not pay his ſcore, becauſe the Iewes Had a Cuſtome?
               
               I, but note ſecondly, and that ſalueth all: The People were without, and the Prieſt within; what of that? why, How then did they vnderſtand him? Saying what? Praying what? He ſpake nothing; he was not to ſpeake, to vſe his hands; not his lippes: had he ſpoken, muſt it needes be they vnderſtood him not, becauſe there was a wall betweene? or becauſe a wall betweene, and they could not heare him ſpeake; did he therefore ſpeake the Ethiopian Tongue? I will put a Caſe. Suppoſe A. Pe. or this fellow, were at Supper in Partridge Alley, at a Bottle-Alewifes, or a Bakers Houſe, with a brace of woodcockes beſide himſelfe; his Hoſteſſe is in the Sollar, or in ſome outward remoued roome: he calleth vnto her, for what you will: Sawce for the fooles, ſay it be; He may call his heart out, till his tongue ake, and not the neere: for why, his Hoſteſſe vnderſtandeth him not. Marke his owne reaſon: He is within, ſhee is without; how then can ſhee vnderſtand him? No more then if a Gypſie ſhould cant vnto her in Pedlers French; becauſe there is a wall or two, or ſome other partition that diuideth her and him aſunder: muſt it not be ſo? For Note. Mutatis mutandis, Change but the termes, and the reaſon is all one. The People were without, the Prieſt within, how then did they vnderſtand him? The man were

beſt to take heede of ſuch reaſons as this, leaſt a worſe thing betide him; then not being vnderſtood: lest the Woman ſuppoſe hee call her Whore: For why not in an vnknowne tongue? and ſo crack his cockſcombe for his labour. It were worth the noting to haue him ſo ſerued. The Animall had but his iuſt reward for ſuch a frothie reaſon as this; fitter for an Ale-wife than a Prieſt.
               
                  Praemonitus praemunitus; fore-warned, halfe-armed: Peraduenture by aduertiſement he wil preuent it: and ſo we leaue him noted for that which he is: The meaning of that place, nothing to purpoſe, either expreſly, or by any conſequence, is this. In the Temple at Ieruſalem, where this accident was, that is thus remembred by Saint Luke; The Prieſts, both of the City and of the Country, ſerued by courſes in their ſeuerall moneths; not ſingular: for they were many thouſands, and had manifold employments in that ſeruice; but as they were deſcended from the XXIIII Founders of ſo many ſeuerall Courſes, all of one Linage and Family in a Courſe. Theſe ſeuerall XXIIII Courſes were firſt of all inſtituted, as appeareth in the Scripture, by King Dauid; and ſo continued till the Captiuity of Babylon: and after the Captiuity, being reſtored, to the deſolation of the Iewiſh State. Zachary was of the courſe of Abia; in ranke the VIII. The Prieſts ſeruice in the Temple was diuers, and different euery day; who ſhould performe what ſeruice in his courſe, was determined and aſſigned by Lot. It fell to Zachary to burne Incenſe; as to others to offer Sacrifice: Now the Temple of Ieruſalem had diuers diuiſions; as wee haue in

our Churches; Iſles, Chauncels, Reueſtries: Theſe were ſeuered by Vayles, Trauerſes, or Walles. The firſt was the Sanctuary, or moſt holy Place: No People or Prieſt went in thither at all, but onely one, once a yeere; and no oftner then once that one day, the high Prieſt, and no other man. The ſecond was called the holy Place; the Altar of Incenſe ſtood there, whereat the Prieſts offered Incenſe vnto God in their Courſes, as Zachary here did, and nothing elſe; neither reading the Law, nor expounding of it, nor teaching the People, nor praying with them, nor ſaying any deuotions for them: it was no Cuſtome, or part of Seruice there.
               A third diuiſion was, atrium ſacerdotum, the body of the Church, into which none came, but onely Prieſts; and they to offer Sacrifice onely: The People came not ſo high, but into a fourth Court, atrium populi, or mundorum, in which they were praying at that preſent. So betwixt the place in which Zachary offered Incenſe, which was ſeuered by a vayle, and that place in which the People prayed, there was ſome diſtance: what maruell if the People could not heare him? But as is touched, they needed not: for he was not to read, expound, or ſay any part of Seruice within, but onely to burne Incenſe, and no more. There were that taught them beſide, they did it in the place for the purpoſe; in the Peoples Court, and in that tongue which the People vnderſtood. So our Sauiour taught in the Synagogues, and in the Temple, being vnderſtood; and Moſes was read in the ſame forme and Language, that euery one vnderſtood. If it had beene added, that the People were praying in Latin, Greeke, or in ſome other exoticke

Language, this Tale-teller had noted ſomewhat to purpoſe. This which he ſaith, and noteth; i
                     •
                   as much to purpoſe, as mother Bumly hitting a Hen in the forehead.
               
                  Leuit. 16. 17. And there ſhall be no man in the Tabernacle 
                  Therefore it is not forbidden in holy Scripture, the publike ſeruice of the Church to bee in a tongue not vnderſtood by the Aſſiſtants. 
                  of the Congregation, when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place, vntill hee conuent, and haue made an atonement for himſelfe, for his Houſhold, and for all the Congregation of Iſrael. Therefore: Conclude. Aron muſt goe in alone: For of Aron and his Succeſſors is this ſpoken. When he goeth, he muſt goe alone: Now what is this to purpoſe? Therefore it is not forbidden in holy Scripture, that the publike ſeruice of the Church ſhould be in an vnknowne tongue? A poke full a plummes: no foote nor foote-ſteps of ſuch an inference; at leaſt let vs haue it with this exception, vnleſſe at one time onely of the yeere: for onely once, what, the high Prieſt hither.
               
               But to purpoſe. This Text is to no purpoſe. For there muſt be Aſsiſtants where the Seruice is in an vnknowen tongue: and here Aſsiſtants are ſhut out of doores. It is preciſe; There ſhall be no man in the Tabernacle, when he goeth in. If no man there; no seer, no hearer preſent: then what neede we talke of tongues either vnderſtood, or not vnderſtood? Secondly, the Textis to no purpoſe: For it ſpeaketh but of a peece of Iewiſh ſeruice, and of ſuch a peece, as was performed by hands onely, without lippes or tongue: and then it was priuate betwixt God and the Prieſt. Prieſts nor People were Agents or Aſſiſtants at it. Let your morrow Maſſmungers when they maſſe it alone, vſe Iaponian, or Mexico Language,

if they liſt: and when they make priuate interceſſion vnto God, ſpeake in any of the Dialects that were at Babel, but in the publique Seruice of the Church, Piety and Practice, reaſon and Religion require a tongue that is vnderſtood of the Aſſiſtants, that they may ſay Amen, to what is ſpoken.
               It is a tricke of vanity, an idle flouriſh; What ſhall I neede to produce authorities of Fathers, when the practice of the Chriſtian World for many hundred yeeres together is contrary vnto Proteſtants. A very ſtrange practice, of which there is no Conſtat: let but one Father ſay ſo, and I yeeld the bucklers. Inopem te copia fecit: Such plenty you haue as hath made you poore. If you name me one Father that thought ſo, or wrote ſo, I will goe with you to Maſſe to morrow, and acknowledge Pope Vrban for abſolute Monarch directly ouer all the Earth: I can but laugh at your inſolent and impudent folly, that bluſh not to write; What neede I produce authority of Fathers? I ſay againe, doe name me but one that ſquinteth that way, nedum that ſaith it poſitiuely; That the ſeruice of the Church hath beene, or may be in a tongue vnknowne; and haue with you to Maſſe next morrow.
            
            
               
               VII.
               
                  That Saint Peter was not firſt or chiefe amongst the Apoſtles, and that none was greater or leſſer amongst the twelue.
               
               
                  
                     Firſt or chiefe: how ignorantly ſpoken? as if two words of one ſignification: Firſt and Chiefe are not euer of equall extent. Ruben was the firſt; but Iuda, chiefe. Firſt and Chiefe, in ſome things, are not euer ſo in all. Peter was firſt; but Iohn, chiefe, in reſpect of Chriſts ſpeciall and peculiar affection to him aboue the reſt of the Apoſtles. It is graunted, Peter was firſt called to be Now the names of the twelue Apoſtles are theſe: the firſt Simon, which is called Peter. Therefore, &c. an Apoſtle, though not firſt to be a Diſciple. In rancke and reckoning wee graunt him firſt: As in your firſt Text of Matth. 10. 2. No Proteſtant liuing will deny this, nor fall ſo foule with their owne Bible: perſwade not your ſelfe they will doe ſo.
               But this precedency will neither ſerue your turne, nor content you. Another chiefedome muſt be caſt vpon, which you collect by ſequell; for you haue it not expreſſe, out of Luke 22. 32. and 26. and yet at laſt you fleete backe to his firſt-ſhip in place, Peter is euer named firſt. Thus you are not reſolued what to haue, and how can your Proſelites tell in what to truſt you, but that you leade them hoodwinked, by the noſe?
               
                  Luke 22. 26. The words, is greateſt, is chiefe, doe euidently ſhew, that among the twelue, one was indeede

ter than another, and ſo accounted by Chriſt himſelfe. Proue that, by Chriſt himſelfe. Thoſe words inſiſted on, doe not proue it: for they may be an Irony, or a Conceſſion: Admit there be greater or leſſer amongſt you; yet hee that is greateſt, let him be thus or thus: He that thinketh ſo highly of himſelfe, yet let him doe thus. But let it be euident, and graunted, that one was greater than another amongſt them, this greatneſſe yet is farre ſhort of that tranſcendent greatneſſe giuen to Saint Peter. Let Saint Peter be the man, inueſted with that greatneſſe, yet, quouſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     ? What bounds and limitation had it; ſince the greateſt greatneſſe vnder Sunne, is not without ſome circumſcription? It is not queſtioned whether Saint Peter were great: whether the greateſt among thoſe great ones: Wee graunt it: but the controuerſie is about the extent and nature of his greatneſſe. Hic Rhodus, hic ſaltus. This is that you ſhould haue expreſſed out of our Bibles, or the Fathers: In ſetting out his greatneſſe otherwiſe, you doe but trifle.
               Haue it hee muſt firſt, and then practiſe it. Happely the execution will bound it out. Let vs ſee how farre Luke 22. 32. And when thou art conuerted ſtrengthen thy Brethren. You reade, you ſay, confirme: In good time; reade ſo ſtill. Strengthen and confirme, no great ods in either, if it be ſhewed what his greatneſſe was: and yet ſtrengthen is more than to confirme: the Originall is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to ſtay and hold vp from falling: to the purpoſe, and preſent caſe of Peter, who And what other thing is it for Peter to confirme and ſtrengthen his brethren than to practice and exerciſe his greatneſſe ouer them? was to fall, and foulely, in denying Chriſt. Strengthen, or confirme, muſt needes imply execution of

greatneſſe: for, to confirme and ſtrengthen, what is it, but to practiſe and execute his greatneſſe ouer them? A poore practiſe; and ſorry greatneſſe: not of ſoueraigntie to which you driue, but of ſuperintendency at moſt, in his Paſtorall charge: to plant, and to water, to doe no more. It is true, He that doth ſtrengthen and confirme, is greater than hee that is confirmed: but in that act onely of confirming, not in vniuerſall iuriſdiction For he that doth ſtrengthen and confirme is greater: and they who are ſtrengthened, &c. are made thereby inferiors to him who doth ſtrengthen and confirme them. I hope. Your ghoſtly Father, if you were a Potentate, and at poynt to dye, as his duetie is and office, confirmeth you in your Faith: Becauſe hee confirmeth you, and in that hee confirmeth you, hee is your better; will you take him for your Lord and Soueraigne therefore? Paul ſtrengthened Peter, when he went not aright to the Goſpel. What was then become of Peters headſhip, can your ſheepes-head tell? To confirme in faith, requireth nor implyeth no ſupremacy in power. No other confirmation is intended there: Goe caſt your Cap then at Peters Primacy from, confirming his Brethren.
               
               See more proofe of your folly, Mark. 3. 16. Where See more for proofe hereof, &c. Saint Peter, in the liſt of the Apoſtles, is onely named firſt: which doth not neceſſarily inferre hee was the chiefe: but wee graunt him a chiefe, a prime, a firſt place. Wee acknowledge him the greateſt amongſt the Apoſtles, in many reſpects. And what of this? No more but this: Firſt, you belye vs in your poſition: Secondly, you cannot claime your Popes Monarchie from any greatneſſe that Saint Peter had, Act. 1. 1
                     •
                  . not the 13. Hee ſpeaketh firſt; propoſeth a caſe: Will Pope Vrban be contented to doe no more? will

he callenge no other royalty? take it: vſe it? let him goe as farre as euer Saint Peter went, as a Biſhop, and not as an Apoſtle, and wee will goe along with him. Therefore, in concluſion, your texts of Scripture are not to any purpoſe at all to proue Peters Primacy, but you a poppet.
               Much leſſe your Fathers, ſee them who liſt, for I See Fathers that affirme the ſame. Theoph. in 22. Luk calleth Peter, Prince of the Diſciples. Euſebius in Chron: Firſt Biſhop of Chriſtians. haue ſeene them more times than I haue fingers and toes, and could neuer ſee any ſuch regality in them. Theophilact calleth him, Prince of the Diſciples; and ſo doe I: as Ariſtotle, Prince of the Phyloſophers: and Virgil, Prince of Poets: who had no commaund for al that either ouer Poets or Phyloſophers. Euſebius in his Chronicle, calleth Saint Peter, the firſt Biſhop of Chriſtians: Admit hee doe: What then: Firſt, is in reſpect of time, of place, order, and authoritie. Euſebius expreſſeth not how he meaneth firſt: nay, doth hee call him firſt at all, in any ſenſe? In my Euſebius, I finde no ſuch matter. What is in yours, I cannot tell. I reade but this: Petrus Apoſtolus cum primus Antiochenam Eccleſiam fundaſſet, Romam mittitur vbi Euangelium praedicans, xxv. annis eiuſdem vrbis Epiſcopus perſeuerat: Where Romam mittitur, is not much for his greatneſſe, or that principality you giue vnto him: and preaching the Goſpell is leſſe than that.
               
                  Cyril of Hieruſalem calleth him, Prince, and moſt 
                  S. Cyril of Hier. Cat. 2. Prince, and moſt excellent of all the Apoſtles. 
                  excellent of the Apoſtles. I adde, the Greeke Text is more for your aduantage: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . He that ſtandeth before, and is head ouer the Apoſtles. And againe, in his 
                     xi.
                   Catech: which

belike you neuer read, no more, I gueſſe, did you the other, but tooke it vp on credit by reta
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Peter Prince, as you call him, of the Apoſtles, a principall Preacher of the Church. Titles of honour: Quis negat? of great honour. I adde ſuch as neuer was any like vnto it: but honour and aduancement, as it is confined, ſo is it deſigned, how farre, whereto, in what ſenſe. He ſtood firſt, in ranke: hee was chiefe among: ſo was Ioab ouer 30. but not King vpon them: or Lord ouer them: There is an headſhip which will not reach that illimited power giuen to the Pope, Our Lord, Vice-God vpon earth.
               
               
                  Saint Chryſoſtome, hom. 55. in Math. neither calleth S. Chryſ. hom. 55. in Mat. Paſtor, and Head of the Church. him Paſtor, nor head of the Church. Some well-willer of the cauſe, added the words. In Greeke wee haue but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a man that was a Fiſher. But, admit both Paſtor and Caput too; what is it to purpoſe? Wee deny no titles giuen vnto him: wee deny your inferences vpon thoſe titles. If you will thanke me for it, I will helpe you to tenne times as many moe titles as you haue collected; as tranſcendant as any of theſe: and when I haue done, to as large and ample, giuen to Saint Paul. Doe you ſhew mee but one place of any one Father, that giueth him that power you challenge to the Pope, I except not Leo, nor yet Gregorie, and I will ſubſcribe: viz. for, vniuerſalitie of iuriſdiction, infallibilitie of iudgement, and power direct or indirect, ouer Kings, and Kingdomes. This is your Helena: Firſt, chiefe, great, or greateſt will not content you, nor ſatisfie ambition now in the ruſſe. Vndertake

this: trifle not out the time, in pleading ſo idlely and vainely for Saint Peters prerogatiues, which wee the Church of England deny not.
            
            
               VIII.
               
                  That Saint Peters faith hath failed.
               
               
                  ANd yet Saint Peter denied Chriſt. Dare you deny that? Belike, in your opinion, and new diuinitie, a man may deny Chriſt, and his faith not fayle: Turne Turke, and his faith not faile: onely, turne Protestant and his faith faileth. But wee muſt hold it howſoeuer: for it is contrary to our owne Bible, Luke 22. 3. I haue prayed for thee that thy faith faile not.
               
               Your Proſelites may know you are an Empoſtor: That propoſe it in theſe words, ſo oppoſite to Scripture and euent. That leaue it ſo ſuſpence, without diſtinction. Saint Peters faith fayled, after this very prayer and aſſurance: and yet Chriſt obtained what hee did pray for. God heard him euer, how can you reconcile this?
               Your Maſters conſider Saint Peter two wayes, euen in this prayer made by our Sauiour for him, as a priuate man, as a publique perſon: or as they loue to ſpeake, Head of the Church. As a priuate perſon, Chriſt did pray for him, that though his faith fell totally for a time, it yet might not faile eternally, and for euer; as Iudas failed, and fell: and hee was heard in

that he prayed for. Peter denied, but repented: hee recouered after his fall, and perſeuered vnto the end. Our Sauiour ſaid not to him, thou ſhalt not deny mee; but, That thy faith fayle not: and that his faith did not eternally fayle, it was out of his ſpeciall fauour vnto him, and care of him, ſaith Chryſoſtome hom. 83. in Math.
               
               This is the prime, true, and literall meaning of the Text, euen in the opinion of your owne Partiaries: that Chriſts prayer was perſonall for Saint Peter: reſtrained vnto Saint Peter alone: which being ſo firſt ſetled and acknowledged, Peter may be ſaid in a ſecondary ſenſe, to ſuſtaine the perſon of the whole Catholique Church: in which ſenſe many, and they no Proteſtants, doe vnderſtand it. And ſo his Faith, that is the Faith of the Church, fayled not either totally or finally, no not in the greateſt eclipſe that euer was: becauſe Chriſt was euer heard in that which he prayed for: and he prayed for the Church.
               The refiners of Popery, the quinteſſenſe of villany, the Ieſuites, haue inuented a third ſenſe to fit the purpoſe more than the former. This promiſe was made, ſay they, to Peter, not perſonally, but as Pope. And therein was inferred, thereby aſſurance made that the Pope neuer did, neuer ſhould, neuer could maintaine, decide, hold, belieue any thing againſt Faith. A thing not heard of but out of ſuch mouthes, a late dayes. Falſe in euent, for their faith hath failed; totally, finally, vtterly for euer. Falſe according to themſelues, and their other reſolutions. For Peter was not Biſhop, much leſſe Pope, when our Sauiour Chriſt prayed for

him: inſomuch as by inchoation: when hee denied Chriſt, ſaith Bellarmine. And good reaſon for his ſaying ſo: leſt his ſucceſſours might fall into the ſame predicament. His principality in and ouer the Church, was not inueſted in him, vntill after our Sauiours Reſurrection. Thus hee, de Rom. Pontif. 4. 8. therefore hee did not pray for him as Pope. Therefore Bellarmine contradicteth himſelfe: and is contrary to his companions. Therefore this prater gagleth hee knoweth not what, againſt his owne rules, and againſt his Maſters.
               As alſo out of Matth. 16. 18. The gates of Hell shall not preuaile againſt it. It? What? Saint Peters Faith. Was the Church therefore built vpon Saint Peters Faith? Take heede of that. It, is the Church; not his Faith, nor his Perſon: nor his Papacy. But let it, for once, be his Faith. I anſwere, there is a twofold preuayling againſt. Firſt, to ouercome: So Ioſua in fight, preuayled againſt Amalec, by the ſigne of the Croſſe, rather than the ſword. Secondly, a preuayling againſt, to deſtroy. So did Saul preuaile againſt the ſame Amalec. The Gates of Hell did not preuayle againſt Peters Faith, to vndoe it. For being lapſed, hee recouered: and mightily preuayled againſt them. They did preuaile againſt it, to ouercome him: For he forſwore and denyed his Maſter. The Faith of Marcellinus and Liberius fayled: but they recouered as Saint Peter did. The Faith of Honorius, and Iohn 12 fayled: happely hee recanted before his death: and ſo his Faith did not fayle finally: But Iohn 12. liued and dyed in his

                  Faith; that is, in his Sinne: and ſo Body and Soule went to the Diuell. Saint Peters Faith fayled onely for a time: Of this ſpeake the Proteſtants, His Faith fayled. Saint Peters faith did not finally or irrecouerably fall. Thus intended our Sauiour in that ſaying; I haue prayed that thy Faith fayle not. But, Sir, it mattereth not much what became of his Faith: His Perſon is the thing to be ſtood vpon: his Power, Principality, Papall Prerogatiues, ſeated therein; this, I trow, is ſo cleare in holy Scriptures, no great neede to fortifie it by or from the Fathers: and yet I maruaile why, if ſo cleare, there, wee haue ſo few Texts of holy Scriptures for it: onely two Texts; nay ſcarcely that: For one of theſe is cleare for another thing. And againe, whatſoeuer you vaunt of Fathers, needeleſſe to be brought, it is more than preſumption, you had not one Father to fling at this Faith, not fayling: For when you haue them, you ſpare them not.
            
            
               
               IX.
               
                  That a Woman may be ſupreame Gouerneſſe of the Church in all Cauſes, as well Eccleſiasticall, as Temporall, as Queene Elizabeth was.
               
               
                  QVeene Elizabeth was? With lye and all. No Proteſtant euer ſaide ſo of Queene Elizabeth: No Proteſtant euer thought ſo of any Woman. You ſhameleſſe pennes, and brazen faces: You haue often vouched Caluin againſt ſuch Gouernement: whom you make the Patriarch, fondly, of our Profeſſion, and yet you impute it to our Doctrine. Lyers in this, or in that, needes. Can you of your knowledge ſay, this title was giuen vnto Queene Elizabeth? Did ſhee euer practiſe it actually? or challenge it habituall; to her Perſon, or her State? And if it had beene challenged, or giuen in Her time, ſeeing that it is not at preſent, but diſclaimed by him that beſt may: and ſeeing it dyed, if yet it euer liued, together with her, what meaneth this quarreller to ſtirre vp a new allayed ſtrife, and trouble things ſetled, and well diſpoſed of. The truth is, Queene Elizabeths ſtile, was no other then, than King Iames is now, mutatis mutandis, Ouer all perſons, in all Cauſes, (not and all cauſes) as well Eccleſiaſticall as Ciuil, in theſe her Maieſties Realmes and Dominions,

next vnder God, ſupreame Gouernour. Can your ſmall vnderſtanding put no difference, betwixt, Ouer all; and In all? betwixt Perſons and Cauſes? ouer all Perſons, in all Cauſes, is one thing; Ouer all Perſons and all Cauſes, is farre another thing: Ouer Each: or ouer Cauſes, without Perſons, looketh your way. But Cauſes with Perſons, ouer the Parties in their proceedings, is no ſuch exorbitances: no Scripture expreſſe, none inferred againſt it to any purpoſe.
               We doe not profeſſe, much leſſe propoſe or propugne, that Princes are Heads, or Gouernours, to any ſuch intent; as to coyne, or ſet abroad new Formes of Faith: to determine what is defide, what not; as your ſide belyeth vs, and beareth your Proſelites in hand we doe. Wee giue no ſuch authority to any humane Power. They were of you that did it at Trent, that caſt it vpon your Lord God the Pope: He was one of you, none of our ſide; Stephen Gardner by name, who to flatter the Prince in ſtate, and keepe himſelfe in thoſe hurring times in his fauour, openly auouched, as Cardinal Poole relateth; That the King might take away the Cup from the Laity: Poteſtas enim ſumme eſt penes regem: For the King hath ſupreameſt Power. Such aphoriſmes neuer came out of our mouthes. We ſay, Princes haue ſupreame Power in Earth vnder God, ouer all Perſons, in all Cauſes whatſouer, within their Dominions; euen in Cauſes meerely Eccleſiasticall: to compell them to doe their duties, by the Ciuil Sword. Not ouer all Cauſes, to doe as they will, to command, or change beliefe or Faith. Will it relliſh better with you in Saint Auguſtines words? Then this is our profeſſion

in his words: Kings ſerue God as Kings, if in their owne Realmes they command good things; not alone, which concerne the ciuill ſtate of men: but which doe alſo touch Religion and Piety. Thus he, ſo we in our Cont. Creſcon. 3. 15. 
                  Profeſsion, ouer all perſons, in all cauſes. Not, In all Cauſes alone and ſingular, as you traduce vs.
               
                  Hoc poſito: Now ſee wee your Texts of Scripture contrary to this in our owne Bibles. 1 Tim. 2. 11. Let the woman learne in ſilence, with all ſubiection: Therefore a woman, heire, or otherwiſe, cannot be Gouernour in her Realmes. Doe you thinke that the Lady Infanta, no Proteſtant Princeſſe, will be ſo confinde; becauſe ſhee may not ſay Maſſe, nor ſpeake in the Congregation: therefore as Dutcheſſe of Burgundy, or Counteſſe of Flaunders, may ſhee not meddle with the State? Marke your owne words: But I ſuffer not a woman to teach, nor to vſurpe authority ouer the man. Therefore ſhee cannot be ſupreame Gouerneſſe. Let Catholicke Ladies looke to this. Such Fellowes if they had their due, would haue their mouthes gag'd with an halter; I, their tongues cut out, and caſt to Dogges If this were intended by Saint Paul, I maruell why the Eunuch returning home into Ethiopla, did not put downe Candace from being Queene.
               If you take it not as you ſpeake it, (for Equiuocators ſay one thing, and meane another) generally of all authority, nor yet of any ſubiection; but as Saint Paul reſtraineth it, onely to Teaching and ſpeaking in the Church; we ſubſcribe vnto you: wee are of the ſame minde with you; we ſay the ſame thing that you doe: but then wee call your honeſty into queſtion, and affirme,

you deale perfidiouſly with vs, in belying vs, and falſly with your Proſelites in ſeducing them. Did euer any Allen, or Saunders, or Parſons, or Kelliſon, heare Queene Elizabeth Preach? Did euer any ſee her adminiſter the Sacraments, take vpon her to expound Scripture; appoint Faith, or denounce Excommunication? Shee claimed, and might, and had authority commanding, coerciue, coactiue, ouer Church-men. Did ſhee euer challenge, or vſe it, or was it giuen her in Churchſeruice; as Saint Tecla did, and Saint Katherine of Siena in your Legends: as Pope Ioane did, if there ſate ſuch a ſtrumpet in Saint Peters Chayre; as Prioreſſes, and Abbeſſes haue, and exerciſe by your Canon Law, or with Diſpenſations. An Abbateſſe may command the Prieſts that are ſubiect to her, to excommunicate her rebelling Nunnes; and the Prieſts are bound to obey her: So Tabiena, Armilla, Panormitane, Aſtenſis. The Canoniſts are of this minde, ſaith Stephanus de Aluin, that the dignity of Prelacy, and excellency of Office, may giue to Eccleſiaſticall women, (therefore howſoeuer to women) ſpirituall and Eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction; which they may enioy, not onely by right delegated and committed vnto them, but by ordinary alſo. Now good Sir Gagger, how digeſt you this good Catholicke Doctrine? gaue wee euer so much to Queene Elizabeth? Is this according to your Bibles? or are your Bibles and ours not the ſame?
               
                  That of 1 Cor. 14. 34. is not cited according to our Bibles of the laſt Tranſation, which you yet pretend to follow: and howſoeuer cited, it is not to purpoſe; onely it diſcloſeth your leud demeanor. Saint Paul forbiddeth

women to ſpeake or teach in Churches: ſo doe we. And in conuenticles alſo, you may ſee it inquirable, preſentable, puniſhable in our viſitations, if any ſuch preſume to expound or interpret Scripture in priuate Houſes. You may ſooner heare Pope Vrban preach, then any Woman with vs to execute any function Eccleſiaſticall, who with you doe ordinarily baptize.
               For ſatisfaction to poore miſled Catholikes in this point, if yet they will be ſatisfied, take the reſolution of our Church, Art. 37. The Queenes Maieſty (it was made you know in Queene Elizabeths time) hath the chiefe power in this Realme of England, and other her Dominions, vnto whom the chiefe gouernement of all Eſtates of this Realme, whether they be Eccleſiasticall or ciuill, in all cauſes, doth appertaine; and is not, nor ought to be ſubiect to any forraigne iuriſdiction.
               
               2. Where wee attribute to the Queenes Maieſtie, the chiefe gouernment; by which titles wee vnderſtand the mindes of ſome ſlanderous folke to be offended, wee giue not to our Princes the miniſtring either of Gods Word, or of the Sacraments: The which iniunctions alſo lately ſet forth by Elizabeth our Queene, doe moſt plainly testifie. But that onely prerogatiue, which wee ſee to haue beene giuen alwayes, to all godly Princes, in holy Scriptures, by God himſelfe; that is, that they ſhould rule all estates and degrees committed vnto their charge by God, whether they be Eccleſiaſticall or temporall, and reſtraine with the Ciuill Sword the ſtubborne and euill doers. This is all that Queene Elizabeth had or challenged. Publike Records, publike notice, publike teſtimony of the State, and all that then liued, are of greater

credit, I hope, with all moderate and honeſt Romiſh Catholikes, then the leud lying aſperſions of a partiall Factioniſt, ſuch as this Fellow is; and many of his companions are, who haue taken vp this courſe, as of inheritance and kinde, to dare ſay any thing in deſpight of honeſty and truth, in ordine ad Deum; for the Catholicke cauſe.
            
            
               X.
               
                  That Antichriſt ſhall not be a particular man, and that the Pope is Antichriſt.
               
               
                  THat Antichriſt was to come, and ſo prophecied of, that he is called, That man of ſinne; is in my Creed, and an Article of my Beliefe, as being plainly and directly expreſſed ſuch in Scripture: And this I know no Proteſtant but beleeueth. But whether he was to be One particular man; or a State, a ſucceſſion oppoſite to Chriſt; I know no Article, Canon, or Iniunction, that tyeth mee to beleeue. The Church of England leaueth me to my opinion: Euery man may abound in his owne ſence, and beleeue it, or not beleeue it, as he will. For who dareth peremptorily define what God himſelfe hath not, but left at liberty? The Fathers, I grant, runne moſt vpon one man: So doe your Maſters of the Roman Church. The Proteſtant Writers, doe moſt of them encline rather to a Succeſſion, and a ſtate of men; but not all.
               
                  
Not all ſo peremptorily, as not to encline notwithſtanding, vnto one man, who more then any of his rank ſhall oppoſe himſelfe to Chriſt in that ſtate and Succeſſion Antichriſtian; vnto whom all thoſe markes and deſcriptions ſet downe in holy Scripture, ſhall perfectly agree: as Zanchius, and many others doe hold. For in point of Prophecie, and that ſo obſcure as this, vntill plaine euent doe make it manifeſt, iudgements doe and may well, ſauing the peace of the Church, vary: nor ſhould wee condemne or cenſure Diſſenters any way from our priuate opinions.
               Whether the Pope bee that Antichriſt or not, the Church reſolueth not, tendreth it not to be beleeued any way. Some I grant are very peremptory; too peremptory indeed, that he is: He for inſtance, that wrote and printed it, I am as ſure that the Pope is Antichriſt, that Antichriſt ſpoken of in Scripture; as that Ieſus Chriſt is God: But they that are ſo reſolute, peremptory, and certaine; let them anſwere for themſelues, they are old enough: the Church is not tyed, nor any man that I know, to make good their priuate imaginations. Nor can or ought the ſeuerall fancies of men, to be imputed vnto the authorized and approued Doctrine of the Church: A fault more then ordinary with you Papiſts, to charge the Church of England with euery priuate opinion, that any man holdeth in our Church, though he be ſingular and alone.
               For my ſelfe; I profeſſe ingenuouſly, I am not of opinion, that the Biſhop of Rome perſonally, is that Antichriſt, that Vrban the VIII: or Gregory the XV; or Paul the V. were Antichriſt: though Pauls name

                  Borgheſie, before he was Pope, written in Greek, St Iohns Language, doth make 666. the number of the Beaſt. Nor yet that the Biſhops of Rome Succeſſiuely, are that Antichriſt ſo ſpoken of: An Antichriſt I hold him, or them, carrying themſelues as they doe in the Church; either as the word hath hitherto beene taken for, one that is 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , againſt Chriſt: or according to the new tricke and deuice of ſome; for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in ſtead or place of Chriſt. Rather in this point I ſhould encline vnto that opinion of many Proteſtant Diuines, that for the State Antichriſtian, the Turke and Pope together may ſeeme to make it: and for the Perſon, ſome one notorious varlet aboue the reſt. Thus Zanchius, and others: ſo Melanthon, Draconites vpon Daniel, Oecolampadius vpon the ſame; Hiperius vpon the ſecond Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians: Zanchius in Miſcellan: Lambert in Apocal. Zegedynus in Locis: Grynaeus in praefat. Eiuſdem Libri: and a Diſputation at Geneua, 1589. vnder Faius. I ſay, rather this way, then the other; though for full reſolution I cannot reſolue for either: but profeſſe my ignorance in ſuch myſteries, and therefore as is fitting 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and craue pardon.
               But had I no greater cauſe to refraine from concluding then your wiſe worſhipfull reaſons, Sir Gagger, Contrary to their own Bible, 2 Theſ 2. 3. I ſhould conclude as peremptorily as any; Papa eſt ipſiſsimus Antichriſtus: Your Texts are not expreſſe, they are not euictiue, nor conuincing: 2 Theſ. 2. 3. He is called, That man of ſinne, the ſonne of perdition: Your inference is hereupon thus. The words, Man of ſinne; and ſonne of Perdition, being ſingular, doe plainly proue, that a ſucceſsion of men, as the Popes are, cannot be this

man of ſinne. For ſo Saint Peter alſo ſhould be Antichriſt; for he was Pope, and the very firſt of all the Popes. So your good Goſſips long ſince reaſoned in this point, but idely all, and you more: Though the words be ſingular and perſonall; Man of ſinne: and Sonne of Perdition: yet followeth not, that the ſubiect is one Perſon; they may denote a body: For any Corporation, though collected out of Pluralities, is a totum, and ſo but one, and ſo ſingular in it ſelfe. The Prophecies of Iacob for Iudah, and his other Sonnes, runneth preciſely in ſingular and perſonall termes; yet your ſelfe, I thinke, are not ſo ſenceleſſe, as to faſten them all vnto the Perſons of the Patriarchs. The Man of ſin, is perſonall in termes, I grant, but the deſignation may be a collectiue vnity; a Corporation, a Succeſſion. A ſinfull man, a wicked generation; an impious body, and an Antichriſtian State. You haue read in the Pſalmes, That the man of the Earth be no more exalted againſt them: And againe; For man goeth about to deuoure me. Some priuate man the Prophet meant by your reaſon; no Company, combination, or ſociety of men: For, The words Man, and Man of the Earth, being ſingular, doe plainely proue, that he could not intend any priuate man: this is your reaſon for the Pope.
               As for Saint Peters being then a limbe of Antichriſt, becauſe he was Pope, and the firſt of Popes; I anſwere, For ſo Saint Peter ſhould then be Antichriſt: for he was Pope, and the very firſt of Popes. that he was none of Antichriſts members, becauſe he was firſt: For the Spring is good and wholſome, where the ſtreame is muddy, bitter, or vnwholſome; the foundation good, where the building is ruinous: the firſt moſt regular, where Succeſſion is not. Thoſe that hold

the Pope Antichriſt, neuer imagined all Popes to be ſo: but the defection of Popes; ſince the falling away either from the Faith; or from the Roman Empire; or rather indeede, from both. So that Saint Peter, though Biſhop of Rome, and a Pope, and many other ſucceeding him in that See, cannot be included within the pale of Antichriſt, although it be pleaded that the Pope is Antichriſt, and reſolued ſo.
               
                  Reuel. 13. 18. The holy Spirit giueth both you and others good aduiſe, Qui operta ſacri ſupparo ſilentij irrumpere audent; Let him that hath vnderſtanding, count the number of the Beaſt: for it is the number of a man. I cannot tell certainely what is meant by that number of a man. You can, it ſhould ſeeme: but this I can tell, as I haue told you already, that a man doth not euer and neceſſarily imply a particular and ſingular man. For the name of Chriſt, is as particular, rather more ſingular than the name of man: and yet your owne directors acknowledge, it is attributed vnto any, and all that haue any ſimilitude or reſemblance vnto him, as Prophets, Kings, Prieſts. And your laſt Therefore the great Antichriſt ſhall be a particular man. Text to be ſeene, is, 1 Iohn 2. 22. where hee is a lyer, that denieth Ieſus; that denieth the Father and the Sonne, is Antichriſt; and yet I hope no ſingular man neceſſarily. Therefore the great Antichriſt may not be a particular man.
               
            
            
               
               XI.
               
                  That none but God can forgiue or retaine Sinnes.
               
               
                  SInnes are forgiuen two wayes: by power originall, and authority: by deriued power, and delegation. God alone, and none but God, doth or can forgiue ſinnes the firſt way; againſt whom onely ſinnes are committed, Pſalm. 51. Againſt thee onely haue I ſinned: and therefore Eſay 43. 25. I am hee that blotteth out iniquities for my ſelfe. In this ſence the Phariſes did not erre, Luke 5. Who can forgiue ſinnes but God alone? In this ſence it is true, and truely maintayned, None but GOD can forgiue, or retaine ſinnes. Verum dicunt Scribae: The Scribes ſay true, faith venerable Bede, No man can forgiue ſinnes but God alone. And hee doth forgiue them by the miniſtery of thoſe men to whom hee hath giuen power to forgiue them; by actiue delegation.
               Hee hath giuen power vnto men to doe that: wee profeſſe and maintaine; The Prieſt hath power and authoritie from God, to forgiue ſinnes, in as ample manner, as hee can receiue it. So your Fathers and Scriptures may well be ſpared, and haue beene kept by you in ſtore againſt a dearer time. Your owne director, Controu. 9. hath theſe words, to our aduantage and acquittall, and your confuſion. Hereunto is alſo pertinent the doctrine of thoſe Proteſtants, who hold; That Prieſts haue power not onely to pronounce, but to giue remiſsion of ſinnes. That hold moſt of the forenamed

authors, and others very many. Yes, it ſeemeth to be the doctrine of the Communion Booke, in the visitation of the ſicke; where the Prieſt ſaith: And by his authoritie committed vnto mee, I abſolu
                        •
                      thee from all thy ſinnes.
               
               If this be acknowledged the Doctrine of our Communion Booke, and practice of our Church accordingly, as it is, iniurious are thoſe oppoſites vnto truth, and lyers againſt their owne knowledge, that impute it to vs, which wee are confeſſed to deny, That none but God can forgiue ſinnes. This muſt proceede out of faction, Contrary to expreſſe words of their owne Bible. or that which is worſe: But this fellow proceedeth vpon a further extreamity, to ſtrengthen a truth in it ſelfe, with a lye made by himſelfe, that our Doctrine is contrary to our Bibles.
               
                  Matth. 9. 3. 8. To proue againſt vs that which we deny not, viz. this power delegated vnto Prieſthood, thus you alledge: But when the multitude ſaw it, they maruailed, and glorified God, who had giuen ſuch power vnto men, as to forgiue ſins. Which words, As to forgiue ſinnes, are not in our Bibles, out of which you vndertake to proue your Aſſertion: Nor in your owne Bibles, follow which you will. You haue added them out of your ſtore, to ſerue your owne turne, contrary to Scripture; and further, contrary to ſenſe. Becauſe that thing which amazed them then, for which they glorified God, was a thing ſensible, viſible, apprehended of all: When they ſaw it. Now, ſee ſinnes forgiuen they could not: heare it pronounced; belieue it, they might. Secondly, the power there giuen, is not ordinary, as that of abſolution is: but extraordinary, and

miraculous, to heale the ſicke. Peter, and his Succeſſour had that: but very few or none had this. You know, it was anſwered a Pope once, when he ſhewed a maſſe of Gold and Siluer to one, and added, The Church could not ſay now, Siluer and Gold haue I none; No, quoth the other, Nor can it ſay; Ariſe and walke. This is that power there mentioned, could you ſee it, not that of Abſolution ordinary.
               That of Ioh. 20. 21. Matth. 16. 19. Giue that power vnto the Apoſtles to forgiue ſinnes: But may it not See more, Mat. 16. 19. be excepted, it was a perſonall priuiledge? I anſwere, not ſo: for I belieue it not. The collation was originall, to them, as to thoſe from whom it was to be conueyed vnto others. But ſome are happely of that opinion: and it may ſeeme probable vnto others: you ſhould haue cleared the Texts of that obiection, and then your performance had beene to purpoſe.
               
                  Matth. 16. 19. May be vnderſtood you meane of ſinnes forgiuen, but yet only ſecondarily: for theſi ſecunda: Becauſe we reade in the Euangeliſt, whatſoeuer, and not whomſoeuer; this place is to be vnderſtood of any knot whatſoeuer: indeede rather of the power of the ſword, than of the keyes. And it ſeemeth that if this place be not perſonall to Peter, and his ſucceſſors, as by this allegation for forgiuing, it neither is, nor can be, then our moſt holy Father hath loſt a maine pillar of his Papacy, peculiar to Saint Peter, and his ſucceſſours: So theſe Madianites ſheath their ſwords one in anothers ſides; and croſſe themſelues in their owne poſitions.
               In Matth. 18. 18. The Text is ſo expreſſe to the

purpoſe, that Origen, Chryſoſtome, Theophilact, and Anaſtaſius, vnderſtand it of all Chriſtians whomſoeuer: that ſundry Roman Catholiques, if Maldonate deceiue vs not, vnderſtand it of no more than ciuill policy. Goe take it, Whatſoeuer you binde on earth, ſhall be bound in Heauen, and whatſoeuer you looſe in Earth, it ſhall be looſed in Heauen: as your ſelues will for the power and execution of the keyes. Wee deny not in any ſort, that power is giuen vnto mortall men to forgiue ſinnes on earth, nor to binde by excommunication, which is frequently practiſed, and peraduenture too frequently amongſt vs. Vnto that, 1 Cor. 5. 5. Artic. 33. thus wee ſubſcribe, That perſon, who by open denunciation of the Church, is rightly cut off from the vnity of the Church, and excommunicated, ought to be auoyded, and to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithfull, as an Heathen, and a Publican, vntill hee be openly reconciled by penance, and receiued into the Church by a Iudge that hath authoritie thereunto. And in this ſort Saint Paul deliuered Hymenaeus, and Alexander, 1 Timoth. 1. 20. and forgaue the inceſtuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Which places by your direction wee haue ſeene, and finde the Article agreeing with them. As for 2 Cor. 5. 19. It is not to purpoſe of forgiuing ſinnes by delegated authority vnto a Prieſt, but of Reconciling by the whole office and function of the miniſtry. God was in Chriſt, ſaith the Apoſtle, and reconciled the world vnto himſelfe, not imputing their ſinnes vnto them, and hath committed to vs the word of reconciliation. So wee haue

ſeene eyther, nothing at all to purpoſe: or elſe that of which wee made no queſtion, nor yet doe any at all.
               As little in Fathers that affirme the ſame. Irenaeus 
                  See Fathers that affirme the ſame. 
                  Lib. 5. cap. 14. ſaith, the raiſing of Lazarus from death to life, was a Symbole or figure of our Reſurrection from Sinne to God. Hee ſaith no more that I can ſee or finde. Ambroſe Lib. 1. it ſhould be de paenitent. cap. 7. Nor Auguſt. Tract. 49. in Iohn: Nor Gregor. hom. 26. in Euangel. if wee may belieue Bellarmine, Lib. 3. de paenitent. cap. 3. from whom you tranſcribed theſe teſtimonies, without conſidering of theſe Fathers, in their owne workes: but ſo careleſſely, that if you were a Schoole-Boy, lures in corpore: for you referre vs to Gregor. hom. 26. in Euangel. Whereas Bellarmine hath it 6. and to Ambroſe, Lib. de paenitentia: as if Saint Ambroſe had written but one Booke of that Argument, not diuided into Chapters, whereas Bellarmine directed you aright to the ſeauenth Chapter of his 1. Booke. Was this ſecuritie, ſtupiditie, or inſolency in you? or what was it?
            
            
               
               XII.
               
                  That wee muſt not confeſſe our Sinnes but onely vnto God.
               
               
                  THat wee muſt not, implyeth a flat negatiue, or iniunction rather, vnto the contrary: Shew mee any ſuch inhibition, and I will ſay, which I belieue you neuer will deſerue at any Proteſtants hands, you are a true dealing, and an honeſt man. Otherwiſe, you are that you are, and ſo will be ſtill.
               The moſt that hath beene ſaide, is, that priuate confeſsion is free, not tyed: and therefore ſuus poſitiui, not diuini: Therefore, happely of conueniency, not of abſolute neceſſity. That in a priuate Confeſſion vnto a Prieſt, a peculiar enumeration of all Sinnes, both of commiſſion and omiſſion, with all circumſtances, and accidents, is neuer neceſſary neceſſarily: moſt an end not expedient, nor yet, all things conſidered, required. It is confeſſed that all Prieſts, and none but Prieſts, haue power to forgiue ſinnes: It is confeſſed, that priuate Confeſſion vnto a Prieſt
                     •
                   is of very ancient practice in the Church: of excellent vſe and practiſe, being diſcreetly handled. Wee refuſe it to none, if men require it, if neede be to haue it. We vrge it and perſwade it in extreames: Wee require it in caſe of perplexitie, for the quieting of men diſturbed, and their conſciences. It hath beene ſo acknowledged by

your fellowes, that in the viſitation of the ſicke, it is required by the Communion Booke: That the ſicke perſon make a ſpeciall Confeſsion, if hee feele his Conſcience troubled with any weightie matter: And likewiſe before the receiuing of the Lords Supper, according to which doctrine and iniunction, our Biſhops doe, or ſhould enquire in their Viſitations, touching the vſe and neglect of this ſo good an order: as did that right learned and reuerend Biſhop of Norwich, Dr. Oueral, of late: A man for admirable learning, and yet as ſtrange humility, in communicating his knowledge vnto any poore Scholler, hardly equalled, ſure outgone by none ſince the world had him. The 21. Article enquired of in his Viſitation 1619. concerning Miniſters, is: Whether doth your Miniſter before the ſeuerall times of the adminiſtration of the Lords Supper, admoniſh and exhort his Pariſhioners, if they haue their Conſciences troubled and diſquieted, to reſort vnto him, or ſome other learned Miniſter, and open his griefe, that hee may receiue ſuch ghoſtly counſell and comfort, as his Conſcience may be relieued, and by the Miniſter hee may receiue the benefit of Abſolution, to the quiet of his conſcience, and auoyding of ſcruple. And if any man confeſſe his ſecret and hidden ſinnes, being ſicke, or whole, to the Miniſter, for the vnburthening of his Conſcience, and receyuing ſuch ſpirituall conſolation, doth or hath the ſaid Miniſter at any time, reuealed and made knowne to any perſon whomſoeuer, any crime or offence ſo committed to his truſt, contrary to the 113. Canon? that hee might be puniſhed accordingly. Which is not like the iniunction of thoſe

that hold, Wee muſt confeſſe our Sinnes but onely vnto God. Our people happely are negligent in performing this moſt behoofefull vſe and practice of the Church, but the judgement and reſolution of the Church, is not auerse from it, as you belye vs: much leſſe is it our deciſion. We muſt not confeſſe our Sinnes, but onely vnto God.
               
               The words of our Bible, Matth. 3. 5. 6. are expreſſe Contrary to the expreſſe words of your owne Bible. for confeſſing. I graunt: and for confeſſing of Sinnes too: But not expreſſe for publique or priuate confeſſing: not for confeſſing vnto whom, to man or vnto God: not, whether in generall, they confeſſed themſelues ſinners; or, deſcended to ſome particulars there more ordinary, direct, and enormious ſinnes. Theſe are not inſtanced, diſcerned, nor determined; Writers are diuided in opinion. You know it not: onely becauſe there was confeſſing of Sinnes, it muſt needes be ſuch confeſſion of ſuch Sinnes, as you imagined. Haue you read what Maldonate that learned Ieſuite hath ſaid of ſuch bold Bayards, as your ſelfe, Quis vnquam Catholicus tam indoctus fuit, vt ex hoc loco Confeſſionis probaret Sacramentum? Was there euer any Catholique ſuch a blocke, as would goe about to proue out of this place the Sacrament of Confeſsion? Not in his time, or before peraduenture. Maldonate could not prophecie, nor fore-ſee therefore, that ſuch an vnlettered Dolt would riſe vp after him. I doe ſpeake but in his Language: Indoctus, is as much in effect. If you meant not of ſacramentall Confeſſion: bucus, blennus es. What other Confeſſion could you ſpeake of? If of Confeſſion ſacramental; in Maldonates iudgment,

                  bardus es: howſoeuer, fungus, fatuus es: For, if all thoſe that went out vnto Iohn Baptiſt, came to him for ſhrift; hee had ſhriuing worke enough for ſeauen yeares. I adde. It is happely intended, They confeſſed vnto God: For it is not ſaid, they confeſſed vnto Iohn. And then, what is become of your, Therefore 
                  Therefore ſinnes may be confeſſed vnto man. 
                  ſinnes may be confeſſed vnto man? Secondly, your tenet is of muſt be, not may be. They did it voluntarily, once: therefore, often, and againe. Wee muſt neceſſarily doe. Thirdly, they did it once in all their life: and that on occaſion, and time extraordinary; at their Baptiſme: not againe, for any thing that wee know. Your Confeſſion is penitentiall, flat oppoſite vnto this in Baptiſme You may as well inferre out of this Text, reiteration of Baptiſme: as reiteration of Confeſſion: Baptiſme in Iordan, neceſſarily, as Confeſſion of Sinnes neceſſarily: So many incumbrances are in the words: ſo many Non ſequiturs vnto the maine.
               That of Act. 19. 18. I graunt is more proper: and as Bellarmine obſerueth, in ſome ſort it is true, that the words are of ſpeciall Confeſſion: but yet they come not home vnto Auricular; Confeſſion in priuate into the Prieſts eare. Againe, it was not of inforcement or neceſſitie, but of voluntary motion. Nor is it expreſſed, which is moſt materiall: whether it were made onely vnto God, or alſo vnto man. If you be put to proue it, what proofe or euidence can you make for it? The Text hath, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Confeſsing and declaring openly what they had done: Before men, not vnto Paul, or

any Prieſtin priuate, but vnto God, before men; that all the Aſſembly might take notice of it, and vnderſtand it.
               That of Numb. 5. 6. is for Confeſſion vnto, at leaſt before the Prieſt: but is your iudgement ſo craſed, to award vs the iniunction and practice of this Iewiſh Ceremony, for a ground of Confeſſion Sacramentall? If ſo, your braines are rather to be purged, then your error refuted. If you take it but for typicall, as you muſt and will, if you vnderſtand your ſelfe: then ſuch Propoſitions are not argumentatiue. Nor was there here enioyned any particular enumeration of their ſinnes in kind, but onely of that one ſinne for which the Sin-offering was brought: for which an attonement was ſought, & to be procured by the Prieſt. Peccatum illud quod feceram, is Bellarmines obſeruation: and ſo, no way for the point in Controuerſie; Confeſſion Auricular vnto the Prieſt, vnleſſe onely by way of equality and conueniencie, as left vnto vs free, and not vpon obligation as to them, which helpe you not.
               Thus we haue no great ſatisfaction out of Scripture, Goe and ſee Fathers that affirme as little: Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 9. ſpeaking of ſome ſilly women, one or two, ſeduced by Marcus, a Sorcerer and Gnoſti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Hereticke, relateth thus much, that being reconciled and regained to the Catholike Church, they confeſſed, Marcus had abuſed them carnally; which nothing promoteth their Catholique Cauſe, vnleſſe their ghoſtly Fathers ſhould ſhriue them in ſecret as Marcus did: They might confeſſe that before a temporall ludge, vnto ſome Neighbour or friends of their owne. To a Prieſt: ſome

Prieſts; and yet not in aurem: or if ſo, yet not by ſpeciall enumeration of all the circumſtances, or relation of their other ſinnes. It might be in the face of the Church in generall. Irenaeus words are not confined: Hae ſaepiſſimè conuerſae ad Eccleſiam Dei, confeſſae ſunt, & ſecundum corpus exterminatas ſe ab eo velut Cupidine, & inflammatas valdè ſe illum dilexiſſe. They confeſſed it often, vnto many, what Magicall inchantments he vſed to beſot them: Therefore not likely in Sacramentall Confeſſion, where hauing receiued abſolution of the Prieſt, it were but idle to confeſſe it againe; vnleſſe the man imagined the Proteſtants denyed and tooke away all Confeſſion, vpon any termes, what neede we goe ſee in Irenaeus?
               
               Or in Tertullian; who in his Booke de poenitentia, (I muſt ſupply the Chapter, you had forgot it, or elſe could not tell it) Cap. 4. blameth ſome that through baſhfulneſſe would not confeſſe: but where, or to whom he telleth not. Happily he meant it of Confeſſion vnto God. For almoſt inſtantly before he hath theſe words; Quâ delictum noſtrum Domino confitemur: To God, notto man; and Delictum, the ſinne that lyeth cloſe, that preſſeth downe, that diſquieteth vs in Conſcience: not Delicta, our ſinnes by enumeration. But paſſe it for priuate Confeſſion to a Prieſt. Tertullian vrgeth it no farther, then for conueniency; and draweth it vp no higher then Delictum. Euery way conſpiring with the Proteſtants, who miſlike not Confeſſion, nay, approue it vnto men: who condemne not Abſolution, but approue it, enioyne it, though not with that rigour as Romaniſts doe; and approue Saint Ambroſe counſell

well: Confeſſe freely vnto the Prieſt, the hidden ſecrets of thy ſoule. If yet it be the counſell of Saint Ambroſe. For Plagiary as you be, did you not here miſtake your Authour: and Father that ignorantly vpon Saint Ambroſe, which Bellarmine telleth you was the aduiſe of Gregory Nyſſen, Orat: in mulierem peccatricem? Such groſſe Bayardiſmes in ſo inſolent a Bard, are intollerable: Saint Ambroſe hath no ſuch Booke, de muliere peccatrice. 2: de paenitent. 6. He exhorteth to repentance, but not a word of Confeſſion vnto a Prieſt: many confeſſing vnto God.
            
            
               XIII.
               
                  That Pardons and Indulgences were not in vſe in the Apoſtles times.
               
               
                  IN the Apoſtles times? no, nor yet many hundreds of yeeres ſince their times. Such Pardons as commence in the Apoſtolicall Chauncery; ſuch as Tecelius diſperſed in Germany: others in other Countries: are impious, irreligious, prophane, and ſacrilegious cooſnage; an impoſture of Merchants that trade for the Diuell; that chaffer Heauen and happineſſe, for the reward of iniquity. The firſt mouing cauſe of Luthers riſing vp, and taking Armes againſt the Church of Rome. Bellarmine and Baronius, thoſe grand Dictators, and vndertakers for the Papacy, faile in proofes of this nouelty; and what can ſuch a puny as this fellow

performe? Yet let vs ſee his beſt endeauours, and faireſt ſhewes; becauſe with Catholikes euery Piſmire is a Potentate: as euery Gooſe a Swan. Contrary no doubt to our own Bibles, we denie them. For 2 Cor. 2. 10. S. Paul remembreth them thus; To whom you forgiue any thing, I forgiue alſo, &c. You muſt know, that are to learne: The Corinthian that had married his Fathers wife, was for his inceſt Excommunicated, and put to penance by the Apostle; as appeareth, 1 Cor. 5. 3. Well, what when? why here he giueth order for his Pardon. This is not denied vpon any hand. The Proteſtants beleeue the Scriptures more then Papiſts will doe. Why, but theſe two places compared, are a plaine proofe of the Apoſtles power of puniſhing and of pardoning. They are, it is granted: Therefore Pardons were in vſe in the Apoſtles time. Is any Aſse ſo ignorant as to ſay nay? Long before the Apoſtles time they were in vſe. Long before Moſes, or Abrahams daies. Can a man with patience here this Animall thus bray? I ſuppoſe there is no Roman Catholique beſide himſelfe ſo ſenceleſſe; as to imagine, Protestants beleeue or teach, That no offender was pardoned in the Apoſtles times: That the Apoſtles had no power, or wanted will to accept any Contrite, and Penitent into the Church. Ingenuous Romane Catholikes, can you brooke the wittall thus to babble? Pardons were in vſe, then, after, before: but Pardons no more like the Pardons hee meaneth, or ſhould maintaine, then Simon the Sorcerer was to Simon the Tanner, or Stephen the Deacon, to Stephen Gardiner; or this gooſe gagger vnto an honeſt man.
               2 Cor. 2. 6. In the ſame caſe, vpon the ſame perſon,

the Apoſtle ſaith; Sufficient to ſuch a ma
                        〈…〉
                      his puniſhment: And therefore he forgaue what remained of his puniſhment, not yet fulfilled. So that there paſſed an Indulgence for his farther durance. There did no doubt. We willingly yeeld it; and take it for a warrant againſt Nouatian Puritaniſme: for a ground vnto the Diſcipline of the Church; whoſe practice in Diſcipline is eſtabliſhed. Art. 33. It is in the hands of the ſpirituall Magiſtrates to meaſure the time of ſuch puniſhment or penance impoſed. Let your Pardons be no otherwiſe, and we quarrell them not: Let them ſtay vpon the liuing in foro fori, and not meddle with pardoning the dead for money: nor yet cooſen the liuing, by falſe Coynes, out of the ſuppoſed Treaſures of the Church; and no oppoſition will be vnto Pardons granted, no, though ſold in externall Courts abroad. For the faults of men ſhall not be imputed vnto the Diſcipline by vs, if that were rectified as it ought to be. But the man is conſcious to the fouleneſſe of his Cauſe, and prophane Roman marting; and therefore attireth a proſtituted Strumpet, in the habit of a graue Matron. Popiſh pardons and Indulgences, ſo prophane and enormious, are paſſed vnder the names of thoſe things, with which they haue no more affinity then in name: which the Prince of the Apoſtles of the Lambe, had with the firſt begotten of the Diuell. Pardons, and Pardons: Simon and Simon, homonym
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     s. For, the Doctrine and Practice of the Church for Repentance, in Excommunication, Contrition, Confeſſion, Satisfaction, Reſtitution, Abſolution, is according vnto Piety, and the rule of Faith, in thoſe that haue ſinned, and are reſtored: but in the

Church of Rome, thus it goeth. They imagine a treaſure in the Church, compounded together, out of the ſatisfactions of Chriſt, and his Saints: which Treaſure ſo compoſed, is in the hands, ſay they, of the Pope, and other Prelates, vnder locke and key, ſafe enough from purloining, to be diſpoſed and diſpenced as they ſhall thinke good, to whom they will open and communicate it, more or leſſe, which is euer Danti, (for Giff-gaff is a good fellow) to none elſe; and anſwerable to his purchaſe much or little, Plus, or minus danti, as his meanes are.
               For in euery good worke, there is Merit and Satisfaction. Merit is Perſonall, not Tranſitiue, nor yet Communicable: but Satisfaction is and may be imparted. Becauſe Satisfaction is onely for a Temporary paine; which is often more, and greater then Iuſtice, or right for the offence exacteth. So that God in Iuſtice requiring but Proportion, the ouer-plus in remainder is laide vp in ſtore againſt time of neede, and drawen forth for vſe, when mens purſes are fluſh; then, & not till then, to be ſoueraignly applyed vnto the purchaſer, not payer.
               This premiſed, to your Scriptures and ancient Fathers: Find you any ſuch Pardon in Saint Paul forepriſed? or Indulgence imparted vpon thoſe termes? The Corinthian was reſtored, without a Bul: a Biſhops Seale; a Commiſſaries direction vnto the Parſon. He payed no rate, nor fees for Reſtitution, or ſtanding rectus in Curiâ: No Treaſure of the Church was applyed vnto him. Vpon his hearty repentance, and hearty ſatisfaction, he was reſtored. Satisfaction, not to God, but to the Church; whom hee had ſcandalized by his fall. Goe

along with Saint Paul, and the Primitiue times; no man will euer ſay, Blacke is your Eye.
               We haue ſeene, Mathew 18. 18. and 16. 19. once and againe, to as little purpoſe then, as now; and now, as then. The name, Pardons; and the thing, your Pardons, are two things much differing euery way: and yet in neither place auonched is the Name, as by your vndertaking for Expreſſe, it ſhould be. The thing as much differing as white and blacke. Power to binde and looſe we denye not: wee maintaine and practice it in our Church. We may differ in the Execution; but Circumſtances alter not Nature: your proofes may vouch the Thing, the right, the vſe, the being; but manner, faſhion, execution, onely doubted of, and to be proued, that you touch not.
               See Fathers that liſt, and like to looſe their labour. See the Fathers, who affirme the ſame: Tertul. lib. ad Mart. ca. 1. In Tertullian I am ſure nothing, either in the firſt Chapter of his Booke, ad Martyres, remembred by ſome other of your Goſſips, nor in his fifth, which is ſupplyed out of your ſtore: His Booke ad Martyres, is very 
                     ••
                  ort. Finde me Pardons and Indulgences there mentioned, and I will purchaſe a Bull from Rome my ſelfe, whatſoeuer it coſt me: deere enough, without doubt. That which you haue a minde vnto by direction of others, is this, as I gueſſe, Quam pa
                        •
                     em, quidam in Eccleſia non habentes, à Martyribus in carcere exorare consueuêre: Which Peace ſome not enioying within the Church, haue beene accustomed to intreat the Martyrs in Priſon for it. Peace there is Pardon, after the African phraſe of Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, whom you make your ſecond Father to be ſeene; and whoſe

teſtimony is almoſt idem numero with Tertullians. The meaning of both, as Pamelius, no Proteſtant, may enforme you, was this. Thoſe that had fallen in time of perſecution: to auoide or eleuate the cenſure of the Church, through their great ſuite and importunitie, often procured letters deprecatory to the Biſhop and Clergie, whereto they were lyable, from Conſeſſors, ſuch as were empriſoned for the truth, whom thoſe Fathers call Martyrs, that ſo at their intreaty, and for their confeſſions famous in the Church, the rigour of diſcipline might be ſuſpended, mitigated, or determined, and they without more adoe, be reſtored vnto the Church. Againſt this cuſtome in breach of diſcipline, Tertullian, and eſpecially Cyprian, inueigh moſt bitterly. So then, take your choyce, either theſe Fathers cannot be ſeene to affirme for your purpoſe: or if ſo, auoide it if you can your pardons at the firſt ariſing vp in the Church were but abuſes, and as ſuch, reſiſted, exclaimed on, condemned as irregular, and as impious, by the Fathers of thoſe times, Tertullian, and eſpecially Cyprian: and ſo you haue ſpun a faire threed either way.
               As for Pope Vrban the ſecond, make you merry Pope Vrban the ſecond, graunted a plenary Indulgence to ſuch as would goe to the Holy-Wars, An. Chriſti. 160. with him: much good may his plenary indulgence for the Holy-Land warre and voyage doe you. Aske my fellow if I be a thiefe, Vrban graunted ſuch Indulgence I confeſſe: So did Gregorie the ſeauenth his next Predeceſſor but one, firſt take vpon him to depoſe Princes, and diſpoſe of their Kingdomes, by Apoſtaticall authoritie. No man heard of the one before Gregorie: nor of the other before Vrban. The

eldeſt aboue 1000. yeares after Chriſt. Vrban the eight, that now Popeth it, may proclaime a Croiſado if hee will, and iuſtifie his fact as well as any other: but the true reaſon holdeth not now: The World is growne wiſer, and men loue money too well to be ſo cheated of it, as their fore fathers were: to emptie their owne, and fill the Popes Coffers by Croiſado couſonages.
               But what a Bayard is this, to ſhew ſuch blockiſh Ignorance, being an vndertaker, and that with ſome contumely againſt the whole Nation of Proteſtants? Wee are told it was Anno Chriſti 160. as if there were any Holy warres in thoſe times, when as Vrban the firſt, (if hee were then borne,) yet certainely was not Pope many yeares after, till 224. aboue 60. yeares betweene. As for Vrban the ſecond, hee ſate in Anno 1088. A foule ouer ſight in ſuch an vndertaker, for the gagging of all Proteſtants mouthes for euer. But ſomewhat there was in it, that the Cat wincked, when both her eyes were out. Some wiſer, more learned, and skilfull than himſelfe, had obſerued, it ſeemeth, that Vrban the ſecond, Founder of theſe pardons, was the 160. Pope in order from Saint Peter: and this poore Ignaro, meaning well to the Cauſe, to aduance the credite thereof by antique vſe, thought it had bin a thing ſo auncient as the yeare 160. at leaſt, beſt to vſe a Catholique tricke of piae fraudis, to let it goe ſo. For, honeſt good Catholiques muſt belieue what their Inſtructors ſay, though they teach that the Snow is blacke: ſo are they hood-wincked in implicite Faith. And as for Heretiques, no matter if they ſpie it: or

what they ſay: poore miſ-led Proſelites, either reade not their anſweres, good cauſe why; or if they reade them, will not belieue them, though neuer ſo plaine and euident: Therefore Quicquid in buccam, theſe men may ſay and write any thing; no matter what.
            
            
               XIIII.
               
                  That the Actions and Paſsions of Saints doe ſerue for nothing vnto the Church.
               
               
                  
                     MEntiris furcifer: a leude lye: in imputation of flat impiety. They ſerue for nothing? thoſe worthies of Dauid? thoſe mightie men of Warre? Holy Saint Stephen and his Arriere-ban of valiant Aduenturers in the cauſe of Chriſt Ieſus, that in life and death haue ſo glorified God: and ſet vp that bloudy banner of our Redemption, diſplayed on the battlements of Death and Hell! 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Indeede this was the power of that omnipotent God, not to be vttered by the tongue of men, which did ſo inable them vnto ſuch performings, ſaith Iustine himſelfe, one of that Societie. They are our Crowne, and our exceeding great reioycing. We boaſt of them, and of their noble acts: wee commemorate their worths in our common ſeruice. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſaid Nazianzen, I take it, or Baſil, one of the two, and wee take vp that ſaying, whoſe ſoeuer it was. In

doing them honour we delight exceedingly. We triumph in the bloud they haue ſhed for our Sauiour. Their acts were recorded for imitation; that conſidering their Precedents, and worthy performings, wee might be incouraged to follow their example, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . As ſpringing Wels they ſupply vs continually, ſaith Clemens Alexandrinus; What doe they ſupply vs with all? 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , with commonifaction to ſhew our ſelues religious louers of God, though with ſhedding of our bloud. To ſhew forth our Faith, with loſſe of our liues. Witneſſes they are: ſo is their name. Martyres, for 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is to witneſſe. Credendorum: agendorum: ſuſtinendorum, recipiendorum: Of things to be belieued, performed, indured, receiued, ſaith Bonauenture. And are theſe for nothing vnto the Church? Did euer any Proteſtant ſay or thinke ſo of theſe Holy Saints of God? For ſhame ſpeake truth, and ſhame the Deuill, the Father of lyes, and ſuch lying Libellers as our Gagger.
               
               But belike it is for nothing, which is not for your purpoſe. And therefore, whatſoeuer Proteſtants doe thinke, and teach, and eſteeme of the life and actions; the death and Paſſions of thoſe holy Saints of Chriſt, it is nothing, becauſe that they build not vp thence a Magazin, nor ſtore-houſe for the Church, nor ſupply other mens defects, by their ſuperfluities: that the Holy Father may thereby mugle men, and fill his 
                     〈◊〉
                   coffers by lifting law. A thing ſo improbable for that fained treaſury, that as Bellarmine confeſſeth, ſome of

the Schoolemen, as Maironis and Durand haue not approued it: Which they durſt not haue done, had Saint Paul beene of that minde, and tendred that, Doctrine, Coloſ. 1. 24. I reioyce in my ſufferings for you, and fill vp that which is behinde: you reade wanting, (and reade ſo, if you liſt) of the afflictions of Chriſt in my fleſh, for his bodies ſake, which is the Church: 
                  Hence hath the ground of Indulgences beene alwayes taken: but more principally from the ſuper abundant merit of Ieſus Chriſt. Whence, if you ſay true, the ground of Indulgences hath euer beene.
               And you meane ſince there were Indulgences heard off: For the time was, in the Proteſtants opinion at leaſt, that no ſuch thing was in being: which yet I maruaile much it ſo ſhould be: and that many writing of that argument, haue not ſo much as dreamed thereof: and many, no Proteſtants, expound it otherwiſe. Oſorius a Ieſuite, in his Sermons, ſaith, Quid deeſt paſſioni Chriſti, niſi vt nos ſimilia patiamur: What can be wanting to the ſuffering of Chriſt, but onely this, that wee in like ſort ſuffer with him? Paul ſuffered much; indured much; yet was hee not perfect, if himſelfe ſay true: and for the Church of Chriſt, to giue them example, to ſtrengthen and confirme them in what they had receiued from him, filled vp the meaſure appointed for him in conformitie to the ſufferings of Chriſt Ieſus. Barradas, another of that ſame Society, Tom. 3. vpon the Goſpels. Quod ad ſufficientiam attinet nihil deerat paſsioni, & Cruci Chriſti: The Croſſe and ſufferings of Chriſt were all ſufficiency: and that way naught wanted vnto his paſsion. Vt tamen efficax eſ
                     
                        •
                     et Crux app
                        〈…〉
                     tio, & praedicatio laboribus plena deerat. Ideo Paulus 
                        •
                     it, ſe adimplere, quae deſunt paſsionum

Chriſti, quia per multos labores Euangelium gentibus praedicabat. And yet to make the Croſſe and ſufferings of Chriſt effectuall, there wanted application of it, by Preaching: A thing laborious, and exceding painefull: For which cauſe Paul ſaith, that hee filleth vp, or ſupplyeth, if you will, that which was wanting vnto the ſufferings of Chriſt, for as much as, with great paynes hee preached the Goſpell vnto the Gentiles.
               
               Differences there may be amongſt Interpreters: but none, not partialiſts take it ſo, as to make vp a Store-houſe for the Church, out of Chriſts ſufferings ſupplied by Saint Paul: For ſo it muſt be: admit this Magazin, and we muſt admit a ſupply: a ſupply is not but vpon inſufficiency. Can a man without blaſphemie babble thus? Chriſts imperfect, a d inſufficient ſufferings, were made vp and ſupplyed by Saint Paul? In the merits of Chriſt, there are no 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , comming ſhort, remaines, or as you will call them, wants: For if ſo: I ſay no more, but how can your ſelfe call them ſuperabundant as you doe, and as they are? The Text ſhould ſpeake expreſſely, if you kept your wo
                     〈…〉
                   for making vp a ſtore for the Church in time of need: which is ſo farre from expreſſely doing that, as that not obſcurely it inſinuateth what you pretend: no not in the interpretations of no Babes, vpon your owne partie, Ieſuites of note and learning.
               
                  Philip. 2. 30. Becauſe for the worke of Chriſt he was nigh vnto death, not regarding his owne life to ſupply your lacke. Epaphroditus is the man there ſpoken of: a faithfull ſeruant of Chriſt in the worke of the miniſtery: who with the hazard of his owne life puts himselfe

to doe ſeruice vnto the Church of God. This is the commendation Saint Paul giueth of him. Your inference is: Hee did more than hee needed to haue done: for who required any ſuch ſeruice at his hand as this? Hee might haue kept himſelfe cloſe, and warme at home: and haue ſlept if hee would, in an whole skinne. This is your good wholeſome Catholique Doctrine: For the benefit accruing out of the actions and Paſſions of Saints, is to make vp the treaſure of the Church, out of workes ſupererogated by them, when they doe more than God requireth. As for inſtance, when the Virgin Mary, without not onely actuall ſinnes, mortall, veniall, in your opinion, but alſo originall, as not conceiued in them, ſuffered yet much, which was not due to her: becauſe all ſufferings are the wages of Sinne: as when martyrs ſuffer more, or greater torments, than can in iuſtice be exacted of them, though God ſhould enter into iudgment with them, and deale with them in the rigour of his iuſtice. So, Epaphroditus, ſicke vnto death, indu
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   that which in no caſe was his deſeruing, or due vnto him: hee indured it therefore for the Philippians ſake, that through his ſufferings they might be ſaued, and haue ſupply of that which was wanting in the reckoning to the ſufferings of Chriſt: as good blaſphemy as euer was vttered by any enemy of the Grace of Chriſt, I will abide by it.
               Secondly, admit it, good Catholique truth; yet is it not to purpoſe true: for Epaphroditus was then aliue; and vpon recouery, aliues-like. They are, and muſt be dead, that bring in their ſhot, to make vp that

maſſe of treaſure for the Church; and good cauſe why: For though then at preſent hee had enough at home, and alſo ſpare to ſerue others turnes, yet wiſdome would hee ſhould not be too lauiſh or profuſe; for happely hee might haue neede thereof himſelfe: For your Doctrine alſo is, Hee that ſtandeth may fall. No man is ſure of his Saluation: therefore, well is it prouided, though you regard it not, or know it not, that your ſtore is not to be augmented till men are dead. Thirdly, in your owne conſtruction and learning, this Text of Saint Paul will doe you no good: For in poynt of ſupply, for Pardons and Indulgences from the Actions and Paſſions of Saints, you admit not of merits, but onely ſatisfactions Now this text ſerueth, if at all, for any thing to any purpoſe, for merit, and not for ſatisfaction.
               Laſtly, you play the Catholique knaue in plaine termes: a man may call a ſpade a ſpade, and him a knaue that ſo deſerueth it. For you will conuict vs by our owne Bibles. Now in our Bibles wee reade thus, Becauſe for the worke of Chriſt hee was nigh vnto death, not regarding his life, to ſupply your lacke of ſeruice towards mee. You cut off theſe words of ſeruice towards mee; and ſet vp your reſt vpon, to ſupply your lacke: as if the defects of the Philippians toward God, had beene ſupplied by the ſtore of Epaphroditus: whereas the defect was temporary, towards St. Paul, to ſupply which, Epaphroditus did venture his life. Such legerdemaine befitteth well your cauſe, not to be vpholden but by colluſion. Now goe and inferre your concluſion thus; Therefore the paſsions of

the ſeruants of God, may be imparted; and ſerue to good purpoſe to the Church: which no man but like you, will deny: but is not the thing in queſtion, or to be proued. And how commeth halting in the cloſe, Roman. 9. 3. where Saint Paul remonſtrateth his feruent loue indeede vnto his Brethren the lewes, in wiſhing to be ſeparated from Chriſt for them? Goe you and doe ſo, (and you ſhall haue a better treaſure in Heauen) for vs Proteſtants your Brethren in the ſame alloy, I wonder wee heare of no Fathers heere: nor any bragge of their aboundance, at leaſt ſuch a Catholique verity as this is, can afford whole thraues of Fathers I neede not doubt. But Roſcius noſter, noluit agere, aut crudior fuit. Wee muſt be faine to be without them, whom hee cannot name: neither here, nor for workes of Supererogation. No maruaile; for Cauſa eſt conclamata.
               
            
            
               
               XV.
               
                  That no man can doe any workes of Supererrogation.
               
               
                  WHat is meant by workes of Supererrogation wee may collect out of the Texts of Scripture cited, viz. that man in the ſtate of Grace, and aſſiſted by Gods grace, may doe ſome things councelled, and not commaunded or exacted in rigour. Many particulars are produced: it is commonly inſtanced, in virginitie, and wilfull pouertie. For my part I know no Doctrine of our Engliſh Church againſt Euangelicall Counſels. Priuate reſolutions this way or that way, are but opinions, and may as well be reiected as admitted: I willingly ſubſcribe vnto antiquitie for the poynt of Counſels Euangelicall: For, Quod ex voluntate eſt, laudis eſt amplioris, ſaith Philaſtrius. God putteth the yoake of Virginitie vpon no man, but leaueth it to thoſe that can and will vndergoe it: Therefore Nazianzen well reſolued; Wee haue Lawes amongst vs, that binde of neceſsitie: others, which be left vnto our free-choyce, to keepe them or not: ſo as if wee keepe them, wee ſhall be rewarded: if we keepe them not, no feare of puniſhment or danger to be vndergone therefore.
               
               But I deny thereupon workes of Supererrogation, to be laide vp in ſtore for imployments: ſuch indeede you call workes of Supererrogation: not the things

onely done by aſsiſtance of Gods grace, as councelled only, and not commanded. Which were it ſo, and no otherwiſe, Whence it appeareth, that man by aſſiſtance of Gods grace, may doe ſome things counſelled. And theſe we call workes of ſupererogation. I would not contend with you: but then your Magazin would be emptie enough of Churchtreaſure. The truth is, as faitors vſe, you play faſt and looſe: For although a man in ſome one poynt may doe more than is exacted, in many other things hee doth much leſſe than he ſhould doe. A man profeſſeth continency and ſingle life, hee muſt preciſely keepe it. He chaſtiſeth and bringeth vnder his body, with faſting, praying, lying on the ground, &c. the better to keepe it: as thoſe ancient Aſcetae and Anachorites did, in their meruailous and admirable Scleragogie; This was more than they needed to haue done, out of ſtrict commaund: But were they not defectiue? Came they home, thinke wee, in many other things commaunded, required vnder that fearefull dictate, Doe this, and liue? Now, ſet the Hares head againſt the Gooſe giblets; let one ſcore pay another, and then much wil not be left to ſatisfie for others: well for him that can anſwere for one. If a man could in all things keepe the whole Law, and haue no neede at all to ſay, Forgiue mee my treſpaſſes, then hee might happely Supererogate: as in opinion of the Aduerſary, the bleſſed Virgin may: till then, that wee meete with ſuch perfect liuers, wee may conclude rather for ſubtererogation, than ſupererogation any way. So this is your Doctrine of Supererogation vnto the Law: that of Counſells Euangelicall, is but of pretence to extenuate and palliate the enormitie of the other.
               
                  
                  Mathew 19. 21. In our owne Bibles our Doctrine is croſſed thus. If thou wilt be perfect, goe and ſell that thou haſt, and giue to the poore, and thou ſhalt haue treaſure in Heauen: then come and follow me. A Councell I grant: no Imperious forme of Precept. If thou wilt; not, Doe this: Left to choyce and liberty, to doe, or not. Chriſt tyeth no man, but leaueth him to doe, or not doe. But doth Chriſt ſay; When thou haſt ſo done, thou ſhalt haue enough remaining in ſtore, to make ſatiſfaction for another? No. He goeth no farther then merit, in their owne Language, thus: Thou ſhalt haue treaſure laide vp for thee in Heauen. For thee: Not, by thee, for thine owne vſe and employment, againſt thy neede: Not for others, borrowing out of thy ſtore: viz. Thou ſhalt haue it; in effect for thy ſelfe; appropriated to thee: not to conferre or beſtow it vpon other that neede. Farre ſhort of your ſupererogation.
               1 Cor. 7. 25. 28. Now concerning Virgins, 1 haue no commandement of the Lord, yet I giue my iudgement; you reade Councell, as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithfull: He that giueth her in mariage, doth well; but he that giueth her not in mariage, doth better. This hoe aduiſed, and gaue his counſell as you will haue it, and ſo let it be: Man to keepe himſelfe ſingle and alone, eſpecially as thoſe times then went, and as the times ſucceeding were to be: But ſo to doe, was a worke of ſupererogation: More I grant, then they were tyed vnto by any Law of God, which leaueth them at liberty, and to themſelues: but let me ſee, if Saint Paul hath any ſuch inference, as, out of this ſame worke they could ſatisfie for their owne offences otherwiſe

committed; or other mens offences beſide their owne, or out of their ſupernumerary perfections, adde any thing elſe vnto the Churches Stocke. He that is able to receiue this counſell, let him receiue and follow it all he can; and when as he hath ſo done, he ſhall benefit his owne Soule: no profit wi
                     •
                  l thence out, more then exemplary accrue vnto another. Theſe are indeed the workes of Supererogation, which you meane: The other are onely ti
                     •
                  ular, and doe but halfe it. So you wholy abuſe and circumuent your Proſelites, in pleading for one, and p
                     •
                  inting out another.
               
                  Mathew 19. 12. is of the former ſtampe; He that is able to receiue it, let him receiue it: leaueth it at liberty without tye or precept. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . He ordained this courſe for them that could receiue it; as ſaith Euſebius. This may ſuffice: for Luke 10. 25. thou ſhalt finde nothing vnto purpoſe.
               Fathers for the point wee may looke after, but not See one Father for the ſame, in ſtead of many I could produce. ſee. It is a vaine and falſe brag; you could produce many: All that you had heard of by relation of your Informers (for poore man your ſelfe are not guilty of them) wee ſhall finde in the caſe of keeping the Law. Saint Chryſostome ſhould haue gone amongſt them there: For ſo C. W. B. quoted them vnto your hand: all that you could doe, was to part him from the Fellowſhip, and bring him in alone in this particular. And yet he hath nothing for ſupererogation: His plea is for poſſibility to keepe the Law, (of which in due place.) Now keeping of the Law reflecteth vpon Precept. Precepts and Counſels, in your owne Learning, by your owne Confeſſion, are two diſtinct ſeuerals: Your prooſes out

of Scripture, were all for Counſels, not Precepts: and now Saint Chryſoſtome is ſummoned to ſpeake for Precepts: the poſſibility of keeping them. So, What would this man haue? what would he ſay? who floateth betwixt Counſels and Precepts thus vncertaine, vp and downe he knoweth not whether.
            
            
               XVI.
               
                  That by the fall of Adam, wee haue loſt all our free will: and that it is not in our owne power either to chooſe good or euill.
               
               
                  AQueſtion of obſcurity, which better might haue beene ouer-paſſed in ſilence; fitting rather Schooles, then popular eares: eſpecially the differences hanging on such niceties; and the controuerted particulars of no great moment in fine, vpon due examination. For it is confeſſed that free will is a Power of the reaſonable Soule; and peculiar vnder Heauen to man, which is indued with freedome to doe, or not to doe: whereby they make choyce of one end rather then of another, and of ſome meanes rather then of other, vpon aduice and deliberation of the vnderſtanding, chiefe Councellor to the will.
               This Power was conferred vpon man at firſt, in the day of his Creat on, when he was made a liuing Soule. In ſtate of Nature intire, a naturall faculty, not any ſupernaturall endowment at all: whereby moſt freely and

abſolutely he was Lord of his owne actions, and could doe or not doe what he pleaſed and would. That liberty was much empaired by ſinne, not extinct, or amoliſhed in corrupted Nature, ſuch as now it is. The Councell of Trent rightly ſo defineth it, Seſſ. 6. Cant. 5. And we profeſſe, Non amiſsimus Naturam ſed gratiam. As rightly is it by that Counſell determined, Liberum arbitrium non quidem extinctum eſſe, ſed viribus attenuatum. The queſtion is all of theſe vires remaining, and quatenus attenuatum liberum arbitrium: The Church of England, Artic. 10. concludeth thus. The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is ſuch, that he cannot turne nor prepare himſelfe by his owne naturall ſtrength, and good workes, to faith and calling vpon God: Wherefore we haue no power to doe good workes, pleaſant and acceptable vnto God, without the grace of God by Chriſt preuenting vs, that we may haue a good will and working with vs, when we haue that good will. Man is here conſidered in a two-fold ſtate, of Nature depraued, and reſtored. In that, Free-will is denyed vnto man, for workes of righteouſneſſe before conuerſion; not for workes of Nature, or of Morality. In the ſecond, Free-will is granted vnto man, When we haue that good will, what is it elſe? and By our Free-will, aſsiſted by Grace, worke out our ſaluation vnto the end. This is not that opinion condemned in the Councell of Trent: Seſſ 6. Can. 5. which taketh away free-will from man after preuenting Grace, in cooperation vnto increaſe of Grace; for it is ſaid, that Grace, infuſed firſt, and had, worketh together with our good will.
               
               So it is not denyed, but free-will is, In vs, ſubſiſting,

not in title onely. It is not ſaid, that by the 
                     •
                  all of Adam wee haue vtterly loſt all of vs our free-will, as if the Soule were cleane defeated and disfurniſhed of that Power: So that this blunderer ſtumbleth at a ſtraw, and impudently belyeth our Profeſſion. What ſome haue thought or taught, is nothing to vs. No Church is to be charged with priuate opinions. Man in ſtate of Corruption, hath freedome of will in Actions Naturall and Ciuill: Secondly, Man in ſtate of Corruption, hath free-will in matters Morall. Thirdly, Man hath free-will in Actions of Piety, and ſuch as belong vnto his ſaluation: But quatenus, and quale, is the Queſtion, as much amongſt your ſelues, as with vs. For the concurrence of Grace aſſiſting, with Free-will: The correſpondency of Free well, with Preſcience, Prouidence, and Predeſtination, is much debated in your owne Schooles. Intricate Diſputes are hereupon inferred: Queſtions almoſt inextricable; ſuch, as Armachanus ſtudied twenty yeeres to reſolue one of them, and was faine to giue it ouer without an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , I haue found it. Wee reſolue thus farre. Firſt, with Saint Auguſtine, Lib. 1. cont. 2. Epiſtolas Pelagianorum cap. 2. Quis noſtrum dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit arbitrium de humano genere? Libertas quidem perijt per peccatum: ſed illa quae in Paradiſo fuit habendi plenā cum immortalitate iuſtitiam: Doth any of vs affirme, that Freewill is periſhed vtterly from man by the fall of Adam? Freedome is periſhed, I grant by ſinne: but that freedome which was in Paradiſe, of hauing righteouſneſſe with immortality. Againe, we confeſſe with the ſame Saint Auguſtine, Man is not meerely paſſiue in all workes of

Grace, to glory: For, Qui creauit te ſine te, non ſaluabit te ſi
                        •
                     e te. He that made thee alone without thy helpe, will not ſaue thee alone without thy concurrance. Man is to worke, that will haue reward.
               In Concluſion, the Condition of Man ſince the fall of Adam, is ſuch, that he cannot turne, nor prepare himſelfe to God, by, or through his owne naturall or humane power and ſtrength. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England. Preuented by Grace, and aſſiſted therewith, he then putteth to his hand to procure augmentation of that Grace, and continuance vnto the end. No man commeth to God, but hee is drawen. Drawen, hee runneth or walketh, as his aſſiſtance is, and his owne agility and diſpoſition to the end. This is enough: And the wiſdome of the Church hath not ventured farre, to put a tye of Obedience vpon mens beliefe, in points of inextricable obſcurity almoſt, of the concordance in working of Grace, and Predeſtination with Free-will. Moderate ſpirits would well and wiſely ſit them downe by temperate courſes, and not clamor without rage, where is no cauſe; nor delight to ſet the Peace of the Church on hurres, onely for faction, and ſome priuate ſiniſter indirect ends of their owne.
               
                  Contrary to our owne Bibles, it is not which we reade, 1 Cor. 7. 37. He that ſtandeth ſted faſt in his heart, hauing no neceſsity, but hath power ouer his owne will, and hath ſo decreed, that he will keepe his Virgin, doth well. So it is confeſſed he doth, and that hee may haue power ſo to doe: For, it is not abſolute, as if euery one had ſuch Power, but Conditionall: If any haue ſuch Power. The Apoſtic ſaith; That man hath Power, if he be not tyed:
                  
which Text may as well demoliſh, as build vp Free-will. For here is ſuppoſed, at leaſt ſome time, an ouer-awing, and ouer-commanding; Neceſſity, or Coaction. Again, this Freedome ſpecified here, is but in bono morali, and no more. It may tend to Piety, I grant: but it is not intentione primâ; and directly it is onely occaſionally, as elſe-where, 1 Cor. 9. Am I not free? or Acts 5. Was it not in thy Power? That of Deuter. 30. 19. is more to purpoſe. I call Heauen and Earth this day to record againſt you, that I haue ſet before you life and death, bleſſing and curſing; therefore chooſe life, that both thou and thy ſeede may liue. For this is directly in point of Piety, and performance of duty immediate vnto God. Neither was it ſpoken to men according to generall notion of them, and their generall ſtate, in caſe of alienation from God; in ſtate of Nature onely, and Naturall endowments: of which it is conſented, I thinke, They cannot chooſe life; but to men preuented by Grace, called to Life, aſſiſted with much and many concurrances of Grace: This is not contrary to our Tenent, as is plaine in the Article before alleaged.
               That of Ioſhua 24. 15. is to the ſame purpoſe, almoſt in the very ſame words: one anſwere will ſerue to both. The Article denieth free-will quoad points of Pietie, to mere naturall men onely, in the ſtate of deprauation: but auoucheth it in ſtate of Grace, with See more: Eccleſ. 15. 14. concurrence of Aſſiſtance Eccleſiaſticus 15. 14. is not to purpoſe. The wiſe man ſpeaketh of what was; not what is: in the ſtate of innocency before the fall; not of deprauation being falne. God from the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his owne counſell.
                  
In 2 Sam. 12. I finde not for freewill, but onely this Verſe 17. that Dauid would not eate meate, but refuſed it: which place, if ignorantly alledged, proueth this fellow, as hee hath beene diſcouered often, a plaine blunderer: if with aduiſe; a ſhameleſſe ſlanderer, that would impute vnto Proteſtants ſuch a ſenceleſſe aſſertion, that man had not free-will to eate if hee would, for ſuch is the inference vpon that allegation.
               In Matth. 23. 37. There is an oppoſition of mans wilfulneſſe vnto Gods will. God would haue called Iudah: Iudah would not: therefore freely men renounce the calling of Grace: and freely runne themſelues, without any abſolute irreuerſible decree, vpon Perdition: which I graunt; being the purpoſe and intent of thoſe ſucceeding Texts of Scripture, with many moe to purpoſe in Gods Booke. How this is done; how farre it extendeth, I liſt not to diſpute. It is for Schooles, not for Pulpits; ſearching wits are at ſtand therein: common capacities muſt not be ſurcharged with it. It is wilfulneſſe, or more, to deny free-will: and it is wiſdome and truth to deny free-will: To deny Is it not then plaine wilfulneſſe to denye Freewill? the being, is ſo. And I wiſh with Scotus in 1. diſt. 39. that a man ſo wilfull were well cudgelled, vntill hee confeſſed, it ſtood in mans power to deſiſt from beating him: But to giue ſuch an abſolute ſway to free-will, as many doe, is little leſſe than flat impiety againſt God; againſt Saint Paul I am ſure; It is not of him that willeth, or him that runneth. Truth is in the middle betwixt two extreames, euermore, and here alſo.
               
                  
What the Fathers teach wee know: and where See Fathers that affirme the ſame. S. Iren. Lib. 4. cap. 7. they exceede, interpret them gently as you alſo doe. For take them at large, and they lauiſh ſo farre ſometime, that your greateſt Patrons of free-will dare not ioyne iſſue with them: not as if thoſe worthie lights did any way faile, or darkeneſſe poſſeſſed their cleare vnderſtandings: but being to deale againſt fatall neceſſity of the Pagans: againſt impieties of the Manichees, to cleare that imputation of belieuing, without further enquiry of reſolution; they extended the power of freewill to the vtmoſt; eſpecially, hauing then no cauſe to feare, ante mota certamina Pelagiana; there being no Pelagius yet riſen vp in the world, an enemy of Grace, and aduauncer of Nature beyond degrees of power or poſſibility. Thus your ſelues acknowledge as well as wee, and therefore to Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Epiphanius, and (who hath much more to purpoſe than all the reſt together) Chryſoſtome, though you name him not, becauſe you knew it not: and to Augustine alſo in his former writings, it might ſo be anſwered, that they ſpake of free-will, not in reſpect of Grace, but of Nature; yet I will particularly fall in with you, to each ſeuerall Father in his order.
               
                  Irenaeus Lib. 4. cap. 7. hath theſe words, as your Informer C. W. B. ſetteth them downe. Almightie God hath put in man a power of Election, as well as he hath done in the Angels. And againe, cap. 72. If it were not in our power to doe or not to doe theſe things, what cauſe had the Apoſtle, and long before that, our Lord himſelfe, to giue vs counſell what to doe, and from what

to abſtaine. This latter teſtimony is not in the Gagger: His Maſter hath it: and I alledge it, to let all Catholiques ſee, what an Ideot this poore animall is. C. W. B. hauing produced theſe two Texts of Irenaeus, cited in his Margin lib. 4. cap. 7. and ibid. cap. 72. This gooſe, becauſe hee would not gagge vs too much, made choyce of one, and wiſely too; for, by errour of the Printer, it was put cap. 7. in which Chapter is nothing to purpoſe; not a word of Angels, or of freewill: whereas it ſhould haue beene cap. 71. Which hee not knowing, becauſe hee hath all by retaile: a poore fellow, that (I thinke) knoweth not who Irenaeus was, followed the errour of the Printer, and ſo ſent vs to ſee nothing there. But let him paſſe: To the place I anſwere. Irenaeus attributeth vnto man, as hee may, free-will, before and after his fall: but ſo, after, as with Grace, to men in ſtate of Grace. The diſcourſe is long, and to purpoſe; but miſ-alledged heere, and miſ-applyed by the Gagger.
               
               
                  Epiphanius, how commeth hee in betwixt Irenaeus and Tertullian? being ſo much younger than eyther of them: eſpecially, rightly diſpoſed in the Inſtructor. Howſoeuer, I anſwere, that hee there diſputeth againſt the Phariſes: one of whoſe opinions was, that all things came to paſſe through fatal neceſsity. Which being ſo, there can be no choyce, nor free-will. But experience ſheweth, and Scripture cleareth it, there is free-will: therefore fatall neceſsitie is not at all. As true as Goſpel: Nothing touching vs, who graunt it as much as themſelues doe, that obiect thus vnto vs.
               
                  
                  Tertullian in his ſecond Booke againſt Marcion: the Chapter you knew not, becauſe you were not told; for your Inſtructor had it not. It is Chapter V. diſcourſeth thus. He proueth againſt Marcion, that God created all things out of goodneſſe, becauſe hee was good. Nor was the fall of man any worke of his at all, but to be imputed vnto free-will. A power and facultie originally in man, according to Gods goodneſſe, and mans nature and condition. Who could not haue deſerued well or ill: nor haue beene puniſhed or rewarded, except hee had beene left vnto his owne choyce, and not neceſſitated vnto either. Thus he, at large; and thus alſo we. Contenting himſelfe with the generall being, working, and concurring of Free-will, which wee deny not, with Gods grace.
               Not to trouble the Reader with any moe. This is enough that which is queſtioned, is as well queſtioned at home with the Church of Rome themſelues, as with and betwixt vs: that which heere is proued, is not queſtioned: Homini dedit Deus eligendi arbitrium quod ſequatur. Ante hominem vita & mors: ſi deliqueris, non Natura in culpa eſt, ſed defectus eligentis. Wee beleeue it, (as well as the Author of the Hypognoſticon, vnder Saint Auſtines name) with the certaintie of our faith, and preach it as an vndoubted verity, that in man there is free-will. And with Saint Auguſtine himſelfe, Lib. 1. de Ciuit. Wee are no way enforced, either by admitting Gods preſcience, to take away the freedome of mans will: or by admitting the freedome of mans will to deny, which were an haynous matter, Gods fore-knowledge of the things to come: but

both wee embrace, both mee freely and faithfully confeſſe. Thus that iudicious Father in C. W. B. though wee can hardly explicate the concurrence of both: and thinke it not fit to diſcourſe vnto vulgar capacities of ſuch myſticall poynts. Will it content you? Our concluſion and yours is all one. Wee cannot deny freedome of will: which who-ſo doth, is no Catholique: no nor Proteſtant.
            
            
               XVII.
               
                  That it is impoſsible to keepe the Commandements of God, though aſsiſted with his Grace, and the holy Ghoſt.
               
               
                  THe Commandements of God are perfect, euen as himſelfe is perfect: and therefore the rule of our life and actions, in ordine ad Deum, for the attaining of eternall happineſſe in Heauen: all of them tendered vnto vs vnder that condition, and high commaunding forme, Do this and liue for euer, the ſtile, in ordinary, vnto the Law of the higheſt: a condition ſo requiſite in euery part, that the Delinquent but in one, is guilty of all, and lyable vnto puniſhment for breach of all.
               Humane Lawes are commonly but vpon miſdemeanors precedent, to be corrected and preuented: For, ex malis moribus bonae Leges: good Lawes come from euill lines: as Phiſicke is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Reſtoratiue,

to repaire empayrings in the outward man. But Gods Law, as all his waies are ſaide to be, was of another faſhion; elder than tranſgreſſion; was Doe this and liue: as Phyſicke is alſo 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   preſeruatiue, to preuent the diſeaſe before it breake out: to keepe off tranſgreſſion not yet in being, God gaue the Law.
               When it was firſt ſaid to man, Doe this and liue, there was no queſtion of poſſibility to doe it. God at the firſt made man right, ſaith the ſonne of Syrach, and left him in the hands of his owne counſell. Hee might not haue eaten, God did not compell or neceſſitate him ot it: which if hee had done, hee had liued for euer. Such was his caſe, his ſtate, and his abilitie in his originall being. The Law was then verbum abbreuiatum; Thou ſhalt not eate. One word, not tenne words, as anon afterwards. The annexum then the ſame which afterwards: If thou eate, thou ſhalt dye the death. The commaundement enlarged vnto more particulars, as Sinne increaſed: but the condition ſtill the ſame, liue, or dic: ſo that the Law was elder than tranſgreſſion, and had reſpect, not to weakeneſſe as it is now, but to power and poſſibilitie; which man then had, when as firſt the commandement Doe this, went forth to be obſerued.
               Then it was poſſible to keepe the Law. God commaunded that which man might haue done. The queſtion is of poſſibility ſince, whether or no it be now poſſible which was then. Touching which poſſibility, and impoſſibility, I anſwere out of your owne ſchoole learning with Durand. Lib. 1. diſt. 42. qu. 2. There is a

two-fold poſsibilitiy and impoſsibilitie. Firſt, a thing is poſsible in reſpect of actiue or paſſiue power and capabilitie incident naturally. As thus. It is poſſible that the fire ſhould heate and warme mee actiuely: and I be warmed of the fire paſſiuely: becauſe there is that naturall actiue power in the fire to doe it: and that naturall paſſiue capability in mee to receiue it. So that is ſaide to be impoſſible, as many wayes, where there is no ſuch power nor capability in the creature, as, viz. for a man to flye, or a worme to walke.
               Secondly, a thing is poſſible, when there is a certaine habitude, reference, proportion, and correſpondency betwixt the termes: as betwixt a man and a liuing creature: the one hath an habitude vnto the other. Impoſſible is, where no ſuch habitude is: as euen and odde; two and three: It is not poſſible, that what is euen ſhould be odde: or what is odde ſhould be euen: that two ſhould be three: or three become two. Here is implyed a contradiction: as in this, Truth to be falſe: God deny himſelfe. Thus contradictorily, it is poſſible, not impoſſible to keepe Gods commandement: For there is no contradiction implied here. There is an habitude betwixt the termes. For there was in man created, as he came forth of the hands of his Maker, an actiue power to obſerue them: and in them, when they were tendred, a paſſiue poſſibility to be obſerued; which one day ſhall come againe into act, namely, in that ſtate of perfection in Heauen. But at preſent, as the ſtate now ſtandeth, this capability is not anſwered: this poſſibility is not brought into act, in regard of fore-ſtaling hindrances and impeachments.

And ſo our anſwere is vnto that queſtion, Whether it be poſsible for a man to keepe the Law and Commandements of God, Negatiue: It is not poſſible for a man in ordinary courſe of Nature, ſtantibus vt nunc, to attaine to that perfection in this life, to keepe the Commandements preciſely.
               I ſay in ordinary courſe it is not poſſible, becauſe of impeachments. But ſimply it is not impoſſible for God, becauſe there is an habitude betwixt the termes, to aduance man in nature, by a ſpeciall and peculiar aſſiſtance of Grace, to that height of perfection, to keepe all the Commandements of God. It is not impoſſible: for the power: yet for act, ſet Chriſt Ieſus aſide, it was neuer done ſince the fall of Adam. Nor ſtanding the ordinary courſe of Nature, and diſpenſation of Grace, ſhall euer be done in this world. For to keepe the Commandements, is to be without ſin, to keepe them all, and ſingular, in all poynts, at all times: not in ſome things onely at all times. Nor in all things at ſometimes onely.
               Thus then, that is poſſible which man can doe: that falleth within the verge of his Power to doe. Either meerely of himſelfe, or elſe by aſſiſtance of ſome concurrent. It is confeſſed, I ſuppoſe, that no man of himſelfe, in himſelfe conſidered, can poſſibly now keepe all Gods Commandemenrs. For there being two originals of Actions in Agents, Power and Will; a man may haue power to doe, but no will. As Diues had to releeue Lazarus. A man may haue will, and no power; as Agar had to relieue her ſonne Iſmael almoſt affamiſhed. To an Act conſummate, both Power and Will muſt concurre.

                  Et Non caret effectu quod voluere duo: Either mans will is wanting to doe what he can; or his power not ſufficient to doe what hee would. Now for Aſſiſtance, where man faileth of himſelfe, he muſt haue recourſe vnto ſome abetting hability. As the man in priſon, that cannot helpe himſelfe, muſt be relieued by ſome other. God muſt here doe it, or none elſe: for, of him is all our ſufficiency and might. God can by his Power, which is illimited, aduance any thing ſo farre vnto perfection, as hee will not doe it, in regard of his owne purpoſe and decree: in regard of order, and courſe in Nature. He can make Nature now altogether pure, as he did at firſt by ſupernaturall endowments; and as hee will doe at laſt in confirmed ſtate of Glory: But things ſtanding as they doe, and muſt, he will not doe it; and ſo it is impoſſible for man to attaine it, but onely by ſome diſpenſation, and peculiar eleuation: but in ſuch caſes of ſingularity, it muſt Conſtare what God wil doe. If it be a word gone out of his mouth, it is not impoſſible: if he haue ſaid it, it is impoſſible. Take here heed then leaſt we iuſtle his will and power together; which doing, we ſhall faſten many incongruities, abſurdities, and inconueniences vpon his Courſes, and Diſpenſations in the World.
               Againe, Man as he is patient, in reſpect of God aſſiſting, though Agent in himſelfe, and his performing, muſt be conſidered three wayes; in a threefold ſtate, for a threefold time, as hath already beene touched: Of Nature, Grace, and Glory. And that of Nature, two wayes: Made by God, with all ſufficiency; depraued by the Diuell, to all diſſability: As once it was, as now

it is. The Queſtion is not meant of Naturall ſtate, at all; what then man could doe: Any thing then, what now he can doe: Nothing at all now. Nor is it intended of the State of Glory, what hee ſhall be able then to doe. It is a ſtate of perfection confeſſed vpon all hands; of Perfection, without any Imperfections: And therefore performable euery way of all Gods Commandements, in all points, and at all times: but the queſtion is, of ordinary Grace in Regeneration, how farre it doth or may enable him now in this World.
               Thirdly, that to keepe Gods Commandements, is to obſerue and doe what God commandeth to be done. Not onely in part, as to keepe preciſely and to an haire, ſome of the Statutes; or ſome branches, or clauſes of thoſe Statutes: or at ſometimes onely, but for euer; in all parts: of any one, and euery Commandement, all points muſt be kept and obſerued.
               Fourthly, wee conſider what they command, and how: which is comprehended in two heads. Spirituall Obedience, from and with the Heart: Perfect Obedience, with all the Heart. For, as God is a Spirit, ſo thoſe that worſhip him, muſt worſhip him in ſpirit and in truth: not onely externally, with cap and knee. God is perfect, and accordingly the rule is; Be you perfect, as I am perfect. Such as he is, ſuch be his Lawes; and ſuch obedience vnto his Lawes is required of him that ſerueth God: But ſtill ſeruatis ſubiecti proprietatibus, as the ſubiect is capable of perfection. For nothing can be perfect, as God is perfect: that is, in the ſelfe-ſame degree of Perfection; for ſo it ſhould be God; but reſpectiuely perfect, in conformation like vnto him, as humane perfections

can be enabled, not in iuſt proportion.
               God requireth not perfection as himſelfe hath it, nor yet perfection exceeding the proportion of the Subiect. Not the ſame here, which is required in Heauen; nor here of all men alike: but as he ſcattereth, ſo he requireth; as hee hath conferred two Talents, or fiue, ſo he exacteth. So that, at laſt to adde limits to this rouing Propoſition, I reſolue it thus: No man in the ſtate of Grace regenerate, by any ordinary courſe or aſſiſtance of Grace, euer did or can obſerue all the Commandements of God, in euery part; no, not in that degree which God hath fitted him vnto, and requireth of him, at all times: At ſome time he may, in ſome particulars; or peraduenture in all particulars in ſome time, or ſome particulars in all time. Now let vs ſee how the Texts contrary this: or how the Fathers are of another opinion.
               
                  Philip. 4. 13. I can doe all things in Chriſt that enableth 
                  Contrary to expreſs words of their owne Bible. 
                  me. Therefore keepe the Commandements of God. Therefore any man may doe it: Therefore euery man may keepe them. As if whatſoeuer Saint Paul could doe, might haue beene performed by any ordinary Chriſtian: As if Saint Paul were not a man alone, of tranſcendent endowments, beyond ordinary alloy; who ſaith of himſelfe, He was in ſufferings beyond them all: who faith of himſelfe, Hee was rapt vp into the third Heauen, and heard things that neuer man heard. Secondly, what All things could hee doe? He that ſaith, All, ex
                     •
                  mpteth none; and ſo you take it at a large extent. Could he make Contradictions true? could hee Prophecy, or ſpeake with Tongues, where, and when

he would? Could hee walke on the Waters, or in the Ayre at pleaſure? And yet he ſaith; I can doe all things. All things extended, includeth theſe things. Otherwiſe, Quo warranto doth it follow, that amongſt thoſe All things, which Saint Paul could doe, the keeping of Gods Commandements ſhould be ranked? If it be reioyned, That muſt be included. I reply, it is the Queſtion: and ſo ought to be proued, not begged.
               Againe, I anſwere; Pauls performing, goeth no farther then Chriſts enabling: I can doe all things. But how? In Chriſt inabling me. That is, ſo farre as Chriſt ſhould or did inable him: but how appeareth that this is one of thoſe things, in which, or whereto Chriſt would inable him? So againe, this is the queſtion, and muſt be proued, not begged; beſide, Chriſt might enable him now, and not anon: many times, but not euer; in ſome things inable him, not in all.
               And yet farther, that All, hath a limitation. All thoſe things he could doe, of the which he ſpake, viz. want, and abound; ſuffer and endure proſperity and aduerſity alike, through the Grace of Chriſt Ieſus which did aſſiſt him. So Chryſoſtome, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Lombard, Thomas, Lyra, Caietan: So the Text it ſelfe to any man that ſhall but view it, Saint Paul meant nothing leſſe, then that in the whole courſe of his life, hee was able to keepe the entire Law of GOD, in euery point, which is the ſtate to be made good, and yet was Saint Paul able to doe and performe as much, as any other man could performe.
               1 Iohn 5. 3. This is the loue of God, that wee keepe his Commandements. It is ſo: and what of that? Herein

we ſhew our loue to God, that we keepe his Commandements: That is, in effect, as we loue him, ſo we keepe his Commandements; and as we keepe his Commandements, ſo we loue him. Perfect or imperfect: in all or in part it is not ſaid. Indeed, we loue in part, not as wee ſhould; we keepe his Commandements in part, not as we ſhould, or would in all.
               But his Commandements are not grieuous. What of that? Therefore poſſible to be kept in euery point, at all times, by any man? I deny that. For, I ſee no ſuch ſequell to be inferred. Grieuous, is ſimply or reſpectiuely. In regard of thoſe many incumbrances of Moſes Law, the Law of Chriſt Ieſus was not grieuous. Againe, a thing may be weighty, and yet not in reputation or eſteeme, vnto ſome men; who will runne with that weight eaſily, or vndergoe that burthen willingly. For to a willing minde, what is grieuous, though it be impregnable, inexpugnable, impoſſible? The Heathen man could tell vs, that the Romane Legions went often with alacrity vpon that peece of Seruice, from whence they knew and were aſſured, they ſhould neuer come off with life. Weighty and inſupportable are two things. Weighty and grieuous, are two things. To thoſe that loue God, nothing is heauy for God: not for the thing it ſelfe, but becauſe of Loue; which maketh that ſeeme light, which indeed is heauy, and giueth men, if not actiuity beyond power, yet will beyond poſſibility of Power to doe.
               See more. But firſt heare a reaſon, that interlopeth betwixt theſe teſtimonies of holy Writ. A reaſon or two: for ſo it is. The firſt, A man is not bound to impoſſibilities:

but a man is bound to keepe the Commandements, 
                  Briefly, if the Commandements were impoſſible, they could binde no man: For it is not to bee conceiued, how one ſhould ſinne, in a thing which hee could not poſſibly auoid. 
                  and is lyable to puniſhment for breach of them. I anſwere: It is true, no man is tyed to ſimple Impoſſibilities, where there is no habitude betwixt the termes. As to be immortall in this life; to flye, or walke in the Ayre, or on the Waters. Such impoſſibility is not betwixt the Law of God, and mans performance. Secondly, when the Commandements were giuen, there was not onely a poſſibility, but ability and ſufficiency in man to keepe Gods Law: For in effect and ſubſtance it was all one, Eate and dye, with Doe this and liue. The particulars were explained in time, the Nature of Obligation altered not: If ſince there hath accrued an impoſſibility of Conſequence, what is this to that ſufficiency which was before, when the Law was firſt giuen; and man tyed to Obedience, as Adam was?
               Againe, it is confeſſed with Saint Augustine, that It is not to be conceiued how one ſhould ſin in a thing which hee could not poſſibly auoid. ſinne is not ſinne, except it be voluntary He that cannot poſſibly auoid neceſſity of ſinning, is iniuriouſly dealt withall, if he be puniſhed for ſinning: But no man is ſo neceſſitated, either actiuely in regard of the ouer-awing and determining decree of God, vnauoidable, vnreſiſtable. No man is ſo neceſſitated paſſiuely. For, as hath beene ſaid, betwixt mans Actiue poſſibility, and the Paſſiue poſſibility of Gods Law, there was at firſt, naturally is, and finally ſhall be, a Correſpondency. If interim, ſtantibus vt nunc, impediments, incumbrances make it impoſſible, man may thanke himſelfe that hath loſt his power of performing.
               Now ſee more, and ſee as little. Ecclus. 15. 15. a place twice or thrice alleaged by this Trifler againſt the Proteſtants,

whom hee knoweth not to receiue the Booke as Canonicall: and therefore not bound to ſtand vnto the authority of the ſame, or ſubſcribe vnto the aſſertion. But I quarrell it not: I accept the authority, and anſwere it out of the Text. They obſerue his Commandements ſo farre, as to doe their beſt, and teſtifie their good will. Which proueth, in his opinion, rather a defect, then any poſſibility of perfection. If thou wilt, thou ſhalt obſerue the Commandements, and testifie thy good will.
               
               
                  Ezech. 36. 27. I will put my ſpirit in the middeſt of you, and will make you to walke in my ſtatutes. It is the effect and operation of Gods Spirit to doe this. But the Prophet doth not ſay; They ſhall not ſtumble, nor fall, as many walkers doe, who yet attaine their iournies end in peace, and goe on in their courſe with commendation. The Prophet addeth: And you ſhall keepe my Iudgements, and doe them. I will take no aduantage vpon the word Iudgements; Let it goe for the morall Law of God. He keepeth the Law, that doth what hee can: and hath defects and infirmities pardoned him. As Dauid is ſaid to haue done, who yet fell foule moe times then one.
               
                  Mathew 11. 30. ſpeaketh of a yoake, the ſame in effect with 1 Iohn 5. 3. That which is not heauy to bee borne, is not impoſſible to be kept: but Gods Commandements are not heauy: for they are the yoake, which Chriſt ſaith, is eaſie. I anſwere, Chriſt ſpeaketh not primarily of Gods Commandements there, but of the Polity of Grace in the Goſpell of Peace, in regard of the Polity of the Law, to which hee preferreth it as

eaſier, and leſſe cumberſome, for cauſes well collected and obſerued by Maldonate out of the Fathers. You may ſee other expoſitions in Ianſenius: but nothing for your dreame of perfection.
               Againe, in this argumentation, that which is not heauie to be borne, is not impoſsible to be kept; the Propoſition is abſolutely falſe. For it is iugum, though dulce: as feathers are onus, though alleuians: as wheeles, though cauſe of motion, vnto a Coach.
               
                  Matthew 19. 17. Is not to purpoſe. The queſtion is not, whether To keepe Gods Commandements be the ready way and means to enter into life: that Scripture ſaith ſo, and Proteſtants approue it, for them that can doe it. But whether no man otherwiſe entreth into life: whether euery one that entreth into life, hath perſonally kept Gods Commandements: whether it be poſſible for them to doe it, This Proteſtants deny. This that Scripture ſaith not. Againe, it is not heere propoſed as a condition vnto him, but as a Conuiction; who came in the vanitie of his minde, truſting in his owne worth. And is propoſed as a neceſſary implication of the Law vnto him, who was a Lawyer by Profeſſion, and propoſed his queſtion onely De faciendis, the Tenor of the Law: not de credendis, the Tenet of the Goſpell. And doubtleſſe if Saluation be ſought by onely doing, the workes of the Law muſt needes be done. But how doth this follow, if thoſe that ſeeke Saluation by their owne worke, muſt be put ouer to performe the workes of the Law, therefore all men muſt preciſely keepe the law? the fooliſh preſumption of ſome foole hardy vndertaker, is no preiudice

vnto wiſer men. Nor tye for them to venture on the ſame follies.
               
                  Iohn 14. 15. If you loue mee keepe my Commandements. And adde if you will in the ſame Chapter, If any man loue mee hee will keepe my word. And Chapter 15. If you keepe my Commandements, you abide in my loue. All which, and others of that Nature, proue this, Gods Commandements muſt be kept: they conclude not the manner and meaſure of the thing, How, wherein, how farre they may be kept. Secondly, I anſwere out of Ianſenius, Chriſt doth not vnderſtand the whole Law of God; but ſome part of the Law of the New Teſtament: ea ſcilicet quae modo tradidi, of Faith in mee: and Loue amongst your ſelues. Nor doth our Sauiour here promiſe any ability to doe it: or ſpecifie any performance of it: but exhorteth them rather to ſhew their loue vnto him, by ſtriuing to doe what hee gaue them in charge, rather than to weepe and take-on for his departure. Thus Ianſenius one of your owne ſide.
               
                  Rom. 13. 8. He that hath charity hath fulfilled the Law. True, hee that hath it in gradu ſummo: but euery Regenerate man hath charitie. True, at leaſt in remiſſe degrees. Saint Paul ſpeaketh of the Perfection of Charity; and of perfect fulfilling of the Law; or elſe of Charity with imperfections: and ſo of anſwerable fulfilling of the Law. Euery true regenerate man hath Charity. True: and ſo fulfilleth the Law in hauing it. But ſometime more, ſometime leſſe: and ſo accordingly fulfilleth the Law. Againe, the Apoſtle ſaith by way of ſuppoſition, He that hath charity:
                  
hee doth not auouch that any man hath it, ſo as is ſufficient totally to fulfill the Law. So that at leaſt, the text cited is not to purpoſe. Beſide, Saint Paul inferreth it by way of exhortation, Becauſe it is the fulfilling of the Law. And the nearer a man commeth vnto perfect loue, the nearer hee is to fulfill the Law. Now in Exhortations to performance, we vſe to ayme at the higheſt, and ſet vp the beſt, for markes and obiects. Which the Apoſtle did: not as perſwaded all men would attaine, or could attaine vnto it, but to incite them to indeauour vtterly.
               
                  Ioſua 11. 15. 22. 5. Pſalm. 17. 3. Luke 1. 6. are examples of men that are remembred to haue walked in Gods Commandements, and kept his Lawes. A thing done; therefore not impoſſible to be done. To which I anſwere, firſt, as this Rouer ſhooteth his bolt at them, there is no conſequence: Some men haue done it, therfore euery man, or any man, may doe it: For they happely might doe it by extraordinary aſſiſtance; and by miraculous grace: but the Propoſition is of ordinary courſe. Secondly, it is no where ſaid that theſe holy men, all of them, at all times, did keepe all the Commandements of God. They did their beſt, and it was accepted by God.
               That of Ioſhua is to be taken and vnderſtood, onely of one particular kinde; Namely the execution of Gods iuſtice vpon the Cananites, and the Inhabitants of the Land of Canaan: And yet hee failed euen in that, and kept not all, as is cleare in the caſe of the Gibeonites. The man as well might haue brought out Moſes and Aron, whoſe commendation is, That, as the Lord

commanded, ſo did they. And yet we know there were ſome things, in which they failed both: for which cauſe they entred not into the Land of Canaan ouer Iordan.
               
               
                  Dauid ſaith, Pſalm. 17. 3. That there was no iniquity in him. Which if you take at full extent, you muſt anſwere your Proſelites vnto this Queſtion, What was the Caſe of Vriah and his Wife, if hee kept all the Commandements of God: and no iniquitie was found in him? Sure we muſt take it of the time before his fall. And ſuppoſe the Pſalme to haue beene made before that. For in that action hee cannot be excuſed. He notoriouſly broke the Law in two enormious ſinnes, of Murther & Adultery at one time: Then, there was iniquitie in his hands; at leaſt.
               That of Zacharie and Elizabeth, is of more importance, Luke 1. For it is ſaid, They walked in all the Commandements of God without blame. But firſt one ſingular example is not concluding for all, or for a common courſe. It neuer was denied, but God might, extraordinarily, aduance ſome one or other vnto ſuch an height of Perfection, as fully and perfectly to keepe all his commandements poynt per poynt. God might haue done it: but hee neuer did it. Neuer man attained ſuch a pitch. Secondly, it is not ſaid, that They kept the commandements of God, which was this mans vndertaking. But they walked in them: in which courſe they might haue rubbes, diuerſions, pulbackes, ſlidings, fals. Then, they walked in them, vntaxable, vnblameable, not complained of. Not that God could finde no fault with them, but that men

could not blame them; nor ſay, blacke is their eye. Gods eyes are tenne thouſand times brighter than the Sunne, and can diſcry blemiſhes where men cannot. The keeping his Commaundements muſt not be according to the view and cenſure of men, but after the eſtimate of God. But they were iuſt before him too. So they might be, and yet not keepe all his Commandements. For euen the iuſt man falleth ſeauen times a day. Perfection is three-fold, in different degrees: Actuall euer, and in being: incident onely to the Saints in glory. Actuall not in-being, but deſire: referring all euermore vnto God, by conſecrating all vnto his Glory. And Habituall, when in purpoſe a man loueth God aboue all, and is ready to leaue all other things for Gods ſake. This man is vnblameable euen before God: not becauſe hee cannot be reprehended: but becauſe hee is not reprehended; God in mercy accepting his will and deſire, for his deed. Thus Bellarmine himſelfe hath anſwered the place, being to oppoſe the Pelagians. Many moe places might be alledged, to as little purpoſe, which either proue that which is not denied: or proue it in part, and ſo are defectiue. Now Fathers wee may ſee, to as little purpoſe, ſome few heere remembred. His good Maſter C. W. B. could haue afforded him moe. The firſt is, Origen hom. 9. in Ioſua. But what hee ſaith, the good ſimple man knoweth not, becauſe his inſtructor did not let him vnderſtand, as being not fully informed from Bellarmine, himſelfe. But thus it ſtandeth. Origen, figuratiuely, as his manner is, maketh theſe ſorts of men in the Church: Viros, mulieres, infantes, proſelytos.
                  
Thoſe whom hee compareth vnto Women, he exhorteth, to ſtriue what they may, to attaine to perfection of Men in chriſtianitie. Now hee calleth them Mulieres, comparing them to Women, who ſay, I cannot doe as it is written; Goe ſell all, and giue it to the poore: nor yet turne to him my other cheeke that ſtriketh mee vpon one: nor bleſſe him that curſeth mee. Caetera ſimilia quae mandantur, qui dicit implere non poſſum, quid tibi videtur aliud, quàm inter mulieres, quae nihil virile poſſunt, eſſe numerandus? Hee that faith, I cannot doe theſe, and ſuch other things as theſe, which be commaunded, ſeemeth hee not worthily to be accounted amongſt women? Origen heere ſpeaketh of Perfection, and degrees of Proficiency. Who queſtioneth it? and inſinuateth that a man might keepe thoſe Precepts of the Goſpell. Who Doubteth of it? but doth Origen ſay it is poſſible, for a man to keepe all the Commandements of God? Shew me that, and I haue done.
               
                  Cyril Lib. 4. contra Iulian: So your director told you; perhaps through error of the Printer. And you good Innocent, belieued him. But go conſult with Cyril, and you ſhall finde it in his third Booke, about the middle, as Bellarmine directed your Director. In the Law it was written, as ſaith Cyril there, Thou ſhalt not couet. It is poſſible, to keepe this Commaundement, ſaith Bellarmine, through aſſiſtance of Grace, and ſo, not to couet at all. Which thing, if St. Cyryl ſaid, hee ſaid not onely more than hee can make good, but more alſo than is required. More than Bellarmine would haue him ſay, or doth deſire at his hands. Nay

more than he would approue in him, or make good, if he ſhould ſay it. For Non concupiſcec, thou ſhalt not couet, goeth on ſo farre, as to exclude, euen veniall sins. Which needeth not. For our Maſters yeelde vnto them, and exclude no more but mortall ſinnes. It is poſſible to fulfill the Law. Why? Becauſe the Law forbiddeth and condemneth onely mortall ſinnes. But a man cannot poſſibly auoide veniall ſinnes. Thoſe therefore the Law forbiddeth not. They may be Praeter, beſide the intent of the Law: They are not contra againſt the Law. Againe, Non concupiſces, pricketh vp to that fomes peccati, the ſourſe, nurſe, and fomentation of ſinne, which our Maſters confeſſe, is not extinct, cannot ceaſe in the Regenerate. If Saint Cyril ſaide, that Non concupiſces, may be performed: that is, that the ſuſtentation of Sinne may ceaſe, he ſaid that which Bellarmine will not defend. And you, Sir Puny, what are you? For in this life, that fomes peccati ceaſeth not; which your men maintaine againſt Proſper Dyſ
                        •
                     
                     deus, or Fauſtus Socinus, and ſuch impes of Sathan.
               But indeede, nor ſo, nor ſo, Cyril reſtrayneth Non concupiſces, thou ſhalt not couet or deſire, vnto one particular Act, obiectiuely, the not-luſting after or deſiring of a Woman. This Chriſt forb
                     •
                  d beyond the Law: which at leaſt was taken by them to inhibite no more but the outward act. And this may be done: many haue done it, I make no queſtion. As for Concupiſcence in generall, it is apparant hee held it not, as is imagined: and held it altogether vnmaſterable; for hee ſaith, Res eſt, vt opinor, ad quam pertingi nequeat: It is in my opinion of that condition, as no man can attaine

vnto, vtpote incomprehenſibilis & quodam modo ſupra naturam, as being out of mans reach, and compaſſe altogether, and in a ſort aboue the aſsiſe of Nature. Thus Cyril, albeit hee nameth Concupiſcence, yet taketh it not ſo, as the aduerſary pretendeth, for any Concupiſcence, in large extent, but onely in ſpecie for that kinde of Concupiſcence, and no more, which is in carnall affection to a Woman. Many haue attained vnto this perfection: neuer any vnto that, but Ieſus Chriſt, in one fleſh, without ſinne. Saint Hilary vpon Pſalm. 118. ſaith ſomewhat, it ſeemeth, but not that which you would haue him ſay. It is not hard, are his words, if our will be but preſent to fulfill the Commaundement of God. Thus your Maſter C W. B. out of Bellarmine, jugler as hee was: and thus you, as falſe a Traytour as hee As if it had beene Saint Hilaries minde, A man that will may eaſily keepe the Commaundements; and whole Law of God, who nor ſaid it, nor yet thought it: For hee vpon theſe words, of the 119. Pſalm. Thy Commandement is exceeding large, expoundeth large in a two fold ſence. Firſt, becauſe the knowledge of Gods Law doth infinitely extend and aduance the vnderſtanding of mans Ignorance: that is, Make ignorant men to vnderſtand and know very much: Or elſe, becauſe there are many parts of it: many dueties required in it: ſo that hee which cannot keepe one, may keepe another: and pleaſe God in one, as hee may diſpleaſe him in another. It neither being required of any man to performe all: nor poſſible for any man, to performe all. How like you this Doctrine Sir? This is Hilaries reſolution? thus and no

other way he concludeth, that it i
                        •
                      poſsible to keepe the Law. You ſhall haue his words at large: not, as they are curtailed by falſe knaues, to deceiue men. Latum plauè eſt, ſiue quod in infinitum cognitionem humanae ignorantiae extendit: Siue quod multa ſunt in quib us Dei praecept is obtemperatur at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      placetur, ſecundum diuisiones & munera gratiarum. Non enim abomnibus omnia expectantur: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vniuerſi vniuerſa ad ſummam placendi implere poſſunt. Alius 
                        〈…〉
                     nio placet: Simplicitate fidei promeretur alius: alius vitia eleemoſynis redimit, &c. Latum igitur mandatum Dei eſt, & in omnia ſpei noſtrae genera diffunditur, vt non difficile ſit praecepto Domini obtemperare, cum latum & diffuſum ſit ad placendum officioſae religionis varietate. It is then particular obedience which he ſpeaketh of, to any one point or precept of the Law. Hilary to that purpoſe ſets it downe praecepto, not praeceptis, not vnto the whole Law, as is pretended. So that much colluſion hath been in this Teſtimony. Firſt by Bellarmine, who taketh it by halfes for his aduantage. Then by our Engliſh Succedor, who geldeth it more, to make it ſerue as an Eunuch, the Babylonian turnes.
               Next Saint Baſil pronounceth it an impiety to ſay, Laſtly, Saint Baſill who ſaith it is an impious thing to ſay, that the commandements of God are imposſible. 
                  Impoſsibilia eſſe ſpiritus ſancti praecepta. Our Engliſh Iugler repreſenteth it. That the Commandements of God are impoſsible. Of God. For of the Spirit. Why? what materiall difference? The Spirit is God: and God is a Spirit. Yet a difference betwixt the Commandements of God, and, Commandements of the Spirit. For marke. Saint Baſil explaining thoſe words, Attende tibi, ſaith, they may be conceiued of two wayes. Corporally:

looke to thy Body, and the things thereof. Spiritually; and that which appertaineth vnto the ſtate of thy Soule. And he addeth, they muſt be taken for the things of the ſoule: becauſe, that which God commandeth, as you will haue it, or as he ſpeaketh, The Commandements of the Spirit, are not impoſſible. But to attend a mans body corporally, is impoſſible: For it cannot be, that euery part of a mans body ſhould be ſo perpetually in his Eye, as that attendance be ſtill vpon it. The Eye cannot diſcerne it ſelfe, nor yet any part of the head, the backe, or inward parts. This is impoſſible: therefore this is not the meaning. For the Spirit would not command things impoſsible: that is, impoſſible in themſelues, where there is an impoſſibility betwixt the termes. So that in Saint Baſil, impoſsibility, is that impoſſibility which is not actionis ſuſceptiua. For as Halenſis obſerueth; the Irrefragable Doctor. Poſſibility is of two kinds. Actiua, and Actionis ſuſceptiua. Par. 3. memb. 5. art. 1. Now no man ſaith it is impoſſible to keepe any, or all Gods Commandements; becauſe in, and of themſelues, they are not keepeable. The Eye is not ſuſceptiua actionis, to behold or ſee the things behind. But that which the Spirit there commandeth, is in it ſelfe poſſible to be done. So Baſil ſaith as little to the purpoſe, as any other Writer doth whatſoeuer; being arightly vnderſtood, and not peruerted in his meaning. See Baſil, and if this be not his meaning, let me be held as honeſt as this Gagger, that peruerteth his ſence a contrary way, that is, a falſe knaue.
               
                  Hierome laſtly, in his third Booke againſt the Pelagians, who pleaded then, as our Romane Catholiques

doe now, hath theſe words: God hath commanded, things poſsible. No man doubteth. Poſſible in themſelues, abſolutely: though not to vs, as the Caſe now ſtandeth reſpectiuely. Poſſible vnto vs, when they were firſt commanded: though not ſo poſſible, ſince the commandement. For God made man right, and gaue him a Law: Since that hee hath intangled himſelfe many wayes. Poſſible now in part, though not in all: to ſome men, albeit not generally vnto all. It plainly appeareth what Hierome meant: for he addeth, Sed quia homines poſsibilia non faciunt, idcircò omnis mundus ſubditus eſt Deo, & indiget miſericordiâ eius. But becauſe men doe not that which of it ſelfe is poſsible, therefore all the World is ſubiected vnto God, and ſtandeth in neede of his mercy. So that hee explaineth his owne meaning: They were poſſible in themſelues, though not poſſible vnto man. Secondly, ſome things poſſible at ſome time, to ſome men, though not to all men at all times. And ſo is that to be vnderſtood which Bellarmine hath out of the ſame Hierome in Mat. 5. omitted by this Collector; becauſe not found in his good Founder C. W. B. Multi praecepta Dei, imbecillitate ſuâ, non Sanctorum viribus aeſtimantes, putant eſſe impoſsibilia, quae praecepta ſunt; to wit, thoſe Precepts explained vpon the Law, Loue your enemies, Doe good to thoſe that hate you: Et dicunt ſufficere virtutibus, non ediſſe inimicos. Caeterum Diligere plus praecipi, quam humana Natura patiatur: Sciendum eſt ergo Chriſtum non impoſsibilia praecipere, ſed perfecta. Quae fecit Dauid in Saul & Abſolon. Stephanus quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Martyr, pro inimicis lapidantibus deprecatus eſt. Many men, measuring the Commandements

of God, not by the performings of Saints, but their owne weakneſſe, account things impoſsible, by God commanded, and account it enough for a vertuous man, not to hate his enemies: As for that, To loue them, it is a Precept beyond humane poſsibility. But wee muſt know, Chriſt commanded not impoſsible, but perfect things. Such as Dauid did in Saul, and towards Abſolon. And that bleſſed Martyr Stephen, prayed for them that ſtoned him. So it is not obſcure what the Fathers meant by that, It is poſſible to keepe the L
                        •
                     w. In it ſelfe not impoſſible. At ſome times not impoſſible. In part not impoſſible, they neuer came to this preſumption. Any man: at any time: All the Law.
               
               Therefore Iuſtine Martyr againſt Tryphon ſaith, vpon that Text, Curſed is euery one that doth not obſerue all the Precepts of the Law to doe them. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Your ſelues dare not ſay it, (and what the Iewes durſt not ſay, you dare ſweare;) that any man hath perfectly kept them all. But there are that haue obſerued ſome more, ſome leſſe, in thoſe things that were commanded. I grant with Hierome, Lib. 2. c. Pelagian: That many men haue liued iuſt and righteous. But I doe not grant that euer any man was without ſinne: Sine omni autem peccato fuiſſe, omnino non aſſentior. If any man imagine hee hath obtained that perfection, Aut ſuperbus aut ſtultus eſt, He is no letter then a proud foole. All that I can challenge in the height of my perfection, is, but onely that of Saint Auguſtine, Meritum meum, miſericordia Domini; The mercies of

the moſt high, are my merits. Therefore wee profeſſe with earneſt deprecation, Enter not into iudgement with thy ſeruants O Lord: For in thy ſight ſhall no fleſh be iuſtified. And, If thou ſhalt be ſeuere to marke what is done amiſſe, who, O Lord, ſhall endure it?
               
               
                  Iob neuer aduanced his perfection, to the fulfilling of all that God commanded, though 27. 6. he vſeth thoſe words in your Tranſlation, Non reprehendit me Cor meum. My heart hath not reproued me, all my dayes. For his meaning is, As long as I liue I will maintaine my Innocency, that I haue not diſſembled in my heart. This I will ſtand to euerlaſtingly, and not betray my owne Cauſe. Otherwiſe as Saint Gregory hath obſerued here, Se pe
                        •
                     ceſſe ſuperius accuſat. He hath formerly accuſed himſelfe of ſinne. Nor doth God excuſe him from all breach of the Commandement, who giueth him that Teſtimony, 1. 22. Ioh did not ſinne. For it is limited, In all this: and yet not ſinne in that ſort, as to Charge God with iniuſtice. Sciendum eſt: We are to know, ſaith Gregory, that there are ſome kinde of ſinnes which the righteous men canauoid: and there are ſinnes which the moſt righteous cannot auoid. If ſins: then needs againſt ſome Commandement. For no Sinne, but is a Tranſgreſſion of the Law. If againſt the Law: then the Law is not kept in doing them: and if the moſt Righteous cannot but doe them, ſurely the moſt Righteous cannot keepe the Law. This was once the Doctrine of the Romane Church: For Gregory hath it, that was Biſhop of Rome; in his Morals, Lib. 27. and 7 Chapter vpon Iob. Hath that Church then left her ancient Faith?
            
            
               
               XVII.
               
                  That onely Faith iuſtifieth: and that good workes are not abſolutely neceſſary to Saluation.
               
               
                  COntrouerſies are ſometime multiplied vnneceſſarily, by theſe Romance Catholiques; to iangle the more: and ſometime hudled vp by confounding many, to deceiue the more: as in this preſent Queſtion of Faith iuſtifying: a great Controuerſie: And workes concurring: as maine a diuerſity, vnto Saluation. Though diſtinction of parts be fit to teach, and giueth life and luſtre vnto diſcourſe; yet ſeeing it hath pleaſed this fellow to confound theſe two, we muſt goe on with him in his wild-gooſe race vp and downe.
               To iuſtifie is a word of Chriſtian learning onely: yet taken and deriued from externall Courts, and iudiciary proceedings in Caſes of Accuſation and Defence. In which regard it hath a three-fold extent, vpon a three-fold ſeuerall act: Firſt to make iuſt and righteous. Secondly, to make more iuſt and righteous. Thirdly, to declare and pronounce iuſt and righteous. Not exactly obſerued in humane Courts I grant: For no Iudge can make a man what he is not: he can finde him what he is, and make him appeare ſo more and more by euidence; and at laſt declare him, and pronounce him ſo by publike ſentence of abſolution. But for thoſe three

ſeuerall acts, in the iuſtification of a Sinner, the Scripture plainely (it cannot be denied) doth diſtinguiſh them thus.
               
                  Rom. 4. 5. He that belieueth in him that iuſtifieth the vngodly. Auguſtine vpon the 30. Pſalme expoundeth it thus. Who is it that iuſtifieth the Wicked? Hee that of a wicked man maketh a righteous. So, Rom. 3. 20. 24. and 1 Cor. 6. 11. For there is a two-fold ſtate of man in this world: The one Originall; as he is conceiued and borne in ſinne, and accordingly produceth in life and actions, the curſed workes of a bitter roote: The other Acquiſite, renewed according to the Spirit, vnto the ſtate of perfection with God. Of Nature, wherein: Of Grace, whereto. In Nature, there is nothing cleane, or pure, that can pleaſe God, or be accepted of him: Hee is not iuſt that is in this ſtate. In that of Grace, a man is iuſt when hee is changed: which muſt haue concurrence of two things. Priuation of being to that which was; the Body of ſinne. A new conſtitution vnto God, in another ſtate. In which, hee that is altered in ſtate: changed in condition: transformed in minde: renewed in ſoule: regenerate and borne a new to God by Grace, is iuſt: in the ſtate of iuſtification: ceaſing to be what hee was: becomming what he was not before.
               Thus to be changed, is to be a new Creature. The act is ſaide by Dauid, Pſalm. 51. To create: Which being a worke of Omnipotent power, exceedeth the indowment of any Creature. It is not therefore of our ſelues, from, or by our ſelues. But this change is, the worke of the right hand of the moſt high, operating

powerfully, as hee can: and actiuely, as hee will. Wrought it is by God: by God alone: Man, or Mans free-will is not author hereof. Therefore no merit interveneth: therefore not to be aſcribed to our ſelues. None here but Chriſt preuenting vs: the Author of our integritie: crowne of our felicitie: and conſummator of our glorie.
               
               Secondly, to iuſtifie, is to giue increaſe, and augmentation vnto that firſt Article, as to be more iuſt in proceſſe and profectu: by increaſe of Grace, and the fruit of that Spirit, by which they are renewed in the inner man. In naturall action and paſsion it plainely appeareth. Cold water is made warme vpon the fire: heere is an alteration of the propertie. Warme water is made hotter by continuing on the fire, with an augmentation and acceſſe of that heate. So I vnderſtand it, Apoc. 22. Qui iuſtus eſt, iuſtificetur adhuc. Hee that is iuſt, let him become more iuſt, by acceſſe of Gods Grace euer, day by day.
               Thirdly, to iuſtifie is to declare and pronounce one iuſt. as, Prou. 8. He that iuſtifieth the wicked, and condemneth the righteous, is alike abominable before the Lord. So againe in the 50. Pſalme, That thou mayeſt be iuſtified in thy ſayings, and cleare when thou art iudged. God is not otherwiſe iuſtified, but by being knowne, acknowledged, and confeſſed iuſt in all his wayes. As he is ſaid to be magnified, when his noble acts are made knowne, and men doe praiſe him for his mercy, goodneſſe, and ſaluation.
               Iuſtification properly is in the firſt acceptance. A Sinner is then iuſtified when hee is made iuſt: that is,

tranſlated from ſtate of Nature, to ſtate of Grace, as Coloſ. 1. 13. Who hath deliuered vs from the power of darkeneſſe, and hath tranſlated vs into the Kingdome of his deere Sonne. Which is motion, as they ſay, betwixt two termes, and conſiſteth in forgiueneſſe of ſinnes primarily; and Grace infuſed ſecondarily: Both the act of Gods Spirit in man, but applyed, or rather obtained through Faith: which repreſenteth firſt God willing, and ready to forgiue and renew. Draweth neere vnto him: cloſeth in faſt with him. Adhereth vnto him inſeparab
                     •
                  y, with, I will not let thee goe, except thou bleſſe. And God doth returne, I will bleſſe thee: pardon thy ſinnes for my names ſake, and accept thee as mineowne in Chriſt my ſonne, whoſe Bloud hath made attonement for Man. So that properly to ſpeake, God onely iuſtifieth, who alone imputeth not, but pardoneth ſinne: Who onely can and doth tranſlate vs from death vnto life, renueth a right Spirit: and createth a new heart within vs. Cauſally, and actiuely God doth it. But becauſe God was drawne thereto by our Faith, which laying hands vpon his mercy, in Chriſt, obtayneth this Freedome, and newneſſe, and renewing from him, Faith is ſaide to iuſtifie inſtrumentally. And Faith alone to doe it without copartners in the act: which is in inſtanti, as Gods immediate workes are all done; and not long adoing, as wee know. The Soule of man is the ſubiect of this act: In which, vnto which, are neceſſarily required certaine preparations, and preuious d
                     •
                  ſpoſitions to the purpoſe. As knowledge of God, our ſelues, his Law, his iuſtice, iealouſie, iudgement, &c. Feare, Hope, Contrition,
                  
                  Loue, deſire of, purpoſe for, a new life, and ſuch like. But theſe are all with, and from Faith: which in the very act of iuſtification, are not actiue, though habitually there, then, before, and after: at leaſt, ſome of them, perhaps not all. Iuſtification is not but in the Church: Faith is the life and originall of the Church: as appeareth by the Scriptures, by the Subiect, and performance of Faith. So that worthily may the principall indowment of Grace, be aſcribed vnto the roote and originall of Chriſtian Piety, Faith. Fides prima datur, ſaith Saint Auguſtine: ex qua caetera impetrantur. In the firſt ſignification then of iuſtification, the which properly is iuſtification, wee acknowledge inſtrumentally Faith alone, and Cauſally God alone. In the ſecond and third, beſide God and Faith, wee yeeld to Hope, and Holineſſe, and Sanctification, and the fruits of the Spirit in good workes. But both theſe are not Iuſtification: rather Fruits, and Conſequents, and effects, & appendants of Iuſtification; then Iuſtification, which is a ſolitary act.
               So that well, and truly, and according to the tenet of Antiquity, is it reſolued by our Church, Artic. 11. We are accounted righteous before God, onely for the merit of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, by faith, and not for our owne workes or deſeruing. Our Iustification, in the act thereof, is onely the worke of God, for Chriſts ſake: whoſe death and Paſſion apprehended by Faith, which is the ſole peculiar worke of Faith to doe, as it hath made an attonement betwixt God and vs, ſo hath it procured remiſſion of our Sinnes at his hands, and thereupon a new ſtate of Grace: not for any

merit, or deſeruing of our own, which is vtterly excluded in this Act. Thus Thomas 1. 2. q. 114. ar. 7. Nullo modo aliquis poteſt ſibi mereri reparationem poſt lapſum. Reſtauration after fall, that is Iuſtification of a ſinner, no man can procure, or deſerue vnto himſelfe. To whom agreeth the Councell of Trent Seſſ. vi. can. viij. and your owne men confeſſe it is gratuita. And therefore, as our Article saith, not for our owne workes or deſeruings. Further our Church proceedeth not, to the augmentation, or declaration, of iuſtification there. But inferreth: Wherefore, that we are iuſtified by faith alone, is a moſt wholeſome Doctrine, and very full of comfort: as it is indeede: and your long diſputes may intangle the ſimple, but not infringe the truth, nor indeede diſcent from it. Fides non abſoluit iuſtificationem, (ſaith Caſalius, and wee admit it) but ſola iuſtificat; and hee admitteth that: For ſo haue antiquitie auouched generally, as himſelfe and Caſſander doe confeſſe, Origen, Hilary, and many others, to haue reſolued ſo.
               But this is contrary vnto our Bible, 1 Corinth. 13. 2. Though I haue all faith, ſo that I could remoue mountaines, and haue no charitie, I am nothing. Therefore only faith doth not iuſtifie. Why? becauſe Faith without Charity doth not iuſtifie: for the greateſt Faith that can be, without it, is nothing. As if it were not in euery Proteſtants mouth: and confeſſed by theſe oppoſers, that howbeit Faith alone doth iuſtifie, yet, not that Faith which is alone doth iuſtifie: Fides ſola, but not ſolitaria. Faith that is without Charitie doth not iuſtifie: but Faith may yet iuſtifie without Charitie.
                  
They haue their ſeuerall diſtinct acts; and the act of Faith is to iuſtifie: though both are vertues incident to a iuſt man. As if the Proteſtants that affirme onely Faith doth iuſtifie, did withall maintaine that all Faith did iuſtifie: or as, if hee that propoſeth a thing conditionally, muſt needes imply the condition to be reall and true. It is a ſuppoſition, if I had all Faith, &c. but a ſuppoſition of impoſſibility: For it is impoſſible that all Faith, ſhould be without Charitie; though ſome may be, and is without it. Beſide, I can anſwere, that the Faith which iuſtified, when it did iuſtifie, (to admit the Supposition of poſſibilitie) was not then without Charitie, though afterwards it was. For, in your opinion, iuſtifying Faith may diminiſh, and aboliſh, and be loſt. Now iuſtification being in an inſtant; may eftſoones be loſt againe: Why not? and ſo a ſeperation of Faith, and Loue. Secondly, it is contrary to Iam. 2. 24. You ſee then how that by workes a man is iuſtified, and not by Faith only. In this poynt of Iuſtification, as mine and thine, are the common barretters of the World, ſo Faith and good Workes haue broken the peace. It is the errour of the Proteſtants, ſay the Papiſts, that Faith onely iuſtifieth. It is the errour of the Papiſts, ſay the Proteſtants, that Workes doe iuſtifie. Flat ad oppoſitum, at leaſt in tormes. And whether ſhould a man belieue? Nay more, this difference ſeemeth very ancient, and in being when thoſe names of oppoſition, Proteſtants and Papiſts, were not heard of in the world. For Saint Paul ſaith: By Faith, without the workes of the Law. And Saint Iames saith, as poſitiuely, by Workes, and not alone by Faith. Scripture

againſt Scripture; Apoſtle againſt Apoſtle; Paul againſt Iames; Iames againſt Paul. Is Chriſt diuided? or the Spirit irreſolued? or at oddes? God forbid. At oddes they were then, as wee are now. I would that wee were at no more oddes now, than they then were: Controuerſies ſoone might be at an end, and Chriſts Coate diuided, ſoone made vp againe, which is diſmantled with new rentts daily.
               Saint Paul had great contentions, all dayes of his life, in the whole courſe of his miniſtery; with halfe-Chriſtians, falſe-Chriſtians, thoſe of Conciſion, as hee termeth them. That neged as neceſsary vnto Saluation, workes, and obſeruing of the Law. As if Chriſt without them did not profit any thing: againſt theſe hee aduaunceth the excellency and worth of Faith: and depreſſeth the condition of any or all thoſe works of the Law, whereupon they inſiſted; on which they relied: whereof they gloried Saint Iames on the other ſide, oppoſeth as much Simon Magus, Menander, their adherents, and that damnable Sect of the Gnoſticks, that liuing in all brothelry, and horrid impieties; caſt off all care and opinion, and account of good workes: as being for imperfect ones, for ſimple ones, and beginners in Chriſtianity, not to be regarded, or inſued of, by themſelues, who would be counted perfect men in their Generations; and through Faith alone, as they pretended, of neete acquaintance and alliance with God. Againſt theſe Saint Iames oppoſeth the neceſſitie of workes. But neither doth Saint Paul deny workes, to the Regenerate: nor Saint Iames deny the act of Faith. Secondly, I anſwere here, that

Saint Paul ſpeaketh of Iuſtification in attaining it: which in reſpect of man, is confeſſed to be the act of Faith. Saint Iames, of Iuſtification now obtayned: which neceſſarily is not ſeperate from workes. Iuſtus factus, through the Grace of Chriſt: is Iuſtus declaratus, by his holy life and conuerſation. And ſo Saint Iames is expounded by your ſelues: or elſe hath acceſſe of Iuſtification: as it is alſo taught by your owne men.
               
                  Iames 2. 14. What doth it profit though a man ſaith hee hath faith, and hath no workes? Can faith ſaue him? Nothing at all. Not at all. For a better ſaith then that which Saint Iames meant, the Faith of the Gnoſtiques, the Deuils had. Beſide, it is a faith onely ſupposed, preſumed, and in opinion. If a man (ſay he) hath faith. A manifeſt inſinuation it was not reall. A Faith boaſted of, but not had. So that this Faith, and that other of the Proteſtants, Caelo & ſolo diſparantur. Nor can they be compared as they are. For the Faith of the Proteſtants (generall or ſpeciall, I diſpute not now) is a Faith wrought and infuſed by God, through the Grace of Chriſt: Liuing: liuely: actiue: fruitfull: declaring the roote by the good fruit: they neuer ſeperate them in their Doctrine. And your men doe blame them, becauſe they neuer ſeperate, the Spring and water-courſe, Faith and good workes, but they profeſſe it muſt and doth worke by Loue. And therefore it is a lying imputation, that good workes, are not neceſſary to Saluation. All Writers, old and new, as Caſſander ſaith in generall, doe with ioynt conſent teach, that Faith muſt bring forth the fruit of good

workes. Otherwiſe, It is a dead faith without workes. And hee produceth the Confeſſion of the Proteſtants thus: Fatendum eſt, haec opera quae à iuſtificatis fiunt, ad ſalutem; id eſt regnum Dei & vitam aeternam conſequendam, eſſe neceſſaria, iuxta illud, ſi vis ad vitam ingredi, ſerua mandata: It muſt be confeſſed, that the workes which are done of iuſtified men, are neceſſary to obtaine Saluation: that is, to purchaſe the Kingdome of God, a
                        •
                     deternall life: according vnto that, If thou wilt enter into life, keepe the Commandements. And the Church of England expreſſely teacheth, Artic. 12. Albeit that good workes, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after Iuſtification, cannot put away ſinnes, and indure the ſeueritie of Gods iudgement, yet are they pleaſing and acceptable to God in Chriſt, and doe neceſſarily ſpring out from a true and liuely Faith. Inſomuch, as that by them a true and liuely faith, may as euidently be knowne, as a Tree is diſcerned by the fruit. I adde, as this mans Spirit is diſcerned by his lying. That of Matth. 7. 22. is ſo farre from being expreſſe in the point, that it is farre from being to purpoſe. It is not for iuſtifying of a ſinner by workes, but rather for relapſing of one iuſtified by Grace.
               
                  See Fathers that affirme the ſame. Namely, that which wee doe teach: that Faith alone iuſtifieth: For ſo all theſe three named doe: Origen, Hilary, and Ambroſe. Origen, ſaith Caſſander, clearely declareth, in his Commentaries vpon the Epiſtle to the Romans, Solâ fide, abſque operibus, aliquos fuiſſe iuſtificatos: That ſome haue beene iuſtified by Faith alone, without any workes at all. The Theefe vpon

the Croſſe was not ſaued by workes, which hee had not. Faith alone ſaued him, in the mercies of Chriſt: but this being ſpeciall, and therefore extraordinary, may admit an exception for common vſe. Therefore in Rom. 3. he ſpeaketh plaine, in generall, not with that limitation of ſome. Iuſtification of Faith alone ſufficeth: albeit a man hath not done any workes. As direct a Proteſtant as euer wrote, Caluin, or Chemnitius could ſay no more. But in Rom. 5. he is otherwiſe minded. If ſo: what, why vrge you the witneſſe of him, that ſaith and vnſaith the ſame thing? But it is not ſo. Origen is wronged by you. His words are: Faith cannot be reputed vnto Iuſtice to ſuch, as beleeue Chriſt, and yet put not off the old man, with his Acts. Doe Proteſtants ſay it can be? We diſtinguiſh Hiſtoricall, and Iuſtifying Faith. You doe difference Faith in Degree, if in nothing elſe. Beliefe, may be before, without Iuſtification; a generall aſſent, without application, or adheſion. Origen is in this alſo, a perfect Proteſtant. It is their Doctrine, That there is a Faith which iuſtifieth not. It is Origens Doctrine abſolutely. Origen ſaith; Which beleeueth Chriſt: He doth not ſay, Which beleeueth in Chriſt. Thus per omnia, in all points he ſideth with the Proteſtants in their Faith, concerning Faith as you propoſe it. Secondly, ſee Hilary vpon Math. 7. And doe: See him Proteſtant, to thy confirmation. See him Papiſt to thy confuſion. The ſaluation of Nations, are his words, is through faith: and in the Precepts of the Lord, the life of all men. Doth this man ſpeake againſt the Iuſtification of a man by Faith, that aſcribeth ſaluation vnto Faith? And Can. 8. in Math. vnto onely

Faith. And elſe-where as he is cited by Caſſander. A Chriſto per fidem remiſsio eſt, quod lex laxare non poterat. Fides enim ſola Iuſtificat. Remiſsion of ſinnes is from Chriſt: which could not be releaſed by the Law. For onely Faith iuſtifieth. Saint Ambroſe runneth the ſame way with Origen and Hilary in Comment. vpon the Epiſtle to the Romans. Hoc etiam conſtitutum eſt à Deo, vt qui credit in Chriſtum, ſaluus ſit, ſine opere, ſolâ fide, gratis accipiens remiſsionem peccatorum. It is ſo ordained by God, that whoſoeuer beleeueth in Chriſt, is made partaker of ſaluation, by faith alone, without workes, receiuing forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. In concluſion, it is confeſſed vpon all hands, by the moſt lerned in the Church of Rome, that many of the ancient Fathers, aſcribe Iustification vnto Faith alone. Caſalius in his ſecond Booke, and 16. Chapter, allayeth their ſaying, and we approue it, but implyedly he giueth to vnderſtand, that Doctores Sancti, doe affirme, that ſola fides iuſtificat; Faith alone is that which iuſtifieth. No new Goſpell therefore, as this Gooſe gagleth.
            
            
               XIX.
               
                  That no good workes are meritorious.
               
               
                  IN the former Propoſition the Proteſtants were belyed in the Caſe of good workes, as excluding their neceſſity vnto Saluation. For, though Faith alone acted in the act of Iuſtification, yet there neceſſarily followed in ordinary courſe, an

harueſt of good workes. Now the valew of thoſe workes is next to be queſtioned, in the point concerning merit, and deſert, wherein this Gagger, as elſe-where, lyeth out aloofe in ambiguities: for he diſtinguiſheth not of workes, nor merit; nor the termes how farre they are meritorious: nor how they deſerue what they haue.
               
                  Workes are conſidered before or after Iuſtification: In the ſtate of Nature or of Grace, workes are not all of one kinde. There are ſome good, and ſo farre good, as that they cannot be done to any euill end. Such as are directed vnto God immediately, to honour him, to loue him, and to feare him. Others ſo euill, that no intent or purpoſe can make them good: to commit Adultery, doe murther, blaſpheme God. Others good in themſelues, and in a generality, which may yet be done to an ill intent and purpoſe; to giue Almes to be ſeene of men; euill in a generall notion, as to goe to the Stewes: yet good in the deſignment, to conuert a ſinner. Others indifferent euery way. Now in the Propoſition, not any of theſe are meritorious, according to the Doctrine of the Proteſtants, ſaith the Gagger generally: Not meritorious: what is that? Your Schooles aſſigne vs a two-fold merit of Congruity, of Condignity: that, where Retribution, or reward is not due, yet conueniency requireth recompenſation: this, where reward is rightly due, and the denying thereof is iniuſtice and wrong vnto the party. Here is no diſtinction of merit at all. We are not giuen to vnderſtand, whether is intended Merit of Condignity or Congruity. We know that in the Doctrine of the Romane Schooles (and vnleſſe

wee did know it otherwiſe, this fellow would not tell vs.) Merit of Congruity is not commonly meant, as ſcarce vouchſafed the name of Merit. Good workes therefore ſaid to be meritorious, are ſo vnderſtood to be, ex condigno; which that a worke may ſo be, theſe Conditions are required. That it bee morally good: Freely wrought: by man in this life: In the ſtate of Grace, and friendſhip with God; which hath annexed Gods Promiſe of Reward. All which Conditions, I cannot conceiue that any Proteſtant doth deny vnto good workes, the fruits of Faith, liuely and liuing. For firſt, euill workes are rewardable, but with due deſert: that is, Gods wrath, and ſecond death. Worke, s ſecondly, of compulſion, are not worth Gramercy. 1 Cor. 9. 17. and thirdly, after death, working doth ceaſe. In the ſtate of Grace to be wrought, is the Proteſtants Tenent, that preciſely hold; firſt, Faith is neceſſary, before good workes can be acceptable to God: For God had firſt reſpect to Abel, ſay they, and afterward vnto his Sacrifice. Deus non habet gratum offerentem propter munera, ſed munera propter offerentem, ſaith Gregor. hom. 9. in Ezech. and then they maintaine, that as God doth Crowne his owne workes in vs, ſo he doth it, hauing promiſed ſo to doe. This is your owne Doctrine in the Romane Schooles: And ſo farre the Proteſtants, for theſe Conditions, goe along with you.
               Now if your Texts doe contrary this, expreſly, or obliquely, looke you to it: it concerneth you as much as vs. Firſt, Math. 5. 12. Reioyce, and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in Heauen. Reward, you ſay, is due debt; and debt is vpon deſert. But this deſert,
                  
whence came it? and what is it? Ex gratia ipſius, ſaith Tertullian, non proprietate noſtrâ. In the ſtate of Grace men onely merit, your ſelues teach: then all their merit is of Grace; As of Grace, ſo ex compacto, God hath promiſed, therefore due, to be required. This is your fift and laſt Condition vnto merit. Reward in Heauen, no man denyeth: Reward appointed for our good workes, all confeſſe: If this be your merit, we contradict See more, 1 Cor. 9. &c. it not. And this is your merit that you plead for. All your Texts of Scripture, Math. 10. 42. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 17. 18. 25. Heb. 11. 26. Pſal. 18. 20. and many moe in the ſame courſe and kinde, ſpeake directly this way, and no other; ſo that the man fighteth with his ſhadow, and taketh a ferne buſh for a Foxe to hunt.
               As idle in allegation of his Fathers, as impertinent See Fathers that affirme the ſame, S. Ambroſe, de Apolog. Dauid, ca. 6. S. Hier. lib. 3. cont. Pelag. S. Aug. de ſpirit, & lit. cap. vlt. in his Texts of Scripture. For theſe places of Auguſt. Hierome, and Ambroſe, produced by this iugler, to be ſeene, are meerely for another matter: and ſo to that end recited by his inſtructor C. W. B. a man of more learning, and better iudgement to proue that all the beſt workes of the righteous are not ſinnes, but truly good workes, as proceeding out of a good roote. That man, had this fellow beene but a gagler, would haue afforded him Fathers enough from Ignatius along for many ages, to purpoſe as is ſpecified, in this point. And yet Ignatius wrote in Greeke, and could not vnderſtand merit: and thoſe that wrote in Latine, did vſe the word, but with no ſuch intent as is ſuppoſed, nor as is put vpon them by theſe later Tormentors of other mens meaning. The Fathers who vſe it, tooke vp the word, as

they found it, in ordinary vſe and cuſtome with men in thoſe times, not for to deſerue, which in our Language, implyeth merit ex condigno: but to incur, to procure, to purchaſe: as Tacitus hath it in the life of Agricola; Iijs virtutibus iram Caij Caeſaris meritus eſt: By theſe vertues he incurred the anger of Caius Caeſar. Which vſe of the Tongue, the inferior Ages miſtaking, haue built vp I know not what great Towers of Babel vnto themſelues, in conteſtation with, and preſumption againſt GOD, which the ancient Fathers neuer dreamed of, whoſe ioynt vnaminous and orthodoxall Doctrine is, that which we will remember in Leoes words, Non de qualitate noſtrorum operum pendet coeleſtium menſura donorum.
               
               In concluſion, touching good workes, the Church of England conſidereth them two wayes, Artic. 12. 13. Firſt as they are, or may be done before Iuſtification had and obtained; done by men meerely naturall, and in the ſtate of alienation from God: and then as they are done after Regeneration, by the inſpiration and aſſiſtance of Gods Spirit. Concerning the firſt, Workes done before the grace of Chriſt, ſaith Artic. 13. and the inſpiration of his Spirit, are not pleaſing vnto God: for as much as they ſpring not of Faith in Ieſus Chriſt, neither doe they make men meet to receiue Grace: or as the Schoole Authors ſay, deſerue Grace of congruity. Yea, rather for that they are not done as God hath willed and commanded them to be done; we doubt not but they haue the nature of ſinne. And ſo our Concluſion is, Good workes thus, and in this ſort, merit not at all, vnleſſe you meane Hell, and Gods wrath.
               
                  
For good workes done after Iuſtification, which onely and alone are indeed good workes: The Church of England in the 12 Artic. concludeth thus, 1. They ſpring from a true and liuely Faith. 2. They declare a true and liuely Faith. 3. They are pleaſing and acceptable to God. 4. They cannot put away our ſinnes, nor endure the ſeuerity of Gods iudgement, to wit, not of themſelues: conſidered in themſelues: no, not as iſſuing from their Fountaine, Faith: becauſe Rem
                     〈…〉
                  ſſion is in Chriſt, gratuitum: and pardon muſt preceede before that they can ſucceede. Touching their merit and deſert, here is concluded nothing: but the meaning of the Church in the Doctrine of her Schooles, is directly this: That the workes of Gods Saints, in Faith and Charity, are rewardable here, and in the World to come; both in generall, as good workes: and in particular, as ſuch good workes, ſome more, ſome leſſe, according to meaſure, and proportion: it being a rule in Nature and Grace both, that whatſoeuer is receiued, is receiued, as the Donce can receiue it, not as the Donor can conferre it. Which procuring of reward at Gods hand, both for things Temporall and Eternall, the phraſe of Antiquity hath called merit, vpon the vſe of the Tongue in thoſe dayes, and no otherwiſe, though much miſtaken afterward.
            
            
               
               XX.
               
                  That faith once had cannot be loſt.
               
               
                  THere is no ſuch Concluſion or Article tendred vnto the Church of England: or reſolued of, vnto vs as of Faith. Opinions haue varied, and may keepe at large: each one contenting himſelfe with his owne priuate: ſobeit hee diſturbe not the peace of the Church: nor impoſe his priuate iudgement, to be held of all. It is held by ſome I grant, that iuſtifying Faith, that excellent gift of God, is not conferred vnto any but to the Elect and predeſtinated vnto life. The wicked that periſh eternally from God, as they neuer were in the ſtate of Grace, ſo neuer were they indued with true Faith. Secondly, as conſequent hereunto, that Faith once had cannot be loſt, or ſhaken out or off wholy from man, but continueth inextinguible, indefeiſable. And therfore thirdly, thoſe that once haue been indowed with that Tranſcendent guift, are ſure to be ſaued eternally; nor ceaſe to be, and ſtand 
                     •
                  uſtified before God. Theſe are opinions, and defended, but not of all Proteſtants, not of the Church of England, but oppoſed and refelled at home, abroad, as this fellow cannot but know, if he know any thing in theſe points: which for the maior part are fitter for Schooles then popular diſcourſes: and may be held or not held, without hereſie either way.
               That Faith once had (the propounded Concluſion) cannot be loſt, may be interpreted, and is, moe wayes

then one. Whether not loſt at all: whether totally or finally loſt. Men are diuided in this Tenent. Some ſuppoſe neither totally nor finally: Some totally, but not finally: Some both totally and finally. Which is indeed the aſſertion of Antiquity, and your Schoole. Some perceyuing the current of iudgements for the loſſe thereof totally and finally; and conſidering alſo at leaſt probability, of Scripture conſenting, put in a new diſtinction, of God, and Man: of the firſt and ſecond cauſes of Faith and Iuſtification. In regard of Man, his weakeneſſe, inſufficiency, and oppoſition againſt him: in reſpect of ſecond cauſes concurring in this action, Faith once had, may be loſt they ſay. But in regard of God, conſidering his counſell and purpoſe vnchangeable, reflecting on his abſolute decree irreuerſable, faith once had cannot totally or finally be loſt, nor they periſh eternally that were endowed therewith. Now, which of all theſe waies will you vnderſtand the poſition, Faith had may be loſt? For my part, I know your meaning well enough: but you ſhould haue explayned it, and not haue couertly reſted in ambiguities. You meane, it may be loſt totally, and finally: in regard of God, who made no ſuch abſolute irreuerſable decree: as alſo in reſpect of ſecond cauſes in man, both without him, and about him, and againſt him. I determine nothing in this Queſtion poſitiuely, which the Church of England leaueth at libertie vnto vs, though the learnedſt in the Church of England aſſent vnto Antiquity in their Tenent: which the Proteſtants of Germany maintaine at this day: hauing aſſented therein vnto the Church of Rome, in the Diot

at Ralisbone, by Bucer and others, vpon theſe grounds. Firſt Ezech. 18. 24. 26. If the righteous turne away from his righteouſneſſe, and commit iniquitie: and doe according vnto all the abominations that the wicked man doth, ſhall hee liue? all his righteouſneſſe that hee hath done ſhall not be remembred: but in his tranſgreſsion that hee hath committed, and in his ſinne that hee hath ſinned, in them ſhall hee die. And againe, repeated with like aſſeueration, and reduplication: verſ. 26. againe, Ezech. 33. 12. The righteouſneſſe of the righteous ſhall not deliuer him, in the day of his tranſgreſsion. And againe, The wickedneſſe of the wicked ſhall not cauſe him to fall, in the day that hee returneth from his wickedneſſe: neither ſhall the righteous liue for his righteouſneſſe, in the day that hee ſinneth. And verſe 13. If hee commit iniquitie, all his righteouſneſſe ſhall be no more remembred, but for his iniquitie that hee hath committed, hee ſhall die for the ſame. Which againe is repeated verſe 18. Therefore the righteous may loſe his righteouſneſſe, abandon his faith, dye in his ſinnes; and receiue the reward of his Tranſgreſſions in his auerſion from God, hell fire.
               
               Againe, Matth. 12. 44. The vncleane ſpirit eiected, returneth vnto his former reſidence, entreth, poſſedeth his former ſtate, and the caſe of that man is worſe than the beginning. Sathan is not eiected, but where the partie is in the ſtate of Grace with God: being regenerate by faith. Repoſſeding is not but by relapſe into ſinne: nor a worſe ſtate, but where a man dyeth in ſinne, Luke 8. 13. They on the rocke, are they who when they heare, receiue the word with ioy, who for a while belieue,

and in time of temptation fall away. Iohn 15. 2. Euery branch that beareth not fruit in mee, hee taketh away. Matthew 24. 12. Becauſe iniquitie ſhall be increaſed, the charitie of many ſhall grow cold. Surely it was hot, that groweth cold: and charitie inlarged, is not but the fruit of a liuing faith, which if it continued in ſtatu quo, the charitie of many could not waxe cold. Therefore once had, may be loſt, ſay they.
               Againe, Rom. 11. 20. 21. Thou ſtandeſt by Faith, be not high-minded, but feare: and feare is not but where change may be. Here change may be: or why doth it follow? Take heede leaſt hee alſo ſpare not thee. The reaſon is, Any man may haue that which another had. Now 1 Timoth. 6. 20. Some haue erred concerning faith. And 1 Timoth. 1. 18. 19. holding faith and a good conſcience, which ſome hauing put away concerning faith, haue made ſhipwracke: Nor was it onely for thoſe times, but fore-told of ſucceeding ages, 1 Timoth. 4. In the latter dayes ſome ſhall depart from the faith, Gal. 5. 4. Saint Paul ſpake not vpon ſuppoſition of impoſſibility, Yee are aboliſhed from Chriſt, whoſoeuer are iuſtified by the Law, yee are fallen from Grace. For many were ſo, that hauing belieued, and being baptized, did euacuate Chriſt by their owne righteouſneſſe in the Law. Of whom Saint Paul complayneth in all that Epiſtle to the Galathians, and elſewhere. Nor in point of onely Hereſie was Faith by them loſt, but alſo of good liuing, and conuerſation, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Where thoſe that had eſcaped the filthineſſe of the World; therefore waſhed and made cleane, through the knowledge of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt:
                  
Therefore iuſtified truely by Faith: are yet intangled againe therein, and ouercome. Therefore lapſed from Faith: as is expreſſed verſ. 21. and 22. enſuing.
               Infinite are the teſtimonies of Scriptures to this purpoſe, inſiſted vpon by the auouchers. I adde but one of them. Heb. 6. 4. It is impoſsible, that they which were once enlightned, and haue taſted of the heauenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghoſt, and haue taſted of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, (if theſe were not iuſtified, they know not who were: if theſe had not faith, where was it to be found) if they fall away, ſhould be renued againe by repentance: ſeeing they crucifie againe the Sonne of God vnto themſelues, and make a mocke of him.
               
               Thus Scripture ſpeaketh plaine. Their Reaſons from 1. Scripture are euident. Man is not likely in ſtate of Grace to be of an higher alloy then Angels were in ſtate of Glory: than Adam was in ſtate of Innocency: For Grace is but a conformitie thereto, and no conformitie exceedeth the Architype: At moſt it is but an equalitie thereto: and equals are of the ſame proportion. Now if Adam in Paradiſe, and Lucifer in Heauen, did fall and looſe their originall ſtate, the one totally, the other eternally, what greater aſſurance hath any man in ſtate of Proficiency, not of Conſummation?
               Againe, Faith muſt needes be loſt, where it cannot 2. conſiſt. It cannot conſiſt where God will not abide. God will not abide, where hee is diſobeyed: hee is

diſobeyed, where mortall ſinne is committed: the moſt righteous man liuing vpon the face of the earth, continually doth or may in this ſort tranſgreſſe: Who can tell how oft hee offendeth? Cleanſe thy ſeruant from preſumptuous ſinnes. Thou wilt haue no fellowſhip at all with the deceitfull; Nor ſhall any euill dwell with thee.
               
               
                  Saul was at firſt the Childe of God: called according to the election of Grace: not onely temporall, 3. for the Kingdome of Iſrael, but alſo eternall for the heauenly Kingdome. In opinion of Antiquitie thus hee was: and yet afterward hee fell, it is confeſſed; totally all ſay: Eternally theſe ſay, that maintaine iuſtifying Faith cannot be loſt. But if Saul were not of Gods Children in grace, inducd with Faith, and the holy Spirit: yet Salomon was, there is no queſtion with them, becauſe hee was a Writer of holy writ, and wrote as hee was enſpired by God. If they did not graunt it, the Scripture would euict it. For 2 Samuel 7. God ſpeaketh of him literally: though of Chriſt Ieſus, intentionally, I will be his father, and he ſhall be my ſonne: And in the 12. Chapter of the ſame Booke, Hee called his name Salomon, and the Lord loued him: and ſent by the hand of Nathan the Prophet, and called his name beloued of the Lord, becauſe the Lord loued him indeede: Yet Sal
                        •
                     mon fell, as Saint Auguſtine and Saint Chryſoſtome are cleare for it, at leaſt temporally, and totally too, when hee went and ſerued other gods. If Salomon were neuer the Childe of God, yet Dauid was without contradiction: and

Saint Peter without nay: Yet Dauid fell foule in that act of murther and adultery, and loſt his Faith and preſent ſtate of Grace: if Dauid had periſhed in that his Sinne, what had become of his Soule for euer? It was not poſſible hee ſhould, in regard of the purpoſe of Grace; but had it beene ſo, where had he bin? Surely hee that deſired a new heart to be created, had not that heart which he had before his fall: For Creation is production from not being, vnto being. Saint Peter was a choſen veſſell of Chriſt Ieſus, and if euer was any, the Childe of God. Yet hee denyed Ieſus Chriſt with an oath, which was peccatum lethale, as Saint Auguſtine prooueth in his 66. Tractat. vpon Saint Iohn. Chirſt prayed for him, that his faith might not fayle: But his Prayer was, for the end, not the act. That hee might not fall finally, and hee did not: but not that not totally, for ſo hee did. His infirmitie appeared in his fall: Gods mercy was ſeene in his reſtauration.
               
                  Simon Magus was an Heretique, an Arch-heretique, the father of Heretiques, and firſt begotten of the Deuill: yet Simon Magus was a Chriſtian once, and baptized, and belieued, and brought forth fruits of new life, and followed Philip a certaine time. He belieued, it is ſaid, but not truely. It is not ſaid, he belieued not truely. Saint Luke ſaith hee belieued, in the ſame termes, with the ſame words, to the ſame intent and purpoſe, that hee ſpeaketh of others, that belieued truely, & conſtantly: Where the Holy Ghoſt putteth no difference, what man hath any warrant to diſtinguiſh?

The Scripture doth not ſo much as inſinuate the hypocriſie of Simon Magus then: and what is hee, that would haue his nay belieued, before Saint Lukes yea? Iudas was a Reprobate, and caſt away for euer. Our Sauiour calleth him the Sonne of perdition, and ſaith it had beene good hee had neuer beene borne: Yet Iudas was numbred with the twelue Apoſtles: had all the Prerogatiues which they enioyed. God gaue him to Chriſt as well as Peter or Iohn. And if hee periſhed onely in the number of them that were giuen vnto Chriſt, doubtleſſe hee was firſt ranked in that number: and periſhing, ceaſed to be of that number, as ceaſing to be of that number he periſhed.
               Beſide, if Faith had cannot be loſt, the Dogge cannot be ſaid, to returne vnto his vomit: nor the Swine to wallowing in the myre. If righteouſneſſe had cannot be loſt, why doe wee pray continually againſt that, Leade vs not into temptation? Why did the Apoſtle chaſtice and bring vnder his body, leaſt he ſhould become a caſt-away? Why ſhould hee admoniſh as hee doth, Hee that ſtandeth, let him take heede leſt hee fall? And Worke out your Saluation with feare and trembling. Againe, ſay they, totally it may be loſt; for Faith is an adheſion vnto God. Sinne ſeperateth man from God: and maketh a diuiſion in that firſt Coniunction: but by repentance it is againe reſtored, and recouery gayned after fall. Totally loſt, is not then euer finally, eternally, nor ineuitably loſt; For yet wilt thou returne and refreſh mee, and bring vp

my life from the gates of death againe. And as the Tree that is cut downe at the ſtemme, ſo long as the ſtocke remaineth in the ground, yet by the ſent of waters it will recouer, (ſaith Iob,) and againe, ſhew forth the branches: So, ſo long as men in the Church haue meanes in Chriſt, it is poſſible to be renued by Repentance. Poſſible they ſay. Neceſſary ſay ſome, becauſe of that neceſſitating purpoſe of God, whereby hee is ſaued, and could not periſh, that was appointed vnto life vnchangeably. So then they teach, that are thus perſwaded, Faith totally may be loſt. Faith totally loſt, may eternally be loſt: and alſo not be loſt eternally, though totally for a time. Becauſe God againe will reſtore them to Grace: and except hee would doe ſo, they could not riſe to Grace: but becauſe his will is not put into practiſe by his power, he neceſſitateth no man ſo irreuerſably vnto life nor death, thoſe that haue lapſed totally, may alſo periſh finally. It will be vrged by them, which is here ſaid by you, What needes there any further proofe, where holy Scripture is ſo plaine? and they graunt in a caſe ſo fully cleared and reſolued in Scripture, no further proofe needeth as neceſſarily required: yet for illuſtration, and aſſurance, a concurring aſſent of many is requiſite of congruitie. Wherfore they bring Fathers for their purpoſe. Ignatius, the ancienteſt this day extant: of whoſe writings there is little or no queſtion, in his Epiſtle to the Magneſians, pag. 26. diuideth mankinde into two ſorts of Coynes, as hee ſpeaketh there: and explicating his meaning, ſaith, hee doth not ſo

intend it, as if hee meant two diſtinct Natures in man, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   &c. That one and the ſame man, is, ſometime the Childe of God, and againe the Childe of the Deuill. If hee liue godly, he is a man of God: if wickedly, the Childe of the Deuill: not ſo by Nature, but from his owne depraued will. And ſpeaking elſewhere of conſtancy in perſecution, ſaith; Albeit I am exceedingly ſtrengthened in God, yet ought I to feare ſo much the rather. And againe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . I doe not know whether I am worthy or not.
               
               
                  Clement in his Conſtitutions, 5. 26. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. The Holy Spirit is continually aſsiſtant with thoſe that poſſeſſe him, ſo long as they are worthy ſo to haue him. From whomſoeuer this holy Spirit is diuided, Hee leaueth them deſtitute and forſaken, and deliuered vp vnto the wicked Spirit. I know the Author is queſtioned vpon his honeſtie; at leaſt hee is ancient: but I hold him honeſt, and perſwade my ſelfe I can proue him ſo to be, as hee ſeemeth, for my part: Tertullian, in de praeſcript. Cap. iij. Et hoc mirum opinor, vt probatus aliquis retro poſtea excidat? Saul bonus prae ceteris liuore poſteà euertitue. Dauid vir bonus ſecundum cor Domini: poſtea caedis & ſtupri reus. Salomon omni gratiâ & ſapientia donatus à Domino, ad Idololatriam à mulieribus inducitur. Soli enim dei filio ſeruabatur ſine delicto permanere. As if it were a thing ſo ſtrange that any Man approued by God, ſhould afterward relapſe from Grace. Saul, a man

better then the reſt, was ouertaken and vndone at length through Enuy. Dauid was a good man, and according vnto the Lords heart: yet afterward guilty of murther and adultery. Salomon inducd with all grace and wiſedome from the Lord, was by women brought ouer vnto Idolatry. For why, it was reſerued to the Sonne of God alone to be without ſinne. What then, if a B
                        •
                     ſhop, a Deacon, a Virgin, a Widow, a Teacher, a Martyr, haue ſwarued from his rule, ſhall Hereſie therefore haue the better of Truth? Doe wee eſtimate and approue Faith by Mens Perſons, or not rather Perſons by Faith? Onely the faithfull man is a wiſeman: Onely a Chriſtian man is of account: No man is a Chriſtian, but he that continueth vnto the end. Thus farre he.
               
                  Cyprian is through for the point, Epiſt. 7. Parum eſt adipiſci potuiſſe aliquid. Plus eſt quod adeptus es poſſe ſeruare, ſicut & fides ipſa, & Natiuitas ſalutaris, non accepta ſed cuſtodita viuiſicat. Nec ſtatim conſecutio, ſed conſummatio, hominem Deo ſeruat. Dominus hoc magiſterio ſuo docuit dicens, Ecce ſanus factus es, ſani noli peccare, nequid tibi deteriu
                        •
                     : fiat. Puta hoc illum & Confeſſori ſuo dicere, Ecce Confeſſor factus es, ſani noli peccare, nequid
                        〈…〉
                      deterius fiat. Salomon deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & Saul, & caeteri multi, quam diu in vijs Domini ambulauerunt, datam ſibi gratiam tenere potuerunt, recedente ab ijs diſciplinâ Dominica receſsit & gratia. Goulartius here talketh to no purpoſe, in the Cloudes, totally or finally it skilleth not, the Grace of God departed away from them; therefore they loſt their Faith

in Saint Cyprians iudgement, by which they ſtood at firſt in Gods fauour.
               And in Nazianzens too, who writeth thus of Saul, in his Apologie vnto his Father, Pag. 37. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Annoynted hee was, and made partaker of the holy Spirit: and then at that time was Spirituall. I dare not ſpeake otherwiſe of him. Nay, more then ſo, hee prophecyed. And yet for all that, becauſe hee ſuffered not himſelfe to be wholy and entirely directed by the Spirit, nor became perfectly and ſincerely another man, what neede I relate the Tragicall end, which hee vnder-went? Saint Hierome forſaketh not his Maſters direction, Lib. 2. aduerſus Pelagianos. Ne beatum dixeris, quempiam ante mortem. Quamdiù enim viuimus in certamine ſumus: quamdiù in certamine, nulla eſt certa victoria. Call no man happy vntill he be dead. So long as we liue, wee are to ſtriue and contend: ſo long as there is opposition againſt vs, ſo long we are not aſſured of the victory. And elſe-where againſt Iouinian, he teacheth, that vntill a man repent, Faith is caſt off by ſinne, and the party in disfauour with God.
               Saint Auguſtine propoſeth it as an Article of his Creede, de Corrept. & gratiâ. 13. Credendum eſt quoſdam de filijs perditionis non accepto dono perſeuer andi vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in finem, in fide quae per dilectionem operatur incipere viuere: & aliquandiù fideliter & iuſtè viuere, & poſteà cadere ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de hac vitâ priuſquam eis id contingat auferri. And againe, Ad quam vocationem pertinere

nullus eſt homo, ab hominibus certâ aſſeueratione dicendus, niſi cum de hoc ſaecule exierit. In hac autem vitâ humanâ quae tentatio eſt ſuper terram, qui videtur ſtare videat ne cadat.
               
               And laſtly, Gregory Lib. 6. in primum Regum. Quia Iudicium omnipotentis Dei imperſcrutabile eſt, vnde veniat, & quo vadat homo, neſcit: quia ſciri non poteſt, an quis in gratia quam recepit perſeuerare in perpetuum debeat. Becauſe the Iudgements of GOD Almighty are vnſearchable, man doth not know either whence hee commeth, or whether hee goeth; becauſe it cannot be knowne, whether a man ſhall euer ſtand without falling in that Grace, which hee hath receiued.
               
               It was a Stoicall paradox grounded vpon their fatall neceſſity and concatenation of Cauſes, that vertues once had, cannot be loſt at all. Seneca thus in his 50 Epiſtle. Semel tradidi boni poſſeſsio perpetua eſt. Non dediſcitur virtus. Fideliter ſedent quae in locum ſuum veniunt. Good once had, is held for euer in poſſeſsion. Vertue is not againe to bee learned. For what thing ſoeuer hath obtained the proper place, reſteth therein without alteration. If any ſuch neceſſity be inferred by any, it is but opinion, not deciſion; priuate opinion, not publique reſolution, which a man may follow or abandon

at pleaſure, not to be blamed for reſolution. So, or ſo.
               In courſe of Chriſtianity, and ſeruice of God. Finis coronat actus: It is the end that crowneth the Act. In mans profeſſion of Loue, Feare, and Obedience of God. Nil
                        •
                     praesumitur eſſe actum dum reſtat aliquid ad agendum. The Law preſumeth nothing at all is done, ſo long as reſteth any thing to be done. Non quid egeris, ſed quid ſuperſit curandum: ſi dixiſti Sufficit, Defeciſti. It is not reſpected what is already performed by them, but what remaineth yet vnfiniſhed. If thou ſay it is enough, thou art fallen off, and fainteſt. For Leuit. 22. Euer the tayle of the whole burnt Offering was offered. Many begin to build, but doe not all ſet vp the roofe. Many thouſands came out of Aegypt, but few of them paſſed ouer Iordan. Asa was good till the go
                     •
                  te vexed him. Ionathan followed the Chace till hee met with Honey. Many are good till they haue cauſe to be badde, and then vertunt omnia ad extremum: They end in the fleſh, that begun in the Spirit. The Concluſion of all is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . A man is not happy ſo long as hee liueth, becauſe it is vncertaine what ſhall become of him, ſaith Saint Baſil vpon the firſt Pſalme. Theſe are the reſolutions of many, if not moſt

Proteſtant Diuines: as priuate men of Proteſtant Churches, in their Deciſions; and Reſolutions. I am ſure, the Church of England, doth not tender it to be taught or belieued, that Faith had, cannot be loſt againe. Priuate opinions of men. are no Goſpels of the Church. I am of this opinion, another is of that. I maintaine Faith cannot be loſt totally or finally: another verily perſwadeth himſelfe it may be loſt, both totally and finally. Hee that once was, in regard of iuſtifying Faith, and Grace, the Childe of God, may become the Childe of Sinne, Wrath, Death, Hell, and Deſtruction. to neither of theſe, doe I ſubſcribe, as de fide, being vndecided, vndetermined, in the Church: Lei euery man abound in his owne ſenſe and vnderſtanding, what is it to mee, ſo be it hee keepe Faith, Peace. Charitie, and a good Conſcience? The very Church of Geneua it ſelfe, as I was told by one of the chiefe Miniſters thereof, doth not maintaine theſe priuate opinions of the principall Paſtors of that Church. So that, what honeſty can there be in this rambling Companion, who ranketh it with the Errours of the Proteſtants, That Faith had cannot be loſt. Which, if it were an errour, as I diſpute not that, is as much or more oppoſed by Proteſtants, as propugned. As much refelled by Proteſtants, as Papiſts. Sir Gagger, to let the

World ſee your ignorance, or impudency, or both, I haue laide theſe parts together out of Proteſtant Diuines. I iuſtifie no priuate opinions. Thoſe that hold the one or other, are old enough; let them anſwere for themſelues. And ſo I proceede.
            
            
               
               XXI.
               
                  That God, by his will & ineuitable decree, hath ordained from all eternity, who ſhall bee damned, and who ſaued.
               
               
                  
                     DAmned and Saued diuide Mankinde. Not any hath come forth of the loins of Adam, but, as this Gaggler will himſelf confeſſe, is neceſſarily ranged in one of theſe Ranks; either with the Damned or the Saued, Sheep or Goats, vpon the left hand or the right.
               But he, whoſoeuer, that is é cenſa damnandorum vel ſaluandorum, finally and eternally damned or ſaued, as one day actiuely all ſhall bee, is ſo damned or ſaued, not without God's will, according to the purpoſe of his decree, at leaſt conſequent, though not antecedent; who doth whatſoeuer hee will in heauen and earth; who worketh all things according to the counſell of his will, the higheſt Rule, ſupremeſt Law; nothing beyond it, againſt it, without it. So Damned or Saued, are ſo ordained by God.
               Whatſoeuer God willeth, commeth to paſſe: and whatſoeuer commeth to paſſe, commeth ſo to paſſe, becauſe God hath ſaid, So, and not otherwiſe, it ſhall come to paſſe; either poſitiuely, by diſpoſing it; or elſe permiſſiuely, by giuing way, and ſuffering it ſo to come to paſſe, as it doth come to paſſe. This his

will, as nor himſelf, began not in time: it is and was eternall, as he is: euer, I am; not, I will be or haue bin. Whatſoeuer is done in proceſſe of time, was ſo ſeen, ſo diſpoſed of, and ordered before all Time: for, he is not meaſured but by Eternity, which is Tota ſimul, & perfecta poſſeſsio ſui; The totall and perfect poſſeſsion of it ſelf.
               
               If then there bee Damned and Saued, as there are, God's eternall will did ſo determine of them & their finall eſtate, from all Eternity: and, after that determination of God, they are damned or ſaued ineuitably; not onely according vnto Preſcience, but alſo according to Predeſtination, ſay the Roman ſchools; in which, this Fellow would ſeem to haue ſent ſome idle houres after their fleeing Predeceſſors.
               What then? Why, ſurely the poore man meant well to the Catholique Cauſe, and would ſay ſomewhat, though no matter what, which he did not vnderſtand, nor could vtter. He thought well, though he could not handſomly tell his Tale; which ſhould haue been marſhald thus:

                     That God, by his ſole will and abſolute decree, hath irreſpectiuely reſolued, and ineuitably decreed, ſome to be ſaued, ſome to be damned, from all Eternity.
                  
               
               Man, in curioſity, hath preſumed farre vpon, and waded deep into the hidden Secrets of the Almighty; no-where more, or with greater Preſumption, than where that grand Apoſtle ſtood at gaze, with O the depth! and in conſideration cried out, How vnſearchable are his waies! who yet was admitted into Councell of State, and rapt vp into the third heauen.
               In the point of Election for Life, and Reprobation

vnto Death, Proteſtants and Papiſts are many wayes at oddes in oppoſition, and each diuided at home amongſt themſelues; not for the Thing, which all reſolue, but for the Manner, in which they differ; agreeing in the Main, that It is ſo; diſagreeing on the By, How it cometh ſo? as if God meant to reſerue no Secrets vnto himſelf, but impart them all to men; as if it were not enough to ſaue ſome, and caſt others off, but he muſt giue account of dooing ſo.
               Some Proteſtants, and no mo but ſome, haue conſidered God, for this effect of his will, in reference to Peter and Iudas, thus; that Peter was ſaued, becauſe that God would haue him ſaued abſolutely; and reſolued to ſaue him neceſſarily, becauſe hee wo
                     •
                  ld ſo, and no further; that Iudas was damned as neceſſarily, becauſe that God, as abſolute to decree, as om
                     〈…〉
                  ipotent to effect, did primarily ſo reſolue concerni
                     •
                  g him, and ſo determine touching him, without reſpect of any thing but his owne will: inſomuch that Peter could not periſh, though he would; nor Iudas be ſaued, doo what he could.
               This is not the doctrine of the Proteſtants: the Lutherans in Germany deteſt and abhorre it. It is the priuate fanſie of ſome men, I grant: but what are Opinions, vnto Deciſions? priuate Opinions, vnto receiued and decided doctrines? The Church of England hath not taught it, doth not beleeue it, hath oppoſed it; wiſely contenting herſelf with this Quoúſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   and Limitation, Art. 17. We must receiue God's promiſes in ſuch wiſe as they be generally ſet forth to vs in holy ſcripture; and not preſuming to determine of When, How, Wherfore, or Whom; Secrets reſerued to God alone. So

this Gooſe the Gagger may put his Gag into the Bils of many of his owne Gaggle, as well as into others Lagges; who preſume as farre, and wander as wide, ſometime as they do, though more couertly in their tearms.
               
                  Our Bible, in expreſſe words, ſaith what we beleeue: it teacheth not contrary to that which is reſolued in Contrary to the expreſſe words of their owne Bible. the Church of England: the poſitiue doctrine wherof is no other, but what this Wittall confirmeth out of Scripture; that God at the beginning made not death, as Wiſd. 1. 13. becauſe ſhe hath learned out of S. Paul, that Through ſinne, death came into the world: whereof God was neither Aurthor nor Abettor; but Hee, the Father of lies, a Lier, a Murderer from the beginning, in procuring the Fall of man.
               Sinne being entred, and by ſinne death, and ſo all mankinde in the Maſſe of perdition, God fitted and prepared a Reſtorer, a Mediator, the Man Chriſt Ieſus; that ſo, Whoſoeuer beleeued in him, ſhould not periſh, but haue euer lasting life, out of his mercy both free and meer, becauſe he was not willing, that any ſhould periſh, but all ſhould come vnto Repentance, as 2. Pet. 3. 9. and be ſaued.
               
               So large was his Mercy, ſo enlarged his Loue, that out of his good pleaſure it was his will, All men to bee ſaued, and to come to knowledge of the Truth. Shew a contrary reſolution of the Church of England, and gag vp my mouth, Sir Gooſe, for euer: elſe goe gaggle on the Green.
               For particular opinions, So or ſo, aetatem habent; let them ſpeak for themſelues: and ſo be it they rent not the peace of the Church, let them abound in

their priuate ſenſes. I nor teach nor beleeue any ſuch Paradox; nor the Church whereof I am, and you ſhould be, a Member, poſitiuely.
               Wee need ſee no more, except to more purpoſe: See more Oſe 13. 9, &c. the places are adrem, but touch not vs. They ſpeak home, and to purpoſe, which they ſhould declare: but we are not intereſt in oppoſition. Vrge them againſt thoſe who do vndertake to maintain, that men are damned neceſſarily.
               See Fathers we may, but wee ſhall not need: wee See Fathers, that affirm the ſame. beleeue what they ſhould ſay, and go hand in hand with what they doo ſay dogmatically: but ſee them all we cannot if we would, vnleſſe we would go ſeek when we need not; and if wee would, might blowe the ſeeke for ſome of them, and after long ſearch be neuer the neer in finding them.
               For Saint Augustine; what or where wil you tell S. Aug. lib. 1. ciuit. vs, or are you able to informe vs, that hee affirmeth? You mean, he affirmeth ſomewhat in his firſt Book of the City of God: and I knowe he doth, more by much than you can report me. You haue had ſome acquaintance with ſome Particulars there, as you met them by chance in your perambulation of ſome tranſ-ſcripts of other mens Notes, and haue now forgotten where, and what. Elſe, what man, but ſuch a Scribbler, would ſo looſely, in a point of oppoſition, and therefore like enough of examination, haue referred vs to Saint Auſten, in his firſt Book de Dei Ciuitate? Something you would ſay, I knowe not what: and therefore till you let me knowe, I ſay nothing to what you haue ſaid, I cannot tell how.
               I haue ſeene and read Tertullian, in that place remembred, 
                     Tert. de Orat. cap. 8.
                  
expounding that Petition in our Lords Prayer, Lead vs not into temptation; who propoſeth it reſolued and de fide: and I knowe no man that doubteth of it, that God tempteth no man, Quaſi aut ignoret fidem cuiuſque, aut deijcere ſit conſentiens, as out of Ignorance what hee can performe, or as conſenting to vndoe him. But this paſſage, there is nothing in Tertullian that I can gheſſe at, that we ſhould ſee. And Sir, doth this paſſage come home to purpoſe, of decree vnto life or death? Or knowe you any Proteſtant not ſo perſwaded? No, thou fore-head of braſs, and tongue of Say, wee are fully reſolued with Tertullian, that Diaboli eſt infirmitas et malitia; beeing taught by the Prophet to profeſſe, Our deſtruction is of our ſelues, our ſaluation of the Lord.
               
               S. Cyprian they may ſee, that think it worth their S. Cyprian Lib. 4. Epiſt. 2. labour, Lib. 4. Epiſt. 2. or as other Editions haue it, Epiſt. 52. and there is nothing to purpoſe, but by conſequence; hauing cited that ſaying, euen now remembred, Wiſd. 1. 13. God made not death, thus he inferreth againſt the Nouatians, rigorous men, that denied repentance to lapſed Chriſtians after Baptiſm: Vtique qui neminem vult perire, cupit peccatores poenitentiam agere, et per poenitentiam denuo ad vitam redire: Becauſe he would not that any ſhould periſh, his deſire is that Sinners ſhould repent, and by Repentance reuert to life againe. Doe Proteſtants deny Returne of the Lapſ
                     •
                  d vnto God? or Grace to Repentants after Fall? If we doe, this teſtimony may gagge our mouthes; if not, as we do not, then gaggeth it your owne mouth, Sir Gooſe.
               Saint Ambroſe will not, nor Saint Auguſtine, nor S. Ambroſe Lib. 2. de Cain et Abel will n
                        •
                     t that we refer vnto God the preuarication of Adam, or treaſon of Iudas, though hee knew the ſin before it was committed.
                  
any elſe, whoſe brains are his owne, as yours are not. God fore-ſawe it in Adam, and in Iudas: but Preſcience inferreth not Predestination. For, not becauſe foreſeene, therefore effected; but becauſe effected, therefore foreſeene. The Treaſon of Iudas, the Fall of Adam, God fore-ſawe, and ſuffred; this is certaine: God was Author of neyther Poſitiuely. That Good which they had, they had from God: this Woe and Vnhappineſſe came from themſelues. Priuate opinions we vndertake not: you ſhould not in diſcretion, much leſſe in honeſty, impute it vnto vs. Your ayme is againſt the Church of England. Quarrell that if you can: vndertake againſt it, if you dare. For what my word is paſt, I will make it good againſt all your Bandogges of Belzebub whatſoeuer; That Church maintaineth nothing againſt the Faith of the antient Church of Chriſt, reſolued on for 500 yeeres.
               
            
            
               XXII.
               
                  That euery one ought infallibly to aſſure himſelfe of his ſaluation; and to hold, that he is of the number of the Predeſtinate.
               
               
                  NOw you ramble indeed: your penne runs too faſt: your malice ſent your wit, I ſuppoſe, on wooll-gathering. Where finde you this concluſion in the Church of England? where in any mans mouth or writings in the Church of England; that Euery one ought ſo to

aſſure himſelfe. Hee that ſaith Euery one, excepteth none, not genera ſingulorum, any kinde of men; not ſingulos generum, no particular man. Be you well in your wits to bely your ſelfe in belying of vs, and ſo ſoone to forget what you ſaid but now?
               For thoſe that maintaine, as you ſay the Proteſtants doe, that ſome are damned, and ſome are ſaued by an ineuitable decree, cannot bee of opinion, except their braines were made like yours, of the pap of an apple, that Euery one ought infallibly to aſſure himſelfe of his ſaluation; which implieth a contradiction vnto that other Tenet. So that in one of theſe two, auoyd it if you can, you haue belyed your ſelfe, to bely vs.
               And bely vs you do. For, where do you find it thus concluded by the Church of England? Anſwere on your Honeſty, if you can: nay, bely them you doe, that come ſomewhat to your purpoſe; whoſe priuate opinions you make publique deciſions of Faith. Bellarmine, your grand Dictator of controuerſies, from whoſe tables you or your Informers haue ſwept together all theſe ſcrappes and fragments, in your bare abbridgement, propoſeth the aſſertion, honeſtly and truly in reſtrained tearms, of Verè fidelis and Iuſtificatus; That, not Euery one, but Euery true beleeuer, ought ſo to be aſſured; that no man is or can bee ſo aſſured, but the man that is iuſtified before God. And that is not euery one, as you bely them: They teach not; that euery man is iuſtified.
               This opinion is an inference vpon that former, of Neceſſity of Election vnto life; and therefore thoſe Proteſtants, who make not the former an Article of

their Creed, build vpon no ſuch infallibility vnto themſelues, nor preſcribe it to be beleeued of others: And thoſe that ſo doe, are not peraduenture ſo forlorne, as ſuch a ſimple man as you may imagine, hauing Papiſts of reckoning to beare them company, and Fathers, Reaſons, and Scriptures therefore.
               
                  Ambroſe Catharine was no Baby, as great a Stickler as any in the Councell of Trent; in his owne opinion, ſuperior to moſt; in all mens iudgement, inferior to none: who, for ought I knowe, went as farre as any, in particular and ordinary aſſurance of ſaluation, Before, In, After the Councell of Trent, againſt Dominicus a Soto, that maintained the contrary.
               Silly man as you are, you can play in ambiguities, and talk at randome freely, when no man is neere to oppoſe or contradict you. Your Maſters can teach you, that Aſſurance is twofold in this diſcourſe: In reſpect of the Obiect, knowne, belieued; in regard of the Subject, beleeuing, knowing: As man relieth vpon his Euidence; or as is his Euidence to rely vpon. Euidence is diuine or humane, from God or Man. Euidence diuine, if apprehended, is euer certaine, and infallible, both for the neceſſity of our object, God, in whom is nor change nor ſhadow of change; as alſo for the manner of determining the Euidence, whereby that is certaine and neceſſary for effect, which is but contingent otherwiſe in it ſelfe.
               Euidence moſt cleere, aſſurance moſt certaine in it ſelfe, is contingent, vncertaine, as we may both vſe it or diſpoſe it, that are heere and there, of and on: becauſe man is irreſolute in his waies, and vnconſtant

in his works. God is to vs, as wee are to him; knowne, as farre as wee can reach to apprehend him.
               Thus then for thoſe men that aſſert infallibility of aſſurance: Their meaning may bee, for ought you know, I am ſure, for ought you haue ſaid to the contrary, that in regard of God, faithfull and true; in reſpect of his promiſes, Yea and Amen, euery Childe of God, renued by Grace, may and ought infallibly aſſure himſelfe of his owne Saluation procured in Chriſt: who yet, in regard of his owne Infirmity and Inconſtancy, cannot chuſe but wauer in his aſſurance, and feare the worſt, though he hope the beſt.
               This was Auſtens reſolution, if Bellarmine ſay right: Ex promiſsione Chriſti poteſt vnuſquiſque, vt S. Auguſtinus rectè docet, colligere ſe tranſuſſe à morte ad vitam, et in iudicium non ventre: Euery man may collect thus out of the promiſe of Chriſt; but with what aſſurance, the queſtion is: thereto Saint Auguſtine doth not proceed. Wereſolue, ſaith he there, that a man may collect it by infallible aſſurance, and diuine, if wee looke into the faithfulneſſe of him that promiſeth: but if wee conſider our owne diſpoſition, we aſsigne no more but probable and coniectural aſſurance. This Bellarmine aſſigneth. This is enough. Faction may tranſport a man to wrangle for more; but when once they ioyne iſſue, the difference will not be much.
               Much or little, great or ſmall, thus or ſo, the Church of England is not touched, that deſigneth neither. Vngratefull Colt you are, that ſpurne with your heeles at the breſts that gaue you life; if not to God, yet to nature; and impute more vnto her, then ſhe meant or intended to determine or maintaine.
               
                  
Indeed, contrary, as you bely them; conſonant, Contrary to their owne Bible. agreeing, as they beleeue and maintaine: They neuer went againſt theſe words of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 9. 27. Leſt, by any meanes, when I preached to others, I my ſelfe ſhould be a Caſt-away: But they ſay you miſtake, and miſ-apply thoſe words, and therein goe againſt your owne Directors. For, their Tenet is, that Saint Paul was aſſured of his ſaluation: whether by ordinary diuine Faith, or extraordinary diuine Reuelation, I enquire not at preſent, nor much care. I take, which you ignorantly doo contradict, or vnlearnedly doo oppoſe. Secondly, you oppoſe plain Scripture, in your Bibles: for, Saint Paul, a Iew by birth, as Bellarmine reſolueth, ſemper ſe in numero Electorum point, cùm de Praedeſtinatione loquitur, Rom. 8. 9, 11. & Eph. 1. accounteth himſelf euer in the Roll of Elect, whereſoeuer he mentioneth Predestination, as in the 8. 9, 11. chapters to the Romans, and 1. to the Epheſians. And yet ſay Therefore S. Paul himſelf was not aſſured infallibly. you, He was not aſſured infallibly. He diſſembled therfore; thought one thing, ſaid another. So much is That Apoſtle beholding to you.
               They neuer went againſt him that you intend, in thoſe other two Texts of Rom. 11. 20. Philip. 2. 12. For to him that continueth faithfull vnto the end, is appointed the reward of eternall life. And yet it is poſſible, and I could doo it, to puzzle ſuch a Lozzell as your ſelf, with expositions of thoſe Texts that might well put off your application: but I vndertake no priuate opinions or peculiar intereſt. I iuſtifie no man but the Church of England. That I can doo againſt your Betters: that I will perform againſt your ſelf.
               A cleanly Put-off, but too common, and therefore A point of doctrine ſo improbable, that we will not labour to ouerthrowe it by any further proof of Fathers.
                  
to be ſmiled-at for your pouerty. You will not labour to ouerthrowe it by proof of Fathers. For why? Your good Patrons were themſelues to-ſeek: and you haue but reuerſions from other me
                     ••
                   trenchers. If it were ſo improbable, as you would haue vs ſuppoſe it, Catharine could not haue maintained it as he hath done; nor put Dominicus à Soto, no Baby, ſo to it, as I knowe hee hath; nor backed it with authorities of Auſten and others. If ſo improbable, I maruell, the Councell of Trent did ſo hardly paſſe it: and two Legates of three, or foure at moſt, profeſſe, it went too ſoon out of their fingers, and came to reſolution, before it had throughly been decided. What Spirit directed that Councell in this, where the Principall, in a ſort, complains of ſurreption? This I haue from no Heretick: Catharine related it from their mouthes. He, you haue heard, was an Arch-biſhop of great name, and as learned as many were in Trent. But I proceed.
            
            
               XXIII.
               
                  That euery one hath not his Angell-keeper.
               
               
                  THis fellow, it ſeemeth, had but little emploiment, when he vndertook to abridge our Controuerſies; he is ſo apt and diſpoſed to enlarge them, and ſet them at odds, who would willingly haue been quiet. Such Boutifeus as he is, hinc ad malam crucem: quibus quieta mo
                        •
                     ere magna merces, that loue to ſee the waters troubled; and take the very queſtioning of things that might

reſt; a ſufficient hire to ſet them on worke, that the Father of Diuiſion may applaude them, and crie; Oh, well done. For, concerning Angell-keepers, what needed this Theſis? A thing not defined in any Councell; no not in that laſt Conuenticle of Trent, becauſe free, and in Opinion euery way. The moſt that can be ſayd againſt Oppoſers, is that of Vaſques, diſputing this Diuinitie probleme, Sine graui temeritatis notâ negare non licet: VVee cannot deny without very great raſhnes, that euery man hath his Angell-keeper.
               
               To this I ſubſcribe with all my heart: ſo doth the Church of England, for ought I knowe. Indeede I do not finde Deciſion or Reſolution one way or other in the Confeſſion publike of our Church. No more do I in any Councell generall or particular to my remembrance, in any age. The reaſon is; no man did queſtion it, all held it a truth: and what needed deciſion where no ſcruple was? The opinion of the antient Schoole, (the Fathers of the Church), is poſitiue and affi
                     •
                  matiue for Angel-Keepers: the ſaying of Saint Auguſtine is well knowne, Parum eſt feciſſe Angelos tuos, feciſti et cuſtodes par
                        •
                     ulorum. It ſufficed not; my God, that thou madeſt them thine Angels; thou createdſt them keepers of the little ones. The later Schoole runnes mightily the ſame way, though both with ſome differences, How, and To Whom, and when deputed.
               Before Origens time, (and he liued long within 300 yeeres after Chriſt) as himſelfe relateth, Tract. 5. vpon Saint Mathew, there were two different opinions in the Church: The former maintained, that onely thoſe had Angell-keepers deputed vnto them, who

were of the number of Gods elect, from the firſt inſtant of their Natiuity: The other, that none but ſuch holy men indeed had Angel-guardians, but from the day of their Baptiſme and new Birth in Chriſt, aſſigned them, not before, or from their Natiuitie.
               This was the opinion of Antiquitie, and no more; not as the Church of Rome hath enlarged it, that Euery man liuing, good and bad, from the verie firſt inſtant of life, to the laſt gaſpe, hath an Angel-guardian deputed vnto him, as I could make manifeſt, if need were: and Baſil is punctuall and expreſſe vpon the 33. Pſal. page 221. and the 48. Pſal. page 247. Nor doth the Maſter of Sentences otherwiſe conceiue it then, Vt quiſque Electorum habeat Angelum ad ſui protectum atque cuſtodiam ſpecialiter deputatum. In 2. d. 11. So that, hic Magiſter non tenetur: our Roman Vndertakers haue forſaken not alone the Fathers, but their owne Doctor Peter Lumbard, to enlarge the point.
               And yet this giddy Gooſe-gaggler muſt prate, he knoweth not what, againſt the Church of England, concerning Angell-keepers in this point: who with as good reaſon, and to as great purpoſe, mought haue ſtirred touching Guardians of Kingdomes, Cities, Corporations, Elements, and ordering of the world; touching the time when, the maner how, the extent how farre, and many other like ſpeculations, all diſputed of among Diuines in the Church, none reſolued of as de fide by Diuines for the Church. So that had we denied it, no ſuch great matter: for, ſalus Eccleſiae non vertitur in iſtis: the Church may ſubſiſt

and proſper without any ſuch determined reſolution. But, ſeeing we beleeue and profeſſe it too, his lips would bee gagged, and his idle brains garbled at the leaſt, for charging vs with ſuch an vntroth.
               What is ſo contrary, can you tell, to the expreſſe words of our owne Bible? Not well, 
                     〈◊〉
                   wis. Yes, th
                        ••
                     
                   
                  Contrary to expreſſe words of their owne Bible, Mat. 18. 10 
                  they had not their Angell-keeper. For, Mat. 18. 10. wee read the contrary; not to that which wee deny: for, we deny it not. If wee ſhould deny it, yet this Text, thus cited, would not conuince vs: for, do you finde Angelus cuſ
                        ••
                     s, Keeper or Guardian there? Put on your conſidering Cap ſome what cloſer to your Cockſcomb. Angell I finde, and their Angels I finde; In Heauen their Angels alway behold the face of my Father which is in Heauen: but Angels and Angell-keeper are two ſeuerall words, importing ſeueral offices in thoſe heauenly Subſiſtences, as I conceiue it. And therefore That cannot inforce This, except there were no Angels, but Angels-Guardians in Heauen. Again, I finde Their Angels, by appropriation: but appropriation is in moe reſpects than one. Their friends and well-willers they might well bee, though not Guardians to attend them; their Guardians ſometime, vpon ſpeciall imploiments; their Patrones aſſigned extraordinarily in Acts of Gods prouidence, ſo many, ſo diuerſe, eſpecially on parties of their allotment.
               But I take not aduantage as I might: for, I admit the Tenet concerning Keeping-Angels, though vntowardly maintained by this poor Catholique Companion. This I queſtion; the Object of Protection, Therefore they had their Angellkeeper. at randon ſpecified in the Gag. Their and They, who

were thoſe They? Euery one, ſay you, if you ſay what you ſhould. So teach your new Maſters, that neuer ſo learned it of their Fore-fathers. In the now Doctrine of the Romane Schooles, Euery man liuing hath his Angell-keeper, Iew, Gentile, Turk, Chriſtian, Pagan, Epicure, Atheiſt, Antichriſt himſelfe, and peraduenture diuell and all. For Euery one, in your opinion, hath his Angell-keeper, without reſtraint, or limitation. Are the words of our Bible expreſſe for this? I cannot finde it in any of mine; the contrary rather. They are Little-ones who haue this Guard aſſigned. Their Angels putteth vs back to them, formerly mentioned and infiſted vpon. If Little ones; then not Greatones, then not all; and certainely not all, though Great ones: for these Little ones are Great indeed. Great with God, high in his bookes, though Little in the world, two wayes; through contempt of others, and their owne account, out of Humility and Opinion. Therefore now what? Euery man hath his Angell-keeper? No, ſome haue, and not all. Therefore you are a blunderer in this Text, of as little vnderſtanding or leſſe in that which followeth.
               
                  Pſal. 91. 11, 12. The Prophet aſſureth thus from God: Hee ſhall giue his Angels charge concerning thee, to keepe thee in all thy waies. They ſhall beare thee vp in their hands, leſt thou daſh thy foote againſt a ſtone. But this Text will not reach vnto euery man, Simon Magus, Mahomet, or ſuch like, but either reſtrainedly vnto Chriſt Ieſus incarnate in our fleſh, in all things, ſinne onely excepted; tempted as we are, and ſubject to infirmities: and ſo Irenaeus, Euſebius, Auguſtine, and others doe expound it; as did alſo the diuell in his

combate with Chriſt; and then, it is not to purpoſe: for though it be granted, which your Schooles diſpute, that Chriſt incarnate had his Angell-keeper, a thing abſurd, injurious, idle, if not impious, yet it goeth no farther but to one particular, and him onely, as Head of the Church; and will confine this Keeperage to the Church. Or it may be vnderſtood more enlargedly, of all thoſe that it belongeth vnto; that is, Thoſe that dwell vnder the ſhadow of the moſt High, that haue made the Lord their refuge, euen the moſt High God their habitation; that is, of them in the Church, at leaſt, if not onely of The righteous in the Church: as, after Ignatius, the major part of Authors haue expounded it. Take it how you will, this way or that, it prooueth not, that Euery one, in generall tearmes, hath his Angell-keeper: but the Proteſtants Tenent, Some haue, onely, and no more.
               Saint Cyril of Alexandria is not ad oppoſitum: he This very paſſage Saint Cyril of Alexandria, Lib. 4. con. Iulian. applieth to our Angel-keeper. doth applie it to our Angell-keeper. And let him in good time, a Gods name ſo apply it. I know no reaſonable man but will embrace his application, and bee glad to be aſſured of ſuch a Guardian. But that Our Angel, Sir Gagger, in your language, vnto whom, I pray, is it applied? To Iohn a-N
                        •
                     ke and Iohn a-Stile with you. To euery man in your Aſhdod language, Antichriſt and All, you cannot auoyd it: for Antichriſt with you, is a ſingular man: therefore, if Euery man haue his Angell-keeper, Antichriſt, a man, muſt haue his; auoid this if you can. Now ſee if S. Cyril applieth this very paſſage as you would haue him.
               See then how handſomely your Texts and Propoſition hang together. That is conceiued in theſe generall

termes, Euery man hath his Angell-keeper, in opinion of your Maſters (for I think you cannot tell what they teach, nor your ſelf what to hold), the explication is for ſinguligenerum, Euery man liuing vpon Earth. The proofes out of Scripture are reſtrained, and ſpeake onely for ſome men, a Peculiar People; the Righteous onely, the ſonnes of God, at leaſt, that liue within the pale of the Church, and haue intereſt in the Couenant of Grace. Therefore, though They had their Angels Guardians, yet it followeth not, All and Euery one hath ſo.
               Go and ſee, good Reader, thoſe places, moe; not Proofes for Euery mans Angell-keeper, but as plaine 
                     See more, Acts 12. 14. 1. Cor. 11. 10. Euidences of this fellowes witleſſe allegations. For firſt, thoſe Angels mentioned, 1. Cor. 11. 10. may, for ought he knoweth out of the Text, be other Angels extraordinarily ſent. It is not ſaid, They were His or Theirs, but indeterminately, The Angels. Therefore ought a woman to haue power vpon her head, becauſe of the Angells. Secondly, They may bee Angels of the Church in generall, and not peculiarly of that man or this. Thirdly, Whoſoeuer, or whoſe-ſoeuer thoſe Angels were, we find them not in the Wildernes, among the Tents of Cedar, or at Babylon; but in Sion, in the Church, the Chappell, in the Chancell; not onely ſpiritually, in the Church of the Redeemed, but materially, in the place of Diuine Seruice, vpon an Holiday; In locoſancto, actione ſacra. So that theſe are no Rangers amongſt the beaſts of the Forreſt: they haue their ſeuerall walks in the Church-pale.
               That Angell, Acts 12. 14. is One, a ſpeciall one, an Angell-keeper indeed, Leiger with Saint Peter in his

life; but yet ſuch an Angell, as for whom Euery man is neuer theneere. He enlargeth not the Guardianſhip vnto All, but confineth it vnto Some; A man in the Church, a member of the Church. Nay, ſay you, The Church in him, prouided for him, built vpon him, committed to him. Saint Peter's Angel, that great Apoſtle, of him ſpeaketh Rhode, it is his Angel.
               
               Thus we haue ſeene all we are likely to ſee. The poore man can afford vs no Fathers heere; his reading, it ſeemeth, would not reach vnto that, and his good Maſters were not at hand to help him. I could furniſh him, if hee would thank mee, to better purpoſe, then his Scriptures haue: but want, I ſuppoſe, he will rather, then be beholding to a Proteſtant. To conclude, wee will not deny him, that Euery man hath his Angell-keeper; but within the Church at leaſt, not rambling abroad. Are they not all of them miniſtring ſpirits, ſent forth to miniſter? To whom? where? Not to euery man vnder heauen, but with reſtriction, Who ſhall be heyres of ſaluation; In offenſiue ſort againſt their foes; in defenſiue manner for their good. Thus the Scriptures ſpeake, and no otherwiſe: thus the Fathers taught, and no otherwiſe. Not Euery man, but Euery Chriſtian man, at his Birth, or at his Baptiſme, hath his Guardian Angell deputed to him.
            
            
               
               XXIIII.
               
                  That the holy Angels pray not for vs.
               
               
                  WIth Ly and all, Sir Gagger. Not pray for vs? Now, I pray you, who ſaith ſo? No man will ſay or think ſo, that beleeueth in his Creed, The communion of Saints, and can tell what connexion of the two parts of the Church of the Redeemed there is, the one militant heere in Earth; the other Regnant and Triumphant in Heauen. Now a principall part of that Communion and Society which they haue with vs, is, to recommend our ſtate and neceſſities vnto God our Father. To which end God Almighty hath, as wee profeſſe in our Collect vpon Michaelmas Day, appointed the Seruice of men and Angels in a wonderfull ſort.
               
               But ſomewhat there was, or the man miſtook. Their Praying for vs may bee conſidered two waies; either in Generall, or in Particular. For the peace of Sion: the proſperity of Ieruſalem: the ſtate and condition of the Church militant in earth; thus in generall. For Manaſſes in Captiuity, Hezechiah beleaguered by Senacherib. For this man or that man in particular, vpon ſpeciall motiues and occaſions: and that likewiſe two waies; either ordinarily, and of common courſe; or ſpecially, by Delegation in extraordinary ſeruice.
               
                  
Now this Propoſition, Holy Angels pray for vs, doth not limit nor explaine the tearmes, but is ambiguous; as this peddler moſt an end frameth all in his Pack, to calumniate, and to deceiue. Whether All Angels pray for All men; or All for ſome men; or ſome for all; or ſome for ſome; who can tell, that was not of counſell to his pen and purpoſe? As it lyeth lurking in fraudulent tearmes, I can anſwere both waies, and contradictory waies. Firſt, Holy Angels pray not for vs; and truly too. Nor ſhall this Gooſe hiſcere againſt my anſwere, viz. Not euery holy Angell in ſpeciall, for euery man in particular; Not at all times, vpon any or all occaſions. I can alſo anſwer, and truly too; Holy Angels pray for vs. And ſo this Gagger may goe ſhoo the Gooſe. That is, It is a principall part of their performance in Heauen, as they magnifie their Maker eternally, ſo to recommend vnto Him, vnceſſantly, the Eſtate and good beeing of the Church of the Redeemed, as yet in great Tribulations. I adde yet further, At all times, ſome of them pray for the particular eſtate of ſome priuate Men, Cities, States, Societies or Countries: And the Holy Angell-keepers, for their ſpeciall charges commended vnto their truſt by God, at ſometime, ſome of them for all, for ſome, vpon ſpecial occaſion, employment, or deſignation, as extraordinarily they may and doe vndertake.
               Now to come home to your looſe & laxe affirmation: Contrary to expreſſe words in your owne Bibles, Zach. 1. 9, 10, 11. Your expreſſe words in our Bible are not ſo expreſſe, as to ſpeake to your purpoſe: that of Zachar. 1. 9. 10. runneth thus: O Lord of hoſts, how long wilt thou net haue mercy vpon Ieruſalem, and on the Cities of Iuda,

                  againſt which thou hast had indignation theſe 70 yeeres? For, it followeth not, becauſe this one Angell prayed for Ieruſalem in Captiuity, any Angel doth pray for any or euery man. This was extraordinary: your ſuppoſall muſt bee ordinary. This was occaſionall, for his employment: your Angels muſt not bee ſo allotted. Happely this was their Angell-Guardian; Michael, Prince of the Synagogue. Pleade thus for Angell-keepers, none will gayn-ſay you. They pray for vs, no queſtion at all. This was in a peculiar caſe, for reſtoring Ieruſalem and Iuda, according to promiſe, in appointed time, 70 yeeres deſigned by the Prophets. So the queſtion was idle like your ſelfe, Whether 
                  Now what, I pray you, is a praier, if this be not? 
                  this were not a Prayer? The queſtion well ordred, ſhould haue beene, Whether All Angels, at all times, doe not in particular pray for euery particular man, as this Angell heere did for Sion? To the former wee anſwere poſitiuely, Yea; to the ſecond, negatiuely, No. Nor can this inſtance euict that.
               
                  Tobie 12. 12. Raphael telleth Tobias thus: When thou didſt pray, and Sara thy daughter-in-law, I did bring the remembrance of your praiers before the Holy One. Firſt, what an Addle-head are you, that trump in the Proteſtants way with this Teſtimony, which your Maſters can tell you (for, happely your ignorance knoweth not ſo much) they eſteem of no otherwiſe than a Talmudicall Tale? Secondly, how can you accord this Tale with your owne Tenents? Raphael both ſpeaketh heer as their Angell-keeper, and carrieth himſelf ſo in that whole negotiation. Raphael was of the higheſt Hierarchy; next to Michael and Gabriel, in your account. Your ſelues teach, that Angels

of that Hierarchie are not Custodes, nor imploied vnto men: but all imployed ordinarily, are of the inferiour and loweſt rank. Riddle me, riddle mee: what is this? You told vs of one that could vntie knots: let him vntie this, or cut it in pieces; for, it troubleth vs not a little.
               That Angell, Reuel. 8. 4. from whoſe hands the ſmoke of incenſe aſcended, which is expreſſed to haue been the prayers of Saints, who was he? can you tell mee? whether the Angell of the Couenant, Chriſt Ieſus himſelf; or Michael, the Protector of the Church, do you knowe? or ſome other Angell, are you aſſured? Was his imployment ordinary or extraordinary, can any tell? Myſticall, you may be ſure, this Paſſage is: and can you draw Arguments from ſuch Teſtimonies? Your great vnderſtanding doth happely think, Yea: the common reſolution is for, Nay. But howſoeuer the praiers of all Saints, that is, of the Church, were offred to God in the hands of an Angell, their Mediator, therefore All Angels pray for all men; or ſome Angels for ſome men ordinarily? I deny the neceſſity of this doctrine. When you ſay more, you ſhall heare further; but much more, I beleeue, you cannot: for, you fail of your wonted Cue, See more, and See Fathers that affirm it: neither Scripture nor Fathers heer.
               In Concluſion, from whence drew you forth this imputation, that The holy Angels pray not for vs? For, Bellarmine, your Polſtar and Cynoſura in point of Controuerſie, doth confeſſe, It is not denied, that Sancti, and ſo Angell orant pro nobis, ſaltem in genere ſecundum Scriptur as. And thoſe that aſſent, as moſt doo, a
                     •
                   the

Church of England doth, vnto Angell-keepers, will not ſtand with you for it, that orant pro nobis, not onely in genere, but in particulari. Your deſire is onely for priuate aduantage, to keep a Faction on foot: and therefore you flutter in dubious tearms; Holy Angels pray not for vs: which is, or true, or falſe, as it may be taken.
            
            
               XXV.
               
                  That we may not pray vnto them.
               
               
                  PRay to them, if you like it; or to Saint Loiola, if you pleaſe: we cannot hinder you from playing the fools, and expoſing your ſelues to bee laughed-at for your labours. I ſay, as Ioſua ſometime ſaid, in a caſe not very much vnlike, Call vpon what Saints or Angels you will: go ſerue Baal or Astaroth, if you fanſie it. We in the Church of England will call vnto the Lord of Heauen and Earth, by immediate addreſſe, without interceſſion of Mediators; hauing warrant moſt ſufficient, by direction and inuitation, Pſalm 50. 15. Call vpon me in the time of trouble; so I will beare thee, and deliuer thee. Doo you knowe any man ſo vnaduiſed, that will go about, when hee may well go ſtreight? or will ſue for aſſiſtance, and that alſo vncertain, when he needeth none? Perhaps there is no ſuch great impiety in ſaying, Sancte Laurenti, ora pro me: but in my opinion, till I am better informed,

it is grand foolery, to ſay, Sancta Catharina, ora pro me; where I may ſay, cum effectu, vnto God himſelf, Miſerere mei, Deus: Lord, haue mercy vpon me. If you might haue acceſſe vnto his Holineſſe at pleaſure, would you vſe the mediation of Cardinall Barberino, if there bee any ſuch, though the Pope's Nephew? I ſuppoſe not: if you did, I ſay no more, but The Vicar of Saint Fooles be your ghoſtly father.
               
               But our Bible is againſt our Doctrine. In good Contrary to their owne Bible. time: how ſo? For, Iacob ſaith, Gen. 48. 16. The Angell which redeemed mee (you read, deliuereth mee) from all euill, bleſſe theſe Lads: where, firſt, you bely your owne reading. You read, Angelus qui er uit me. Is that deliuereth, in the preſent Tenſe, in your Grammar? It is to all, but you, in the Time paſt, that hath deliuered. Now, what ſuch difference, that it ſhould bee noted, betwixt deliuered and redeemed? indeed, that hath taken me out. Secondly, read it how you will, it is not to purpoſe. You propoſe it thus; That we may not: you proue the lawfulnes, quia factum: ſo you may proue theft, murder, and what not? It is a priuate fact of Iacob, there related by Moſes: and the Acts, no not of the beſt men, are no rules of actions vnto others. We ſhould liue by Precept, not by Practice. Our Sauiour ſaid not, What ſeeſt thou? but, What readeſt thou? But thirdly, I will take no ſuch exception: I admit it ruleable euery way. Iacob did well: wee may doo ſo as Iacob did, and yet not pray to Angels.
               Therefore, fourthly, I anſwer contradictorily to That this was ſpoken to a true Angell, and not to Chriſt. your inference. This is not ſpoken to, but of an Angell; ſecondly, not of a created Angel, but of Chriſt. Thirdly, Chriſt is a true Angell. This Fellow muſt

go learn to ſpeak, before hee write; what to put in Print, before hee publiſh it; to vnderſtand Diuinity, before he babble in it. Is Chriſt an Angell, and not a true one? Is he a falſe or a counterfet Angell? in appearance, in collusion, not in ſubſtance? Who euer heard ſuch Stuffe from a Prieſt's lips? Chriſt is an Angell, not created, a true Angell, of an higher alloy, Prince of Angels, as of men; a mighty Angell, The Angell of the Couenant.
               
               And this was ſpoken of him by the Patriarch Iacob: The God of Bethel, as hee is called, that ſpake with Iacob in Bethel, and met him there, who wraſtled with him, who bleſſed him, who told not his name, being ſecret; ſpoken of him, by commemoration; not vnto him, by inuocation: That Angell which deliuered mee, bleſſe theſe.
               
               The man had, I knowe not how, ſome intimation from ſome other, that we would reply, that this Angell 
                     Baſil. l. 3. c. Eunomium. & S. Chryſ. ho. 7. in laud. S. Pauli, and vpon 1. of Col. and S. Hier. vpon 66 of Eſay.
                   heer ſpecified, as indeed wee beleeue it, was Chriſt himself, and no created Angell: and therefore, to gag our mouthes, hee preuents our anſwer; that in the opinion of Saint Baſil, Chryſoſtome, and Hierome, it was not Chriſt, but a created Angell: and therefore who for ſhame can ſay he praied not to him?
               
               Wiſely, I warrant you; as if it could not bee auoyded, but he was then prayed vnto, becauſe in the opinion of theſe men, hee was a created Angell: which is no conſequence, except it were granted, that none but created Angels were to bee prayed vnto, on any hand, at any time, vpon any occaſion. Now, who for ſhame will thus reaſon, to ſhame himſelfe, but hee, that eyther is paſt ſhame, or through ignorance

not capable of it? It is good to vncaſe ſuch a Mountebanke, that he may be knowne what he is. But I go from him, to this, the point in queſtion.
               Theſe Fathers opined, That Angel was not Chriſt, but a created Angel: and what then? As if as many were not of a contrary opinion. But were it not ſo, no more can be collected then this, that in ſome mens opiniō 
                  Iacob ſpake of a created angel; & thence, in ſome mens opinion, not by any expreſſe words of our Bibles, which we were promiſed to haue, this was not Chriſt. Which if it were ſo, as this Gagger can neuer proue it ſo, I will vndertake againſt him if hee dare: yet wee anſwer firſt, Then it was Iacobs Guardian at leaſt, as Toſtatus, and Ieſuites that I haue ſeene, imagine. Now the caſe of Angels-keepers, in point of Aduocation & Inuocation, is much different from other Angels not Guardians; as being continually attendant, alway at hand, though inuiſibly: & therfore though we might ſay, Sancte Angele Cuſtos, ora pro me; it followeth not, we may ſay, Sancte Gabriel, ora pro me.
               
               But laſtly, heere is no Inuocation nor Interceſſion, nor praying vnto any Angell Cuſtos or not Custos, ordinary or extraordinarily attendant. It is a deſire directed by Iacob vnto God, to ſend his Angel for that ſeruice and employment, to bleſſe & keep thoſe Lads. It is no addreſſe vnto that Holy Angel, whoſoeuer he was. Which being ſo, & ſo far from expreſs words pretended, were not this fellow paſt all ſhame, he Which beeing ſo, who for ſhame can ſay, He prayed not vnto him? would ſhame to ſay, Iacob prayed vnto an Angel. But of this, and this Queſtion elſewhere more at large. Thither gang this Gaggler, and I ſhall gag him, I am ſure, in this point of praying vnto Angels and Saints.
            
            
               
               XXVI.
               
                  That the Angels cannot help vs.
               
               
                  SEale vp thy Lips for euer, thou lying tongue. Said euer any Proteſtant, Angels cannot helpe vs? Name mee the man that may thus bee blotted, or hot burning coles bee thy portion, thou Lyer, and misborne El
                     •
                  e of the Father of lies. It is contrary indeed to expreſſe words of our owne Bibles, not alone in the places rightly produced, but many moe; and more to purpoſe then ſome of theſe are; contrary to ſenſe, reaſon, beliefe, and experience; contrary to our teaching, our meaning our dreaming. We beleeue & confeſſe of Holy Angels, They can, will, haue, doe help vs, ordinarily, extraordinarily: toties quoties, they are employed, as the mighty Executioners of the Almighties will, for his ſeruants, againſt his foes.
               And yet see the pouerty of this fellowes vndertakings! He is to prooue, that Angels can help vs. His firſt proofe is, Daniel 10. 13. Michael, one of the chiefe Princes, came to help mee. I queſtion not the meaning of that Text. I yeeld it. But I maruaile, this fellowe can ſet it downe, Angels help vs; and come in with this proofe, which ſhould bee expreſſe; and therefore name Angels; where Princes, not Angels

are remembred; and ſo remembred, as ſenſu primo, they may bee taken for ſome temporall Potentate, ſome of the Satrapaes of the King of Perſia. But the Prince of the Kingdome of Perſia withſtood mee twenty daies: but lo, Michael, one of the chief Princes, came to help mee: and I remained there by the Kings of Perſia: are theſe words expreſſe, for Angels helping? They are, I grant, for their help; but farre from expreſſe, which are ſo myſticall.
               That of Acts 12. in Saint Peter's caſe, is indeed expreſſe: and nothing can be more plaine, for proofe, then that place, which repreſenteth a performance of that delegation, Hee hath giuen his Angels charge concerning thee: a thing neuer queſtioned, denied, doubted, dreamed of by any Proteſtant, that I know. To proue himſelfe an honeſt man, it were good this accuſer would name the man. But ſomewhat there is in it, though he cannot tell what. We deny to addreſſe our ſelues in time of need, vnto Angels for mediation, or interceſſion; and we doe deny it, becauſe we hold it needleſſe, vnneceſſary, as no part of our duty, as vnbehoouefull, & to no purpoſe; becauſe we are perſwaded, that ordinarily, in euery exigent, at all times, no Angel, not attendant without remoue, can take notice of vs, vnderſtand our ſtate inſtantly, pitty vs in miſery, and ſo relieue vs. This is not for any inualidity of power, nor for auerſnes of will. If they know it, they are willing; if willing, they are ſufficient. The want proceedeth not from them: it is from diſability in ourſelues, to acquaint them ordinarily with our ſtates: which needs wee muſt doe, if wee will looke that they ſhould help vs. This is

that which this fellow ſhould pitch vpon; but then he were gon, and not able to ſay bough to a Gooſe: now hee hath ſomwhat to ſay at leaſt, and make a ſhew amongſt the Gaggle, though it be with a loud lye, that They cannot help vs, as we ſay.
               And yet we haue a ſhew of Fathers, and are ſent to ſee, firſt, Iuſtin Martyr, Apol. 2. and no more, C. W. 
                  See Fathers that affirme what hath beene ſaid touching Angels. 
                  B. This mans founder hath theſe words, The hoſt of the good Angels we worſhip and adore. Which if it were ſo, is not concerning any thing that hath beene ſaid touching Angels, by this Gaggler hitherto. But C. W. B. had it from Bellarmine: and he followed, I know not what tranſlation. The Text of Iuſtin Martyr, page 137 of Robert Steuens edit. in Greeke is this: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . We confeſſe, ſaith that Father, that we are Atheiſts in regard of any worſhip that wee giue vnto thoſe eſteemed Gods; but not ſo in reſpect of the true God: him, and his Sonne that came from him, and hath taught both vs theſe things, and alſo the Hoſt of good Angels, that are different from the other bad that followed him, and were likened vnto him, as alſo the Spirit of propheticall predictions, we worſhip and adore, honouring them in verity and in truth. This is the Text of Iuſtin, meant by this man, word for word related in his owne language, as he did write, and expreſſed thereout punctually. And now Sir, what aduantage from Iuſtin Martyr? What haue your Proſelytes ſeen in him? Your Tranſlator, Perionius, miſtook his Author, and Bellarmine was glad to make aduantage of it: and your Inſtructer took it as he found it.

As for your ſelfe, I think you are innocent of all. Otherwiſe then ſo, it cannot bee taken. For, though wee ſhould yeeld it, Angels are to bee worſhipped; yet not with diuine worſhip your ſelues confeſſe; with ſuch as is due vnto God alone. But if any worſhip bee giuen them heer, it is, point par point, that which is due to God. See what it is to blunder ſo.
               This was for worſhipping of Angels. S. Ambrose ſuccedeth in his Book, de Viduis, for praying vnto Angels. So the man flits to and fro: Angels are to be beſeeched, who are deputed our Guardians; therfore not all Angels, but onely Guardians. And is this to purpoſe; Angels pray for vs; or We may pray to them indefinitely? But I let the reſt alone. I haue anſwered elſe-where theſe and other places, and whatſoeuer other, beſide theſe, haue hitherto come to my knowledge from our oppoſites in the point of inuocation.
            
            
               XXVII.
               
                  That no Saint, deceaſed, hath afterward appeared to any vpon earth.
               
               
                  I Doo not belieue you, that you can name For, ſome ſuch my ſelf haue met with. any Proteſtant that wil defend this, That no Saint, deceaſed, hath appeared after death. Your word is no Goſpell. It is a Catholique Trick now-a-daies, to cog and lie, to caſt any aſperſion vpon Proteſtants. If you haue met with ſome ſuch, it had been well you had named

vs the men. Your luck and experience hath been better than mine: I neuer yet met with any ſuch Deniers. Perhaps, in your ranging vp and downe, you haue met with ſome ignorant & ſimple people, that, hearing your talk of Apparitions, thought you coniured; and, not knowing the meaning of the word, would not beleeue you vpon any hand: and, as your cuſtom is, you publiſh it for the doctrine of the Proteſtants, that No man euer appeared, no not extraordinarily, after death.
               
               But to purpoſe. We may conceiue your meaning two waies; eyther as in common courſe of kinde, or elſe vpon extraordinary courſe. Apparitions haue been, and may be; but, as works of wonder, diſpenſations of the right hand of the moſt High. Apparitions are not ordinary, nor of common diſpenſation. And infinite impoſtures, iuggling tricks, and colluſions, haue beene obtruded at all times vpon the world, eſpecially within the laſt 500 yeeres, by coozening & cheating knaues, vnder vaile and couert of Apparitions; principally, to delude poore ſuperſtitious people, with that opinion of Purgatory, to make merchandize of the pardons. But why not as probable, that ſome Saints haue appeared from Heauen, as ſome Popes haue come from Hell? Both at Gods good pleaſure extraordinarily, who doth all things as hee will in Heauen and Earth. What, if The ſoules of the Righteous be in the hands of God; are his hands ſo ſhortned, that no where but in Heauen they can bee in his hands? God may ſend them, no doubt, extraordinarily. No ceſſation of pain is to the one; no impairing of happineſſe, vnto the other: they carry

their heauen and hell about with them whereſoeuer they be. So that, in no diuerſity of opinion, we might well paſſe-by your Texts to no purpoſe.
               And indeed to no purpoſe: for, Mat. 17. 3. we read, There appeared vnto them, Moſes and Elias talking with them: which apply to your Theſis, No Saint, deceaſed, hath appeared vnto any; and aduiſe how handſomely it agreeth thereto. For, doo you not knowe, or haue you heard of it, that Moſes by ſome Authors is reputed not dead? as by Hillary, Can. 20. vpon Mathew; by Saint Ambroſe, in his ſecond Book of Cain & Abel; but tranſlated by God into Paradiſe, as Helias was afterward: aſſerted of late by no Babies of your owne; Ioh. Arboreus, lib. 11. Theoſophias, and Ambroſe Catharine vpon Gen. 3? If that bee ſo, you may go ſeek a new Text, to prooue apparitions of dead men by. It will be anſwered, Theſe were not dead. For, if Moſes be liuing, Elias is ſure: you hold him yet aliue; and why not both aliue, ſeeing both muſt come, and oppoſe againſt Antichriſt, and bee ſlaine by him before Doomſ-day? Mend your concluſion, and make it thus: Therefore Saints haue appeared to ſome on earth; and Therefore Saints deceaſed haue appearea to ſome on earth I will warrant, no man will quarrell your aſſertion.
               But your ſecond Text of Mat. 27. 52. cometh home to your minde. They were Saints indeed, deceaſed, but reſtored to life; and peraduenture vnto eternall life, in bodies as well as ſoules. They appeared vnto many; the Text is plain: and I beleeue, you neuer met with any ſuch, that, when you ſhewed this Text, would deny their appearing; which is expreſſe. And yet it is not well applied by you: for, your apparitions, as I conceiue it (inform me, if I doo miſ-take you),

are not in bodyes reſtored to life, or raiſed vp out of the duſt, but in bodies aſſumed, or ſome other way. Theſe men appeared in their owne bodies, which were laid into, and roſe vp out of the graues; and ſo, not very fitting your purpoſe.
               As for Onias the high Prieſt, who beeing dead, appeared vnto Iudas Macchabeus, let him iuſtifie it that hath written it. If he report the ſtory as it was; very good; it may be done. I ſee nothing to the contrary; if not true, no great hurt at all: your puling-whining ſoules in Purgatory, get nothing by the bargaine, That ſome Saints deceaſed, haue appeared. For theſe were in Heauen, of which there is conſtat for their appearing: at leaſt prooue you they were in Purgatory, to which your apparitions tend. But the truth is, there are many Schoens & Paraſangs betwixt thoſe wōdrous works of God, and thoſe iuggling tricks in the Romane Church; deuiſed onely to make the Prieſts pot to ſeethe, and fill the Popes purſe by colluſion.
            
            
               XXVIII.
               
                  That the Saints deceaſed know not what paſſeth in the Earth.
               
               
                  SPeake out, and ſpeak plaine. What mean you by what paſſeth? All things that are done on earth? in al places? at al times? by all perſons? ordinarily? of themſelues? or ſom ſaints? ſom things in ſom

places, at ſome times? by ſome perſons? extraordinarily? by reuelation, or ſome ſuch like meanes? No Proteſtant will deny the one: no Papiſt hath hitherto dared affirme the other. Dare you abide by it? if you doe, take vp the bucklers, and ſee what will follow. Your generall poſition will beare eyther interpretation. Wee affirme, that all Saints departed knowe ſomething on Earth; as namely, The beeing of a Church: That ſome Saints departed knowe ſomething heere done extraordinarily, by reuelation, intimation or otherwiſe.
               As your poſition is captiouſly put downe: ſo is your firſt proofe from the Text of Luke 16. 29. Sophiſtically affixed. There Abraham knew, that there were Moſes and the Prophets bookes in earth, which hee himſelfe had neuer ſeene. Indeed Abraham was dead long before Moſes wrote. And after Moſes wrote, till the time that Abraham anſwered thus (if it were an Hiſtory, and not a Parable), were many mo hundred yeeres. In all which time, no Proteſtant will deny, but Abraham might know when he was in Paradiſe, that God had left ſuch bookes vnto Iſrael. Now this is not ad idem, nor prooueth the queſtion: For, your poſition is, what paſſeth, not what hath paſſed: your proofe is for, what hath paſſed; and not, for what paſſeth. A maine difference betwixt theſe two. I cannot tell what you intend to write next: but I can tell, you haue plaid the Gooſe in your Gag: and hereafter when your worthy work putteth forth head to view, I ſhall bee able to ſay what Animal it is. Abrahā
                   knew ſom 2000 yeers after his death. Put the caſe ſo, that Moſes & the Prophets were in the hands of the Iewes, and directors

of them in their courſe vnto God: therefore Abraham knew what Rabbi Gamaliel taught Saint Paul ſuch a day, in his Auditory. Is this a good conſequence now in your Logick? A coozener, a cobler might reaſon ſo. Yet this is your reaſon, cap, apee. I anſwer directly: Firſt, Abraham's caſe is not euery mans. Secondly, Abraham's knowledge might bee extraordinary: our Quaere is of ordinary knowledge. Thirdly, Abraham might know in long tract of time, which he could not ſo at an inſtant; and wee make queſtion of preſent knowledge: for, that is required vnto your purpoſe onely. That which S. Auguſtine witneſſeth, we deny not: that which we deny, hee witneſſeth not. Hee witneſſeth there, that Abraham 
                  At Saint Auguſt. witneſſeth, Lib. de cura mortis. cap. 14. knew of Moſes. He telleth not how he came to know of Moſes; nor what Abraham or Moſes can know touching vs.
               In the next, as much ridiculous. Iohn 5. 45, our Sauiour there telleth the Iewes thus: Do not think, that I will accuſe you to my Father. There is one that accuſeth you, euen Moſes, in whom you truſt. Vpon citing this Text, it may ſeem, the man was ſom what conſcious, that it was not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as it ſhould bee, expreſſe; that the Theſis was, of knowing what is done vpon earth; the proofe, of accuſing vnto God in heauen. Therefore, to help it, we haue an argument, a conſequence inferred vpon that Antecedent thus: How could Moſes, dead 2000 yeeres before, accuſe thoſe that were liuing, if the Saints deceaſed, knowe not what paſſeth in the earth? If ſo; then take heed that Moſes accuſe not you for a fool, as very an one, as euer went without the priuiledge of a bable; who ſo childiſhly imagine, that God ſet in

iudgement, the Iewes were arraigned, euery mothers ſonne. And Moſes did, as the diuell with Iob, came and accuſed them, euery one in particular, of euery crime committed: for ſo it muſt be. Doubtleſſe Moſes had worke enough to doe; eſpecially in thoſe laſt, worſt, tumultuous times. You ſhould haue let vs knowne, who was of their Councell, who their Aduocate againſt Moſes; and whether it came to a demurrer or not.
               But good man Wiſeacres, learne of your Maſters, to take things aright. By Moſes, is not vnderſtood his perſon, then in Paradiſe, dead or aliue; but Moſes writings, the Law of Moſes, that in which the Iewes did ſo much truſt. So it is not perſonall: it is inſtrumentall: his writings accuſe you, and will condemne you. So Caietan, Maldonate, and who not? or if perſonall, Moſes himſelfe, why then thus they take it: It is his office, it will be performed by him at the Reſurrection, and day of Doome: Moſes then will ſtand vp and accuſe you. Any way take it, it cannot conclude, that Saints in Heauen do knowe, by any ordinary courſe, what paſſeth continually vpon earth. What Saints are ſaid to know, and what not; how many waies, to what purpoſes and ends, I could let the Reader ſee, and gagge vp this gabbler for euer: but I haue don it already elſewhere, in that point to which this tendeth of Inuocation: of which notwithſtanding I muſt ſay ſom what heere: for it followeth next in order.
            
            
               
               XXIX.
               
                  That they pray not for vs.
               
               
                  WEE ſay not ſo. You either miſtake vs, or bely vs. The Saints pray for vs all in generall; all Saints for vs; or euery Saint for vs: that is, for the Church militant on earth. You ſhall finde, if you enquire, that the Caluiniſts themſelues, as you call them, or Puritans, hold this.
               I adde, The Saints pray for vs in particular; ſome particular Saint, for ſome particular man, in ſome ſpeciall cauſe, ſome time. And to come more particularly to it: The Queſtion is not, whether Saints departed doe pray vnto God: that is confeſſed on both ſides; all Saints doe, by prayer, interceſſion, ſupplication, as well as thankſgiuing. It is confeſſed they pray for others, and for themselues Nor can any be ſo ſenſleſſe as to ſay they pray for them ſelues. too, by all but this addle-pate, who prates he knoweth not what, and meaſureth other mens ſenſes by his owne ſenſleſneſſe. It is euident they doe, Apocal. 6. 10. How long O Lord holy and true! doeſt thou not iudge and auenge our bloud on them that dwell vpon the earth? The fellow neuer heard, that the ſoules of the Righteous pray for their conſummation in glory: ſuch an infant is hee in theſe ſpeculations which are ſo common.
               Again, it is not denied they pray for vs, in regard of

that Communion of Saints, whereof this holy performance is a principall and main part; for vs in generall, out of fellow-feeling and commiſeration of our miſeries which themſelues haue taſted in this valley of tears; for their friends in particular, whom they remember, whoſe ſtate they recommend vnto God in praier; they hauing loſt no endowment in their Soule in Glory, which did accrue vnto them vpon Earth. And as for Loue and Charity vnto their brethren, which makes them ſo forward to do them good, that is exceedingly enlarged there. Monica, Saint Auguſtine's Mother, for inſtance, departing this life before her Sonne, I make no doubt, being ſeate
                     •
                   in thoſe Heauenly Palaces, might and did remember her ſonne on earth, recommend his eſtate vnto our bleſſed Sauiour, pray for him in generall; his good Conſtancy, Perſeuerance, and Confirmation in the courſe of his Chriſtian Profeſſion and Prieſtly Function; and not onely ſo, but might remember him in ſome particular occaſions, occurrences and actions, with which in her life-time ſhe was acquainted. And yet Saint Auguſtine had nor could haue any warran
                     •
                   at all to pray vnto her for her remembrance of him, or aſſiſtance in things that fell out afterwards, after her death; becauſe there was not, nor yet could bee, any ordinary courſe certain, whereby hee might acquaint her with his particulars after her death: which is all in all for inuocation.
               To come home to the point. It ſhould not be put, as heer it is, that they pray for vs: for, without queſtion, they doo; and it is confeſſed by all Proteſtants, that they doo pray for vs in generall, all, without limitation;

in particular, in ſome caſes. But it ſhould haue been ſpecified, when, for what, by what meanes, and how, they doo, and doo not, pray for vs: but of theſe, and ſuch like neceſſary Inferences as theſe, this Dreamer thought not, or elſe would take no notice. So hard a thing is it, to knowe or ſet down the ſtate of a Controuerſie right: ſo vnwilling, at leaſt, men are to come to tearms of commerce, and ſome agreement, who minde nothing but faction and diſturbance.
               This being premiſed, we proceed to ſee how contrary the Doctrine of the Proteſtants is vnto their Contrary to their owne Bible. owne Bible. Apoc. 5. 8. our Bibles read thus: The 24 Elders fell down before the Lamb, hauing euery one of them Harps, and golden Vials full of Odors, which are the Praiers of Saints. Heer 24 Elders are repreſented; but, in a viſion. Then who told this Smatterer in diuinity, who they were? It is expreſt, that theſe Odors were the Prayers of Saints: but is it expreſſed, who they were that preſented them? or what Prayers? or what Saints? The Praiers of Saints on Earth. But then, except a man be a Saint on Earth, Interceſſion vnto, Mediation of Saints in Heauen will doo him no good at all. Preſented by Saints in Heauen: but, Quo warranto? For, not becauſe this viſion was in Heauen repreſented, therefore the Action and Actors intended, were alſo heauenly; and the thing repreſented, no where done but there. Such obſcure Propheſies, not yet vnderſtood, that you can ſay, by any, are neuer aſſumed for Proofs in point of Controuerſie, but of men that vphold a deſperate forlorn cauſe, for want of cleerer Proofs.
               
                  
For the Text, Irenaeus inclineth to take it of thoſe Prayers which the Church of GOD offreth vpon Earth, lib. 4. cap. 33: Quoniam ergo Nomen Filij proprium Patris eſt, & in Deo omnipotenti, per Ieſum Chriſtum offert Eccleſia, bene ait ſecundum vtraque: in omni loco incenſum offertur Nomini meo, & ſacrificium purum. Incenſa autem Iohannes in Apocalypſi, Orationes ait eſſe Sanctorum: which is again repeated by that mvſticall Diuine, Apocal. 8. And the ſmoke of the incenſe, which are the Prayers of Saints, went vp from the hand of the Angell before God. No more is collected, or can bee, from theſe Texts, but this, that Prayer is compared to Incenſe; according vnto that in the Pſalm, Let their Praier bee ſet forth in thy ſight like incenſe; and let the lifting-vp of their hands bee as the euening ſacrifice. But, concluded it cannot be from theſe myſticall Viſions, that theſe Saints prayed vnto that Angell; that the 24 Elders repreſented the Angels; that thoſe Praiers were addreſſed from men vpon Earth; that the Viſion expreſſed a thing ordinary, and done; that any man of diſcretion or vnderſtanding in Diuinity or common reaſon, would haue gone in hand to haue prooued a thing controuerted and obſcure, by that which is much more obſcure, as this Fellow doth.
               In Macchab. 2. 15. 14. thus we read: This is a louer of the Brethren, who prayeth much for the people, and for the holy City; to wit, Ieremias the Prophet: and from thence the concluſion is, Therefore they pray for vs. To weet, you should haue added, the Prophets or the Iewes. Indeed in a Dream, worthy (no doubt) to be beleeued, verſe 11. For, so Iudas dreamed, and you beleeue it; and draw vs a Conclusion from your Dream thus:

                  Therefore they, Ieremy and Onias, if you will, pray for vs: In a Dream too. So the Doctrine is a Dream; the proof, a Dream: a Dreamer related it: a Dreamer recorded it; and a Dreamer doth tell & beleeue it. So, Qui amant, ipſi ſibi ſomnia fingunt: men are apt to beleeue Dreams, when the Dream is for their purpoſe. Admit it no Dream: let it be a ſtory, and res geſta. Ieremy might wel pray for them in generall, as hauing not forgot them in Heauen, whom he did know vpon earth. In ſome particular he might, eyther by extraordinary relation, or Diuine Reuelation, or howſoeuer; and yet you be farre enough from building your imagined deuice from thence; that therefore we may pray vnto them: if yet you were able to make it good, how Ieremy then in Limbo (for this was before Chriſt harrowed hell, and therefore farre enough from God), could pray for the Iewes, as he is ſaid, who might as ſoone and as wel pray for themſelues, as he might, and were in poſſibility to be heard as ſoone as he.
               For the Text of Ier. 15. 1. Though Moſes and Samuel ſtood before mee, yet my minde could not bee towards this people, I haue acquainted you with what I think thereof elſewhere. You adde out of Bellarmine, touching Hierom in his Comment. vpon that place: and Saint Gregory 9. of his Morals, 12. that they gather, how Moſes and Samuel, after their death, both could and did ſometimes pray for the ſame people. Bellarmine addeth Chryſoſtome. How is hee omitted? Did you forget him? for you looked vpon all alike, ſecure what any of them, or all of them ſaid, more then was tendred to your hands.
               
                  
Firſt, Hierome in his Comment. ſaith thus, nor more, nor leſſe: Hos enim legimus, irae Domini pro populo reſtitiſſe, et iam impendeniem auertiſſe ſententiam. Etſi, inquit, illi ſteterint, vel in conſpectu meo, vel contra me, quorum vni dixit Deus, Dimitte me, et percutiam populum iſtum: tamen non exaudiam, quoniam conſummata ſunt ſcelera populi delinquentis: For wee reade, that theſe men, in the peoples caſe, and their defence, oppoſed against the wrath of God, and put by the ſentence ready to bee put into execution. Although, ſaith hee, that theſe men ſhall ſtand, eyther in my preſence, or againſt me, vnto one of which God ſometime ſaid, Let me alone, and I will ſmite this people: yet I will not heare, becauſe the ſinnes of this wicked people are conſummate. Now, from which of theſe words doth your wiſdome collect, that Hierome made his concluſion, that Moſes and Samuel, beeing both dead, could yet, and alſo did, pray for that people? It is to bee gathered, they did it ſometime. Sometime in their life they did it, it may bee gathered, becauſe it is cleere. But this, beeing dead, is a gloſſe of your owne, an addition to Hierom, that corrupteth Hierome: It dropt from your pen: hee hath it not. That which is to bee collected from thence, is; If Moſes and Samuel, who liuing, appeaſed Gods wrath to the people, were now againe aliue, and ſhould pray for this people, as ſometime they did, yet I would not bee intreated now of them, as I was then; nor giue way to their petitions, as then I did: becauſe now, The iniquity of the Ammonite is fully ripe: the If an Horſe or an Aſſe ſhould pray, &c. ſinnes of this people are now conſummate, which then were but growing in the blade. Your Horſe or your Aſſe, though like your ſelfe in vnderſtanding,

would not ſo conclude, if, as Balaam's Aſſe once did, the poore beaſt could ſpeake: as worthily you doe, and like your selfe. If an Horſe or an Aſſe ſhould pray, &c. You would haue ſaid, bray: that is fitter for ſuch an Animal as you.
               Saint Gregory ſaith leſſe, Moral. 9. 12. For, he but onely repeateth the Text of Ieremie, and enquireth why the Prophet did rather inſiſt vpon Moſes and Samuel, then any other? And his anſwere thereto is, Becauſe they eſpecially prayed for their perſecutors. This is all that I can finde (no prouender for your Aſſe or Oxe): if you can meet with any more, let me knowe it, and you ſhall vnderſtand my minde thereof; onely this (almoſt forgotten in him, though I put it home to you before), not much to your purpoſe, no
                     •
                   thank-worthy; that Saint Gregory did not dreame, as Iudas Macchabeus did, of any Interceſſion by dead men, but conc
                     •
                  iued it thus, that if they were then liuing, they ſhould not preuaile with God, as they had done ſometimes. Quid eſt ergo in difficultate deprecandi, Moſen et Samuel deducere, niſi apertius indicare, quia eius ira neque illi obſiſterent, ſi aſtarent? What meaneth the Prophet to mention ſuch difficultie, in obtaining for Moſes and Samuel; but onely this, to make is cleere, that euen they ſhould not abide or reſist his wrath, if they then ſtood before him, as once they did?
               
               Thirdly, Chryſoſtome yet ſtriketh it further dead againſt you: which maketh me imagine ſome more aduiſed, who had peraduenture looked on the place, left out this teſtimony, though Bellarmine had appealed to him. For hee commeth home againſt you indeed, To. 4. pa. 165. of our E
                        •
                     on Edition, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .

Short, but ſweet, and to purpoſe. Therefore if this man were now aliue, and ſhould ſpeake thus, hee ſhould not for all that preuaile. Doe you mark? you haue wiſhed vs to note, more then once. Were hee now liuing; Nothing to purpoſe, of hearing in Heauen, or vnderſtanding ſo whereſoeuer hee were. This Text is for liuing, not dead men; for their Prayers, not Interceſſion of theſe, in opinion of Chryſoſtome.
               
               
                  Baruch 3. 4. thus wee reade: O Lord Almighty, thou God of Iſrael, heare now the Prayers of the dead Iſraelites (wee reade, ſay you, of the dead of Iſrael): Therefore the dead Iſraelities prayed for the liuing; that you, had you been efemore Iacob, might not abſolutely turne foole. Theſe dead Iſraelites muſt needs then bee in Limbo, when they prayed for their brethren. Some information there they muſt needs then haue had, by ſome Currire: but who was Hee, Qui fas per limen vtrumque ſolus habet, that was ſo imployed vnto Limbus Patrum. For, the reſolution of your Schooles is, if Bellarmine doe not miſ-informe vs, That becauſe the Saints and holy men, who died before Christ came in the fleſh, did not enter into Heauen, did not ſee God, nor could by any ordinary meanes vnderſtand the prayers of ſuch as ſued vnto them; therefore it was not vſed in the old Teſtament to ſay, Holy Abraham, pray for vs: but men prayed themſelues by themſelues vnto God, and alleaged the merits of Saints that were already dead, that by their merits, their prayers might finde acceſſe. Thus that great Vndertaker of all Proteſtant Aduerſaries, thereby cutting the throat of Inuocation, Aduocation and Interceſſion in the old Teſtament; putting

you off from all your recited Texts at once, of Baruch, Ieremie, Iudas Dream and all. And what are you Pumillo, to that great man-at-Armes? What is your word, that we ſhould beleeue you, The dead Iſraelites praied for the liuing? You tould vs of Harps but euen now, out of Apoc. 5. 8. You and your Maſters agree as well as Harp and Harrow, and no better, Your ſelf are fitter for an Harrow, than a Harp, Aſinus ad lyram, in theſe controuerted points of piety.
               But touching your dead Iſraelites, Sir of little wit, and leſſe vnderſtanding, they were not dead, though peraduenture ſleeping. They ſlept not then in the duſt of the earth, beeing gathered vnto their Fathers; but dead, becauſe like vnto the Dead; out of minde, caſt off, caſt out, of no reputation; in the opinion of the world, dead. Ver. 10. 11. in the ſame chapt. Men waxen old in a ſtrange Countrey, accounted with them that go down into the pit, as the Prophet expoundeth his owne meaning. Theſe were not Ezechias, Ioſias, Dauid, Eſaias, or the reſt; but Ezechiel, Baruch, Daniel, Sidrach, his companions then aliue. Theſe dead were liuing, and in caſe to pray, and did pray for themſelues, their wiues and children, their Country-men at Babylon in captiuity.
               Wee imagine ſo: and Baruch himſelf biddeth vs think ſo. Yet note what Theodoret ſaith to the contrary. Where note, that Theodoret, paraphraſing vpon Baruch, interpreteth this very place as Catholiques doo. And ſo we will: for, it is worth the noting, if hee knew Baruch's minde better than himſelf. Note it we will, and ſubſcribe it too, if Theodoret interpret this place as you doo: for, as for Catholiques, I haue not enquired how they interpret it; I need not, it is ſo palpable. I verily ſuppoſe, you haue pigges in your

belly, and cry, We Catholiques (when it is but a Cacolick, and a poor one, God knoweth, your ſilly ſelfe) interpret the place ſo. But haue you looked vpon Theodoret? Are you certain, hee interpreteth it ſo? I cannot finde it, to note it in him. This is all that I can note, in no very great Paraphraſe neither; Verba clarè ostendunt immortalitatem onima: and to this, Proteſtants firmly and conſtantly aſſent, as well as any Papiſts or Popes either: for, ſome of them haue ſcarce aſſented thereto; though not for this Proof of Theodoret: which how clarè it ſheweth that, I ſee not.
               
                  Theodoret could not hence note vnto vs the immortality of the ſoule, otherwiſe than becauſe the dead doo liue: which to admit, yet is it farre enough from the expoſition of Catholiques, that imagine, Inuocation may bee inferred hence. For, dead men may pray, and yet not for others. It is an idle exception; If for themſelues, their glory ſhould not bee compleat. For, doth this Ignaro imagine, their glory is yet compleat? no augmentation to accrue vnto it, at leaſt accidentall, at the Reſurrection? If he knowe not this, the Catholique Cauſe was very farre forlorne, when ſuch Smatterers ſet pen to paper to propugn it. Secondly, there are cauſes, more than one, of ſuch praier. They may well pray for others, and yet not bee prayed vnto themſelues, in regard of generall vnion and knowledge particularly, and remembrance, extraordinary knowledge and information. So this Andabatarian Catholique fighteth with his owne Now, is the Sunne more cleare, than that Saints pray for vs? ſhadow. Wee deny it not in theſe tearms, The Saints departed doo pray for vs. The Sun is not ſo cleer, as there is no cleer vnderſtanding in him.
            
            
               
               XXX.
               
                  That we may not pray vnto them.
               
               
                  WHatſouer they doo for vs, wee doo not much for them: for we ſay, we may not pray vnto them; contrary to our own Bibles. Beleeue it who liſt. Pray to them, if you will: we and our people will pray vnto the Lord, who is ready, willing, able to heare vs euery way, without ſuch Aduocates or Mediators. And where are our Bibles ſo contrary to vs? Nay, vnderſtand you the reſolutions of your owne men? Sancti non ſunt inuocandi, Saints are not to be praied vnto, is a Propoſition of Father Roberts: I grant with limitation, thus; Not as Authors of diuine bleſſings or goodnes. But, what a Buzzard are you in the mean time, that leaue ſuch an aduantage to your Aduerſary? For, againſt this looſe Propoſition of yours, Saints are to bee prayed vnto, without his reſtraint, theſe Scriptures are plain, Pſalm 83. God giueth grace and glory. Pſalm 120. I lift vp my eies vnto the hils, from whence commeth my help: my help commeth onely from the Lord that hath made heauen and earth. And that, Iames 1. Euery good gift, and euery perfect giuing, is from aboue, deſcending down from the Father of lights; and ſuch like, that ſend vs onely and directly to God, in the opinion and vpon the allegation of Bellarmine.
               
               You cannot anſwer theſe Texts of your Bible,

contrary to your Tenet, as you ſet it down. Wee can anſwer whatſoeuer you bring againſt; as, Luk. 16. 24. Father Abraham, haue mercy on mee. Heere is one Saint prayed vnto. Firſt, by whom? By Diues, a firebrand in hell. So the Damned are directers of your doctrine; no doubt good doctrine, ſo wel grounded. Secondly, this was no praier vnto Abraham, if Bellarmine haue taught vs aright: for, the Saints of the old Teſtament, ſaith hee, being then in Limbo, were not praied vnto, as not ſeeing God: but Abraham was a Saint of the old Teſtament, not of the new. Thirdly, it is a Parable; and ſo, not concluding farther than the ſcope and end: which is not this. Fourthly, Abraham is ſuppoſed, at leaſt heer, to haue bin within hearing. Bring the Virgin Mary within my kenning, I will ſay vnto her, Sancta Maria, or a pro mee. Next, Send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue. Heer, ſay you, or elſe you erre, is another Saint praied vnto. No ſuch matter, Sir Gagger: gape wider, and ſtare the Text in the face: you ſhall ſee at laſt, if you haue not loſt your wits and eies and all, that, if any be prayed vnto, it is not another, but the ſame Saint Abraham, to ſend Lazarus. Diues ſaith not, Saint Lazarus, come; but, Father Abraham, ſend. When you call to your Bottle-ale-Hoſteſſe, to ſend her Maid for ſomething you want, the Maid muſt ſo take it; you withall intreat her to go. Sure, your wits are drowned in Bottle-ale, or mured in a Bakers Basket. That of Iob 5. 1. for ſo it is, Iob 1. 5. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   doth not anſwer our expectation, nor your vndertaking. You vaunted to confound vs by our owne Bibles: and you are fain to go to your Bibles. In our

Bibles we read, Call now, if there be any that will anſwer thee: and to which of the Saints wilt thou turn? In your Bibles it is, And turn to ſome of the Saints. Your fleeing from ours vnto your owne, argueth, that in your opinion there is difference betwixt the interpretations; and ſo there is: for, by our interpretation you are gone. Eliphas telleth Iob, It is in vain to go vnto any of the Saints: for, there is in them no help at all; an Interrogation, being equiualent to a Negation. Is there any can doo this? in effect, There is none that can doo it. So that you diſcredit your owne cauſe, that are fain to be recreant in your vndertaking, and flee off from our Bibles vnto your owne Bible.
               Thither I need not follow you: but I will. So little are you to be feared at your own weapōs, euen vpon your moſt aduantage. Let it be, Turn vnto ſome of the Saints; yet haue you no more but opinion: and the opinion you moſt follow of new birth, hatched firſt by Aquinas, as may bee collected. For, as for Saint Auguſtines expounding it as Catholiques do, I will let the S. Auguſt. himſelf expounds this very place as Catholiques doo, in his Annot. vpon Iob. If it had not been the common cuſtome in the time of Iob, to inuocate the Saints deceaſed, it had bin friu
                        •
                     lous for Eliphas to haue asked Iob, to which of the Saints he wou'd t
                        〈…〉
                     ? Reader ſee, and then judge. One of your owne ſaith, Pineda on the place, Some take it ſpoken ironically: and ſo it is for your purpoſe; is it not? By which is meant nothing leſſe. Alij ſeriò: others take it ſpoken in good earneſt; but not therefore as aduiſing Inuocation. Call, ſaith Caietan, vnto ſome of the dead: let him be a man that hath liued moſt vnblameably: put him to defend thy cauſe. Aſsuredly, not any will make anſwer, becauſe they are not; their ſoules hauing di
                        •
                     d together with the bodies. Cardinall Caietan, Luther's great Antagoniſt, was ſo farre from imagining any cuſtome of Inuocation in the time of Iob, which Bellarmine likewiſe

denieth, that he ſuppoſeth Eliphas to haue been an Atheiſt, and to deny the ſoules immortality: and what be commeth of your cuſtome of Inuocation, in his opinion, in the time of Iob? Eugubinus, by Saints, vnderſtandeth holy men aliue; and by Call, not Inuocation, but Allocution or naming of them. And with him accord Philippus Presbyter and Polychronius, as it may be collected by your owne Pineda. Others, by Saints, mean holy Angels; but preſent, imployed, to bee ſpoken to: as apparitions were then frequent among thoſe holy men; either Leiger, or extraordinarily imployed Angels. Lyra runs another courſe; not to the Perſons, but Precedents of Saints. Reuolue the remembrance of Ages paſt, as if Eliphas has ſaid ſo: and go conſider the liues & actions of holy men: thou ſhalt finde them diſcuſſed exceedingly all; but not impatient in affliction, any of them.
               In ſuch diuerſity of opinions, and greater than this, to conclude for Inuocation aſſertiuely, none can, none will, but men like your ſelf, qui
                        •
                     us anima proſale. S. Thomas alone muſt ouerſway all, becauſe, as Pineda confeſſeth, he was the firſt that applied it to Inuocation. Tandem ſapienter D. Thomas ſententiam hanc ad inuocationem pertinere voluit: After all other Expoſitors, ſaith Pineda, he would haue it belong to inuocation of Saints. Therefore put vp your Pipes for Saint Auguſtine, ſinging that Catholique Song. S. Auguſtine's words are theſe: Indignatio, quâ quiſque angitur, tanquam iniquè ſibi aliquid acciderit, dum non cogitat vſque adeò ſe immundum eſſe coram D
                        ••
                     , vt innocanti Angeli non reſpondeant, aut ſe demonſtrare dignati ſint: qui enim hoc 
                        〈◊〉
                      cogi
                        •
                     at, ſtultus eſt, & irâ irrationabili interimitur.

Aut idcirco Angelos non audire, non videre poteſt ſtultus, quia ir â interemptus, & à zelo occiſus. Indignation, ſaith he, expounding the ſecond verſe, which vexeth a man as if he were hardly dealt withall, whilſt he doth not remember, that in Gods fight he is ſo vnclean, that the Angels vouchſafe not to appear vnto him, or giue him any anſwer when he calleth for them. He that thinketh not ſo, is a fool, and killed of wrath. Or thus: A fool cannot heare or ſee the Angels, becauſe anger and wrath haue euen ſlain him.
               
               Thus Saint Auguſtine, in thoſe Annotations, bringeth a double expoſition of thoſe words: in both (according to the Septuagints reading, whom hee followeth), by Saints, he vnderſtandeth not men departed, and with God, as the Catholiques, ſince Thomas, doo interpret it; but Angels of Paradiſe. Secondly, hee is not for calling vpon them (for, how could he, if he held Bellarmine's Rule, for Sancte Abraham?), but vnto them. How? As familiarly conuerſing with them in thoſe daies; as often appearing and talking with them (his very words) either Guardians or otherwiſe. Let it bee ſo now; Saint Peter, Saint Paul appear, conuerſe with, demonſtrate themſelues to vs: for my part, I will ſpeak to them, to remember my neceſſities or cauſe to God; as I would to your ſelf, or any other Chriſtian, for your Praiers, or the Churches. Thus what get you by Saint Auguſtine, or your owne Bible?
               I liſt ſee no more: I haue ſeen enough already: the See more. vtmoſt, I am ſure, that you can ſay, and what I haue ſeen, I haue ſatisfied already, both in Scriptures and Fathers, elſewhere. Theſe very places you haue named,

and many others, I will not, as you vſe is, actum agere: onely this, for your better direction or information in this point of Iouocation, or rather Interceſſion through Allocution, we do not, we dare not pray to Saints, that is ſpeak to them, or intreat them to pray for vs; not for vnlawfulneſſe of the act ſo much, as for vnaptnes of the Agent: for, we are not perſwaded, nor can it be proued vnto vs by any Romiſh Catholick liuing, that the Saints departed, and now with God, doo or can ordinarily, by any power or ability in themſelues, hear, ſee, knowe, take notice of the wants, ſtate, caſes, or praiers of men on earth, to be mindefull of them vnto God in heauen. Nor can it bee prooued, that otherwiſe God doth ordinarily reueal vnto them by any means thoſe former ſpecified, that ſo they may take notice of them. This muſt be prooued, or it is in vain to pray to them; vnleſſe a man will hazard his ſtate and all, vpon vncertainties. It ſufficeth not, that they knowe ſome things, at ſome times, in ſome places, of ſome men extraordinarily; for, ſo wee are vncertain, what Saints knowe what, how much, when, by what means; and ſo may well be blamed of folly for going about, when wee may go direct; vnto them, when we may go to God. Saue all other labour in this point, prooue but onely this, Their knowledge of any thing ordinarily; I promiſe you ſtraight, I will ſay, Holy Saint Mary, pray for me: till then you muſt pardon vs Proteſtants, for not playing the fools with you.
            
            
               
               XXXI.
               
                  That the bones or Reliques of Saints are not to bee kept. No vertue proceedeth from them, after they be dead.
               
               
                  YOu may keepe, if you will, and lock vp, if you pleaſe, in your Cabinet, or Calket, or where you will, Saint Campions thumb, Saint Garnets ſtrawe, Saint Loiolaes hayre; which cured, if I remember, Michael Vaſques, of I know not what: or that goodly Relique, which at Denham once, in Sir George Peckhams houſe, courſt the diuell vp and downe from Anne Smiths foot, ouer all her body, the Prieſt following Him with his hand, vp and downe, whereſoeuer the Spirit went. And further, take Saint Lipſius old breeches to ſhrine them in, and the vertue that did or might drop from them: our Lady of Sichem will perhaps lend them to ſo holy and deuout a purpoſe: I know no Proteſtant will steale them from you. But ad Textum, as Marcellinus vſeth to ſay; your Texts of Scripture I meane.
               As all the reſt, ſo this alſo is contrary to expreſſe 
                  Contrarie to expreſſe words of their owne Bibles. 
                  words of our owne Bibles. This ſay I? but what? Why, two things are prooued, or ſhould be: Firſt, that Reliques

may be kept; Secondly, that vertue proceedeth from them. Both theſe muſt bee expreſly prooued, or the man ſaith nothing, and may hold his peace and pen both.
               In the ſecond of Kings, or the fourth, it skilleth In ſecond of Kings, but is the 4 by the account of Catholiques, 13. 21. not; for, our Bibles alſo intimate as much, 13. 21. it is written, that the bo
                     •
                  es of Eliſeus beeing touched by one that was dead, they did reuiue him. Thus we graunt it is written, and we beleeue it: what then? Why This could not bee, had not ſome vertue proceeded from them. Good: and what of that? Therefore wee that hold, No vertue proceedeth from them after they be dead, are contraried by our owne Bibles. If wee did hold ſo: but wee hold not ſo. Indeede wee hold, and aſſuredly beleeue, that Saint Campions thumb, Saint Garnets ſtrawe, Saint Storyes halter, neuer did, nor ſhall euer raiſe vp any dead man. Wee deny not, Eliſeus bones, or Saint Peter's ſhadow, or Saint Paul's napkins, did worke wonders. Sir Addle-head, or idle p
                     •
                  te, touching vertue from dead men, thus wee hold: this is our opinion:
               Vertue hath often proceeded from the bodyes, bones, garments, reliques of many holy men and bleſſed Saints, dead and aliue; not ordinarily, or of and from them naturally; but extraordinarily, by diſpenſation, as works of wonder wrought by God. But theſe are not euer to bee had, or ſeene. Such works are of voluntary diſpenſation; and therefore not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for all, from all, at all times. The red ſea was diuided for Iſrael to paſſe. Iordan was driuen back more then twice, by Ioſua, Elias, Eliſeus: are you ſo wiſe to imagine, ſo ridiculous

to proclaime, that all Seas and Riuers may ſo be ſerued. Go try the Thames at Trigge Staires, or Broken Wharfe, that the world may take notice of you for a Frantick or an Impoſtor: or the Iewes ſend and hire you to diuide Euphrates, at their returne ſhortly vnto the holy Land: For by your reaſon, or elſe you ramble wide, the water ſhould giue you way. For, marke: Eliſeus bones did once raiſe a dead man to life; therefore they had vertue iſſuing from them, and reſiding in them: therfore all Saints bones or reliques haue vertue that proceedeth from them perpetually, naturally, when they bee dead: and you, if you haue none, may eaſily borrow ſuch Reliques at the Brokers, to ſerue a turn for the Catholick Cauſe. This is your Logick, if you remember what you haue learned: Any particular may inferre a Generall. Once it was done, it may be euer; at one time, therefore alwaies. Eliſeus bones reuiued a dead man: therefore all Saints bones and Reliques can do that or the like.
               
                  Acts 15. 14, 15. And beleeuers were the more added vnto the Lord; multitudes both of men and women: inſomuch, that they brought forth the ſick into the streetes, and layed them on beds and couches, that at leaſt, the ſhadow of Peter paſſing by, might ouer-ſhadow ſome of them. This is not, Acts 15 but Acts 5. But that may bee the Printers fault, not yours. Secondly, heere is no expreſſe mention of vertue proceeding; but of ſhadow ouer-ſpreading. But you anſwer; In our Bibles, it followeth, And they all might bee deliuered from their infirmities. But what is that to purpoſe? We are to be tried by our Bibles, at your owne choice; not by yours: therefore you faile in your vndertaking. And

as for our Bibles, they haue not that clauſe indeed; no more haue the Editions of Catholiques, nor the Copies vſed by Robert Steuen. The old Tranſlator, I doubt not, found it in his Copie, and did expreſſe it: ſo would wee haue done, had we found it in ours: for wee left it not ou
                     •
                  , nor doe you ſay ſo, of ſet purpoſe. But fourthly, let it bee added; for wee grant it true: it is not ad idem: for you propound it of the Dead, and prooue it of the Liuing. Saint Peter was then aliue: betwixt Liuing and Dead, there is a maine difference: the one may doe what the other cannot, in my learning.
               Laſtly, admit Saint Peter then dead, becauſe his ſhadow was no ſubſtance: vertue is immanent, and emanant; and both, two waies conſidered. Naturally and ordinary: or by diſpenſation and extraordinary. It was no naturall quality in his ſhadow: and as for endowments of diſpenſation, they are particular, and reſtrained; now in beeing, anon, not. From no Saint departed or aliue, from no ſhadow or ſubſtance, doth any ſuch virtue iſſue naturally? From many aliue and dead, great vertue hath extraordinarily at times, vpon occaſions, for ſpecial ends, by diſpenſation. And what then? Therefore your Reliques can doe the like? If this be the conſequence, I deny it. Elſe, becauſe the Apoſtles could ſpeake with tongues, our Prieſts and Ieſuites can doe the ſame. Doe it, and I yeeld. But experience prooueth true, you cannot now ſay, Ariſe and walke.
               
               What you cannot doe for Saint Peter's ſhadow, Saint Auguſtine ſhall help at a dead Lift to bring the Text home. Ser. 39. de Sanctis, hee ſaith, If the ſhadow

of his body could help, how much more the fulnes of his power? I will not quarrell the Authority, nor the Author, though I may: how the allegation ſhould ſerue for reliques, I cannot ſee; except the Fulnes of power bee his Relique, oppoſed to the ſhadow of his Body: and that indeed is made a Relique of Saint Peter; and it is the beſt that euer he left, worth all his other Reliques whatſoeuer; and therefore deſerueth to bee kept charily in the Popes Wardrobe. But that is a Relique of another kinde: we ſpeake of no ſuch Reliques now.
               Relique or not: what expreſſe mention? None, nor regarded. For the man hath recourſe vnto conſequence, in ſtead of expreſſe mention, and ſuppoſeth thus: Saint Auguſtine ſuppoſeth two things: The one, that the ſhadow of his body, beeing heere on Earth, did both help and heale infirmities: which Proteſtants Bible leaueth out. And ſo did Saint Auguſtines Bible, without doubt. For hee ſuppoſeth it, you ſay: which hee needed not haue done, had he found it expreſſe. For ſuppoſition is not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , where words are plaine: and no maruaile if Saint Auguſtines Bible did ſo: for the Originalls did and doe ſo; old and new, Papiſts Bibles as well as Proteſtants: neyther is it found in the Syriack Edition, nor regarded by your owne learned Commentors; onely caſt in by ſuch quarrelers, as if the Proteſtants had depraued the Text ſacrilegiouſly.
               The other thing ſuppoſed by Saint Auguſtine, is, That beeing in Heauen, hee can ſtill help vs by his Power. And what Power? how help vs? Saint Auguſtine doth not; and you, I think, cannot reſolue vs. Whatſoeuer

it bee, what reference to Reliques? Not heer mentioned, not to be inferred: or ſay how. The Relique your men dream of heer, is plenitudo virtutis, and gratiae permanent is: which they were wont to preſume to be that Omnipotency of his Sea. Were you well ſerued, you ſhould be turned into the Inquiſition, for abating or tranſ-planting ſuch his Power, and depriuing his Supremacy of ſuch a teſtimony in S. Auguſtine, of your owne. And doo you mark it, that I ſay, your owne: for, this Saint Auguſtine is none of mine. It is ſer. 29. in which this paſſage is; not 39, as you miſ-report it: which is a Counterfet vnder S. Austen's name, as the Louaniſts, and other your owne men, obſerue.
               There is a Commemoration of Saint Peter's chain: you keep an Holi-day in memory thereof, Auguſti 1: and yet Saint Peter's Chain (as Baronius obſerueth) was not found vntill Saint Auguſtine was dead. Had the man been as he would ſeem, Saint Auguſtine, yet might hee haue been deceiued in his collection, as wel as in ſomewhat elſe noted by Lorinus, that hither tendeth. For, de Catechiſ. rudib. 23. he deliuereth, that The ſhadow of Saint Peter, paſsing along in the ſtreets, reſtored a dead man to life. Do you finde this written in your Bibles? I ſuppose not. S. Auguſtine did (without doubt) in his: or how is it, that he ſaith it? Therfore the Papiſts Bible hath left ſomething out, aſwell as the Proteſtants. Look vnto it, and anſwer it as you can.
               
                  Acts 19. 11, 12. And God wrought ſpeciall miracles by the hands of Paul: ſo that from his body were brought vnto the ſick, handkerchiefs, and aprons; and the diſeaſes departed

from them, and the euill ſpirits went out of them. Therfore what? Vertue proceeded from Saint Paul when he was dead? I deny that: for, Saint Paul was then aliue, and aliues like. Therefore this is for the liuing, not the dead. And yet take mee not ſo, that I deny the thing. Vertue may proceed from the true Saints of God, dead and aliue. I deny your proof, and wonder at your wit, that can go ab equis ad aſin
                        •
                     s ſo eaſily, as if both were fit Inmates for ſuch an Animal as your ſelf; Aſſe, Horſe, & you, for ſuch prouender.
               S. Chryſoſtome might very well inferre, vpon the paſſages of Saint Peter and Saint Paul, that Chriſt, S. Chryſoſt. To. 5. cont. Gentil. quòd Chriſtus ſit Deus, in an whole Booke, proues heerby, and by the like vertue of other Saints, that Chriſt their Lord and Maſter, is God: whoſe ſeruants napkins and ſhadows could do ſuch wonders. their Lord and Maſter, was truely God: whoſe ſeruants, in his Name, and by his Power, nay, their ſhadows and napkins, did ſuch wonders: for, Could any man do ſo, except God were with him? But, all this winde ſhakes no corn. Firſt, this vertue was not inherent; onely incident. Secondly, it was miraculous; ſo, peculiar. Thirdly, it was Then: thoſe Times are done; thoſe napkins gone into Materia prima. Shew ſuch napkins or ſhadows, and wee yeeld. For, no man doubteth what hath been done, or may be done: we go no further than to what is.
               See more, you ſo direct vs: and wee had need, or elſe we ſhall ſee your proofs by halues: for, hitherto wee haue onely heard of vertue proceeding from the Dead; nothing touching keeping of Bones and Reliques. Now haue at them, or elſe neuer; and indeed neuer: for, Exod. 13. 19. Ioſeph's bones were carried by Moſes out of Egypt. What then? Therefore bones of holy men may, by warrant of that, be digged vp, ſhrined, and preſerued. Happely they may in ſome caſes, but

not therefore: for, this was a ſingular Fact; which are no precedents for generall rules. One Swallow maketh not Summer; nor one Woodcock, Winter, but among Birds of that Bill and Feather. Secondly, as it was ſingular in Fact; ſo, ſpeciall in Reaſon. There was a Tie vpon Iſrael, to doo that which they did. Ioſeph, dying, had bound them with an oath to do ſo. Had our Lady ſo bound you for her ſmock or her milk, you were excuſed. Thirdly, they carried them thence, not to keep them, which is your Tenet; much leſs to ſhrine them or adore them, which is your practice; but to bury them in the Land of Canaan: which they did, Ioſ. 24. 32. Doo you in like ſort, and wee applaud you with your Reliques.
               So we ſee in this firſt place no more than wee looked for; nothing to purpoſe: nor in the ſecond, 2. Reg. 4. 8. Eliſeus taketh vp Elias cloak that fell from him; and, wrapping it together, ſmote the waters of Iordane; which parted aſunder. A Text ſeeming to ſay ſomewhat: for, Elias cloak is Relictum, a Relique to Eliſeus; and he took it. But this is verſe 14. not 8. but not yet a Relick for our purpoſe. For, what he did with it, is not remembred: it is like enough, Eliſeus wore it out. We read not what he did with it; whether he laid it vp, and left it to poſterity to be adored: vnleſs you can prooue this, you ſay nothing; otherwiſe, in your ſenſe it is no Relique. For, keeping and adoring is all in all for them.
               But let it be kept. Eliſeus did no more than I▪ or any Proteſtant elſe, ſhould haue done. For, you miſtake vs. The Reliques of Saints are not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   with vs: we diſhonour not their garments, much leſſe their bodies,

hauing beene the Temples of the holy Ghoſt; beeing againe to bee raiſed from the duſt, and be made like Chriſts glorious body. By and in them, at ſundry times, God hath miraculouſly magnified himſelfe in his Power; as, when the body of Babylas made the Oracle mute, in deſpight of Iulian that Renegado: Then eſpecially, when there was great cauſe; when Paganiſme, Perſecution, Oppoſition ſwayed, for the manifeſtation of that Truth, which in them & by them had beene propagated. Shew any ſuch Relique, and ſee what wee ſay vnto it. It is naturall for any man to affect the remembrance or memorials of a friend; to admire and make much of rare things, not euery day ſeene. Bring mee then a piece of the Croſſe of our Sauiour, one of the Nailes, or ſome ſuch memoriall of his Paſſion: ſhew mee Moſes R
                        •
                     d, Saint Peter's Sword, I will prize them aboue all the Iewels I can haue. Will this content you? I know no Proteſtant will doe leſſe then ſo.
               Worſhip them I dare not. Shew them as you doe, I would not: as men do monſters in Fleet-ſtreet or Sturbridge Faire: in this you abuſe them too profanely, making merchandize of the Word of God. In that you profane them to Idolatry, miſleading the People to adore them. This did not Antiquity, nor doe wee. In the Primitiue Church, Memoriae Martyrum were in great eſteem; The place where they ſuffred, or elſe where they were buried: Heere commonly their Church-meetings were for diuine Seruice; for receiuing the Sacraments, with commemoration of their Paſſion; and a collation to follow their noble Acts: which was ſeconded with this opinion,

that thoſe bleſſed Soules themſelues, by ſpeciall grace and diſpenſation of God, took notice of that generall Act of the whole Church, and accompanied their deuotions, with their own beſt aſſiſtance vnto the Maieſty of Heauen. But times are changed, mens manners altred: Thoſe Saints, Reliques, Memories, and Oratories of the true Saints of God, gon, no where to be found; coozening, colluding, fraud, impiety, come in place. The miracles, memories, reliques of Saints in your Romane Church, are all of them knowne to bee iuggling tricks of deceiuing knaues: and if Saint Martin were aliue againe, hee might finde out onely one mans Reliques, but many thouſands to bee the bones of theirs that died at the gallowes for their ſinnes; nor of Martyrs, that ſhed their bloud for Ieſus. Talk not then of Reliques, and keeping of them: but ſhew vs the Reliques, true ones indeed, and then blame vs, if wee reſpect them not, as Auguſtine, or Ambroſe, or any antient Fathers did.
               See your Fathers I need not. I haue ſeene them often, before euer I ſaw C. W. B. your good Benefactor, whoſe ſcroles you haue filched euery where: yet leſt it bee thought, there is ſome ſtuffe to bee ſeene which wee dare not ſet out to view, the Reader ſhall ſee them, if hee will bee ſo idle, and haue ſo much leaſure. Euſebius in the ſeauenth booke, and fifteenth Chapter relateth, that the chaire of Saint Iames, brother to our Lord, and firſt Bishop of Ieruſalem, was kept & preſerued by his ſucceſſors. And what if Euſebius write thus? it is no ſuch great wonder for a chaire to laſt 300 yeeres; in keeping of

it, I know no hurt, or impiety, as I doe in your Lipſanolatria. For Euſebius doth not ſay, that they worſhipped it, or that any vertue went out of it. Though, if you haue read the place, as I thinke you neuer did, you may remember, that Euſebius there ſaith, It was a cuſtome taken vp from the Pagans, as it was indeed; and can demonſtrate, if need be. But I take no exception at that originall, as you would doe with vs for much leſſe aduantage. Onely this I adde: It was no bone or Relique of Saint, nor had any vertue iſſuing from it; and therefore not to bee remembred heere.
               
                  Athanaſius, in the life of Saint Antony, hath many paſſages; the work is of ſome reaſonable length. Now what ſhall we ſee therein? or whereabout? you know not: for C. W. B. did not informe you: and you, poore man, are not ſo well prouided at home. But well fare Bellarmine, who would haue told you, had you conſulted him. Hee doth informe vs: who otherwiſe mought haue ſought a needle in a bottle of hay, and haue giuen the hay to this beaſt for prouender. Saint Antony dying, bequeathed his cloake vnto a friend: the Legate accepteth it very kindely: an example of kindnes giuen and taken; no more. If Saint Antony could haue giuen more, he would haue done it: had hee giuen leſſe, the Party would haue taken it. It is not ſaid, He receiued it ſo, as hee layd it vp, kept it amongſt his Iewels, and plate. Which if he did, what is that to Proteſtants not adoring reliques? did the man make an Idoll of his cloke? did there any vertue come from that cloke? If I knew you, were acquainted with you, I would bequeath a Cockſcombe

to you, and you would lay it vp happly for a Relique for ſuch fooles to adore.
               Saint Basil in Pſal. 115. what doth hee ſay? You know not: for you were not told. Let me help you. Vpon thoſe words, Right deare in the ſight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, he dilateth touching the Perſons and Paſſions of bleſſed Martyrs; preferreth them before Garlands, Iewels, and precious ſtones; oppoſeth the ſtate of the time of Grace, vnto that of the Lawe. Then it was not lawfull to touch a dead body; but hee that touched it, was vncleane. But now, ſaith hee, Hee that toucheth the bones of a Martyr, ſomewhat partaketh of ſanctifying power, by that Grace which aſſiſteth the body. This was true in thoſe times: but thoſe Martyrs are not: thoſe bodies are gone: that grace is neither diffuſed nor effuſed at this day. It was of that grace which then wrought wonders; now, no where to bee found: your pretended Martyrs are ſcarce Chriſtians ſome; few good Chriſtians; your relicks, impoſtures; your miracles, iuggling tricks, lewd lies, and forgeries, Prooue them otherwiſe; wee will doe as they did, and giue them the reſpect Saint Baſil did.
               So wee anſwer you for Chryſoſtome and for Ambroſe: let the caſe bee the ſame which then it was, our affections euery way ſhal be the ſame with theirs. But thoſe daies are done; thoſe Worthies gone: impoſtors are euery where, in euery corner. In regard of theſe Iugglers, and not with reference to the Heroick times, I ſay with Tatian, If God had made them (hee ſpeaketh of charmes and amulets) to the purpoſe that men employ them, hee ſhould haue beene the Author

of ſome euill. But all things that God made, were very good: the diuell, in his inſolency rioting vpon them, hath conuerted them vnto all purpoſes. From him came firſt this euill cuſtome (with you, in adoring you cannot tell what): it neuer was the worke of the Perfect God. For how is it, or can it bee, that while I liue, I doe no hurt; but beeing dead, ſome piece, ſome relique of my ſelfe, without ſenſe or feeling, which can doe nothing, which ſerueth not at all, no more then I doe, ſhould operate, or effect any thing? How can hee that hath beene hanged himſelfe, poſſibly ſaue another from the gallowes? or how can a bone of him that died of a fearfull diſeaſe, deliuer another from the ſame? Sir, I beleeue, Tatianus did prophecy ſo long agoe, ſo graphicially doth he deſcribe the impoſtures of your Romiſh Mountebanks, in applying the Reliques and 
                     •
                  owzie fragments of Knaues, Rake-hels, and Traitors, vnto, I know not what, wonder-working tricks of Leiger-de-maine.
               
            
            
               XXXII.
               
                  That the Creatures cannot be ſanctified, or made more holy then they are already by their owne nature.
               
               
                  VNtill I had read ouer the whole paſſage, and came at laſt to holy bread, holy water, holy aſhes, and the like, traſh and Mountebank wares, I marueiled, I confeſſe, what this man meant by his poſition,

                  The Creature cānot be ſanctified, &c. For, I know no Proteſtant, but willingly acknowledgeth the Separation and Sanctification of the creature vnto diuine, religious and holy vſes. I was ſure, our Church maintained, and many waies practiſed the contrary: there I Are they not therefore fooles and blind, that keepe ſuch a 
                        •
                     ooting at Holy-bread? found my error, and ſo perceiued what the foole meant; and whither the blind Buzzard did direct his groping, that made boyes to laugh and hoo
                        •
                     
                   at him.
               
                  That the Creatures of God are good, we beleeue: as proceeding from a totall cauſe, abſolutely good: that nothing ought to be refuſed, as 1. Tim. 4. 4. if it be receiued with Thankſgiuing, you rather deny then wee. That the Word of God and Prayer doth ſanctifie the creature to the ſeueral vſes, we profeſs willingly, and practiſe it accordingly in all our courſes, Mat. 23. 17. we read & ſubſcribe, that the Temple, the ſeat of Gods Preſence, the Houſe for his Seruice, ſanctified the gold employed in the Temple, as beeing put vnto a religious vſe; That the Altar did ſanctifie the Sacrifices offred vpon the Altar. But if the Calues of Bethel had been placed in the Temple, had they been ſanctified vnto God by beeing in the Temple? The Altar doth ſanctifie the gift, but ſo, that it bee a gift for the Altar. If a Dogge or a Cat were offred there, it would bee no more holy or ſanctified, then the abomination was of deſolation, which was ſet vp in the Holy Place. It is not the place that ſanctifieth, but the true employment of the thing. We neuer read it warranted, that creatures may bee abuſed, or ms-imployed. Are they not therefore fooles, to returne your owne words vpon your ſelf, that produce theſe paſſages, for ſuch ſtuffe as holy bread, &c? which as they

are vſed in your Antiques, may with reaſon be hooted at by Boyes.
               
               
                  Holy bread with you, is an apiſh Imitation of that antient practice in the Primitiue Church, whereby a part of the conſecrated Hoſt, in and for the Sacrament called Eulogia, was ſent vnto the adjoyning pariſhes, or dioceſſes, and imparted vnto ſtrangers that came vnto them, as a ſigne, pledge, and aſſurance of mutuall loue and confederation in the ſame faith; a thing prohibited afterward in the councell of Laodicea, but re-aſſumed, and long time frequented in the Church: which growing at laſt into diſuſe, in the Latine Church eſpecially, Bread began to bee bleſſed indeed, but not conſecrated, for or in the Communion: which in Paulinus, Auguſtine, and others, is named Eulogia, or Panis Catechumenorum. The Catecumeni beeing not baptized, could not bee imparted with the body of Chriſt, but receiued Bread bleſſed by the Prieſt, for their vſe and eating, as an aſſurance of that Communion, whereof in due time they were to be made partakers.
               The later Church abuſed this practice of the Antients, imploying it as ſpells or amulets to caſt out diuils, to heale diſeaſes, to keepe men from danger; whereto nor God nor man had deſigned it antiently. The forme of conſecrating it is this, in Burchard. Cap. 28. Lord God Almighty, vouchſafe to bleſſe this Bread with thy holy and ſpirituall benediction, that it may become health of ſoule and body vnto all, a defence and ſafegard againſt all diſeaſes, and all the aſſaults and deceits of the enemie, through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, thy Sonne, the Bread of Life, who came downe from Heauen, brought life

and ſaluation into the world: who liueth and raigneth with thee for euer. Was any thing thus conſecrated, 1. Tim. 4. 4. Mat. 23. 17. 19? Or any water any where to the like purpoſe, to bee ſprinkled in houſes, to driue away Fayries and Hobgoblins? to remoue the lets and impediments which might hinder the receiuing of the Bleſſed Sacrament of the Altar? to put out the guilt and tainture of originall ſinne? I finde no ſuch thing in Scripture or the Primitiue times. I doe in the Rituals and Pontificals of the Pagans. Nam et ſacris quibuſdaminitiantur Iſidis alicuius aut Mithrae. Ipſos etiam Deos ſuos lauationibus efferunt: villas, domos, templa, totaſque vrbes aſpergin
                        •
                      circumlatae aquae expiant paſsim. Tertullian ſpeaketh of Pagan ſuperſtitions, and it agreeth vnto your fopperies, point by point. Such hallowing and ſacring of the Creature, as of aſhes, bells, and other bables, are farre enough remooued from that ſanctification of the Creature in Saint Paul, vnto holy and religious, or common vſes. Saint Paul neuer baptized or bleſſed a bell, to cleere the ayre, aſſwage ſtormes and tempeſts, help againſt lightning and thunder, driue away diuels, and wicked ſpirits, that would hinder good Chriſtians from going to Church, or righteous ſoules from paſſing through the ayre into Heauen. Such old wiues tales I finde not in Saint Paul, nor in Saint Baſil, whom we are directed to ſee, Lib. 2. de baptiſmo: but for what, or where-about, I profeſſe my ignorance, I cannot tell, and yet I haue Baſil, and haue read him. Tranſeat therefore: till I know what, and where I ſhould ſee Baſil, I muſt ſuſpend my anſwer vnto his authority.
            
            
               
               XXXIII.
               
                  That children may bee ſaued by their parents faith without Baptiſme.
               
               
                  THe man, when hee vndertook this gagging taske, oppoſed himſelfe intentionally againſt our Church: in which regard, with what face, with what forehead, can he thus impudently bely vs, knowing in his conſcience, our Doctrine, our practice to the contrary; and that wee haue beene put to maintaine and iuſtifie it againſt ſchiſmaticall humors, not Papiſts but Puritans at home? In the very firſt Inſtep to the forme of Adminiſtration of Baptiſme, wee profeſſe, All men be conceiued and borne in ſinne: wee adde, alledging our Sauiours words, None can enter into the Kingdome of God, except he bee regenerate and borne anew of water and the holy Ghoſt; Beeing aſſured, that as Truth hath ſpoken it, ſo it is impoſſible, ordinarily, for a man to bee ſaued, that is not baptized. Vpon which perſwaſion of that neceſſity of water and the holy Ghoſt, wee, following the vſe and warrant of Antiquity, haue tolerated, practiſed, and defended priuate Baptiſme at home, by Laypeople: and yet this ſhameleſſe Detractor chargeth vs to hold, That children may bee ſaued by the Parents faith, without Baptiſme, as if it were vnneceſſary. One man peraduenture thought ſo, that the children of

the Faithfull that were in Chriſt, might ordinarily be ſaued without Baptiſm. I ſay peraduenture: for, it appeareth not, that he held it of ordinary courſe, nor referred it to the Parents faith, but vnto that Couenant of grace, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed; as euen Bellarmine his Aduerſary confeſſeth touching him; who yet is nothing vnto vs.
               Touching the neceſſity of Baptiſm, there hath bin variation euer in the Church; and yet euer a neceſſity held vpon all hands, more or leſſe. For, Antiquity ſupplied the want of water, by blood. Martyrs, not baptized, went to heauen. The ineuitable want of water, by the Spirit; in deſire and aſſured faith, if it might bee had, in Chriſt the Author and End of it. For, as in little Infants, the faith of the Church, and thoſe that preſent them to be baptized, is by God reputed their owne: ſo the willingnes and deſire of the ſame Church, of their Godfathers and Parents, is reputed theirs. So that no abſolute neceſſity in opinion of Antiquity, and indiſpenſable, was held of our Sauiours Aſſeueration, Except a man bee born anew of water and the holy Ghoſt, he cannot enter into the Kingdome of heauen. Which neceſſity, thus qualified by Antiquity, ſome late Writers haue qualified further vpon other grounds; as namely, that ſuppoſed Decree of God, touching abſolute neceſſity of ſaluation: which admitted, yet includeth a ſubordination of meanes. As Paul and his company were determinately ſaued from periſhing by ſea; yet he told them, it could not be, except the Sailers ſtaied: ſo nor Gods Decree be accompliſhed without means, which is water and the holy Ghoſt ordinarily.
               
                  
Others, it may be, haue qualified it from the ſtate, faith, and intereſt of their parents: which, if it be ſo, is but a priuate opinion of ſome men; not the doctrine of this, or any Proteſtant Church that I knowe. You would bee loth to maintain all priuate opinions in the Church of Rome. The moſt that wee haue ſaid thereof, is, Of the will of God to impart his grace vnto 
                  Hooker. 
                  infants without Baptiſm: in that caſe, the very circumſtance of their naturall birth may ſerue as a iuſt argument. Whereupon, it is not to be miſ-liked, that men, in charitable preſumption, do gather a great likelihood of their ſaluation: to whom the benefit of Christian parentage being giuen, the reſt that ſhould follow, is preuented by ſome ſuch caſualty as man hath no power himſelf to auoid. So that the most this Fellow can impute vnto vs, is, that In ſome caſe of ineuitable and inunicable neceſsity, little infants may bee charitably ſuppoſed ſaued by their parents faith. And ſo that of Iohn 3. 5. for neceſſity of water, will iuſtifiably bee anſwered, If it bee poſsible to attaine it. That of Tit. 3. 5. vrgeth no more, but that the waſhing of Regeneration is the ordinary entrance into life.
               As for Gen. 17. 14. (to admit all paralleld in Circumciſion and Baptiſme) all were not damned that died vncircumciſed; nor all caſt away, that die vnbaptized, as this Fellow himſelf will or muſt grant; but thoſe that neglect, contemn, or omit the meanes which may bee had. As for Mark 16. 16. the very words doo ſupport this mitigation: for, though Chriſt ſaith, Hee that beleeueth, and is baptized, ſhall bee ſaued; yet he doth not ſay, Hee that is not baptized, ſhall be damned: but, Hee that beleeueth not, ſhall bee damned; that being euery way of indiſpenſable neceſſity; this

ſometime tolerable, the rather, becauſe we are plainly taught of God, that The ſeed of faithfull parentage is holy from the birth; which the children of Pagans are not: theſe hauing an habituall intereſt and conſecration to God in their parents, which the other want. But whatſoeuer, in charitable conſtructions, may be thought of extraordinary courſes, they are not for vs: we muſt leaue them to God; in whoſe moſt rigorous courſes of conſtitutions, and moſt ſharp denunciations, deep mercies are euer hidden: who though he bee the God of iuſtice, yet is hee the Father of mercies. And yet ordinary waies are for vs and our children. Ordinary way vnto life eternall there is none, but by Baptiſme of water, and the holy Ghoſt. Gag them, Sir Gooſe, that teach otherwiſe. The Church of England is not guilty thereof.
            
            
               XXXIIII.
               
                  That impoſition of hands vpon the people (called by Catholiques, Confirmation) is not neceſſary, nor to be vſed.
               
               
                  NOT by Papiſts alone, but by Proteſtants alſo, is it called Biſhopping or Confirmation; not vſed onely by them, but by Proteſtants likewiſe, commended, commanded to bee vſed. Look in the Communion-book, good Reader, and wonder at the impudent face of this leud Impoſtor, that dares giue the Lie vnto publick

Records, that dares tell the world, It is midnight at mid-day: for, if there be then any Sun in heauen, this impoſition of hands by the Biſhop alone, called Confirmation, is both maintained as neceſſary; vſed and commanded, as euery man knoweth, in the Church of England. Would any man but hee, or ſome of his Camerades, take vp the priuate fanſie of euery Peddler, and expoſe it to view for Proteſtants doctrine, contrary to knowledge, to conſcience? But ſo it is. If it were not for ſuch courſes, the poor needy Fellow would haue nothing to prate on vnto his Proſelyte-goſſips in Partridge-Alley. The Lie is ſo loud, the caſe ſo apparant for Biſhopping or Confirmation, I ſhall not need to ſay any thing, but, Bluſh for ſhame.
               
            
            
               XXXV.
               
                  That the Bread of the Supper is but a figure of the body of Christ.
               
               
                  IS but a ſigne or figure, and no more? Strange: and yet our formal words are, This is my body: this is my bloud. This is, is more than this figureth or deſigneth. A bare figure is but a phantaſme. He gaue ſubſtance, and really ſubſiſting eſſence, who ſaid, This is my body: this is my bloud. And yet our Catechiſme in the Communion-book, authorized, ſaith expreſly, The body and bloud of Chriſt taken and eaten in the Lords

Supper; not the figure or ſigne of his body and bloud, which can neither bee taken, nor yet eaten. Poore 
                  Poor Proteſtant, whither now is thy figure fled? Woodcock or Catholique Cockſcomb, that ſendeſt a Proteſtant to ſeek a figure, who is as reall and ſubſtantiall as any Papiſt.
               Were the peace of the Church, and vnity of faith (which is more myſtically inſinuated in this Sacrament, than elſe-where; in the Materials therof, both Bread and Wine) ſo deare and precious as it ought to bee, vnto ſuch common Barretters of Chriſtendome, as Prieſts and Ieſuites are for priuate ends; this, and many other Controuerſies on foot, might ceaſe. For, it is confeſſed on either ſide, that Sacraments, which haue their Beeing from inſtitution, are ſignes of Gods loue and promiſe, ſeales of his couenant and grace, and inſtruments and conueiances of his mercy. What they intimate, ſignifie, and repreſent, they conueigh vnto the ſoule. In the ordinary Catechisme alone allowed (and I would, no other were tolerated) the queſtion beeing asked, What meaneſt thou by this word Sacrament? the anſwer is, I mean an outward and viſible ſigne of an inward and ſpirituall grace, giuen vnto vs, ordained by Chriſt himſelf, as a meanes whereby wee receiue the ſame, and a pledge to aſſure vs thereof. This is more, euen in your little vnderſtanding, than a bare figure; a means and a pledge whereby &c.
               
               Sir, we acknowledge right willingly, and profeſſe, that in the bleſſed Sacrament (as you call it, of the Altar) the Body and Bloud of our Sauiour Chriſt is really participated & communicated; and by means of that reall participation, life from him and in him conueied into our ſoules. This wee beleeue and profeſſe;
               
                  
knowing, that he is able to effect it, who hath ſpoken it, by that mighty working, whereby hee is able to doo whatſoeuer he hath ſaid. We are not ſollicitous for the manner how he worketh it; not daring to pry into the ſecret Counſels of the moſt High. We haue learned, that Reuealed things are for vs; ſecret things are for God. Therfore we wonder, why the world ſhould be ſo much ammuſed at, and diſtracted with, thoſe vnexplicable Labyrinths of Con-ſubſtantiation and Tranſ-ſubſtantiation, which onely ſerue to ſet the world in diuiſion; nothing to piety, nor yet information. As we therefore condemn that preſumptuous definition of Tranſ-ſubſtantiation, in the Laterane Councell: ſo wee doo not like nor yeeld aſſent vnto that jejune and macilent conceit of Zwinglius and Oecolampadius: whereby men account of this Sacrament, but onely as of a bare ſhadow, emptie & void, and deſtitute of Chriſt; but ingenuouſly profeſs, that by this Sacrament Chriſt giueth vs his very body and bloud, and really and truely performs in vs his promiſe, in feeding our ſoules vnto eternall life. As for the manner how, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : This inexplicable, that vnutterable: it is faith onely that can giue the reſolution. Trans or con, we skill not of.
               
                  Iohn 6. 51. The bread that I will giue is my fleſh; which I will giue for the life of the world. Therefore his fleſh is bread, the Bread of life. Moſt true; but not therefore his fleſh by Tranſ-ſubſtantiation. You finde not that in the Goſpell, or any where elſe. Life, begun in Baptiſme by the Lauer of Regeneration, is confirmed and ſuſtained in the holy ſupper by his body and blood. How? I cannot explicate. How ſhould I, that cannot

tell how (who can doo it?) my body is nouriſhed by the ordinary meat and drink I take? yet is that familiar, and in vſe euery day. When Chriſt gaue it, he ſaid, This is my body. Saint Paul, repeating the Inſtitution, ſaith, This is my body. It was neuer denied to bee his body: it is affitmed ſtill, to be his body. Mad Papiſt, that imputeſt to poor Proteſtants, an Idoll, a Chimaera of thy owne brain; that The bread is but a figure, and no more, of Chriſts body. Proteſtants ſay it not: they neuer ſaid it. As commonly it happeneth, that all Reformations or Innouations are vpon and into extremes: ſo ſome happely haue, that departed long ſince from the Church of Rome. But what is that to our Church, that publiquely, priuately, all and ſom, directly maintains the clean contrary? Your great Aduiſer, C. W. B. hath ſaid enough, could he ſee what himſelf hath ſaid, or you vnderſtand what hee alledgeth, to ſtop the mouth of ſuch Gabblers as you and he for euer, in the cōtrary aſſertions of the Proteſtants. But, the diuell bred you in a Faction, and brought you vp in a Faction, and ſent you abroad to do him ſeruice in maintaining a Faction: otherwiſe acknowledge, there is, there need bee, no difference in the point of reall preſence.
               
               See your Fathers if I doo, I ſhall doo more than See Fathers that affirm the ſame. S. Ignat. in his Epiſt. ad Smyr. you haue done: for, I auow it, you neuer read Ignatius for this. Read that Epiſtle ouer, vnto the Smyrneans, and ſee if you finde any ſuch thing there: if you doo, then truſt not mee again: if you doo not, what deſcrueth that impudent impoſture, S. Ignat. in his Epiſt. ad Smyr. But I can ſhew you better euidence for Bread and Wine out of Ignatius, pag. 125. edit. Pauſ.

Maestrei. The fleſh of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is one: His Bloud, one, which was ſhed for vs: alſo one Bread was broken for all: one Cup diſtributed vnto all, Bread and Wine after conſecration: Both diſtributed to all, againſt your halfe Communion. And againe, pag. 261. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; Breaking one Bread, which is the medicine procuring Immortality. Thus I finde nothing in Ignatius for you: this I haue, and happly more could againſt you, were I deſirous with you to maintaine a faction.
               
                  Iuſtin Martyrs teſtimony I acknowledge in the end Iuſtin Mar. Apol. 2. ad Antoninum. of his Apologie, and willingly make his words our owne: For wee doe not receiue theſe things as common Bread, or common Drink: but, euen as our Lord & Sauiour Ieſus Christ, by the Word of God becomming fleſh, had fleſh & bloud for our ſakes; ſo are we taught, that the food which was bleſſed by him, in the Word and Prayer, through which food, beeing altered and changed, our fleſh and bloud is ſuſtained becommeth the fleſh and bloud of him, that Ieſus, who took our fleſh in his Incarnation. Thus that antient Father, not fully repreſented by your director: who ſaith not any thing that Proteſtants deny: For they confeſſe, They eat the fleſh of the Sonne of God and drink his bloud: they are one with him, and hee with them; but commeth not home to the Papiſts Reſolution, that wee eate it and drink it by Tranſubſtantiation; but the contrary: for, but foure lines before, hee calleth it Bread and Wine after Conſecration. Thoſe, ſaith hee, whom wee call Deacons, doe giue to euery one that is there preſent, part of the Bread, Wine and Water conſecrated.
               
               Saint Cyprian, Serm. 5. de lapſis. Now good Sir

Gagger, can you tell how many Sermons de lapſis Saint Cyprian wrote? ignorant Aſſe, and yet bold Bayard! Saint Cyprian wrote no Sermons de lapſis: hee wrote a booke de lapſis, diuided into ſections by ſome or other. But Reader, ſee the audacious Dunſery of this Ignaro. C. W. B. had, in his Catalogue of the Fathers of the third Age, for tranſubſtantiation, cited Cyprian thus; Ser. 5 de lapſis, for Sect. 5. de lapſis (vnleſſe he alſo took his Authors by tale vpon truſt) and Ser. de coena Domini. This blunderer ſtumbled vpon the firſt, falſe or true; to purpoſe or not, all was one to him; and ſet it downe: the ſecond quotation hee left out: yet that is it which hee ſhould haue taken: for in the firſt, Sect. 5. de lapſis, there is nothing; in the ſecond, Ser. decoena Domini, as he will haue it, though it bee no Sermon, Sect. 6. there is, thus: The Bread which our Lord reached vnto his Diſciples, beeing changed, not in appearance, but in Nature, by the omnipotency of the Word, is made fleſh. Saint Cyprian ſaid as much as this once or twice before. No man denyeth a change, an alteration, a tranſmutation, a tranſelementation, as they ſpeake: no man otherwiſe beleeueth, but that the naturall condition of the Bread conſecrated, is otherwiſe then it was; beeing diſpoſed and vſed to that holy vſe, of imparting Chriſt vnto the Communicants. Stay heere: be contented with That it is, and doe not ſeeke nor define How it is ſo: and we ſhall not conteſt or contend with you. Hoc Sacramentum aliquando corpus ſuum, aliquando carnem & ſanguinem, aliquando panem Chriſtus appellat, portionem vitae aeternae, cuius, ſecundum haec viſibi
                        •
                     ia, corporali communicauit Natur
                        •
                     . Panis iſte communis in carnem et ſanguinem
                  
                  mutatus, procurat vitam et incrementum corporibus: ideoque ex conſueto rerum effectu, fidei nostrae adiuta infirmitas, ſenſibili argumento edocta eſt, viſibilibus ſacramentis ineſſe vitae aeternae effectum, et non tam corporali, quàm ſpirituali tranſitione Chriſto nos vniri. Thus the ſame Saint Cyprian: ſo we: we confeſſe it: we beleeue it: we cannot comprehend it.
               Saint Ambroſe ſaith no more then wee will ſubſcribe, Lib. 4. de ſacramentis. Before conſecration it was Bread; common, ordinary, meere Bread: but after conſecration, it becommeth the fleſh of Chriſt, becauſe then the Sacrament is conſummate. But doth Saint Ambroſe tell you how it is ſo made? That I finde not, that I expect, that I muſt finde, or I finde nothing to your purpoſe.
               One Father yet you adde. Saint Remigius ſaith, but you cannot tell where: your Director told you, it was in his comments vpon the 10. Chap. 1. ad Corinth. The fleſh which the Word of God took in the Virgins wombe, and the Bread conſecrated in the Church, are the ſame body. And yet, beeing conſecrated, he calleth it Bread. How can your Saint Remigius make that good? Hee ſhould haue ſaid, for doubtleſſe hee meant ſo, The Bread which was beeing conſecrated in the Church, is tranſubſtantiated into that fleſh which the Word of God took in the Virgins womb, and becom the ſame body. This Remigius ſaith not; a great ſigne hee meant not. And indeed hee did not meane it: hee goeth no further then Reality: he determineth not modum praeſentiae at all. And yet this Remigius is not, peraduenture, the man you would haue him; namely, Saint Remigius, Archbiſhop of Rhemes, who conuerted King Clouis of

                  France to the Chriſtian Faith, who liued within 500 yeeres after Chriſt, though he died about 544. This man wrot nothing, that I can heare of, eyther in Sidonius, who liued at that time, or Hinckmarus, or Flodoard, or Sixtus Senenſis, or Bellarmine, or Cheſneu, or any other. Hee that wrote the notes vpon Saint Paul's Epiſtles, taught indeed at Rhemes, as appeareth by Flodoard (and thence grew the error, I ſuppoſe, of thoſe who took him for Saint Remigius Biſhop of Rhemes): but hee is called Remigius Antiſiadorenſis, because hee was borne at Auxerre. Of him we read in Sixtus Senenſis, that hee wrote on Saint Paul's Epiſtles. He is of a much later date; liuing vnder Charles the bald, about 880. Howſoeuer, we are not touched by him, or any of the reſt: for wee neither beleeue, nor ſay, that the Bread of the Supper is but a bare figure of the body of Chriſt, not his Body: we profeſſe, wee receiue the Lords Body, and drink his bloud, in commemoration of his Death and Paſſion, as hee hath appointed. If you ſay otherwiſe, we haue done with you.
            
            
               
               XXXVI.
               
                  That wee ought to receiue in both kindes; and that one alone ſufficeth not.
               
               
                  WEE ought ſo indeed: nor is it ſufficient to adminiſter the Communion, as the Romaniſts now doe, vnder one kinde. This is the authorized and receiued, and iuſtifiable Doctrine, and Orthodox practice of the Church of England. Artic. 30. thus we reade: The Cup of the Lord is not to bee denied vnto the Lay-people. For, both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Chriſts ordinance and commandement, ought to be miniſtred to all Chriſtian men alike. And in the Communion book it is expreſly ſaid, That the chiefe miniſter, if there bee moe preſent, as it often hapneth, in Colledges eſpecially and Cathedrall Churches, ſhall receiue it firſt himſelf, and then deliuer it to other Miniſters, and ſo to the People in both kindes. This is our practice and our profeſſion: for which I ioyne iſſue with all Papiſts liuing; that it is the prime, originall inſtitution of our Sauiour; which giueth Birth and Beeing to a Sacrament; that it is Sacriledge to alter it therefrom; that it neuer was otherwiſe vſed in the Church of God, for aboue 1000 yeeres after Chriſt. Let all the Papiſts liuing prooue the contrary, and I will subſcribe to all Popery. As for this poore fellow, hee can ſay no more then hee findeth ready to

hand, or is put into his mouth: his Camerades were conſcious to themſelues of nouelty and innouation: for in a point ſo notorious, ſo ſcandalous, of ſuch conſequence, wee are not ſent, as accuſtomed, to ſee any Fathers.
               
                  It is manifeſt, ſaith Ceſſander, a man profeſſing himſelfe a Romane Catholique, though of wonderfull modeſty, moderation, and learning, that in adminiſtration of the ſacred Sacrament of the Euchariſt, the Vniuerſall Church of Chriſt vntill this day, and the Weſterne or Romane Church, for more then 1000 yeeres after Chriſt, eſpecially in their ſolemne and ordinary diſpenſation of this Sacrament, did exhibit and giue vnto all faithfull Chriſtians, not one only, but both the kinds of Bread and Wine: as is moſt cleere and euident out of innumerable teſtimonies of the old Writers, both Greeke and Latine; which I can make good, and of ſome will giue a taſte.
               
               
                  Ignatius in his Epiſtle to the Philadelphians. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : One Bread is broken vnto all; and one Wine giuen to the whole multitude. This man was Saint Iohn's Diſciple. Martialis, as you ſay, one of the 70 Diſciples: Epiſt. 1. Sect. 3. Nunc autem multò magis ſacerdotes Dei honoratis, qui vitam vobis tribuunt in calice et viuo pane: and he ſpeaketh, you ſee, to the people. Dionyſius Areopag. S. Paul's Diſciple, pag. 157. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. for hauing diſcouered the couered & vndiuided bread, and diuided it into many parts, and diſtributed to all, the Vnity of the Cup, hee conſummateth in thoſe Symbols and ſignes, the Vnity of the Church: and ſo in many other places. S. Clement, Saint Peter's Diſciple and Succeſſor, in his Maſſe hauing ſet downe the order and forme of conſecration,

cometh to participation thus: Let the Deacon giue the cup; and when all haue receiued, men and women, let the Deacons carry the remainder into the Reueſtry. So Saint Mark in his Liturgie, another Diſciple of Saint Peter. So Saint Peter himſelf in his Liturgie, or Maſſe as you call it. So the reſt.
               
                  Iustin Martyr, in the end of his Apologie, deſcribing the ſeruice of thoſe antient Chriſtians, ſaith, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : They whom we call Deacons, giue to euery one preſent, part of the conſecrated Bread and Wine. Irenaeus in lib. 4. cap. 33. prooueth the Reſurrection, becauſe we participate of the body and bloud of Chriſt. And lib. 5. cap. 11. ſpeaking of a Chriſtian man, he ſaith, that de calice, qui ſanguis eius est, nutritur; & de pane, qui est corpus eius, augetur. That railing Feuardentius, in his Notes vpon Irenaeus, was not able to produce one Teſtimony for half Communions, though he vaunt, it was a practice in the Apoſtles time. Tertul. in de Reſurrect. ſpeaking of all Chriſtians in generall; Caro corpore & ſanguine Chriſti veſcitur, vt & anima ſaginetur. And becauſe theſe Patrons of a deſperate cauſe, contrary to all art and reaſon, conclude negatiuely, The cup was not communicated, becauſe the bread is alone ſometime remembred; we may inferre alike, The bread was not giuen, but the cup, becauſe Tertul. in depudicitia, remembreth onely the cup thus: Aqua & aliis initians, cui ille ſi fortè patrocinabitur pastor, quem in calice depingis, proſtitutorem & ipſum, Chriſtiani Sacramenti, mento et ebrietatis idolū, & moechiae aſylum post calicem ſubſecuturae, de quo nihil libentius bibas, quàm ouem poenitentiae ſecundae. The man

was then, I yeeld, a Montaniſt: but that hinders not his credit from relation of truth and vniuerſall practice on foot, though he oppugn it.
               
                  Clemens. Alexandrinus, Stro. 1. p
                        •
                     . 117. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : For which cauſe, ſome men, when as they diſtribute the holy Eucharist, as the cuſtome is, permit euery man of the common people to take a portion. And what he meaneth by Eucharist, himſelf explaineth, 2. Paedag. 2. cap. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. The mixture of both in one, that is, of Wine and the Word, is that which wee call the Euchariſt: whereof the Faithfull when they participate, are ſanctified in ſoule and body both. Dionyſius, Biſhop of Alexandria, in Euſeb. Hiſt. lib. 7. cap. 8, writing vnto Xystus Biſhop of Rome, relateth of an antient Chriſtian, no Prieſt, but a Lay-man, that vpon occaſion ſuppoſed he had not been well baptized. Of him he writeth there, that long before, and often, hee had been partaker of the body and bloud of Chriſt; not of his body alone, but of his bloud also, in expreſſe words.
               Saint Cyprian, in moe places than one, Epiſt. 63. Tamen quoniam quidam vel ignoranter vel ſimpliciter, in Calice Dominico ſanctificando, & plebi miniſtrando, non hoc faciunt quod ſecus Chriſtus, &c. The Cup of the Lord communicated to the Laity. And again: Quomodo poſsumus propter Chriſtum ſanguinem fundere, qui ſanguinem Christi erubeſcimus bibere? By which reaſon of Saint Cyprian, no Roman Lay-Catholique can ſhead his bloud for Chriſt, that neuer drank the bloud of Chriſt. Which argument he vſeth in another place, Epiſt. 54. Sect. 2. With what ground can we teach or exhort

them to ſhead their owne bloudin confeſsing the Name of Chriſt, if, putting them forth vpon that ſeruice, wee denie them the bloud of Chriſt? or how can wee diſpoſe and fit them to drink the cup of Martyrdome, vnleſſe wee first admit them to their right of communication, in drinking the Lords cup in the Church? Let our good Catholiques anſwer this, who ſo punctually, forſooth, and preciſely follow the ſteps of Antiquity without any ſwaruing. Theſe are all within 300 yeers after Chriſt, and all expreſſe for the Cup.
               
                  Athanaſius, in his ſecond Apologie, being accuſed for breaking a Chalice, writeth thus: What manner of cup? or when? or where was it broken? In euery houſe, in euery ſhop, there are many pots: any which if a man break, hee committeth not ſacriledge. But if any man willingly break the ſacred chalice, he committeth ſacriledge: but that chalice is no where but where there is a lawfull Biſhop. This is the vſe destined to that chalice; none other: wherein you, according to inſtitution, do drink vnto and before the Laity. This was the cuſtome in Athanaſius time; this, in all the Fathers times, as I could deduct almoſt out of euery one. This is euery where the cuſtome in all the world vnto this day, but in the Roman exorbitant Church, as Caſſander ſaith; and was not quite aboliſhed in that Church, till about 1300 yeeres after Chriſt; and by much art, colluding, and fine forgery, was retained from being caſt out of that Church, in the late Conuenticle of Trent, onely kept-in for a faction, but mightily oppoſed by learned, honeſt and conſcionable Catholiques.
               For why: who can alter Chriſt's Inſtitution? who dare change that which he hath ordained? Sacrificium

verum & plenum tune offert in Eccleſia Deo Patri, ſi ſic incipiat offerre, ſecundùm quod ipſum Chriſtum videat obtuliſse, ſaith Saint Cyprian. But ſaith he again, and we knowe it is true, Conſtat Dominum obtuliſſe calicem in commemorationem Paſsionis. Et quia Paſsionis eius mentionem in ſacrificijs omnibus facim
                        ••
                     , nihil aliud quàm quod ille fecit, facere debemus. Why? Becauſe otherwiſe wee offer not the Sacrifice as wee ſhould. Nec ſacrificium Dominicum legitima ſanctificatione celebramus, niſi oblatio et ſacrificium noſtrum reſponderit Paſsioni: and that cannot be without powring out of wine, that repreſenteth the ſheading of his bloud. But your Church hath altred it; preſumptuouſly done. Who gaue your Church ſuch authority? Heare Saint Cyprian again. Quare ſi ſolus Chriſtus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos faciendum putauerit, ſed quid qui ante omnes est Chriſtus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis conſuetudinem ſequi oportet, ſed Dei veritatem. Nam ſi Ieſus Chriſtus, Dominus & Deus noſter, ipſe eſt ſummus Sacerdos Dei Patris, & ſacrificium Patri ſeipſum primus obtulit, & hoc fieri in ſui commemorationem praecepit: vtique ille ſacerdos vice Chriſti verè fungitur, qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur: & ſacrificium verum ac plenum tunc offert in Eccleſia Deo Patri, ſi ſic incipiat offerre, ſecundùm quod ipſum Chriſtum videat obtuliſſe. You doo not this: therefore, in Saint Cyprian's iudgement, your ſacrifice is neither full nor true. Much more in that Epiſtle, Saint Cyprian hath, and alſo elſewhere, vnto the purpoſe.
               But you haue Scriptures for the nonce; expreſly in our Bibles, contrary to that we teach and practice; to iuſtifie what you practiſe and teach touching this

ſacriledge and perfidiouſneſſe in altering Chriſts inſtitution. Maruell you ſhould haue Scripture againſt Scripture, Chriſts inſtitution beeing ſo direct, for Drink you all. Produce your Scriptures, Ioh. 6. 51. If any man eat of this Bread, hee ſhall liue for euer. And the Bread which I will giue, is my fleſh. Heere is eating of Bread; and that ſame Bread, Chriſts fleſh: but heere is no ſuch matter, as wee ought to receiue Bread onely; or, that Bread alone ſufficeth. Yes: for, Lo euerlaſting life attributed by our Lord himſelfe, to eating onely vnder one kinde. I grant: for doe they in your countrey vſe to eat vnder two kindes? Is Wine eaten with ſpoones there? I haue heard of communicating and receiuing vnder one kinde; but neuer till now, heard talke of eating vnder one kinde. Goe learne to ſpeake, and then write. In the Interim I take your meaning. Chriſt, that mentioneth onely eating, doth not exclude drinking; doth not ſay nor meane, eating onely ſufficeth. Bread is not excluſiue heere, no more then where our Sauiour went to eat Bread with a Phariſe: at which time, in your Learning and Logick, he did not drink all dinner-time, or ſupper-time, becauſe he went onely to eat Bread. But Sir, your wiſdome muſt knowe, that hee which eateth Bread, according to the Scripture phraſe, drinketh alſo; Bread importing neceſſaries for mans life: and to eat Bread, is both to eat and drink; as to eat his Body, is as well to drink his bloud. So anon the ſame Euangeliſt: Vnleſſe you eat the fleſh of the Sonne of man, and drink his bloud, you ſhall not haue life in you. Lo heere euerlaſting life, not had without drinking. Looke you to this, if you looke to haue euerlasting life.
               
               
                  
                  Iohn 4. 14. Chriſt promiſeth Water to drink; of which water whoso taſteth, ſhall thirſt no more: therefore, ſay you, He promiſed no Wine: therefore, ſay I, By your reaſon hee gaue not Bread. Therefore, if needs you will haue one kinde, and no more, haue it in Wine, not Bread. Againe, hee telleth his Diſciples elſe-where, that hee would drink no more of the fruit of the vine, vntill hee drink it new in the Kingdome of God: hee maketh no mention of any Bread. Therefore in Heauen, belike, Wine is drink, and onely Wine drunk: but they eat no Bread there. And yet wee read of Angels food: which I can tell you, who take it literally. I might ſay, our Sauiour ſpeaketh heere of Bread, and not of Wine, in regard of that fore-going occaſion, which was the firſt motiue vnto this his Diſcourſe, namely, his miraculous feeding 5000 men with fiue loaues: ſo that hee kept him to the Subiect and occaſion. But this wiſe mans obſeruation is cleane caſhierd by our Sauiours Epexegeſis afterward, ver. 53, 54. hee plainely and expreſly maketh it plaine, that hee meant not to exclude bloud, ſpeaking of fleſh; nor ſhut out Wine, where he mentioned Bread. Euerlaſting life, to returne your owne words vpon your ſelf, is attributed by our Lord, not to eating onely vnder one, but both kinds; Except you eat the fleſh of the Sonne of man, and drink his bloud, you haue no life in you. Lo, without drinking, no life euerlaſting: then, poore deceiued Papiſts, what will become of you? you ſhall periſh in your ſinnes, though your bloud ſhall bee required at the hands of your ignorant or rather deceitufll guides, that thus miſ-leade you from Chriſts Inſtitution.
               
                  
                  Luk. 24. 30, 35. Chriſt at Emmaus communicated his diſciples vnder one kinde. Two things are inſiſted on out of theſe words, as it appeareth by the laying downe. Firſt, that this was actio ſacra, a Communion of the Body of our Sauiour; then that it was done vnder one kinde: this is taken as granted, becauſe there is no mention of drinking of Wine, there is made mention of breaking the Bread. Ignorants and wilfull take things amiſſe: an ordinary Hebrew phraſe it is in the Scriptures, to eat bread, to break bread, for to eat and drink, to take a refection, or repaſt. This man imagineth, that all their meales were ſicca conuiuia; altogether without any liquor, nor Wine nor Water vſed, though in hot countries. Such a foole would haue no other anſwer made vnto him, but as Ariſotle would haue made to him that ſhould deny motion; or that hee ſhould neuer drink at his meales: the beſt anſwer could poſſibly be made vnto him.
               That it was actio ſacra and not communis, our Sauiour did celebrate the Communion of his Body and Bloud: though I know it is controuerted, for my part I will not contend at preſent. I know it is held ſo by Auguſtine, Theophylact, and I adde too Beda, and Hierome with others: but take heede of the Precedent: for if hee communicated onely Bread, then I know not what vſe of Wine at all there will bee in the bleſſed Sacrament. For theſe were, peraduenture, of his Apoſtles; but without all queſtion, of his Diſciples, and ſo had intereſt in the Cup, if any had at all.
               See more wee cannot, Acts 2. 42. then we haue ſeene already; mention made of breaking of Bread,
                  
which is not excluſiue from drinking of Wine: no more then, 1. Cor. 11. 13. drinking doth exclude eating at all. Poore ſhifts for Sacriledge and impiety, of late made an Article of faith in the Church of Rome. He that inſtituted the one, ordained the other, ioyntly both, and at the ſame time, with all circumſtances alike: if any aduantage is, it is for Drink not for Eat. For, Drink you all of this, ſaith the Author of the Sacrament: hee ſaith not expreſly, Eat you all of this; as foreſeeing that impiety, which in time, humane preſumption ſhould bring-in vpon and againſt his owne inſtitution, fulfilled in the Church of Rome at this day.
            
            
               XXXVII.
               
                  That Sacramental vnction is not to bee vſed to the ſick.
               
               
                  VSe it, if you will: wee hinder you not, nor much care or enquire what effects enſue vpon it: but obtrude it not on vs, or vnto the Church, as in Cenſu of the Sacraments of the time of Grace, as Baptiſme is held, and the Lords Supper, Viſible ſignes of inuiſible Grace; Powerfull inſtruments ordained by God, to work in our Soules eternall Life, by conueighing the meanes thereof vnto them.
               
                  Sacramental vnction call it, if you pleaſe, ſo farre as

in the writings of the antient Fathers, all Articles peculiar vnto our Chriſtian faith, and beliefe, are ſometime called Sacraments: all duties of religious piety vnto God; all diuine and Eccleſiaſticall ceremonies, are named Sacraments: in which ſenſe you might reckon not ſeuen, but ſeuenſcore, if you were diſpoſed to make a ſearch for Sacraments.
               
               In the Apoſtolicall and Primitiue Church, it was a cuſtome to anoint the ſick with oyle, to pray ouer them, and ſo commit them vnto God. This Saint Iames remembreth, 5. 4. Is any ſick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray ouer him, anointing him with oyle, in the name of the Lord. The Apoſtle doth not call it a Sacrament; Sacramentall vnction, as the Theſis propoſeth, and which is that ſhould bee expreſly prooued. Our Bibles ſay, the ſick were anointed: but not our Bibles nor theirs doe ſay, that this anointing was a Sacrament. And Fathers wee are not ſent to ſee, that proue it: ſo the place is not to purpoſe, as it is propoſed.
               
                  Mar. 6. 13. is a Text defacto. They anointed with oyle many that were ſick, and healed them: but de iure there is not a word in that Text, whether yea or no this Anointing ſhould bee a Sacrament. The Maſter of controuerſies confeſſeth himſelfe, that it is not accorded whether in this Text or not, Sacramentall vnction was inſtituted: and himſelfe is of opinion, that it is not; grounding on the reſolution of the Councell of Trent: to which, all Papiſts are tyed to ſubſcribe and yeeld; and how dare you bring this as a proofe?
               Now, ſay the truth, Sir Gooſe, and ſhame the diuell. 
                  Now, ſay the truth, and ſhame the Diuell: are not they ſick in their wits, which will oppoſe ſuch plaine Scriptures?
                  
How plain are theſe Texts, that ſet your great Directors together by the ears! Where were your ſick wits, that did not aduiſe you? Take heed of falling foule with the Councel of Trent, the cynoſura of your faith. Sure, they were made of the pappe of an apple; ſo eaſily they ſqueeze themſelues out to nothing▪ your great Dictators haue found hitherto but one direct Text, Iames 5. 4. can we think your ſharp ſight ſhould ſpy out three more? a Fox or a Fearne-buſh: ſomewhat or nothing? for, Mat. 16. 18. Acts 28. 8. nor oyle, nor vnction is remembred; bare impoſition of hands vpon the ſick, and diſeaſed: ſo that wee ſtand in ſome poſſibility heerafter, to haue added an eightth Sacrament to the former ſeauen.
            
            
               XXXVIII.
               
                  That no interior grace is giuen by the impoſition of hands in the Sacrament of holy orders.
               
               
                  THis indeed is contrary vnto the expreſſe words of our Bible; and therefore directly contrary to our Opinion, Doctrine, and Practice. Can this fellowe bee ſo ignorant, as not to know; or rather ſo impudent, as to deny, that in giuing of holy orders, we vſe thoſe memorable, formall words of our Sauiour, Receiue the holy Ghost? Was euer man made Miniſter in the Church of England, but in that

ſort, with that forme? Can hee deny, that wee not onely practise it, but propugne it, command it to bevſed, enquire of, and puniſh the neglect, oppoſition and contempt thereof? What ſhall wee ſay to ſuch a baſe detracting Varlet, as ſhameth not, in view of heauen and earth, to deny the Sun ſhineth at noone-day? Romane Catholiques, I admire your patience, that ſuffer ſuch Hog-rubbers to leade you by the noſe, and make you beleeue the ſnowe is black. Poore deceiued Soules, truſt no ſuch Merchants, that would ſell you to the diuell for a morſell of bread, and make you ſtand out vpon tearms of Separation, for their owne aduantages, againſt the Church, as Schiſmaticks, in which you liue and haue beene baptized.
            
            
               XXXIX.
               
                  That Prieſts and other religious Perſons, or any others who haue vowed their chaſtity vnto God, may freely marry notwithſtanding their vowes.
               
               
                  TOuching marriage of Miniſters, this is our Doctrine, reſolued, maintained, and iuſtifiable, Article 32. Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, are not commanded by Gods Lawe, eyther to vow the eſtate of ſingle life, or to abſtaine from marriage. Therefore it is lawfull alſo for them, as for all other Chriſtian men, to marry at their owne

diſcretion, as they ſhall iudge the ſame to ſerue better vnto godlineſſe. I finde no vow mentioned in this Article, nor leaue giuen to marry, notwithſtanding vow: it is your addition, to ſcandalize the Doctrine which otherwiſe you durſt not touch.
               Marriage is honourable amongſt all men. This you doe not deny: that ſingle life is eſſentiall vnto the Clergie, and indiſpenſable, none of your ſide affirmeth, that I know, but nonus Dogmatistes in Italiâ, as Caſſander calleth him, Franciſco Tunia
                        •
                     
                   the Ieſuite. It is but an Eccleſiaſticall ſanction, this both you and we ſet downe. It is not deined, but notwithſtanding that generall licence to all, the Church may reſtraine marriage vnto ſome, at ſome time, vpon ſome occaſions, as wee vſe in our Colledges at this day: which is no reſtraint, but a condition tendred; Leaue your fellowſhip if you marry.
               The Primitiue Church vſed, I deny not, this conditionall reſtraint in ſome caſes, to ſome men, vpon ſome occaſion: they might ſo doe, without tax or blame: and ſo may you or wee, for ought I know, with moderation or diſcretion. So the queſtion is not, Whether Prieſts may marry? but, Whether it bee conuenient for them ſo to doe? You ſay no, neuer, at no time. Wee deny this rigor, and leaue it indifferent to their owne diſcretion; reſoluing, that at ſome time, for ſome cauſes, it is conuenient, and to bee permitted: to ſome men, at ſome time, for ſome conſiderations, it may be denied to marry.
               Your Church, for reasons beſt known to her selfe, though apparant enough to all, hath a long time doated vpon ſingle life of Prieſts, for I cannot ſay chaste;
                  
and the better to ſecure her ſelfe of that ſtate, hath laid a tye of conſcience, a band by oath vpon them; admitting none to holy orders, but ſuch as firſt ſolemnly take that vow: which hath many times & often filled your Churches with knaues and dunſes abundantly; honeſter men, and diſcreet Scholars, refuſing ſuch a tye.
               Wee aduiſe you not to break your vow, perſwade not your ſelues ſo: we counſell and aduiſe you by all meanes to keep it, & liue honeſt: marry freely, if you be free; if not, we ſay not to you, Do as Alexander did with Gordius knot; Cut it in pieces, when you cannot vndo it. It was ill to vow ſo vnaduiſedly; worſe, to force you to it on no neceſſity, yet worſe to break it ſecurely with preſūptiō: butworſt of all, adhinnire after freſh maidenheads, or neighbors beds cōtinually.
               We ſay, you did ill to vow abſolutely, that which was not in your power to performe: a miſchief paſt, that cannot bee remedied, muſt bee relieued what it may. If you haue vowed, keepe it on Gods name: it is ſinne to breake it, I make no queſtion of it, which was deliberately, diſcreetly, poſſibly promiſed, in things not againſt nature, common right or reaſon; for euen in a bond, a condition euill, impious, or impoſſible, is voyd and bindeth not, they ſay.
               I deny not vowes in the new Teſtament, they may bee meanes vnto, and parts of Gods worſhip, as well in the new Teſtament as the old. So Gregory Nazianzen impoſed a vow vpon himſelfe, not to take the name of God in vaine, and kept it: So haue many other lawfully and profitably done: doe you ſo, and we commend you for it.
               
                  
The Texts you produce, doe not one of them Deuter. 23. 22. Pſal. 66. 13. Pſal. 19. 11. 1. Tim. Math. 5. 12. ſpeak of the marriage of Prieſts or religious perſons, or any other that vowed chaſtity vnto God: of vowes they ſpeake, and of vowes to be kept: but Quid haec ad Bacchum? Your promiſe was, your vndertaking is, to prooue by expreſſe words of our owne Bibles, that the vowes of Prieſts and religious perſons touching ſingle life, ſhould bee kept: and yet neyther doe wee deny the one; nor you prooue the other. See your honeſty in this alſo, and inſufficiency to performe.
            
            
               XL.
               
                  That faſting, and abſtinence from meates, is not grounded vpon holy Scripture, nor cauſeth any ſpirituall good.
               
               
                  
                     FAſting, is abſtaining from all meates; or from ſom certaine meates: the firſt istruly Faſting, which muſt bee limited and confined to a time, for ſo totally to faſt is impoſſible. The ſecond is dieting rather then faſting; and yet is that which this man principally meaneth by Faſting, as ſpeaking according to the tongue of Aſhdod, in the Church of Rome, that is more for appearances then true ſubſtances.
               
                  Faſting is manifold obiectiuely, as it hath beene

practiſed by Iewes, by Pagans, by Chriſtians. This man ſhould ſpeak of the Chriſtian Faſt onely; but huddleth all altogether, without diſtinction. Faſting is diſtinct, ſubiectiuely. Among Chriſtians there is or may be vnderſtood a naturall, a morall, an eccleſiaſticall Faſt; for neceſſity, for remedy, conueniencie, policy, piety. This addle-headed Fellow cares not to put a difference between the kindes, nor to adde quantity to his poſition, that men might know where to haue him, and finde what he ſhould ſay.
               He cannot be ignorant, that we commend Faſting, as a profitable help vnto deuotion and piety. Hee cannot chuſe but knowe, that wee command it, not onely for ciuil, but religious ends, and vſe it in times of ſpeciall note, for fitting diſpatches of principall alloy; In our Ember-weeks, for giuing of Orders; in our Lent, to humble our ſelues against Eaſter; vpon the Vigils of Saints, and other ſet daies: which we ground vpon Scripture, and vſe to this purpoſe, To cauſe ſpirituall good.
               
               So Scriptures and Fathers ſerue to no purpoſe, being brought to proue that which is not denied. We ground it on Scripture, but not that alleaged of the Rechabites. We haue warrant ſufficient from Chriſtian 
                     Ier. 35. 5. Therefore it is grounded, &c. practice and direction. We need no addreſſe to Iewiſh, either Nazarits or elſe Rechabites, for example: and if we ſhould, yet what haue we to do with this pretended? They drank no wine at all; none of them for euer: as the Icthyophagi of Aethiopia eat no fleſh; a generall cuſtome, no Faſt. They did it out of a politick reſpect, becauſe they were ſtrangers in the Land. Wee muſt haue a religious example to ſerue

our turn. And laſtly, they were yet vnder the Law: the Vow of the Nazarite might as well bee pleaded; and all Iewiſh Ceremonies, for obſeruation vnto Chriſtians. So ignorant is this Idle-pate.
               Otherwiſe wee ground Faſting vpon holy Scripture, and could adde many moe places of Fathers to be seen: the true end and intent whereof is double; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to bee anointed with the holy Ghoſt, and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to bee waſhed and rinſed from our ſinnes: but it needs not. It ſufficeth onely, we confeſſe moſt willingly the ground of Faſting to be diuine, the vſe of Faſting to be ſingular. So theſe goodly proofs touch not vs at all. Vſe them againſt thoſe that vſe not Faſts: for, laſtly, it is our practice.
            
            
               XLI.
               
                  That Ieſus Christ deſcended not into hell, nor deliuered thence the ſoules of the Fathers.
               
               
                  APropoſition of two feet, neither relying vpon either: The ſoules of the Fathers might not bee thence deliuered, though Chriſt deſcended into hell; and Chriſt might very well go down into hell, and yet not deliuer any Fathers thence; as finding ſome other work there to doo; and, hauing other cauſes of his deſcent, finding no Fathers to deliuer.
               
                  
For the former part of this Poſition, that Hee went not into hell; with what face, what fore-head, can this Fellow ſhew wee teach it, when in our Creed wee profeſſe, that He went down into hell, and haue publiquely defended it againſt oppoſition! Nay, wee more beleeue it, than the Church of Rome doth; and are more punctuall in it, than are they.
               They quarter out hell into foure Regions; Hell of the Damned, Purgatory, Limbus Infantium, and Limbus Patrum. This diuiſion, without warrant of holy Writ, be it granted them; into which of theſe Quarters, into all, or into ſome, did the ſoule of our Sauiour, ſeparate from his body, deſcend? Say they, Into the hell of the Fathers onely, really; into the other parts, virtually, or by effects. Thus Thomas: and who dare deny him? Thus the Current of their Schools. This is their Tenent, and no otherwise.
               Wee profeſſe and beleeue, that Chriſt went into hell, that is, that the humane ſoule of our Sauiour, in the Interim of ſeparation from the body, did eſſentially and really go downe into hell, the place of the Damned, and of the Diuels; not alone into Limbus of the Fathers, which was not there; not to ſuffer any thing there at all: for, all ſuffrings ended vpon the Croſſe. In the Land of darknes, and ſhadow of death, began the firſt ſtep of his exaltation; that, free among the Dead, he walked where he would, not being consined to any place; that he took reall poſſeſſion of a part of his Kingdome, and preſented his perſon vnto thoſe his vaſſals; hauing beaten his enemy in his chiefeſt hold, chaſed him out of the caſtle of his ſtrength, triumphed ouer him in himſelf, and preached

confuſion vnto his foes, that would not entertain his mercy in time of life, nor partake of grace offred them vnto repentance. This is our belief concerning his deſcent into hell; if not orthodox, antient, and receiued, let this wrangler ſhew where, how, and we will yeeld vnto better diſcretion from Antiquity.
               It is idlely ſuppoſed, that, the deſcent granted, we muſt needs inferre withall a Limbus Patrum, or deliuerance of the Fathers out of hell; there being alledged (not contrary to Scriptures, nor Analogy of faith; not inferring impiety, impoſſibility, improbability, abſurdity, or contradiction) ſo many true, good, and catholick reaſons of our Sauiours deſcent thither, beſide this.
               The Fathers he meaneth, are the Patriarchs and Prophets, and righteous men, that liued and died before Chriſt came in the fleſh; that expected the Promiſes, and beleeued in hope, but enioyed not the fulneſſe which we doo ſince. Being dead, they are conſidered two waies; in regard of ſtate, in reſpect of place. For place, the Scripture runneth in generall tearms: In the hands of God; In Abraham's Boſom; With their people; and ſuch like; thus affirmatiuely determining no certaine place: negatiuely reſoluing, they were not there whereas now they are, in the higheſt heauens, and glorious, where the Body of Chriſt reſideth, exalted aboue all Powers and Principalities.
               For, He first entred into the moſt holy place by his owne bloud. They without vs were not to bee perfect; ſtanding the firſt Tabernacle, the holiest of all was not yet opened.

The way was new, which he prepared for vs. The gates to be opened were eternall gates, neuer opened ſince they were gates; but gates, and eternall ſhut gates together. Therefore wee profeſſe with holy Saint Ambroſe, euery day in our Liturgie, When thou hadſt ouercome the ſharpnes of death, thou didst open the Kingdome of Heauen to all Beleeuers. This, we acknowledge, is the receiued opinion of the fathers, and (for ought I knowe) of Proteſtant Diuines not a few.
               Though they were not in heauen, in regard of place; yet were they in happineſſe, in reſpect of ſtate. The ſoules of the Righteous, ſaid he, before Chriſt came, are in the hands of God: and no kinde of torments ſhall once touch them. This is alſo the conſented doctrine of Antiquity. If no kinde of torment, then not loſſe, nor paine; then not in hell: for, I neuer heard of hell without all manner pain. So it followeth not, in opinion of the Antients, the ſoules of the Faithfull were not in heauen aboue properly; therefore they were in hell properly. Gods hands, in which they were, are not ſo ſhortned; his Kingdome is not ſo narrowed, but that hee might well haue moe places than one; Receptacles, Repoſitories, Reſting-places, for the righteous, where hee would diſpoſe them, enow, could we be content.
               Curioſity will not ſtay heer, but proceed to enquire, Where were they then? In what place of the world was their abiding? I anſwer, I cannot reſolue that: for, the Scripture hath not determined it. Neſcire velle, quae Magiſter maximus docere non vult, erudita eſt inſcitia: It is learned neſcience, Not to knowe what our grand inſtructer will not teach. It is enough to knowe,

they are in better caſe now, than they were then. With Chriſt they entred into his Reſt. Euer they were in the hands of God, though not euer in like diſtance or proportion with God. So what need we wrangle about the place, if the matter bee agreed touching ſtate? See how contrary to our owne Bibles.
               
                  Ephes. 4. 8. out of Pſal. 68. 18. When he aſcended vp 
                  Contrary to their owne Bibles. 
                  on high, he led Captiuity captiue, and gaue gifts vnto men. Chriſt, in his Aſcent, led Captiues along. The Queſtion is, Who theſe Captines were? No, Sir: the queſtion ſhould firſt of all bee, What this Aſcent was? You take it of his Reſurrection. It plainly is referred vnto his Triumph into the heauens, in his Aſcenſion, both in the Prophet, and Apoſtle, and by all Interpreters, but your ſelf.
               But to follow you in your follies; Be it as you Theſe freed Captiues cannot bee the ſoules of the Saued, which no man in his right wits, can call Captiues: nor of the damned; for, ſo the diuels ſhould be brought again into heauen. Therefore they were the ſoules of the Fathers which Chriſt deliuered out of hell. would haue it, of his Reſurrection: muſt theſe freed Captiues needs be the ſoules of the Fathers which Chriſt deliuered out of hell? Yes, no nay; no other poſſibility. For, they were not the ſoules of the Saued, nor the Diuels; therefore the ſoules of the Fathers. Sir, can you finde no mo but theſe, Diuels or Saued? Iuſtin Martyr could: and he is ancient, pag. 57. edit. Rob. Steph. with him in his opinion: and I think hee was in his right wits. We are thoſe Captiues, that ſince the Aſcenſion of our Sauiour, by the preaching of the Goſpell of peace, are captiued vnto truth, being freed and deliuered from error. Irenaeus, in his wits too, I ſuppoſe, goes not far from this meaning: for, hauing remembred the Text whcih he referreth to the Paſsion, hee inferreth thus; Dominus per paſsionem mortem deſtruxit,
                  
                  & ſoluit errorem, corruptionem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      exterminauit, & ignorantiam deſtruxit. Tertullian was alſo in his right 
                        •
                     its; who, in 5. againſt Marcion, writeth thus: Aſcendit in ſublimitatem, id eſt Coelum. Captiuam duxit captiuitatem, id eſt, mortem, vel humanam ſeruitutem.
               
               See then Fathers expounding it of nor Diuels, nor Saued: and yet this confident Ignorant, that ſcarce euer read Father, it is probable (but, who ſo bold as blinde Bayard?) pronounceth, that Theſe freed Captiues heer, could bee no other than the ſoules of the Fathers whom Chriſt deliuered forth of hell, becauſe they were nor Diuels nor Saued, in his opinion.
               
                  They were not Diuels; very magiſterially ſpoken, and pro Imperio; becauſe this learned Theologue ſaith, They were not. Athanaſius ſaith, It was the Diuell that he captiued; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , hauing made captiue the Tyrant of captiuity, To. 1. de ſalutari aduentu Ieſu Chriſti: and yet Athanaſius neuer feared to be challenged for bringing back the Diuels into heauen; vnto whom God Almighty had ſworne in his wrath, They ſhould neuer more return into his Reſt. Might he not lead them along the aire, and ſhut them our, caſt them off at heauen-gates? Captiuity is actiuely or paſsiuely taken; Thoſe that held in captiuity, or ſuch as were held. Chriſt led them both, death and damnation; the Diuell, the graue, the Chief and Principal in the dwellings of Ham, the Commanders of the Prince of darknes: of whom hee made a ſhew openly, and triumphed ouer them in his fleſh. They might be the Righteous, the Saued, though you deny it, that were formerly in captiuity vnto their enemies, and now freed & deliuered to ſerue Chriſt Ieſus; which

the Fathers call, if you euer read it, a better captiuity: whether you hould them in their right wits, or no, I knowe not. I am ſure, your wits and wiſdome are far aſunder, though no great ſubſtance in either.
               
                  Very farre; or could it haue dropped from your penne, They cannot be the ſoules of the Saued; and yet, Therefore they were the ſoules of the Fathers whom Chriſt deliuerd out of hell? who peraduenture were not ſaued, but caſt into another hell, being taken thence. Goe learn to ſpeak and write, Sir giddy Gooſe-gagger, and then vndertake to ſtop the Proteſtants mouthes. You muſt not look to prate and talk idlely to them, as you doo to your Proſelytes, poore fooles, that are hood-winked willingly by each Buzzard, to blinde obedience. You may let theſe freed Captiues be theſe or thoſe, deliuered, ſaued, ſo or ſo: you cannot inferre, they were deliuered by Chriſt, therefore they were freed out of hell. Let them not haue been in heauen before our Sauiour: I deny it neceſſary, they were therefore in hell. Hell is one thing, ſaith Tertull. lib. 4. againſt Marcion, Abraham's boſome is another thing. For, Abraham ſaith, A great depth is betwixt theſe two Regions; which permitteth not any to paſſe to and fro. Neither could the rich man haue lift vp his eies, but to places aboue him, and farre aboue him, by reaſon of that infinite diſtance betwixt that height and that depth. That Region, then, I call Abraham's boſome, which, though it be not heauen, is yet higher than hell.
               
               Thus hee, vpon warrant of our Sauiours words, who placeth Abraham farre aboue that place of torment; and ſo the one no part of the other. And ſo likewiſe reſolueth that profound Diuine, Saint Auguſtine,
                  
in his 99, the memorable Epiſtle to Euodius, inſtantly rehearſed by the Diſcourſer: Non vtique ſinus ille Abrahae, id eſt, ſecretae cuiuſdam quietis habitatio, aliqua pars inferorum eſſe credenda eſt: Then, without doubt, the Boſome of Abraham, which is an habitation of ſecret rest, cannot be thought to haue been any part of hell. You dare oppoſe Saint Auguſtine: dare you not?
               It is true which that illuminate Doctor auerreth in the ſame Epiſtle: None but an Infidell, will deny Chriſts 
                  
                     Acts 2. 27. Which very words Saint Auguſt. applieth to the paint of Purgatory, and addeth, Who but an Infidel will deny Chriſt to haue deſcended into hell? Ep. 99. ad Euodium.
                   
                  deſcent into hell; and as true, that none but an Aſſe or an Idiot will ſay, that therefore neceſſarily hee went thither to fetch vp the fathers that were there in hel. Saint Auguſtine denieth them to haue been there: it is plain, and not denied by your Maſters. Indeed it is anſwered, that Saint Auguſtine did not knowe what the beſome of Abraham was; but that hee applieth that Text, Acts 2. 27. to the pains of Purgatory, is but a coniecture at the beſt. S. Augustine ſaith, that Chriſt deliuered ſome from the pains of hell; and interpreteth himſelf, not to mean That of thoſe holy ſoules that were in the Boſom of Abraham; nor of the ſouls of the Damned that were in hell-torments, out of which is no redemption. Heerupon you think wiſely, he muſt needs mean the pains of Purgatory, and no other. It is the doctrine of your owne Schools, that ſuch as were raiſed at any time from death to life, were not certainly doomed, nor confined into their ſtations: but, in regard GOD foreſaw they ſhould liue again, extraordinarily he ſuſpended their determination, this way or that way irreuocably. Why might not Saint Augustine mean ſome ſuch thing? Without doubt he did not mean it of Purgatory.

For, Saint Thomas, 3. p. q. 52. ar. 8. reſolueth, that the ſoules of Purgatory were not freed nor deliuered by Chriſts deſcent thither; his merit extending vnto eternall deliuerance, and vnto no partiall or temporall freedome. But, ſomewhat you would ſay, though poor man you be to ſeek, in the manifold labyrinths of Purgatory, Limbus, and Hell: out of which, wiſer than you cannot winde.
               The word Hell is ambiguous in the Writings of the Fathers. Sometime it is put for the ſtate and condition; ſometime, for the place and receptacle of ſoules; and that in a different manner, in oppoſition to a twofold heauen. For, earth is reſpectiuely called Superi, and the ſtate of men liuing, by the ſelfe-ſame name: and ſo in oppoſition, any Dead are Inferi; and their place and receptacle, Infernus. Secondly, Superi is the higheſt heauen: and they that do liue there, are ſo ſtiled. In oppoſition heerto, the name of Inferi hath a two fold interpretation. Firſt, for a place or ſtate contrary to the ſtate and place of the higheſt heauen: this is hell properly, or of the Damned. Secondly, for a ſtate or place negatiuely oppoſed, and not contrary to heauen: and ſo euery place and ſtate which is not that higheſt in the higheſt heauen, is called Inferi; and may ſo be, as Pamelius hath obſerued vpon Tertullian, leſt you take it for a Proteſtant deuice.
               This Fellow perchance knew not this before: and therefore whereſoeuer the Fathers ſpeak of Chriſt's deſcent into hell, and carrying thence the Fathers into the higheſt heauens, hee faineth Limbo vnto himſelf, euen as the Bell tinketh whatſoeuer the foole

thinketh; when the Fathers meant nothing leſſe then ſo, but alteration of ſtate, and place. See then as many places as the booke will hold. They may prooue the deſcent of Chriſt into hell; which, as an Article of our Creed, wee willingly embrace. The deſcent to Popiſh Limbus they doe not prooue: the which no Father euer dreamed of, in that ſort as our Maſters tender it vnto vs to bee beleeued at this day.
            
            
               XLII.
               
                  That there is no Purgatorie fire, or other priſon wherein ſinnes may bee ſatisfied for after this life.
               
               
                  NOt reſolued of by Antiquity, out of Scripture; nor determined by Scripture, olde or new, as certaine, and neceſſarily to be beleeued. You ſay, Yes: therefore we contrary the expreſſe words of our owne Bibles.
               
               1. Cor. 3. 13. The fire ſhall try euery mans work of what ſort it is. Is this ſo expreſſe in your opinion, Sir Gagger? It ſeemeth not; for neither haue wee your Therefore, &c. for the concluſion, nor your ordinary expreſſe words; but barely thus: Contrary to their owne Bible. Your conſcience checked you: or did Bellarmine ſtumble you? or what is the cauſe you faint in your Euidence? Bellarmine confeſſeth, it is one of the hardeſt places in Scripture. And ſuch are not expreſſe
                  
Directors, or Concluders; therefore no good proofes in points of faith, without euident conſpiring of ſome more perſpicuous place. For, points of faith muſt haue manifeſt aſſurance: to proue obſcurity, by more obſcurity, your Logick can tell you, if you haue not forgot it, is a fault. Wee doubt, and make a queſtion vnto you of Purgatory. Your Euidence for it, is from that of which wee more doubt, at leaſtwiſe as much as wee doe of Purgatory.
               For, beſide the confeſſion of the Maſter of controuerſies, and the diuers ſenſes, and expoſitions by him confeſſed and produced, the lateſt, I think, I am ſure one of the learnedſt of your owne expoſitors, Eſtius, both confeſſeth as much, and reſolueth againſt your intent for Purgatory out of this place. The Fire, ſaith hee, which the Apoſtle in this diſcourſe hath named three ſeuerall diſtinct times, is variouſly expounded by diuers men. Auguſtine and Gregory vnderſtand it of the afflictions of this life: as in the 65. Pſal. We haue paſſed through fire and water. Others take it for Hell fire. Some, for Purgatory. Some, for the fire of Conflagration, which ſhall eyther proceed or accompany Chriſt the Iudge at the day of Doome. Others imagine a threefold fire anſwerable vnto fire thrice named by the Apoſtle. The firſt, that fire of Conflagration. The second, the fire of Gods ſeuere Iudgement. The third, of Purgatory: an abſurd interpretation, ſaith your owne Eſtius: the fire is the ſame in all places, ſaith hee. That fire is eyther that of Conflagration, or Gods ſeuere Iudgement, or both, according to the opinion of Cai
                        •
                     tan (no Proteſtant), in his owne opinion,

rather that of Conflagration, which ſhall ſet the world on fire at the laſt, which hath a threefold effect vpon three different ſorts of men: for probation vpon the throughly cleane: for Purgation vpon the yet defiled: for reuenge vpon the caſt-awayes & vngodly. For which expoſition, hee citeth Baſil in three ſeuerall places; Hilary in ſecond Canon vpon Mathew, Ambroſe, Lactantius, Eucherius and others: but in no caſe your Purgatory fire, becauſe Purgatory receiueth men after Iudgement particular, and is vtterly amoliſhed before the generall Iudgement finiſhed. Secondly, becauſe Purgatory trieth no mans worke, but puniſheth the euill works of ſuch as ſhall bee ſaued. If ſuch men, your owne, bee not reſolued for it, nay, reſolued againſt it, would you haue vs inſtantly profeſſe a Purgatory, becauſe you ſay Saint Paul meant ſo, and cannot prooue it?
               Prooue it you can, out of Saint Ambroſe, Ser. 20. in Pſal. 118. & Bellarm. ſaith, that Idem habet, on the place Saint Ambroſe, Ser. 20 in Pſal. 118. Saint Hierome vpon 4 of Amos. Saint Auguſt. vpon the 37 Pſal. Saint Gregory lib. 4. Dial. explicate this very place of Purgatory. of S. Paul, in his Commentaries: and Eſtius, Ser. 3. vpon the ſame 118. Pſal. Which teſtimony hee alleadgeth, for, againſt the Conceit of Purgatory extracted hence: ſo that, if theſe teſtimonies are all one, Ignis Conflagrationis is intended, at the end of the world to beginne; not the fire of Purgatory, which is to bee conſummated at the worlds end. Poſt conſummationem ſaeculi, are Saint Ambroſe words, miſſis Angelis qui ſegregent bonos et malos, hoc futurum eſt Baptiſma; quando per caminum ignis Iniquitas exuretur: vt in regno Dei fulgeant iuſti ſicut Sol, in regno Patris ſui; et ſi aliquis vt Petrus ſit, vt Iohannes, baptizatur hoc igni. This is a purging fire as well as a proouing and conſuming fire, as

your Eſtius hath well obſerued. In which ſenſe Saint Ambroſe ſpeaketh, vt per ignem purgatus fiat ſaluus. So you bely Saint Ambroſe, for explicating this very place of Purgatory in your ſenſe.
               Secondly, you prooue it out of Hierome, vpon the fourth of Amos, 11. You were as a firebrand plucked forth of the burning: where what Hierome hath for Purgatory, I would willingly vnderſtand of your Gaggerſhip; for I profeſſe my diſability to conceiue. Hierome compareth that place of the Prophet, with the other of Saint Paul; and onely compareth it, no more: Hierome doth not determine Fire in eyther place, to be your Purgatory fire: all that can bee collected is, That by fire, Saint Hierome meant, the ſeuere Iuſtice of God. Cùm ſubuer ſi fuerint ob ſimilitudinem criminum Sodomae et Gomorrhae, peſsimaque in ijs aedificia diuinus ignis exuſſerit, ipſi liberentur, quaſi torris raptus de incendio. Et quomodo Lot, Sodomâ pereunte, ſeruatus est, amittens ſubſtantiam, et partem corporis ſui, quam intelligimus vxorem: ſic omnes iſti Sodomorum diuitias amittentes, euadunt nudi, iuxta illud quod in Apoſtolo legimus, Si cuius opus arſerit, &c. Si ergo ſaluatur per ignem, quaſitorris de incendio rapitur. If there bee no fire but that in Purgatory, I confeſſe, this fire muſt bee that of Purgatory: but if there bee many fires beſide this of your Imagination, it is rather any fire then that of Purgatory. For I neuer yet heard, that an Heretick dying an Heretick, may haue his Hereſie purged in Purgatory; and ſo leauing that there, as a ſnake her ſlough, himſelfe may ſtie vp to Heauen: but without all controuerſie, out of that fire in Saint Hierome, Hereticks be ſaued into Heauen. Poſtquam in eo opera arſerint, in

antiquum reſtituatur locum. See the place, Reader, and tell mee thy opinion of this Gagger.
               Saint Auguſtine cannot poſſibly vnderſtand this place of your fire of Purgatory, except hee will and doe contradict him: For by your owne confeſſions, Saint Auguſtine conceiued it of the Tribulations of this life; therefore not of Purgatory after this life. The words you meane in Saint Auguſtine vpon 37. Pſal. are, It is ſaid, Hee ſhall bee ſaued, yet as it were by fire. And becauſe it is ſaid, Hee ſhall bee ſaued, therefore that fire is not regarded. No maruell: and yet that fire is more vnſufferable then any torment which a man can poſsibly vndergoe in this life. Heere (no doubt) the game is vp for Saint Auguſtine. Fire after this life, and yet not eternall: therefore of Purgatory, no queſtion. Yes, Sir, a queſtion. Indeed no queſtion what Saint Auguſtine meant. For firſt, he calleth it plainly Emendatorium ignem, fire that correcteth men, and maketh them better. Purgatory is not so: it is penall onely. There is no merit in Purgatory: ſoules cannot ſinne nor deſerue there, in the reſolution of your owne men. Secondly, the fire which Saint Auguſtine meaneth, doth then, in his opinion, performe that office, when the ſheepe are ſeparated from the goates; that is, when your Purgatory, in your owne opinions, is no more for euer. Thus the ordinary Gloſſe vnderſtood Saint Auguſtine. Wee read, ſaith the Gloſſe, of two fires that ſhall come. The one eternall, which eternally ſhall torment the reprobate: This fire is to inſue the Iudgement. The other fire ſhall goe before, which ſhall burne vp the ſurface of this world, and ſhall amend them that haue builded wood, hay, and ſtubble.

But ſuch as haue builded gold & ſiluer, end precious ſtones, ſhal be ſecure & ſafe from eyther fire. And in like ſort doth Salmeron conceiue of Saint Augustine: and Auguſtine could not meane your Purgatory in Saint Paul. For ſuch as build gold, &c. come not within your Verge at all; but into Saint Paul's Fires, as ſaith Saint Auguſtine, commeth both one and other: Ignis de quo locutus eſt eo loco Apostolus Paulus, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      debet intelligi, vt ambo per cum tranſeant: id est, et qui aedificat ſupra hoc fundamentum aurum, &c. et qui aedificat lignum, &c.
               
               Laſtly, Saint Gregory doth explicate this very place of Purgatory, Dial. 4. and to help you out, for you could not tell, Cap. 39. ſed tamen are his words, de quibuſdam leuibus culpis eſse ante iudicium, purgatorius ignis credendus eſt. And to this ſenſe hee ſaith, that Text of the Apoſtle may be applied. But, Sir Gagger, this Gregory, the Author of the Dialogues, is no authenticall writer with mee. I doe not hold him for the man whoſe name hee beareth. But at this time I will not queſtion him for your ſake, though I owe you little. Hee telleth vs of a purging fire. Good: but euery purging fire, is not that you dreame of, which hath made the Popes Kitchin ſmoke ſo much heeretofore. Saint Augustine acknowledgeth another: ſo do many of your owne men. And this of Saint Gregory is no other then that of Fire, which goeth before the Iudge: Ante iudicium, ſaith your Author: which wee deny not, and helpeth you nothing. Saint Auguſtine led Saint Gregory the way: Videtur euidentius apparere, ſaith hee, in illo iudicio, quaſdam quorundam purgatorias poenas futuras. No ſuch matter then in their opinion,

for the preſent. Many trying Fires there may bee: there are both literall and metaphoricall, which will clayme intereſt in Saint Paul's meaning, 1. Cor. 3. 13. before your Purgatory can find admittance there.
               
                  Toby 4. 17. Powre out thy bread vpon the buriall of the iuſt: that is, Offer for thoſe which are in Purgatory; no doubt: For Saint Chryſostome, Hom. 32. in Math. vnderstandeth this very place of Purgatory. Vnderſtandeth? And what of that? Vnderſtanding will not ſerue our turne: we muſt haue expreſſe words in our own Bibles for it: elſe, Olle, quid ad te? Purgatory and Buriall are all one with you: or Purgatory will not appeare hence. As for your warrant from Saint Chryſoſtome, you bely Saint Chryſoſtome, and your Author both. I ſay it, because the man you would remember, is not Saint Chryſostome: but the Author of the Imperfect worke vpon Saint Mathew: who indeed was wont to goe vnder Saint Chryſoſtomes name, but is acknowledged by euery Smatterer amongſt you, not to bee Saint Chryſostome. Did you not knowe this? I pitty then your caſe, which hath ſuch poore companions for Patrons. Did you knowe it? the more to blame you, that would not diſtinguiſh him from Saint Chryſoſtome: who in his 32. Homil. hath not any thing looking that way. You might haue beene challenged for forgery euery way, had I not found you out; as you may for folly or ignorance, or diſſolute ſecurity, beeing found out.
               But neither doth your Saint Chryſoſtome that is the Author ſpecified, ſo vnderſtand or talke of the place of Toby. For, Homil. 26. not 32. vpon 41. verſe of the tenth of Mat. hauing expounded theſe words of Toby
                  
not ill, telleth vs a tale out of Clemens, concerning Saint Peter, and this Doctrine deliuered by him out of Tradition. Sed audi myſterium, &c. But heare a ſecret, and myſticall meaning, giuen by Saint Peter, remembred by Clemens. If any beleeuer ſhall doe a good work, it is profitable vnto him in this world, by deliuering him from euill, and alſo in the world to come, to attaine the Kingdome of heauen; rather there in that world, than in this. But if an vnbeleeuer doe a good worke, it will profit him heere, by deliuering him from euill, and God will returne vnto him good for his worke: But in that world to come, his work will profit him nothing. For neither is hee ranked, for that his worke, with other beleeuers, and that deſeruedly, becauſe hee did that good, out of naturall good motions, and not for Gods ſake. Wherefore hee receiueth his reward, both in and for the body, not in or for his ſoule. Alſo if a Chriſtian ſhall giue vnto no Christian, hee ſhall therefore receiue no great reward, becauſe hee gaue it not vnto a Chriſtian, nor as vnto a Christian; Toby ſaying, Poure out thy wine vpon the ſepulchers of the iuſt, and giue nothing vnto the ſinner. Whoſo giueth a little to an vnbelieuer, hath his reward: but he that giueth any thing to a beleeuer, hath a double reward: firſt, in as much as hee is Gods Creature; ſecondly, becauſe hee is iust before God. But whoſoeuer giueth vnto an vnbeleeuer, hath onely a ſingle reward; in as much as the vnbeleeuer is Gods Creature, though in will oppoſite vnto God. If a Christian doe receiue no Christian, but an Infidel in the name of a Chriſtian, haue his reward notwithſtanding appointed for him hee ſhall; becauſe, as much as lieth in him, he receiueth indeed no Christian, but as a Chriſtian. It was neceſſary I ſhould, as I haue done, ſet downe the whole place at large, both that the

Pamphleter may direct mee to that paſſage, or thoſe words; in which, or by which, Saint Chryſoſtome vnderſtandeth this place of Purgatory: which I profeſſe, ſuch is my dulneſſe, I cannot ſee nor imagine: As alſo that I might deale vprightly in the cauſe, and ſincerely with him that dealeth honeſtly in nothing; and laſtly, that the Reader may pick out, if hee can, where or how hee may ground Purgatory; or if hee cannot, may ſee and knowe, and take notice of a forlorn cauſe, ſo vpholden by falſe ſhews and colluſion. Finde Purgatory fire, or not fire; priſon, or not priſon; ſtate, or not ſtate of the deceaſed in expiatory torments or pains heer, and I will inſtantly profeſſe and beleeue Purgatory without more adoo.
               1. Cor. 15. 29. Elſe what ſhall they doo, which are baptized for the Dead? Vpon this Text the Gaggers Gloſſe is, An euident place concerning the ſuccour which the ſouls departed receiue by the aſsiſtance of the Church. To admit it euident, and concerning ſuccour which ſoules departed receiue, and that by the aſſiſtance of the Church; yet firſt, I ſay, you go from your word: no ſuch contrariety heer, as you pretend. Secondly, you are a poor Ignaro, that think ſoules muſt needs be in Purgatory, that receiue aſſiſtance from the Church. It may be, your poor vnderſtanding will wonder at it: but knowe, Sir, I can admit Praier for the Dead, and deny your Purgatory. I can giue you reaſons to pray for the Dead, and yet keep farre enough from your Purgatory. But for that ſome other time. At preſent I anſwer, You are a ſilly man, that call this an euident place; one of the hardeſt in all Scripture. Quid ſit baptizari pro mortuis, obſcurum est, & ab Authoribus

variè exponitur, ſay your owne men; which is true: For till this day, it is not agreed what is the meaning: no man can ſay, This is the ſense; and yet our Blunderer ſaith, It is euident.
               
               Doo you knowe, that ſome take pro mortuis, for the Dead, that is, for ſinnes, becauſe men die through ſinnes; and the works of ſin are called Dead works? And ſo men are baptized to be deliuered from ſinne. Theſe men dreamt not of Purgatory. That others vſe pro mortuis, that is, doo repreſent the Dead, becauſe we die to ſinne in Baptiſm, and are buried vnto corruption? And not much differing hence, that others take it, Into the death of Chriſt? which of theſe thought vpon Purgatory? Again, ſome take Baptiſm for affliction: men afflicted vnto death, what ſhall they doo, if the dead riſe not again? Some referre it vnto a Iewiſh cuſtome; by which, if a man had died polluted, another was clenſed and waſhed for him; that ſo beeing dead, hee might get aduantage by it. This Iewiſh Fable may happely look vpon your Purgatory: and much good may it doo you. Yet farther, Chryſoſtome relateth vpon this place, that when any of the Catechized among the Marcionite Heretiques died, a liuing body was laid vnder the Beer; and the queſtion propoſed vnto the Party, If he would be baptized? for you knowe, the Catechumeni were 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vnbaptized. The Party anſwered for the dead man, Yes, I will: and so was hee baptized for him. And thus they expounded Saint Paul's meaning. Tertullian, by dead, vnderſtandeth the body of man. If there be no Reſurrection, to what end is the body baptized? Epiphanius laſtly, and moſt men,

commonly take it for the baptizing of the Clinici, as they called them. Men in thoſe times vſually deferred Baptiſm vntill their death, and in extremis would be baptized. So to be baptized for the Dead, is to be baptized, when men are ready to dy: which they not doe, but vpon hope of the Reſurrection. In ſuch variety, and greater than ſo; yet ſaith this fellowe, An euident place. To come home to the aſſertion, It is plaine and euident, the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not of any ſuccour that ſoules departed receiued from the Suffrages of the Church (which were it granted, no neceſſity of Purgatory would enſue), but of comfort that men receiued from that mayne point of our moſt holy faith, the Reſurrection of the Dead; the mayne Subiect of that Chapter, as euery child with vs can tell.
               
                  See more: for wee haue ſeene but little hitherto, 2. Tim. 1. 18. where That day is tranſmued into Purgatory. For Saint Pauls words are, The Lord grant vnto him, that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day, that is, may bee deliuered out of Purgatory at the day of Iudgement. So whereſoeuer God ſheweth mercy, there is Purgatory; or, All that finde mercy at the day of Iudgement, come out of Purgatory. Vnleſſe this bee his meaning, let him tell me what he would haue with Saint Paul here. If this bee his meaning, I wiſh him well: for ſure, hee is in no right wits; becauſe ſo, no man liuing can eſcape Purgatory by this inference. For no man but findeth mercy with God before that time, and then. No man but needeth Gods mercy then, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; In that fearfull and terrible day,

when wee ſtand in need of great mercy indeed, ſaith Chryſoſt. who neuer dreamt of any Purgatory; nor would haue ſent Oneſiphorus thither, had hee fancied any ſuch thing: for euen according to your owne Doctrine, his good deeds had not onely aboundantly merited for himſelfe, ſufficiently ſatisfied for his Peccadilloes: but his Indurances, ouer and aboue, layd ſomewhat vnto the Church-treaſure. And what hath Purgatory to do with ſuch a man?
               
                  Eſay 4. 4. the Prophet ſpeaketh of the Spirit of burning, and of Purging, thus: When the Lord ſhall waſh the filthines of the daughter of Sion, & purge the blood of Ieruſalem out of the midſt thereof by the Spirit of iudgement, and by the Spirit of burning: then, without all doubt, Purgatory burneth apace; the rather becauſe Saint Auguſtine expoundeth it of Purgatory, Lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei, Cap. 25, saith Bellar. You left vs to ſeeke. Cap. 21, ſay others, ſo your ſelues are to ſeeke, I meane, for any ſuch thing in Saint Auguſtine. For hee is belied in both places: which touch not vpon Purgatory at all, but manifeſtly deſigne the laſt Iudgement. In the 21. he profeſſes himſelf, that his diſcourſe was wholly therof, à primo Saluatoris aduentu, vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad vltimū Iudiciū, de quo nunc agimus. And more euidently, Cap. 25. Videtur euidentius apparere in illo Iudicio quodam quorundā futuras Poenas purgatorias. Purgatory paines are by S. Auguſtine put off and adiourned vnto the laſt Iudgement; then to begin when yours end: and this but in opinion, not reſolution. Now Sir, what aduantage haue you by Saint Auguſtine, who ſpeaketh opiningly of Purgatory, but excludeth your Purgatory.
               And to as much purpoſe is Saint Baſil, expounding

the place of Eſay, 9. 18. of Purgatory, you ſay. The text is, For wickednes burneth as a fire, it deuoureth the briers and thornes, and will kindle in the thick places of the Forrest, and they ſhall mount vp like the lifting vp of ſmoke. Baſil in his expoſition nameth purging fire. I grant it: but this purging fire is in life, not after death: in this world, not in the world to come: and God himſelfe is this purging fire; who aboliſheth and conſumeth iniquitie by Repentance, being detected by confeſſion, as any man may ſee, that will but looke vpon the place; and the ſame Father vpon the 10. of Eſay, more plainely explicateth his owne meaning: Pandit hic naturam ignis, quia luſtratiuus eſt et purgatorius. Sanctificabit enim ipſum quaſi in igne ardenti. Quomodo autem ſanctificat ignis? Quia comesturus est ſyluam tanquam foenū. Sanè ex quo Deus noſter ignis conſumens eſt, conſumet ſyluā et vitia, quae à ſyluā, ſiue materiâ promanant animae quae non degit in ſpiritu ſed in carne. Strange conceits; that if any Father name purging fire, hee muſt needs bee a fauourer of Popiſh Purgatory.
               Your ſecond of Macchab. 12. 44, 45. you may make your friends with: your Catholike Readers may paſſe it for currant: but your proteſtant aduerſaries admit it not. And if they did, you gained nothing thereby: I told you before, that Praying for the dead doth not inferre Purgatory. There are other cauſes for that practice, beſide the opinion of Purgatory: And were there none, this text doth inferre but a meer opinion, no deciſion or point of faith. Beleeue Purgatory, if you will: for my part I hinder you not, ſo you leaue it to me to beleeue it, or not, & not force me to conſent againſt my knowledge & reſolution. But laſtly,

I anſwer, The authour of that ſtory did intend no more, but to ſet out Iudas vnto vs as a Phariſe, not a Sadduce: hee thought of the Reſurrection, which the Phariſes beleeued; but was denied by the Sadduces: for theſe factions were then on foot: and Hyrcanus, in whoſe time the book was written, was a Sadduce, denied the Reſurrectiō: which his Vncle Iudas did not: ſo much this writer would infinuate, & ſo tax the impiety of his owne times. For good Sir, how could Iudas dream of any Purgatory ex animi tui ſentētiâ, whē as al the fathers & godly that died before Chriſt, wēt into Limbus Patrū? But were their teſtimōy euidēt, as it is not, yet the book was neuer vſed for dogmaticall cōcluſiōs of faith, farther thē cōfirmd by the Canon.
               
                  Math. 5. 25. 27. no, it is 26. which you would haue: Hee ſhall not come out thence, vntil he haue payd the vtmoſt farthing. Therefore at laſt hee ſhall, payment being made; but not out of hell, therfore out of Purgatory, Nay, as much and as ſoon out of hel, as out of Purgatory. This place wil as ſoone conclude, the Diuels & Damned ſhall be ſaued, as any deliuered out Purgatory. Our Sauiour meaneth, That he ſhall neuer come out, becauſe he neuer can pay the vttermoſt farthing. Hee ſpeaketh of a Reprobate and caſtaway for euer: Such haue nothing to do in Purgatory. For All in Purgatory are at length ſaued, by your owne Rules. This is no Proteſtant fiction: your owne Maldonate put it into my mouth. Quod autem dicit, nos inde non exituros donec vitimum quadrantemper ſoluamus, non ſignificat exituros poſtea, vt ait Augustinus, and you with him, ſed nunquam exituros: Quia qui in Inferno ſunt, cum ſemper debitas poenas ſoluunt, quia pro quolibet mortali

peccato, infinitas poenas debent, nunquam perſoluunt. Vntill then is neuer: as where the Euangeliſt ſaith, He knewe her not, vntill ſhee brought foorth her firſt Son: that is, He neuer knewe her: although Maldonate there miſtooke Saint Auguſtine, vnleſſe his words were miſtaken by the Printer, and tranſpoſed. What you mean by Iohn 22. I can not tell: when I knowe, I ſhall tell what to ſay.
               To conclude: there is not any Reſolution publike or priuate for Purgatory for 600. yeeres, in the Church; where it is, your ſelues are not reſolued; what it is, you cannot tel, whether fire or none; and if fire, whether corporall or not; nor can you reſolue how it tormenteth ſoules. You can not tell, who are executioners of Gods wrath there; who and what manner men are ſent thither; how long they are to continue there. Dominicus à Soto played the foole in broaching ſuch a dangerous conceit as this, No ſoule abideth there aboue ten yeeres. There being ſuch vncertainty on all hands in euery point, what Reaſon haue you to tender it as de fide, and propoſe it, as an Article of my Creed? Beleeue it if you will: I muſt ſee better euidence, before I beleeue it.
            
            
               
               XLIII.
               
                  That it is not lawfull to make or to haue Images.
               
               
                  THoſe that held it ſo vnlawfull, meane, It is not lawfull for men, of themſelues, out of their owne voluntary motion to make them: they neuer intended, that God could not diſpenſe with his owne mandate, or a man might not make them at his command. That Text, Exod. 25. 18. therefore doth not contrary the opinion of thoſe ſuch Propoſers: for God there commandeth it to bee done, by ſpeciall warrant, and in a retyred and reſerued place. So, this place, though expreſſe, is not to purpoſe. Nor that of 1. Kings 6. 35. which was done by warrant of the former direction, and according to patterne in that direction. Salomon did, as Moſes was commanded, make Cherubins in the Holieſt Place.
               But the truth is, this Andabatarian Fencer fighteth with his owne ſhadow. No Proteſtant euer ſaid, that it was vnlawfull to make or to haue Images. No Proteſtant but hath, or hath had in his houſe, cloſet, ſtudy or the like, Pictures and Images, many or few. That which Proteſtants miſlike and condemne in Papiſts, is not the hauing, but adoring and worſhipping of Images; the giuing them honour due vnto God; as the ignorant doe, that goe to it bluntly and

downe-right: the giuing them the honor due vnto the Prototype, as the learned amongſt them perſwade vnto: as much honour to a woodden Crucifix, as to Chriſt Ieſus himſelf in Heauen, at the right hand of his Father: this they miſlike. 
                     Heb. 9. 1. 5. Lo, Saint Paul calleth the pictures of the Cherubins which Salomon made, an Ordinance of diuine Seruice, which Proteſtants call the making of Idols: who now ſhall we beleeue, whether S. Paul, or a Proteſtant? When painting and grauing of 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     tures is ſo farre from beeing Idolatry, that it is prooued to be a Science diuinely infuſed by God himself.
               
               This is no diuine ordinance, but a prohibition to do it: a curſe vpon the maker and adorer of it. S. Paul called, Heb. 9. 5, 1. amongſt other things in the firſt Tabernacle, thoſe Cherubins wee ſpake of but now, diuine Ordinances, and ſo doe wee. It is an impudent ſlander, that Proteſtants call thoſe Cherubins, Idols: thoſe Images which the Proteſtants call Idols, are Images made, abuſed to adoration in the Church of Rome. Doth hee that calleth the Image of our Lady of Lauretto, an Idoll, call the Picture of Baronius, or Bellarmine, Idols? then hee that calleth Will Summer a foole, calleth A. Pe. the Prieſt (what he is I know not) a foole too, becauſe he hath the figure of a man as Will Summer had, though he be indeed as very a Look-like-agooſe as he was, peraduenture.
               See more, you ſay, 1. Kings 7. 36, 42, 44. Numb. 21. 8, &c. and doe ſo, Reader, and thou ſhalt ſee ſo many teſtimonies of Malice, of Ignorance, of Colluſion. Neuer man thought, much leſſe euer ſaid, that painting and caruing of Pictures was Idolatry: but lawful trades, excellent skill, ſciences, not infuſed, but giuen by God to the vſe of man, the glory of Gods name, the commendation of the parties therewithall indowed. Images haue three vſes aſſigned by your Schooles. Stay there, goe no further, and we charge you not with Idolatry. Inſtitutionem rudium: Commonefactionem historiae: et Excitationem deuotionis, you

and wee alſo giue vnto them.
               
                  See Fathers that affirme the ſame. What doe they affirme? This man cannot tell, for hee knoweth not what, nor where they affirme. Hee ſendeth vs to Tertullian in his ſecond book de Pudicitia. The poore Ignorant that talketh thus of Fathers, knoweth not that there is but one book of Tertullian of that argument and title: and lo, he ſendeth vs to ſee the ſecond book. It is well he told vs not in what Chap. we might finde it. Such Roters as theſe, are the men that talk of Fathers amongſt their Goſſips, and Proſelytes; and yet are ſo ſtupid, as not to know what works a common Father hath written. Beſides, had Tertul. wrote ſuch a ſecond book, or ſayd any ſuch matter in that ſecond book, a Proteſtant of but meane reading, could tell him, Tertullian wrote that book, beeing lapſed into Montaniſme; and ſo of no authority in the Church for reſolution, though for relation. But the truth is, the man did but vſe Tertullian's name for a cypher, to fill vp a number, & make a fair dumb ſhew of a Shepheard with a ſheepe on his ſhoulders, on a Chalice, which is the picture he looked at in Tertul.
               
               But I can ſend him to Tertullian, to learne how like a Woodcock hee remembred thoſe Texts of Scripture, for the Cherubins. Sic et Cherubin et Seraphin, aureâ in arce, figuratum exemplum, certè ſimplex ornamentum accommodata ſuggeſtut, longe diuerſos habendo cauſas, ab Idololatriae conditione, ob quam ſimilitudo prohibetur, non videntur ſimilitudinum prohibitarum Legi refragari: non in eo ſimilitudinis ſtatu deprehenſa, ob quem ſimilitudo prohibetur, Lib 2. con. Mar. 22. This commeth home to the reaſon why God ordained them, and anſwereth

your Cauill to the full. As for your Images, take his deſcription in the like, de Praeſcript. cap XII. Igitur ſi statuas et imagines frigidas mortuorum ſuorum ſimillimas non adoramus, quas milui, et mures, et aran
                        •
                     ae intelligunt, nonne laudem magis quàm poenam merebatur repudium agniti erroris? Hee thought not then very honorably of Imagines, whom wee are bidden goe ſee, for I know not what, engrauing on the Chalices.
               For Gregory Nazianzen: I did much maruaile what it was wee might ſee in him, concerning Images, who writeth onely a deprecatory Epiſtle in behalf of the Inhabitants of Diocaeſarea, vnto Olympius the Emperours Lieutenant. For I could finde nothing tending vnto Images, but onely this, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : It is not much if the Statuae bee demoliſhed and caſt downe, though it be indeed a pitty to haue ſuch a thing done. And what is heere to bee ſeene any way to purpoſe? This man, I beleeue, had read, or rather heard of Billius note vpon the place, this, Hic obſerua Gregorij quoque tempore, aedes ſacras ſtatuis & imaginibus ornatas fuiſſe; and hauing heard of it, made much adoe about it: whereas Nazianzen doth not ſo much as mention Churches, nor Chappels: the ſtatues hee ſpeaketh of, were publique Ornaments of the City: and as for worſhipping of them, it came not within the compaſſe of his thoughts. Billius meant well to the Catholique cauſe; and out of his affection, ſet downe that which hee would haue had Nazianzen ſpeake, but not what he did ſay: for Nazianzen not ſo much as ſquinteth that way. More may any man maruaile at his trifling with Saint Baſil, on Barlaam the Martyr:

                  What ſhall I call thee, O valiant Souldier of Chriſt Ieſus? Shall I call thee a Statue or Image of braſſe? why, it is not ſo ſolid or ſubſtantiall as thou art, for Fire doth melt it: but fire could not cauſe thee pluck forth thy hand. This is not that paſſage peraduenture intended, but that which inſueth, Exurgite nunc athleticorum gestorum pictores, mutilam ducis imaginem, veſtro illuſtrate artificio, et obſcurius à me depictum, coronatum athletam, veſtrae industriae coloribus conſpicuum reddite; not with a pencill (conceiue not Baſil to haue beene a Painter) but with a penne. So that Homers deſcribing Achilles, Vlyſſes, in this mans conſtruction, is painting in a table with colours and portraiture to the life. None but a Statue would thus diſcourſe, or one more ſenſleſſe than a block.
               What Baſil and Nazianzen could not doe, Auguſtine ſhall ſupply; who witneſſeth, that in his time Chriſt was to bee ſeene painted in many places, betwixt Saint Peter and Saint Paul. So is hee in many Churches with vs, betwixt the bleſſed Virgin and Saint Iohn Euangeliſt. So was the holy Virgin by Saint Luke, you ſay. So let them be euery where, if you pleaſe. Not the making of Images is miſliked: not the hauing of Images is condemned; but the prophaning of them to vnlawfull vſes, in worſhipping and adoring them.
            
            
               
               XLIIII.
               
                  That no man hath at any time ſeene God; and that therfore his picture or Image cannot be made.
               
               
                  IGnorant Blunderer, whither wilt thou? Sure, the man is not wel in his wits, that challengeth the Proteſtant vpon theſe termes, No man at any time hath ſeene God. Is it not plaine, expreſſe Scripture, that, Ioh. 1. 18. No man hath ſeene God at any time? Exo. 33. 20. Thou canſt not ſee my face. For there ſhall no man ſee mee, and liue. No man hath, no man can in this life: no nor in that which is to come. So Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Whom neuer man ſaw, nor yet can ſee. The reaſon is rendred by a Pagan, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : Mortall men haue mortall eyes, and God inhabits Immortality: and yet this Gagger thinks to gag the Spirit of truth, by oppoſing Texts of Scripture to the contrary; that a man may ſee God.
               
               Gen. 3. 8. Where God appeared vnto Adam, walking in the Garden of Paradiſe, in a corporall forme. Accurſed Gloſſer, to corrupt the Text! There wee read: They heard the voyce of the Lord God walking in the Garden in the coole of the day. So, Hearing and Seeing is all one with this man, that hath loſt both Hearing and Seeing, & vnderſtanding too. A voice, in his Philoſophy, is a corporall forme: and ſo to heare one ſpeake, is to

ſee one go: and Moſes ſaid he knew not what, Deuter. 4. 12. You heard the voice of words; but ſaw no ſimilitude, ſaue a voice. A whip for a fool, rather than an anſwer to his folly.
               Gen. 28. 12, 13. God appeared vnto Iacob, ſtanding aboue the Ladder, whereon the Angels aſcended and deſcended. In what ſhape did he appear? can you tell? The Lord ſtood aboue it, ſo are the words, and ſpake. Hee might there ſtand and ſpeak, as hee did in Sinah; and yet, as ſaith the Scripture, they ſee no ſhape. So that yet wee haue nothing but belying of Scripture, and deprauing the Text, to countenance Idolatry in conſequence.
               Exod. 33. 11. To Moſes He ſpake, face to face, as a man ſpeaketh vnto his friend. Your great Prophet S. Thomas ſhall ſtop your mouth, 1. 2. q. 98, ar. 3. Secundum opinionem populi loquitur Scriptura: The Scripture ſpeaks according vnto popular opinion; who thought, that Moſes talked face vnto face with God, cùm per ſubiectam creaturam, id est, per Angelum & Nubem, ei loqueretur & appareret; where as indeed God appeared vnto and talked with him by the meanes of creatures, an Angell in a cloud: Or if not ſo, and this anſwer will not ſerue, by face to face, the Scripture meaneth a certain eminent and more familiar kinde of apparition, goe anſwer Saint Thomas.
               
               And your Maſters can tell you, that whereas it is related in the old Teſtament often, that God appeared vnto men, the Doctors of the Church are not reſolued, whether God appeared at any time perſonally, or wholly by the Miniſtery of Angels. Your men, the Ieſuites, Victorellus, Vaſquez, and the reſt, nay, all

later Diuines, ſaith Vaſquez, but Clictho
                        ••
                     us, affirme, that God neuer appeared but by the Miniſtry of Angels. So that your expreſſe teſtimonies are in a wiſe caſe; and your ſelf an Ignorant or a Confident, that knew not this, or dare oppoſe your Yea vnto their Nay.
               Therefore, Eſay 6. 1. he that ſate vpon the Throne, and he that, Dan. 7. 9. is deſcribed, was not God, but ſome Angell; or if God, yet the ſecond Perſon: the Father neuer appearing vnto any. Therefore, as Vaſquez himſelf confeſſeth, that great Vpbearer of Roman Idolatry, Henricus quodlibeto 1. Abutenſis in 4. Deuter. Durand. in 3. d. 9. q. 2. ad 4. Martin Aiala de Tradit. 3. part. doo teach it as well as Caluin, that it is vtterly vnlawfull to picture or repreſent the Trinity, or God, otherwiſe than as in Chriſt hee took our fleſh, and was found among vs as a man. Theſe were nor Hereticks, nor Proteſtants, that did teach ſo: and yet we ſee it ordinary amongſt our good Catholicks, to repreſent the picture of the Trinity moe waies than one, which neuer appeared in humane ſhape, as yet to any. Impious Artificers, not onely vain, that make the moſt bleſſed and moſt glorious Trinity a certain Geryon; or, as Tertullian phraſeth it, Sororem vaſculorum: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : A thing not onely contrary vnto reaſon, but to the deſpite and contumely of God: whoſe glory being ſuch as cannot be vttered, and ſhape ſuch as cannot be expreſſed, is denominated from, and repreſented in baſe and corruptible things, that haue no permanency without ſupply. So feelingly complained

                  Iuſtine Martyr of your Camerades, the Idolaters of thoſe times. Such Images Heſſelius a Papiſt, Profeſſor at Louain, wherby God the Father is repreſented in an humane ſhape, vtterly himſelf diſliketh, and iuſtifieth his diſlike out of the Fathers; that not onely Proteſtants may bee the miſlikers of ſuch impiety, but Papiſts of better ſpirits, and more ſolid learning.
            
            
               XLV.
               
                  That it is not lawfull to worſhip Images, nor to giue any honour to any dead or inſenſible thing.
               
               
                  TWo ſeuerall queſtions, as often confuſedly propounded in one Propoſition, which are of different natures, of vnequall extents, of diuers and diſparated approbation. The latter, that It is not lawfull to giue any honour to any dead or inſenſible thing, is a falſe imputation caſt vpon vs, an horrible lie, againſt common ſenſe, refelled in the ordinary practice of Proteſtants; who giue honour and reſpect, though not adoration, to many dead and inſenſible things, as this Fellow, liuing in a Proteſtant State, cannot chooſe but knowe, vnleſſe with Bartimaeus 
                  
                     •
                  ee were borne blinde, and withall hath continued deaf from his mothers womb.
               
                  
This he cannot prooue by expreſſe words, that we deny, nor yet any conſequence thereupon. It is contrary, he telleth vs for faſhion ſake, vnto the expreſſe words of our owne Bible. What is contrary? that It is not lawfull to worſhip images? or to giue any honour to dead things? Two diſtinct Aſſertions, not of neceſſary conſequence or dependance; and ſo, not neceſſarily inferred, one vpon the other. Beſides, where is that expreſſe place of our Bible, which is contrary to that Aſſertion? This place was forgotten through Contrary to expreſſe words of their owne Bible: and he ſaid, Draw not nigh hither, &c. too much haſte. I will ſupply the defect, and deſigne the place which the man intended when he ouer paſſed it.
               Exod. 3. 5. Ioſua 5. 15. Put off thy ſho
                        •
                     es from thy feet: for, the place whereon thou ſtandeſt, is holy ground. This may prooue, that at ſome time, by ſpeciall precept, vpon ſome occaſion, ſome inſenſible thing may be honoured; which no Proteſtant euer went about to deny: but the inference they doo, and moſt iuſtly Lo how cleer a place is produced heer againſt Proteſtants: where an inſenſible 
                        •
                     reature, without reaſon, was commanded by God himſelfe to be honored may, as hauing no reaſon of illation; Therefore an image, repreſenting vnto vs an holy thing, may be worſhipped, ſay, and not honoured: for, of honour we contend not: our difference is about worſhip onely.
               But take it of honour, and ſee the handſome conſequence. God ſaid, Some ground was holy: therefore all Images may bee worſhipped. What an Image of Rie-dough is this Cods-head! To as good ſenſe it might be ſpoken, Ieruſalem was called The holy City: therfore the Iewes might worſhip Images: Or, The Temple was an holy place: none but Iſraelites, and thoſe alſo clean, might enter there: the Prieſts and Leuites did waſh their feet, being to doo ſeruice

there: all common people wiped off the duſt from their feet, when they entred therein: therfore Ahaz might erect his Altars there; Manaſſes prophane it with Idolatry; Antiochus ſet vp the abomination of deſolation there. Had not the Beaſt cauſe to low thus; Lo how cleer a place is heer produced againſt the Proteſtants; wherein an inſenſible creature, without reaſon, was commanded by God himſelf to be honoured: for, the refraining to tread vpon it, was the doing of honour to it? Therefore an Image, &c.
               
               Of Honour be it, but not Worſhip. Honour and worſhip differ more than latria and dulia doo. Without ſenſe. I grant, and life too. The earth hath neither life nor ſenſe. The earth was made to tread vpon. It was not great honour, To inhibite this courſe of kinde. Honour was done, not Worſhip; not to the place, but to the Holy place. The place was holy, not in it ſelf; not made ſo by man, but from the perſonall preſence of the moſt High. Make an Image ſo holy, and then ſo honour it. This honour was not (you were aſleep, man) in refraining to tread vpon the earth: for, where ſtood Moſes and Ioſua, when they talked with God? in the aire, or no-where? or in the fift imaginary body? But the honour was, In refraining to tread on it with their ſhooes on: as when men come into the Church, but vncouer the head at their entrance into the Church.
               And for the honour in kinde or correſpondency; what ſimilitude betwixt that & yours, to an Image? You fall down vnto an Image, at leaſt, before it. You honour the Image with the ſame honour that the Repreſentee is honoured withall; at leaſt accidentally,

in your relatiue worſhip. Did Moſes or Ioſuab ſo honour the ground? Fell they downe vnto it? Put they their ſhooes off to it? for the grounds ſake, and not rather for the preſence of God there; whom, without any relatiue worſhip at all, they honoured immediately in himſelf? Any thing, I ſee, will ſerue a Prieſts turn. No matter what you prate, ſo that you prattle. Happy men that haue ſo pliant Proſelytes, that ſo eaſily beleeue whatſoere is told them, though it be a tale of a Tub.
               There is a reſpect due to all the works of God; as good, as his, as arguing the art and excellency of the Maker: ſo all of them are honourable in their kindes. Doo you therefore adore them? make them Images, as well you may, and farre rather than a carued piece of wood? by them giue relatiue honour vnto God? This you cannot digeſt by any means: for, then your Idolomanie in Images, with ſtocks and ſtones, were clean daſhed. And yet, if dead and inſenſible things bee to be honoured, you cannot auoid the ſequell, doo you what you can, Liue things may be much more honoured.
               
               Vpon the ſame ground, we are ſent to adore the footſtool of his feet, Pſal. 99. 5. as common in your mouthes for Adoration, as Ergo with boies in the ſchools: as if an Image were Gods Footſtool, and ſo muſt be worſhipped. Indeed, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an Image may bee for him to trample and tread vnder foot; as he will doo, in iuſt anger, the Image, and adorer of the Image, that giueth his glory to a ſtock, a ſtone. So wee well may take you at aduantage, if we will: but wee take you at beſt, as your ſelf will. Footſtool you expound in the literall ſenſe, to be the Ark of Gods Teſtament,
                  
as 1. Chron. 28. 2. not as Saint Auguſtine; by Scripture too, for the Earth; or by anaiogic, Chriſts body, after Saint Ambroſe, as I remember.
               Be it the Arke: worſhip and adore it, if you can finde it; worſhip any thing like it, any Image for it, if you can bring ſo good warrant for your ſo doing, your adoring thereof, as is this, Adore the footstoole of his feet. Tu Prophetam imitare, nee adores imagines, niſi tibi Deus iuſſerit. Do as the Prophet willeth; Adore no Images, vnleſſe God command. If God had commanded Iſrael, notwithſtanding that Precept of Eternall Morality, Thou ſhalt not bow downe to them, nor worſhip them, to make Cherubins, and to adore them, Iſrael might haue done it; yet could not you haue followed Iſraels example, without ſacriledge. For, peculiar priuiledges and diſpenſations take away no generall right, nor reuerſe an eternall lawe. Adore you Images, and ſpare not, if you ſhew me ſuch a Text, as, Adore the footſtoole of his feet, if it were an Image.
               I adde, If that footſtoole be the Arke; what is Mountayne, ver. laſt? for as ver. 5. we reade, Adore we the footſtoole of his feete, ſo ver. 9. we alſo reade, Adore we his holy Mountayne. What Images were in that holy Mountaine, can you tell, for which we are willed to adore it? Some there were, ſome there muſt bee, your reaſon is no reaſon elſe: thus, Now the principall reaſon why the Arke was worſhipped, was in regard of the Images that were vpon it. So that, no queſtion, there were Images vpon that holy Mountaine, otherwiſe the Prophet would not haue ſent vs to adore it. We read, Adore his holy Mountaine: we doe not read of Images vpon it; therefore a Reaſon, no reaſon, much leſſe

                  principall, is alleadged, and fathered vpon S. Ierome.
               
               But indeed that is a reaſon, a principall one too: Now the principal reaſon why the Arke was worſhipped, was in regard of the Images that were vpon it, which as S. Ierom ſaith, the lewes did worſhip, in his Ep. ad Marcellan.
                   the ſame in both places: could you ſquint vpon it. v. 5. For he is holy, verſe 9. For the Lord our God is holy. Which reaſon held before in putting off Moſes ſhooes; The place is holy ground; Holines of the Lord. The preſence of God communicated this Holines vnto that place. Adore his footſtoole, for he is holy: Adore his Mountaine, for he is holy: Toward the Mountain, where hee dwelleth: Before his Footstoole, where hee treadeth; or in his Arke, as in his holy Mountain, as your owne Bibles, if I miſtake not, read the place. So take it as you will, or as you can, out of Arke will proceed no Imageworſhip; nor yet from vpon the Arke, any Images.
               The Iewes did worſhip Images vpon the Ark. That is no warrant for you to do ſo; nor yet precedent to take it ſo. They worſhipped Baalim, and the Hoſtes of Heauen, Milcom and Moloch. Will you doe the like? They burnt their children in the valley of Hinnon. Would you be contented to be ſerued ſo? I would I had the pow'r to dreſs you ſo, to make you low a little louder, out of that bul. Such a wiſe collection as this, Becauſe there were Images vpon the Arke: and becauſe the Iewes did worſhip thoſe Images, therefore the Prophet tooke vp that admonition, Adore the footſtoole, &c.
               
               You bely the Iewes, they did not worſhip them. For they could not come to worſhip them. The Arke was reueſtried in the moſt holy place: No Iſraelite came thither to adore it: onely the High-Prieſt had acceſſe thither: He onely once, but one day in the yeare, and but one time in that day. And for any

thing I yet know, Saint Hierom ſaith it not: in his Epiſtle to Marcella doe you meane, or ſome other? S. Hierom wrote many Epiſtles vnto Marcella: in which of them all doth Saint Hierom ſay ſo? Did you ſuppoſe that hee wrote but one? It is more then probable you thought ſo. Or if moe then one, may we intreate you to tell vs in which of his Epiſtles hee ſaith ſo? But I may miſtake, for I cannot tell what to make of in his Epiſtle to Marcellan. When you ſpeake more plaine, I ſhall bee able to giue you a fuller anſwer: till then, I proceed.
               From Images, to, I cannot tell what to giue vnto it, but it is, the name of Ieſus, ſomwhat ſtrangely carried vnto Adoration, Philip. 2. 10. That at the name of Ieſus euerie knee ſhould bowe, of things in Heauen, things in Earth, andof things vnder the earth. Vpon which premiſes the concluſion is. Therefore Images are to bee worſhipped. So the name of Ieſus is become an Image; a ſtrange kind of Image to my vnderſtanding, that a mans name ſhould bee his image. Imago is quaſi Imitago, you ſay: which is not, ſaith Sanders, with Vaſques approbation, any ſimilitude whatſoeuer, but onely that which is expreſſed to repreſent the thing, as the Picture of a long-eared beaſt doth an Aſſe. Ieſus printed, or painted on a wall, is no Image of our Sauiour: much leſſethe word pronounced, conueighed to the eare: which at leaſt is, if not the intire, yet principall meaning of S. Paul. Names are notes of things. But names pronounced, are but tranſeunt: and names painted, no Image. Your Bottle-ale-wife ca
                     ••
                  el you ſo much, that a Bottle, is not the Image of a bottle; and your Baker, that his basket, no repreſentation of himſelfe.
               
                  
But to point. Your vndertaking is for expreſſe words in our Bibles. What expreſnes, in bowing the knee at the name vnto an Image, made of what you will haue it? Beſide, the name of Ieſus is ſo farre from being expreſſe to proue it, that it is not reſolued what is meant by the name of Ieſus heer.
               By that name is meant the Glorie and Power of Ieſus 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſaith Chryſoſtom: becauſe al things are ſubiected vnto him; as, There is no other name giuen vnder heauē, by which we may be ſaued; no Power, no means beſide; or the name of Ieſus, is Ieſus himſelfe, that is, that at his name, in effect, vnto him euery knee ſhould bowe, as He that calleth vpon the name of the Lord: that is, he that calleth vpon the Lord ſhall beſaued; but we grant the name of Ieſus, to bee Ieſus named; and when wee heare that ſweet name of our Sauiour named, accordingly do, and are inioyned by Canon to do reuerence with our bodie. Heere it doth not inſue, wee may worſhip Images: there is text for the one; none for the other. Shewe it, that vnto the Image os Ieſus euery knee ſhould bowe; Difference in the one, from the other. Images are reſemblances, which in vſe and application, may in naturall proportion haue ſuch a relation vnto the Prototype, that they ſupply the roome thereof, inſinuating the forme and faſhion thereof; which the name thereof cannot doe, inſinuating onely that being thereof. So there is reaſon for the one, none for the other: leſſe reaſon of alleadging this text of Saint Paul for ratification of Image-worſhip.
               In the Brazen Serpent there is more reſemblance. It may be a warrant for making an Image, no warrant Num. 21. 8.
                  
for worſhipping an Image made, nor for making ordinarily: becauſe that was made by ſpeciall direction to a ſpeciall end, againſt a generall practice vpon precept, Thou ſhalt not make any grauen Image. God may ſo diſpenſe with his own Law, where, when, in what ſort, and to whom hee will; but not wee.
               The firſt obſeruation then, out of this Text againſt Hence are euidently prooued diuers things againſt Proteſtants, &c. the Proteſtant, that God commanded the making of this Image, is idle: neuer Proteſtant made queſtion of it: nor of the ſecond, that it was ſet vp for a ſigne: nor the third, that the lookers vpon it ſhould receiue health: nor the fourth, of exempting the practice commanded, from the breach of the firſt Commandement. Theſe they confeſſe, they plead, and bid you ſhew the like for your Images, for making, erecting, beholding, reuerencing any Image of God, or Saints in this ſort, and they yeeld.
               This Serpent was beheld, not adored by thoſe that looked on it, though it had a reference vnto a great myſtery, and was a Rememoratiue of ſaluation extended by the Sonne of God. Vnleſſe it were adored, it is to no purpoſe alleaged. For making is one thing: this may be done. Adoring another thing: that is vnlawfull. Therefore Saunders, and Catharine, and Saunders, and Bellarmine doe maintaine, adoration was giuen vnto it. Vaſques denieth it, and that iuſtly: for when they began to adore it, the good Ezechiah brake it in pieces. But yet Vaſques muſt yeeld it was adored, or elſe, that it is alleaged to no purpoſe to prooue Adoration.
               To conclude, no Text of Scripture doth expreſly

ſay, nor by conſequence inferre, that euer Images were worſhipped with countenance or commendation of God, or any holy man in Scripture. Saint Ambroſe ſaith no ſuch thing as is pretended, that Images lawfully may be worſhipped. Hee ſaith, Whoſoeuer 
                  See Fathers that affirme the ſame. Saint Ambroſe, Ser. 1. in Pſal. 118. 
                  crowneth the Emperours Statue, crowneth the Emperor, that is, honoreth him: and whoſoeuer diſhonoreth the Emperours Statue, diſhonoreth him. What then? Whoſoeuer diſhonoreth Gods Image, diſhonoreth him. I grant. And what of that? Therefore, honour is to bee giuen ſome Images. No man denieth it. Therefore all Images are to be worſhipped. Away with that; no ſuch conſequence. Honor is one thing, Dulia, if you will, Latria is another: worſhip, I am ſure. Firſt, What is Gods Image? Then, How farre Gods Image? Then, What honour is due vnto Gods Image? And laſtly, Whether the honor giuen be not more, or other honour then is due vnto an Image?
               Saint Augustine in his third booke de Trinit (You might haue added cap. 10. as well as the book, out of Bellarmines) nameth the brazen Serpent expreſly in the ranke of ſuch things, as, tanquam religioſa honorem haberepoſſunt. And ſo doe wee: and many things of that nature; as the Sacraments of the Church: of the which very things hee ſpeaketh: and it had beene better he had ſayd nothing of them. For hee demoliſheth that Idol of Tranſubſtantiation, in adding, Stuporem tanquam mira habere non poſſunt. Which could not haue paſſed from his pen, had he beleeued Tranſubſtantiation. This place of Saint Auguſtine is to no purpoſe: for there is not a word of Images there.
               
                  
Saint Gregory is of later date then Saint Auguſtine, and of leſſe credit by much in controuerted queſtions. Images in his time were much improoued: and yet not vnto Adoration. Honour, Reuerence, and reſpect was giuen then, to bee bookes for the ſimple and ignorant people: to bee remembrances of things by repreſentation. Hold you heere, and wee blame you not. As for Damaſcene, he was a childe, in reſpect of thoſe Heroes of the Church; Poſtnatus, and a party in that Image quarrell in the Eaſterne Church: exception againſt him may lie as partiall & intereſſed: and yet hee ſaith no more, (though what hee ſaith, cannot bee prooued) then that the honoring of Images, was a Tradition Apoſtolical. You or Damaſcene proue this, and I yeeld. I maruaile none euer ſaid ſo before Damaſcene, who yet had good occaſion to auow it, if it had beene ſo.
               They had, you ſay, and did auow it: for Saint Baſil againſt Iulian, hath the ſame, that it was deliuered from the Apostles. Some body told Pope Adrian ſo, and hee beleeued them: for, facile credimus quae fieri volumus. Adrian related it in the ſecond Synod of Nice: and you take it for Goſpell. It Saint Baſil ſaid it, Ile ſubſcribe it: ſhew it in Saint Baſil, and no more adoe. I maruaile, Saint Baſil ſhould euery where forget this Tradition, remembring ſo many as he doth: eſpecially in his booke de ſpiritu ſancto. Baſil is not the onely man belyed in that ridiculous Synod: nor the onely man forged in that Epiſtle of Pope Adrian, whence the Rhemiſts, and Harding, and Bellarmine had it, from whom you took, whatſoeuer you haue, impudent Plagiary as you are!
               
                  
Saint Chryſoſtom's Maſſe is not intirely his: many things haue beene added in tract of time: no man will deny it, that knoweth any thing: this bowing to the Image is one of those additions: and yet in ſome editions there is no mention of any Image: if there bee, it doth not come home, to iuſtifie that in the Church of Rome, whereby worſhip is giuen to ſtocks and ſtones, and ſuch worſhip as indeed is Gods peculiar.
               Images and Idols may be two things: theſe prophane and impious, neuer tolerable: thoſe not vnlawfull, and ſometime profitable, eſpecially reſemblances of Stories: Images were vnlawfull vnto the Iewes at all, the very ordinary and ciuill vſe and making of them, except by ſpeciall warrant, in ſome place: as in the Temple, vpon the Ark, which though perhaps not obſerued, yet is true, and apparant to any man that aduiſedly ſhall read Philo and Ioſephus. Vnto Chriſtians they are not vnlawful, for ciuil vſes: nor vtterly in all manner of religious imployment. The pictures of Chriſt, the bleſſed Virgin, and Saints may be made, had in houſes, ſet vp in Churches: the Proteſtants vſe them: they deſpight them not. Reſpect and honour may be giuen vnto them: the Proteſtants doe it: and vſe them for helps of piety, in rememoration, and more effectuall repreſenting of the Prototype. But quatenus? In tearmes there is not much difference: you ſay they muſt not haue Latria: ſo we. You giue them Dulia. I quarrell not the terme, though I could: there is a reſpect due vnto, and honour giuen relatiuely vnto the picture, ſigne, reſemblance, monument of great men, friends, good men,

Saints, Chriſt. If this you call Dulia, we giue it too. But whatſoeuer you ſay, howſoeuer you qualifie the thing with gentle words, wee ſay, In your practice you farre exceede, and giue them that honor which is Latria: a part of diuine reſpect and worſhip. So not wee. Let practice and doctrine goe together, wee agree. So that the queſtion is not, What may bee giuen them? but, What is giuen them? You muſt then change the ſtate, and prooue, that what you doe, is not any way, any iot or part of diuine honour, but meerely ciuill reſpect, Dulia. This you cannot doe, ſo long as your people go to it with down-right adoration, and your new Schooles defend, that the ſame reſpect is due vnto the Repreſentee, as muſt be giuen to the repreſented. So that the Crucifix is to bee reuerenced with the ſelf-ſame honor that Chriſt Ieſus is. A blaſphemy not heard of, till Thomas Aquinas ſet it on foote. Cleere theſe enormities, and others like theſe, then come, and wee may talk and ſoone agree concerning honor and reſpect vnto Reliques or Images of Saints, or Chriſt: till then, we cannot anſwer it vnto our Maker, to giue his honour vnto a Creature.
            
            
               XLVI.
               
                  That bleſsing or ſigning vpon the forehead, is not founded vpon the Scripture.
               
               
                  BLeſſing or ſigning, what is that? Doubtleſſe the man meant ſigning with the Croſſe, vpon the forehead: otherwiſe, the fellow is more then impudent, that fathers this vpon any Proteſtant, that bleſsing is not

founded vpon Scripture. And yet this hee would haue his Proſelytes beleeue: to this his two firſt Texts are addreſſed, to prooue that Proteſtants vſe no bleſſing at all, in any action diuine, morall, or ciuill.
               For Mark. 10. 16. wee read, Hee took them vp in his armes, put his hands vpon them, and bleſſed them: without any ſigning in the fore-head: therefore hee muſt needs meane this: That Proteſtants neuer bleſſe any thing, or man whomſoeuer: and yet they doe their children euery Morning and Euening; and yet they doe their meates euery meale: yet in many other actions, nothing ſo frequent as this. The like is that, Luk. 24. 50. For there is no ſigning added vnto that bleſſing: onely, Reuel. 7. 3. there is mention of ſealing, or ſigning, take whether you will, in the fore head: and that happly was with the ſigne of the Croſſe.
               But Sir Maleuolo, know, we vſe Bleſſing as much as you; in as many lawfull things as you, and more piouſly than you. Wee vſe ſigning with the ſigne of the Croſſe, both in the Fore-head, and elſewhere: Witnes that ſolemn form in our Baptiſm: for which we are ſo quarrelled by our Factious. Caro ſignatur, vt anima muniatur, ſaith Tertullian: and ſo doo wee. They vſed it in Baptiſm, all the world knoweth it. They ſigned their Fore-heads, Cyprian, Epiſt. 56. and many other places of his Works: vpon their hands. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Their whole body and bed, Tertul. 2. ad vxorem, 5. ad omnem motum & habitum, the ſame Tertul, de corona milit. 3. Whereupon, the old Chriſtians were named, Religioſi Crucis: and yet they neuer adored the Croſſe. In the Greek Liturgie,

the ſigne of the Croſſe is frequent. The worſhip of the Croſſe is not found. Not any of the Fathers auerre that: the vſe of the Signe they doo all. And if you will thank me, I will adde as many more. Ignat. Epiſt. 5. pa. 48. Clement in constit. VIII. XII. Martial in Epist. ad Burdigal. iuſtin. Mart. pa. 285. & 58. & 92. Euſeb. de vita Constant. lib. 3. 47. and conclude with that of Athanaſius: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : By the ſigne of the Croſſe of Chriſt, all Magick Spels are diſappointed, witchcraft and ſorcery cometh to nothing, all idols are abandoned and forſaken. For the reuerent vſe of ſigning with the ſigne of the Croſſe, I knowe no ſuch cauſe of diſtraction or diſ-affection. Our Church alloweth it, vſeth it, and commandeth it: and I could tell you ſome experimented effects of it.
            
            
               XLVII.
               
                  That it is both ſuperfluous and ſuperstitious, to repeat one and the ſame prayer ſundry times.
               
               A Strange imputation; ſo falſe and ſlanderous, as euery child that can read, knoweth it is a Lie: for, in our Liturgie and publique Seruice, the Lords Prayer is repeated many times. In our Letany, how many repetitions of the ſame thing! inſomuch as that we cannot eſcape reprehenſion for it. But this Fellow, that ſet himſelf to quarrell, and whole opus is, to maintain a faction on foot, raketh vp the retrimenta of each priuate, ſingular, contentious ſpirit, and tendreth them as publique receiued doctrines of the

Proteſtants; who hold it neither ſuperſtitious, nor yet ſuperfluous, to repeat one and the ſame Praier oftentimes: for, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , good things may bee remembred once and again: and if to man decies repetita placebunt, ſome things cannot bee repeated too often to God. It cannot any way diſcontent God, who loueth affection aboue all: and we can haue no ſurer ſigne of affection, than repetition; when a man deſireth to dwell vpon a thing, and not willingly to leaue it, as Pſal. 18. 1.
               But take wee the Fellow according to his fanſie: Where first, our Lord hauing taught his owne Diſciples that excellent Prayer of all praiers, which hee would haue them to offer to him, the Pater noſter or our Lords Praier; hee afterwards, in many other places, willeth them to pray alwaies, as Luke 18. 1. he was not well prouided to prooue a truth by Math. 7. 9. compared with Luke 18. 1. Luke 21. 36. There our Sauior taught his Diſciples a ſet form of Praier, as Iohn Baptist had taught his. There hee wils them to pray continually; to pray, and ceaſe not. This idle fellow inferrs heerupon, How is it poſsible to perſeuere in ſo ſhort a form of praier, except we often repeat the ſame? I grant, not poſſible to continue in praying that Praier, without often repetition. And who findeth fault with repeating it often? Repeat it, on Gods Name, again and again, ſo often as you haue fingers & toes; but your repetition will haue no warrant heer: for, Chriſt doth not bid them, either Luke 18. 1. or 21. 36. repeat the Lords Praier often, pray that Praier only, and no other often. As the matter & occasiōs, so the form and manner, he leaues to themſelues; and nor there, nor elſewhere, 
                     •
                  ieth them to any. If he did, how can the Catholiques anſwer it to God, who haue ſo many and diuerſe ſet form of praiers, beside the Pater noſter?
               
               The Angels Triſagium is more to purpoſe; where The Angels in the Prophet Eſay, Eſay 6. and the beaſts in the Apoc. Apo. 4. which reſt neither d
                        •
                     y nor night, do thrice repeat, &c. 
                  Holy is repeated thrice by them: and yet ſhort ejaculatory

Praiers doo differ from long-contriued Oriſons, and are much fitter for repetition than theſe. Tertullian ſaith well: Dominus proſpector humanarum neceſsitatum, ſeorſimpoſt traditam orandi diſciplinam, Petite, inquit, & accipietis, & sunt quae petantur, pro circumſtātia cuius 
                        〈◊〉
                      praemiſſà legitimâ et ordinariâ oratione quaſi fundamento, accidentium ius est deſideriorum, ius eſt ſuperſtruendi extrinſecus petitiones. It was neuer heard of till now, that the Lords Prayer ſhould be the onely Prayer a man ought to vse vpon occaſion. It is a contrary Extreme, It was not giuen to be vsed at all. The Angels in heauen, the ſoules of the Righteous, Chriſt Iesus in the garden, the three children in the fiery furnace, vſe repetitions of their praiers. A ſanctis pete perfectis exemplum. Vſe them, a-Gods-name. Do as they haue done. A good thing cannot be repeated too often. I doo not knowe any Puritan will diſlike it. I haue knowne as great Puritans as any were, vse the Lords Praier twice at euery Sermon, in the beginning, at the end: and yet I knowe, it was the Puritan opinion at firſt, that The Lords Praier was not ſo often to bee repeated, as it is in our ordinary Seruice. T. C. wrote this, lib. 1. pa. 136. What reaſon is this, we muſt repeat the Lords Praier oftentimes, therefore oftentimes in half an houre, and one in the neck of another? Doth your Proposition driue at this? Driue, a-Gods Name, till you driue it down: we go with you. For, it is a ſingular, vpſtart, nouell, Puritan quarrell; as, infinite other are againſt the Church in all Ages, againſt the doctrine and diſcipline of the Church. But what is this to Proteſtants? Againſt Proteſtants your Gag is directed, not Puritans: and yet all your addreſſes,

well-neer, are againſt Puritan Poſitions, malitiouſly imputed to Proteſtants: and yet your ſelues among your ſelues make a difference betwixt Proteſtants and Puritans; profeſſing, If it were not for the Proteſtant, you would not eſteem what the Puritan could ſay: and truely. For, the Proteſtant commeth vp to you on your owne grounds, and vndertaketh you at your own weapons; ſo that you haue no help againſt him, but to bely him with your Proſelytes. So you began, ſo you continued, and ſo you end this petty Pamphlet. For, otherwiſe you may knowe, that this very point of often repeating the Lords Praier, hath by vs been maintained againſt Puritan detraction, more than by Papiſts; eſpecially by thoſe two Worthies of their time, the moſt reuerend Lord Archbiſhop, Whitgift, of bleſſed memory; and that incomparable Hooker: concerning whom I may much rather ſay, than of his Works, of whom it was ſaid and made by Paulus Thorius:
                  
                     Praeter Apoſtolicas, post Chriſti tempora, chartas,
                     Huic peperere libro, ſacula nulla parem.
                  
               
               In whoſe words I conclude to this babbler. Twice we rehearſe it ordinarily, and oftner, as occaſion requireth more ſolemnity or length, in diuine ſeruice; not mistruſting, till theſe new curioſities ſprāg vp, that euer any man would think our labour heerin miſ-ſpent the time wastfully conſumed, and the office it ſelf made worſe, by ſo repeating that which otherwiſe would more hardly bee made familiar to the ſimpler ſort; for the good of whoſe Soules, there is not in Chriſtian Religion any thing of like continuall vſe and force, throughout euery houre and moment of their whole liues. I meane, not onely becauſe Prayer, but becauſe this very Prayer

is of ſuch efficacy and neceſsity. Know this, Sir Gagger, that this is our opinion o
                     •
                   repeating Prayers; this our doctrine touching the Lords Prayer, repeated, or to bee repeated. That giddy conceit, taken vp by the Puritan faction ſometime, is none of ours, as the faction it ſelf is none of ours: no more then Donatiſts, Meletians, or Nouatians, were antiently the Catholique Church, or their fooleries to be imputed to the Church. The Factioniſts would, were the innouating humor predominant in them, peraduenture preſcribe a forme of Religion to Chriſt Ieſus himſelf, were he on earth againe, though but to laſt for a day: vnleſſe happly they diſagreed, which fancy ſhould haue precedency. For euery Crow thinketh her owne bird fayrer then the neighbours.
               But to conclude with your Fathers, that affirme God knoweth what: you are to prooue, which yet wee deſire you not to doe, for there is no ſuch neede againſt vs; that It is not ſuperſtitious, nor yet ſuperfluous to repeat one and the ſame Prayer oftentimes. For this Lactantius is, cited lib. 4. de diuinâ inſtitut. cap. 28. but might haue beene ſpared. In that Chap. he diſputeth againſt that deriuation which Cicero gaue, of ſuperſtitioſus; That they were called ſuperſtitioſi, qui totos dies immolabant et precabantur, vt ſui liberi ſibi ſuperſtites eſſent. For ſaith hee, Quid mihi afferet cauſae, cur precari pro ſalute Filiorum, ſemel religioſi, et idem decies facere, ſuperſtitioſi eſſe hominis arbitretur? What reaſon can Cicero giue mee, why it ſhould bee counted religious piety to pray once; and ſuperſtition, to pray often? Si enim ſemel facere, optimum

eſt; quanto magis ſaepius? Which teſtimony is direct as may be, for praying often, but not for ſaying the ſaid prayer often: yet this ſhould be proued, not that. This is after the Puritan Cut, not that. Howſoeuer, it may touch our Factioniſts, who regard n o Fathers: it concerns not vs, who reſpect the one, & vſe the other: who profeſs, with the same Lactantius, Multiplicata obſequia demerentur potius, quam offendunt.
               
               The next is S. Amb. lib. de Sp. ſanct. cap. 20. Howſoeuer you haue playd the Idle-pack, Addle-head, Ignaro, or Negligent in the course of your book: yet, as good Orators in a bad cause, lay the ſtrength they haue or can make, in the beginning, and latter end, ſo ſhould you: but who can haue more of a cat, then her skinne; of a Blunderer, then that which is next hand? Saint Ambroſe wrote three bookes to Gratian the Emperor, de ſpiritu ſancto. This poore Innocent knew no ſuch matter; ſuppoſing, hee had wrote but one; nor caring, vnto whom hee wrote it. Saint Ambroſe lib. de ſpiritu ſancto, cap. 20. ſaith, Who can tell what? I ſay, Who can tell? For, the firſt booke hath 20. Chapters iuſt: in the 20. nothing is that tendeth this way. In the second book there are but 12. There can bee nothing in any 20. Chapter there. The third hath chapters 23. but nothing touching repetition of Prayers, or Prayers at all. The truth is, beſide theſe bookes, there is in ſome editions another tract without Chapters at all; a very very ſhort one, de ſpiritu ſancto; by some ſuppoſed, a fourth book to be added vnto the other three; by others, a ſeuerall, headleſſe diſcourſe, none of Saint Ambroſe doing: howſoeuer it be, whoſe-ſoeuer, it ſhould ſeeme the book which

the man would deſigne. For, not farre from the end, hauing recited that text of Eſay 6. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, hee inferreth the cuſtome of the Church for the Triſagium in their ordinary Letany; Vnde etiam tractum eſt, per omnes fere Orientales Eccleſias, et nonnullas Occidentales, vt in oblationibus ſacrificiorum quae Deo patri offeruntur, vna cum ſacerdote, voce populus vtatur, id est, Sanctus, ſanctus, ſanctus, Dominus Deus Sabaoth. Which very words wee vſe in our ſolemnizing of the holy Communion thus: Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and the company of Heauen, wee laud and magnifie thy glorious name, euermore prayſing thee, and ſaying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of hosts, Heauen and earth are full of thy glory. Glory bee to thee, O Lord, moſt high. Can this Gooſe gaggle againſt this?
               
                  Auguſtine is next, lib. 1. de Serm. Dom. in Monte, cap. 5. in whom I finde no ſuch diuiſion, nor any thing to purpoſe. And lib. de doct. Chriſt. cap. 7. againe; As if there were but one booke, there being foure, and no ſuch matter in any 7. Chapter. Who can brooke ſuch an ignorant or negligent companion, in a point of controuerſie and imputation? Which is alſo obſerued by him in Saint Gregory. Saint Gregory is to be seene, lib. 1. Moral. cap. 28. in which booke there are not ſo many Chapters; nor in the Chapters which are, any ſuch thing. The truth is, that which was meant, is lib. 29. Moral. vpon the 38. of Iob, the same in effect with Saint Ambroſe before. Eſais quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , cùm Laudem Trinitatis aperiret, Seraphini voces exprimens, ait, Sanctus, ſanctus, ſanctus: ac ne tertiò Sanctū nominās vni 
                        •
                     atē diuinae ſubſtantiae ſcindere videretur, adtūxit Dominus

Deus Sabaoth: which, almoſt word for word, is repeated, Homil. 16. and not 19. as we find it cited vpon Ezechiel. To which hee might haue added Pſal. 67. Benedicat nobis Deus, Deus noſter: Benedicat nobis Deus; and that in Rom. XI. For, of him, and by him, and in him are al things: to him be praiſe for euer, Amen. Theſe are his Fathers that ſhould affirme the ſame, videlicet, that it is nor ſuperfluous, nor ſuperſtitious, to repeat one & the ſame prayer oftentimes. They repeat nothing: they affirm nothing: they only ſpeak what was done. That which they ſpeake, wee doe. That which they are ſuppoſed to affirme againſt vs, if they did affirme any thing, needed not: For we affirme, vſe, propoſe, and maintaine the ſame, priuately, publiquely, in our Liturgie, and Seruice of the Church. To conclude, Sir Gagger: bring mee any one Place of Scripture, any practice reſolued of the Catholicks, any deciſion of the Church repreſentatiue, any determination of the Church collectiue, in a particular approued Synod; any Saying of any one Father of Credit, dogmatically reſolued for 500. yeeres and better after Chriſt, to the end of the Councell of Chalcedon, againſt any thing eſtablished in the Church of England; that is, in the Communion-booke, the booke of Articles, the booke of Conſecrating Biſhops, and ordering of Prieſts and Deacons; and I will ſubſcribe. Heer is ſcope enough to ramble in. Gagge me, if you can. As for priuate opinions, I am bound to none, no not vnto my owne. Quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      abundet in ſenſu ſuo, ſo be it hee trouble not the Church therewith.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   