
      
         
            
            
            A LAMENTATION
IN VVHICHE
IS SHEVVED what Ruyne
and destruction
cometh of
seditious rebellyon.
            ANNO. M.D.XXXVI.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A LAMENTATION.
            
               IF STVDY HAD GOTEN
me as moch eloquence, as true and
vnfeyned loue of my countrey gyueth
me cause to lament: thē durst
I boldely say, that there is none so
wycked, none so vnnaturall, none
so farre vnder all the senses of humanitie, but I
coude fully perswade hym, nothynge so moche to
be eschewed, as sedition, none soo worthy all punyshement,
as they whyche trayterously make of
one nation two, of them that euen now were frendes,
sodaynly to be vtter ennemies. But seing min
eloquence, whiche I muste nedes graunte to be
very smalle, can not so serue me, as I desyre in so
weighty a mattier, I wyll see what loue, sorowe,
and pitie can do, whiche if they coulde as ernestly
worke, as they be greatte in me, I wolde truste
to make all honeste stomackes to deteste and abhorre
sedicious traytours. Take awaye the commaundementes
of god, destroye all the lawes of
nature and of man, may not eyther the hygh commodyties,
that come of mutuall concorde betwene
all the kynges subiectes, and the kynges grace, or
the excedynge damages, that ensue open sedition,
kepe any honest harte, in maynteynynge the one,
and fleinge the other? But in so shamefull an act,
why do I speke of honest hartes? For who is he,
that can thynke him selfe to haue any veyne of an
honeste man, that feareth not god, that loueth not
his countrey, that obeyeth not his prince, that fynally
dothe as moche as he can to pulle away nature,

honesty, and al good lawes? What is he that
can say, he is an englyshe man, and that he careth
not, though the welth of Englande be troden vnder
the foote? A beast he is, a man he can neuer be
iudged, that passeth but on his owne welth & plesure.
Alas how vnworthy is he to be shaped after
the fourme of a manne, howe vnmete to dwell amonge
men, whiche seeth what foloweth sedition,
and yet woll endeuour hym selfe to styrre the quiette
and obedient hartes of the people to sedition?
He that with hym selfe ernestly ymagineth, howe
moche bloode muste nedes be shedde, what a nomber
muste nedes be slayne, howe many good townes
shall be robbed and spoyled, howe many fermours,
and honeste howseholders shall be vtterly
vndone, howe many gentyll men for lacke of their
rentes shalbe fayn to lay their landes to morgage,
or vtterly to selle them away, howe many honeste
women shall be defiled, howe many virgins rauished:
He that setteth the blody feld before his eies,
here legges, there heedes, these deadly wounded,
those vtterly deed, is it possible, that any man can
so cast of humanitie, so hate men, that he had leauer
haue so many deed, as nedes must die in suche
cruel diuision, than to haue them aliue & his frendes?
If our mooste gratious prince, god saue his
lyfe, and theyrs that so wyshe, had giuen you some
great occasiou, to haue gone from hym: yet to go
agaynst hym and his trewe subiectes, good cause
you can haue none. Howe can ye saye, you fyghte
in a good cause, which in one acte offende so many

of goddis commandementes? Who is he that very
nature hath not taught, to be obeysaunt to his
soueraygne lorde the kynge? Peter, Paule, Christ,
fynally all say, that say well, Obeye thy prince. I
am sory, that Turkes hethen creatures, men caste
away, if Trouthe say truthe, I am sory that they
shoulde so farre excelle vs, in a thynge that onely
perteyneth vnto vs, and lytell or nothing to them,
Obedience is the badge of a trewe christen man.
And be not we ashamed, that the Turke shal sende
for the greattest mans heed in his countreye, and
byd hym leaue the body at home, and fynde theym
here in this so vnreasonable a requeste obediente:
and are we not ashamed, that we beinge demaunded
a lyttell money, to come with clubbes, bylles,
and bowes, to oppresse hym, in whose defence we
ought all to shede our beste blode. Loke howe Dauyd,
whiche was chosen of god to succede Saul
kynge of Israel, trembleth, howe sory he is, that
he had cut a pece of Sauls garment, whiche nowe
ful of iniquitie sought al the wayes that he coude,
to kyll Dauid. Loke vpon the circumstances, Dauids
harte was innocent, pure, and cleane, whiche
dyd cutte his vesture for none other intente, but to
shewe his fidelitie vnto hym: and to declare, that
he had oportunitie, and myght haue slayne Saul,
if he had lysted so to do. There was no denne soo
derke, no rocke so vnclymable, no mountayne so
hygh, but kyng Saul wold vp to it, and seke the
dethe of Dauid. An other tyme Saul was a slepe
in his tente, Dauyd commeth in, he myght haue

kylled hym: what dothe he? nothynge but take away
a spere that was at his heed, and a vessell of
water, whiche stode besyde hym. This is the texte.
Dauid cut the typpe of the skirte of Sauls cloke,
and by and by he repented hym, that he had cutte
the kynges vesture, and began to crye, Our lorde
be mercyfull vnto me, that I do no suche thing to
my soueraygne lorde: Our lorde kepe me, that I
neuer lay handes on hym, bycause god hath anointed
hym. What is he that canne extende his hande
towarde a kynge, and be innocent? Rede farther.
Thou shalt se, that he which sayd he kylled Saul,
and brought the crowne vnto Dauid, was slayne
by Dauids commaundement. Yet here is more to
be marked. Saul felle on his owne swerde, and
wolde in any case be deed. After this came the son
of Amalachites, and feyned, that he had holpe the
kynge to dye, layinge for his excuse the kynge was
halfe deade and more before, and desyred hym to
ryd hym out of his peyne. Not withstandyng Dauid
thought hym worthy to dye, which layd no violent
handes vppon he kynge, but holpe a kynge
to dye. And whan Dauid harde that Saul was
deade, what lamentation maketh he? how renteth
he is vestures? howe fasteth he, and causeth al his
to faste frome mornynge to nyghte? And doo we
thynke theym not worthye mooste cruelle deathe,
that thus haynouslye robbe and spoyle the kynges
trewe subiectes, and farther mooste bloodely
bent ayenst his hyghnes, comme with a huge and
a riottous army agaynst his capitaynes, to the distruction

of his lawes and common welth? Alas
what vnkyndnes may so kynde and so louynge a
prince recken in these traytours, for whose sakes
and sauegarde of lyues, I dare well say, his grace
wolde haue shedde his bloudde? what vnnatural
hartes? That they shulde for none or smalle cause
runne into suche outragious malyce ageynste his
grace, and foolyshely pretende to hate them onely,
whiche his highnes beste loueth? and nedes muste
beste loue, as longe as suche their vertues, qualities,
fidelitie so compelleth his grace to do. Who
can iustely blame hym for makynge them greate,
that in dede haue al those thinges, which at the begynnynge
of nobilitie only made them noble? But
what meruayle if suche vile & abhominable traytours,
highly hate all those, in whome vertue shyneth,
whiche in dede can promote none but suche
as honestie gyueth reputation vnto? It farre passeth
Coblers crafte to discusse, what lordes, what
byshops, what counsaylours, what actes statutes
and lawes are mooste mete for a common welthe,
and whose iudgement shuld be beste or worst, concernynge
matters of relygion? Good lorde, is it
possible that suche a nombre of men, shulde caste
them selfe away, there where a Cobler shalbe coū
               ted
a capitayne? If England coude speake, might
it not say thus? I am one, why doo you make me
twayne? Ye are all myne, howe canne any of you,
where none ought so to do, seke the distruction of
me, my mooste noble and prudente prynce kynge
HENRY the, VIII. and his trewe subiectes? It

is a shrewde hande that scratcheth out the eyen, a
shreude fote, that for his faute putttih the necke in
ieoperdy. Lyncolneshire thou art a mēbre of myn,
I thought if nede had ben, if myne ennemies had
infested me, to haue founde helpe and succour at
thy hand: and thou thus traiterously settest vpon
me? whan meate, whiche shulde kepe the body lusty,
sleeth, what meruayle if hungre kylle many a
one? If thy weapon, whiche shoulde defende the,
fyght ayenst the, what wonder to see an other mās
dagger busy with thy bosome? If Lyncolneshyre
seke to distroye Englande, what wonder is hit, yf
Fraunce and Scotlande sometime haue soughte
to offende me? Alas who canne blame me, if I be
woo, whiche fynde none (I thanke the prudence
of my prynce and his counsayllours) that seeketh
my sorowe, but suche as I haue to longe nourysshed
and pampered vp. Lyncolnshire I toke the
for my frende, so dyd the kynge also, and I truste
he woll do ageyne, if thou pourged of these traytours,
hereafter do as thou shalt wyshe thou haddest
nowe done. Thus Englande myght say, and
moche more, which I wyl say for her. If the feare
of god, the loue of the common welth, and loyall
obeysance to our moost gratious prince, had moued
the reste of his subiectes no more thanne they
dyd you, myght not we haue feared, least it shuld
haue chanced vnto vs, as it dyd to them that came
of the serpentes tethe? The fable is not longe, nother
feyned without good cause. Cadmus by the
consent of the poetis, kylled a great serpent, whose

teth he was commaunded to sowe in the ground,
of the which sodeynely arose harneist men, a rowe
on the one syde, an nother on the other, whiche
streight fell to gether by the eares, in soo moche
that they were almooste deed, er they were fullye
borne. The poetes wolde declare, that where as
is dissention, bothe the parties go to wracke. But
what nedeth me to vse a fable, whan I maye confirme
this thynge with so many histories? Fyrste
what brought downe the grekes? or to begynne
somewhat farther, what was the cause that some
tyme the Lacedemoniens were vnder the Atheniens,
sometyme contrarye? Loke the histories, you
shall euermore for the most parte fynde, that neuer
great realme or common welth hath ben distroyed
without sedition at home. Dissention dissention,
hath bene the ruyne, the venome, the poyson of all
great estates. In so moche that the discorde of capitaynes
onely, ofte tymes put the grekes to moche
calamitie. How oft was Athens vexed by reason
of the priuate hatrede betwyxte Aristides and
Themistocles, Cimon and Pericles, Nicias and
Alcibiades their capitaynes? Surely the diuision
of Grece, that is to saye, the Lacedemonyens ageynste
the Atheniens, the Corinthians and Thebans
indifferent, frende to nere nother, made the
Romayns lordes of Grece. Nowe what broughte
downe the Romayns, which were conquerours of
al the hole world wel nygh? Doth not Silla, Marius,
Cinna, Pompeius, and Cesar seditious citisins
make almost the ende of the reigne of the Romaynes

You se in other landes sedition hath ben
euermore the bringer in of al sorowe and mischief.
Hath sedition doone no hurte in Englande? haue
we hadde no experience before nowe? I wolde we
had not, howe be it I truste the kynges grace will
so prudently and gratiously order this, that here
after Englande shall haue lytel feare of insurrections.
Is there any in Englande, that hathe not
harde of Palme sonday filde, Blacke hethe felde,
and many other, whiche bycause they are almoste
forgoten, I wold no body shuld at any time speke
of theym? I am of Platos mynde, I wolde haue
no histories to make mention of theym, that haue
fought ayenste their countrey. I wolde no sedition
shulde be wrytten of, no nor spoken of, I wold
haue men beleue, that there was neuer none so vnnatural,
as to ryse ayenst his prince and countrey.
But seinge it is to farre past, and the hurt to gret,
to be so soone forgotten, lette vs take in all thynges
some fruite. For what is so yuell, but somme
good commeth of it? These two feldes, how many
wydowes made they, howe many fatherles chylderne,
what bloode they coste vs, fewe be but they
knowe. I lette passe howe all that euer came into
Englande, to infeste vs, neuer dyd hurte, excepte
we were diuided. Iulius Cesar, the best capitayne
that euer the Romaynes hadde, and peraduenture
that euer was, at his fyrste settynge vpon vs, dyd
no man hurte but hym selfe. I praye you see what
opinion he hadde of vs. Rede Paulus Orosius.
where at the fyrst he came but with .lxxx. shyppes,

at his retourninge he came with no lesse than syxe
hūdred shippes, furnished with piked souldiours.
And as Cesar hym selfe writeth, Mandubratius,
sonne of the kynge of London, called Imanuentius,
stale out of Englande and folowed hym, beinge
than at variance with Casseuelaunus kynge
of Kent: And so Cesar cam in holpen by this sedition.
O cruel sedition, O venomus hatred, O vnlucky
debate, O pernitious dissention, O spiteful
rancour, O blynde & euer hurtfull enuy, O seldom
wel endyng malice, why dost thou in one houre oft
tymes marre more, than in an hūdred yeres can be
restored agayn? What foly, what madnes is this,
to make an hole in the shyppe that thou saylest in?
what wylful frowardnes is this, to lese both thyn
eyes, that thyn ennemie may lese one? I pray god
the Cobbler be chief captayne. I pray god there be
no polshorne pedlers, I had almost called them by
their name, that put the Cobbler out of his roume.
Who wil think, but it was gret pitie to put out suche
good religioꝰ mē, yt now haue turned their coules
in to iackes, their portessis & beadis into billes,
bowes, & twenty other praty thynges, and comme
nowe harneist into the feld, ayenst god, their king,
and bothe their lawes? Is it not verye lyke, that
they liued vertuously in their cloisters, where they
myght do al mischiefe, and no man see them, whiche
now in the face of the worlde are not ashamed
to be the ryngleaders of these trayterous rebelles?
Is it nat pitie that these shulde lacke,An halter. whiche wyll
sooner vndo (as farre as they may) an hole countrey,

thā not haue for their harlottes as they haue
had in tyme past? Theyr pope, their puppet, their
idole, their romayn god wyll not out of their hartis.
They can not abyde scripture to com in place,
and beare the rule of religion, as it was wont, and
euer ought to do. But god shal fyght for the kinge
in this behalfe: vnto whom for the settynge out of
his moste holy worde, I dare boldly saye, god is
more bound, if god may be bound to man, than he
is to al the priestes, monkes, friers, cardinals, and
popes that haue ben this fyue hundred yeres. It
was no lesse than a lerned kynges act, to sende the
popes bulles into their owne pastures. To make
of a pope a byshop, whiche is in dede as well both
as one, well sought, nouther of bothe: It was a
princis dede to dryue out him, ayenste whose abusions
no man coude open his mouth, peyn of losse
of goodes, lyfe, and honeste fame, thanke be to
their tyrannous decrees, and abomynable lawes,
whiche I might calle lustis, but that I am vnderstande
well ynoughe. He is gone, but to many of
his lyuerey tarieth styll. I dare say, if it be proued
this sedition to come of them, they wyll not tarye
euer. I speake neuer ayenste the good, bycause I
knowe not where they dwelle. This I knowe
well, the kynges grace for a fewe good, hath suffered
an abhomynable sorte of the yuelle raygne to
longe. But I wyll retourne to my purpose. If the
kynge shulde aske you, as somtyme the Romayne
ambassadours asked theirs, why they had lefte the
Senatours, and were so seditiousely departed?
            
               
Haue you any more to say, than they had? Naye,
you haue moche lesse. For they lacked noo matter
to haue layed for theym, but they lacked a man to
vtter it. I pray you, what can you say, if the kynges
grace laye but vnkyndenes to you, where the
lawe condempneth you of treson? I am sure in so
great a cryme, there muste nedes be some greatte
occasion. Lyncolneshire brynge forth your Cobbler,
what can you lay for your excuse? Howe can
you say, it is lawful, nay that it is not most abhominable,
thus traiterously to inuade, robbe, spoile,
& kyl the true subiectis of your most gratious & louyng
prince? Wil you lay the putting down of abbeys
for you? First why may not the kynges grace
by the counsail of the lordes spiritual and temporall,
and the commons assembled to gither in parliament
(of the which many are among your rout)
do that, that all these, and the better parte of you,
than thought best to be done? And what cruel and
blynde malyce is this, to lay in one or two mennes
neckes, as yuell done, that, whiche was thoughte
by the hole counsayle and consent of the thre estates
of Englande, to be moste to the honour of god,
dyscharge of the kynge, and weale of this his realme
and subiectes of the same? What an inconstancie
reygneth in fooles? Howe longe haue you
cried, monkes, priestes haue to moch? Howe long
haue we al praied, god sende the kynge such counsaile,
that one daye he maye see goodes that were
yuell spente, tourned into a better vse? Howe can
he tourne them into better vse, except he fyrste take

them awaye from these, that you your owne selfe
by act of parlyament publyshed, to haue ben misvsed
and spent in the mayntenaunce of vyces and
oppressynge of vertues. Fyrste you wolde in any
case, that the abbeys shulde downe, that the spiritualtie
shoulde haue lesse. So in dede these spirituall
traytours, that are in harneys ayenste theyr
countrey, call theym selfe, whiche haue none other
spirite, than their father the dyuelle hath inspired
into them. If these be spiritual, put a coule on Catilms
backe, is not he than a religious mōke, and
a good spirituall man? If these be religious and
spirituall men, whiche doo all that they can to distroy
bothe the lawes of god and of man, to bryng
this realme in desolation, why maye not Iacke
Cade, Iacke Strawe, Wyll Wawe, Wat Tyler,
Iacke Shepeherde, Tomme Myllar, and Hob
Carter, a barbour sent for, be shorne into religion?
If they be spirituall, that consume the day eyther
in ydelnes, or in an other thynge worse then that,
sowynge sede in other mens forowes, whom shall
we call carnall? It were not honest to vtter al that
the vysitours in their inquysitions brynge home,
that these holy hooded religious haue theym selfe
confessed, and confirmed with the subscription of
theyr owne handes. What thynges can they be ashamed
of, that confesse suche crimes, as no honest
man can well reherse, nor good man abyde to here?
They shall pardone my shamefastnes, I am content
that I lacke boldnes to wryte that which they
are not ashamed to do. They haue fautes inowe,

thoughe I lay not this to theyr charge. They nede
none to accuse them, except they chaunge their apparayle.
The worlde hath spyed theym: I wolde
scarce beleue, that men coude teche nature a newe
waye, excepte it hadde ben proued to their teethe,
and vttered by theyr owne selfes. They that be lerned,
knowe what I meane, and what they are.
Paule layd the same faut to the Romayns.Rom. 
                     •
                  . They
that be vnlerned wyl moche meruayle, except they
haue ben brought vppe with monkes and friers,
howe yonge nouyces maye stand in stede of yong
wyues. I haue sayd ynough. It stynketh to sore,
to de sturred to moche. Is it possible, that menne
shulde meruayle, such to be put out of theyr houses,
and not sooner wonder, that they be not raked
in the coles? I wol not agrauate thynges. I am
glad that they haue greatter cause to say, that the
kynges grace sheweth mercy, out of his place, thā
to thynke them selfe hardely delte withall, whiche
lese but theyr dwellynge places, where they ought
to lese theyr lyues. The ciuile lawe puttethe suche
not out of theyr house, but with the swerd putteth
them to deth. And howe strayte the acte of the parlyament
is, they shulde haue founde, if it had ben
put in execution. If the kynges grace had done as
the lawe wolde, and not as his most gracious nature
prouoketh hym, coude any man haue sayde,
such detestable vices to deserue lesse punishment.
The kynges grace foloweth suche processe as god
doth vse lyghtly for the moste parte. God doth not
punysshe all, that are synners, nother the kynge

hath punished all monkes, all be not put downe,
that bothe the lawe, and the iudgemente of good
men, thynke vnworthy to stande, but such, which
had neyther preyse of good lyfe, nor of hospitalitie
before they were suppreste. Wherfore I canne not
thynke, that the puttinge downe of abbeyes, that
is to saye, the puttinge away of maynteyned lecherie,
buggery, and hypocrisie, shuld be the cause
of this rebellious insurrection. There was some
other wylde worme, that wolde not suffre madde
braynes to be at rest. You wolde fayne, and haue
soughte to fynde some honest colour to shadowe
your execrable and moste cruell intended robbery,
spoylynges, rauyshementes, burnynges, exilyng
of all honest and quiete persones, and settynge vp
of theues, murderers, and manquellers. Thynke
you that wyse men, whiche haue sene by all histories,
the ende of suche seditious traytours, do not
well espie, what all your intent was? What shuld
other shyres loke to fynde atte theyr handes, that
haue fyrste vndone and distroyed their owne?
            Whom wolde they haue spared to robbe, spoyle, or
kylle, if they had brought their pourpose to passe,
that nowe robbe and slee, whan they are assured
that they canne no whyle continue, neyther coude
haue contynewed soo longe, but that the kynges
goodnes gaue them this space both to aknowlege
theyr hyghe and detestable faute, and to declare
vnto all his subiectes, howe loth he is to shede the
bloode of them, that ought to loue his grace beste,
nexte vnto god. I am glad and sory, that you haue

no better excuse, than eyther you haue made, or any
other for you. Gladde that all menne, whiche
haue iugement, shall thynke you to haue done, as
people is wonte to do, that is, wonderful fondly, &
without any grounde. Sory that you shoulde be
soo madde, none occasion gyuen you, to put your
selfe to suche rebuke, shame, and confusion. It is
to folyshe, that ye laye for you, that for the payement
of a shyllyng in the pounde, you wolde sette
all Englande by the eares. Howe canne he be lesse
worthy to dye, then they that most deserue it, which
had leauer see all Englande distroyed, than parte
from .x. or .xx. s. that was before freely and beneuolently
gyuen and graunted of your selues?
            We coude fynde in our hartes at the requeste of
a sedicious pope,Loke in Froissar
                     •
                   the fyrste parte of his Cronycle the 428. chapyter. called Urban, to part from .xxv.
hundred thousande frankes at one tyme, whiche
amounteth aboue .xii. hundred thousande crownes
of the sonne, to aide and strengthe hym ayenst
an other Romayne byshoppe, called Clement, that
challenged the Papacy, and neuer grudged at the
matter: And nowe for the vrgent busynesses, and
moste nedefull affaires, as to the suppressynge of
the rebelles and other ennemies, that rose vppe in
the kynges lande of Irelande, whiche busynesse,
as it was than thought by all the wyse menne of
this realme, and as in dede we nowe haue proued,
coulde not be redressed and welle fynysshed,
without excedynge charges, besyde the greate expenses,
that his grace is at, vpon many thynges,
that we knowe, whiche knowe but lyttell, as vppon

the hauen at Douer, the bulwarkes fortresses
and buyldynges made for the munition and defence
of his towne of Calyce, of Berwyke, and of
other fronters that are so hyghelye beneficiall for
the common weale of this his realme, not onelye
in his gracis tyme, but many yeres after. Nowe I
say, for all these highe and weyghtye causes, and
many other that I reken not, whiche his grace is
at onely for our profite, quiete, reste, and peace, we
wyllnot departe from so small a somme, that was
(Isay agayne) so freely graunted vnto hym. Euery
man was not charged herevnto, but suche as
all the wyse men of the realme thought, myght easily
beare it. He that sayth his substaunce is lesse
worth than .xx.li. payeth neuer a peny. Alas what
a detestable mynde is this, to wyll sooner .x. or .xx.
thousande to be slayne, than to departe from .x. or
xx.s? Is there any honeste mannes arme, but it
wolde fyghte alone, if it were cutte of, ayenst suche
pestilent and trayterous mankyllers? Is there any
man so naked, but he shal thinke him self twise armed,
that commeth to fyght in suche a cause, and
ayenst suche rebelles? Is there any that thynketh
he can better bestowe his best bloode, than vppon
suche murderers? you say, we haue bene ruled to
moche. There is a prety fable, whiche Plutarche
dothe recite. There was a serpent, whose tayle beganne
to stryue with the heed. The taylle sayde,
Heed, so it is, I haue folowed a great whyle, me semeth
reason, that thou shouldest folowe an nother
whyle. The foolyshe heed graunted the tayle to be

obedient, and folowed hym. To be short, the taile
made capitayne and ruler of the heed, nowe busteleth
forth, oft tymes knockynge hym selfe ayenst
stones, prickynge him selfe with thornes, and also
brynging the heed euermore in peril and daunger
to be spylte. Shulde it not be moche worse, if the
kynges grace shoulde here suiters, that comme in
harneys, and beynge heed, applye to theyr requestis,
that seke nothynge but dissention, shedyng of
bloude, and ruyne of the hole realme? The kynges
grace woll, as his true subiectes truste, so order
this matter, that here after the tayle shall be
contente to do as the heed shall commaunde. The
kynge and this his realme, shulde be to fortunate,
if these rude countreyes knewe, as well as the noble
and faythefull citie of London, and other cyuyle
placis of Englande do, howe moche they be
bounde to loue and trewely serue kynge HENRY
the .VIII. For what act sens Christes departure
was more to be commended, than this exaumple,
that our mooste gracious prynce hath gyuen vnto
all foreyn princis, that is, nothynge to apperteyne
more to a kynges office, then to redresse thynges
of religyon, to putte downe hypocrisye, and to restore
honestie to her place agayne? What coude
he imagen more godly, than the appositions, whiche
are nowe in hande, for to knowe who be shepeherdes,
and who be wolues, Who be able to teche,
and who be yet to lerne? What commendacyon
can be soo great, but it shall seeme farre to smalle,
gyuen to a prynce, that taketh suche care, to see relygyon

restored, his people nowe welle taughte,
whiche so longe hath ben deluded? Sory I must
nedes be, to se monkes, friers, and priestes, whyche
so longe stode doubtynge, whether they myght
aknowlege our soueraygne lorde the kynge to be
theyr heed, soo without any staggerynge, to haue
made a Cobbler their heed. Sory I am to se, that
suche sedicious traytours shulde cumber so honest
a purpose, so godly an intent. Howe be it I trust,
theyr cumbrynge of it, shall sette it moche moore
forthe, than though they had endeuoured theym
selfe, with all redynesse, to sette it forwarde. Thus
god whan hym lusteth, canne make his ennemyes
fyght for hym, whan they thynke mooste to fyght
ayenste hym. I doubte not, but they shall moche
encreace the kynges honour, whyche haue doone
and yet do, all that theyr myght may, to haue dyshonoured
hym. What greatter prouffe coude his
grace haue had of his nobles, true and loyal people,
than in suche occasyon to haue shewed theym
selfe so faythfull, so trusty, so wyllynge, and so obeysaunte?
What wolde they doo, yf straungers
camme, whiche ayenste their owne were soo redy?
I saye more, the kynge is moche bounde to these
traytours, that haue soo assured his grace of his
subiectes beneuolence towarde hym. Wherfore
moste noble dukes, erles, lordes, with all the nobilitie,
doubte you nothynge, but you haue done
seruice to a prince, that bothe dothe consyder your
hartes, and wyll hyghely recompence your faythfull
peynes. Howe be it what greatter reward can

there be of fidelitie, than the ioye, that an honeste
harte receyueth of his faythefulle doynge? All be
it these traytours haue done moche hurt, yet surely
they haue done the nobles of Englande hyghe
seruyce. You may also be ioyfull, you I say, whom
the kynges grace euer hathe taken for his trewe
subiectes, and nowe in very dede hath soo founde
you. Lette them be sory that haue deserued sorow:
Let vs be sorye for nothynge, but that these traytours
shall cause the kynge to stryue with his nature,
and there to doo iustyce, where he gladdelye
wolde haue shewed hym selfe mercifull. Lette not
this the pernycious example of these rebelles, any
thynge alyenate our myndes frome the feare of
god, the loue of our prynce. Lette vs recognyse
our duitie vnto bothe, and whan both their commaundementes
agree, study to accomplyshe both.
Lette vs nowe in the furious rage of these seditious
traytours, declare our selfes both trewe christen
people to god, and faythefull subiectis to the
kinges grace, not onely redy to resiste and pacifie,
but also vtterly to extirpe and distroy these and all
other suche beastes, whiche by any colour shall go
aboute to stoppe goddis worde, to sowe sedition
betwene our moste christen and godly kynge and
his true and obedient seruanntes. Kepe the commaundementes
of one, and thanne you shall kepe
bothe.Luc. 20. For he that sayd, Kepe my commandementes,
sayde also, Gyue your prynce suche thynges,
as perteyne vnto hym: if thou do not, here what
he saythe. Thou shalte be cursed in the cytie,Deu. 28. and

cursed in the felde: Cursed by thy berne, cursed be
thy store, cursed be the fruytes of thy bealye, and
the fruites of thy lande: The herdes of thy bullockes,
and the flocke of thy shepe. Cursed shalt
thou be, whan thou gooest in, and whan thou commest
out. The lorde shall sende the hunger & thyrst
& cursing in al that thou takest in hand, til he haue
destroyed the. All these maledyctions lyghteth on
them, that sette lyght goddis commaundementis:
And for as moche as they be al made for succour &
aide soner of men, than that god hath any nede of
our good doinges, whiche of all the commaundementis
is more necessarye for vs, than this, Obey
ye your kynge? Doinge all the other, and breakynge
but this, howe can we lyue one by an other?
Howe can we lacke any myschefe, any sorowe, yf
sedition entre amonge vs? God thretned before,
nowe he falleth to desyrynge and saythe, He that
wyll kepe my commandementis, I wyl loue him,
blesse hym, and cause all his thynges to encrease.
I wyll blesse his chyldern, and his chyldrens childerne,
his corne, his pastures, his cattelle, all his
shall multiply. Who canne hate hym that god loueth?
Or what maketh matter, if traytours hate
hym, that god promyseth to defend? If god be on
our syde, the Cobbler hath clouted euylle, he hath
putte to moche hempe in his lyngell. God is with
the right parte, and can not leaue it. All traytours
god wylling, shal lerne by Lyncolneshire, nothing
to be more odious to god and man, than treason.
            ¶God saue the Kynge.
            
         
      
   