
      
         
            
            To the moſt Honorable Aſſembly of the Commons
Houſe of Parliament.
            A Briefe of the Petitioners Cauſe.
            
               CHarles Brag ſometimes Parſon of the Church of Stalbridge of 27. pound 4. ſhillings value in the Kings Bookes, did before the Stat. of 13. Eliz: (as the Earle
of Caſtle-hauen pretends,) Leaſe the Rectorie of Stalbridge aforeſaid, to Henry Audley for 61. yeeres, which Leaſe was after the ſaid Statute confirmed
by Geor. Lo. Audley the now Earle of Caſtle-hauens Father then Tenant in taile of the Aduouſon of the ſaid Church, And confirmed alſo by the the L. Archbiſhop
of Cant. During the time the Biſhop of Glocester held the Biſhopricke of Briſtoll in Commend. within which Sea the Church of Stalbridge was.
            The ſaid Church of Stalbridge fell void by Brags inſtitution and induction into a ſecond Benefice with Cure in An. 31. Eliz: and came to the King by Lapſe,
            
               Alan Biſhop Clarke 7. IACOBI before his inſtitution to the Church of Stalbridge firſt accepted a preſentation from 
                   _____ 
                the now 
                   _____ 
                of

                   _____ 
                and became bound in bonds of 1500. pound to the ſaid (
                   _____ 
                then both Patron and Leaſſe as aforeſaid of the ſaid Church and Rectorie vpon condition
that he the ſaid Alan Biſhop ſhould reſigne the ſaid Benefice of Stalbridge within ſixe Moneths after warning giuen. And that likewiſe the ſaid Alan ſhould
not queſtion the ſaid Leaſe ſo made and confirmed as aforeſaid, but accept of 27. l'. 5. s. per annum; the Benefice being worth 300. l'. per annum at the leaſt.
            
               Alan Biſhop after his bonds ſo entred into finding the ſaid preſentation defectiue was by the meanes and beſt furtherance of the ſaid 
                   _____ 
                and by the mediation of
Sir Francis 
               
                   _____ 
                now Lo. 
                   _____ 
                of 
                   _____ 
                preſented, admitted, inſtituted and inducted to the ſaid Church of Stalbridge by the late L. Chancelors
preſentation vnder the broad Seale, Ratione lapſus, The Patent of preſentation conteining in the body thereof theſe words, (Rogantes &c.) and in the foote
thereof theſe words. Per Dominum Cancellarium Angliae, And for the obteyning of the ſaid preſentation the ſaid Alan Biſhop made a counterfeit Certificate,
in his owne hand writing, and thereby informed that the ſaid Church of Stalbridge was but 17. pound value in the Kings Bookes and in the Lord Chancelors
right and gift.
            Afterwards the ſaid 
                   _____ 
                and Alan falling out, the ſaid 
                   _____ 
                by a writing vnder his hand and ſeale bearing date the 14. day of April in the 14 yere of his Maieieſties
reigne &c. Warnes the ſaid Alan to reſigne according to the Conditions of his bonds before ſpecified, whereupon the ſaid Alan gaue way vnder his
hand and Seale to any faithfull Miniſter that would accept of the ſaid Benefice, and acknowledged the ſame to be voide, and ſo the ſaid Simonie and lapſe
came to light.
            Then Caleb Morley in May next following vpon his Maieſties owne preſentation to the ſaid Church of Stalbridge. Ratione lapſus ſeu aliquo alio quocunque modo, was
admitted, inſtituted, and inducted Parſon thereof, His Patent of preſentation hauing in the body thereof theſe words (Mandantes &c.) and in the foote
thereof theſe words, Per Breue de Priuato Sigillo. And afterwards the now Earle of Caſtle-hauens Father viz. George Lord Audley who confirmed the ſaid
Leaſe as aforeſaid dyed.
            
               The Queſtions vpon the whole Precedent matter are Two.
               I. Whether Morley or Alan Biſhop be lawfull Parſon of Stalbridge.
               
               II. Whether the ſaid Leaſe be good againſt Morley being Parſon.
            
            
               To the firſt is anſwered, that the Church was at that time voide when his Maieſtie preſented the petitioner Morley, and not full (as is ſuppoſed) for Alan Biſhop, was
neuer Parſon there for Two Cauſes,
            1 He the ſaid Alan Biſhop was for euer diſabled for the ſame Benefice by reaſon of his Simonicall Contract as aforeſaid, as may appeare by the Statute againſt Simonie
as followeth. If any perſon ſhall or doe for money reward, gift, profit or benefite directly or indirectly, or for or by reaſon of any promiſe, agreement,
grant, bond, Couenant, or other aſſurance directly or indirectly preſent any perſon to any Benefice with Cure, that euery ſuch Preſentation ſhall be
vtterly void; And the perſon ſo corruptly taking, procuring, ſeeking or accepting any ſuch Benefice, ſhall thereupon bee adiudged a diſabled perſon in
Law to haue or enioy the ſame Benefice. And the ſaid Alan Biſhop hath beene ſentenced and depriued for the ſaid Simonie, by ſeauen Reuerend Biſhops,
and ſeauen others in his Maieſties Court of High Commiſſion;
            2 The ſaid Alan Biſhops preſentation is voide alſo by deceiuing the King in his Graunt; Coke 6. Reports fol. 29. For he made a counterfeit Certificate, in his
own handwriting, that the ſaid Parſonage was but 17. pound value in the Kings Bookes, and in the Lord Chancelors right and gift as aforeſaid, and ſo obtained
a Preſentation vnder the broad Seale by the warrant of the Lord Chancellor, whereas in truth the ſaid Parſonage is 27. pound 4. ſhillings value in the
Kings Bookes, and therefore in the peculiar and imediate gift of his Gracious Maieſtie, and beyond the Lord Chancellors power and gift.
            The late Honourable Lord Chancellor Egerton acknowledged in open Court that Morley was rightfull Parſon of the ſaid Benefice, and graunted the Writ De vi
laica remouenda to ſettle him in quiet poſſeſſion, which poſſeſſion was further alſo confirmed for Morley by a Verdict, Iudgement and Execution to the value
of 20. l'. againſt the ſaid Earles Bailiffe, for taking and carrying away his Tythes, in his Maieſties Court of Kings Bench.
            And whereas it is alledged that the opinions of ſome of the Iudges are againſt Morley; their opinions were grounded vpon a wrong Caſe, as making the King to
preſent aſwell the ſaid Alan Biſhop as Morley, without any mention of the ſaid counterfeit Certificate and ſuggeſtion, which being afterward made knowen
to the now Honourable Lord Treaſurer, his Lordſhip did acknowledge thereupon that the King was deceiued in his graunt, and the graunt voide as aforeſaid.
And further how euer the pretence be, it will appeare, that it is but one of the ſaid Iudges that gaue and holdeth the ſaid opinion, all being done
likewiſe, without hearing Morley or his learned Counſell.
            And whereas it is alledged that a verdict did paſſe againſt Morleys Leaſee for 4. l'. that was by the euidence of Alan Biſhop the ſaid conuicted and depriued Simoniſt
being a principall partie, who againſt his Oath vpon Record in the Hon. Court of Chancerie, and High Commiſſion teſtified againſt the ſaid Morley. And
it was by a Iudge who ſhould haue giuen the ſaid Morley the benefit of the Law before (whereby, his Maieſties Title had neuer come in further queſtion)
but did not, being requeſted and required thereunto, and againe the ſaid Iudge gaue his opinion without hearing againſt the King and his right & Title, &c.
            The Kings graunt muſt be taken a
                     •
                   intentionem non ad deceptionem. 1. H. 7. 13.
            And if the King graunt vpon falſe Suggeſtion or Information, this ſhall be taken more ſtrongely for the King and ſtrictly againſt the Patentee.
            
               REASONS in equitie againſt Alan Biſhops Preſentation by the warrant of the L. Chancelor.
               1 If this caſe ſhall be made good for Alan Biſhops Preſentation, the King and his Succeſſors will looſe their right & praerogatiue and this will be the leading Caſe.
               2 The Lord Chancelor by the ſame reaſon may giue all the Church liuings the King hath.
               3 The Lord Chancelors Warrant may giue any thing the King hath.
               4 By the ſelfe ſame reaſon meum and tuum ſhall be all one.
               5 Alan Biſhop (a depriued Simoniſt) ſhall be rewarded for his deceit, and others incouraged to doe the like.
            
            
               To the Second is Anſwered that the ſaid Earle hath not a good Leaſe in Law of the ſaid Parſonage for theſe Reaſons.
            
               1 The ſaid Earle can ſet forth no Title to the ſaid Leaſe. 35. H. 6. 6. & 7.
               2 The Patron confirming being but Tenant in Taile, and now dead, his confirmation is determined by his death. Litleton 107. pag. 31. Ed. 3. Fitz. Tit. Grant. 61.
               
                  
                     •
                   The Lord Archbiſhop of Cant. (Sede Briſtol vacante) could not confirme but during his ſuppoſed Gardian-ſhip at the moſt. 20. Ed. 4. 2. Rastal 514. Wards § 9.
               
                  
                     •
                   The ſaid Archbiſhop was not then Gardian of the ſaid Church, but the Biſhop of Gloceſter, viz. Cheiney, who then held the Biſhopricke of Briſtoll in Commend.
               
               5 The reuerſion being in the Crowne, the Queene viz. Eliz: ought likewiſe to haue ioyned in the Confirmation with the Patron aforeſaid. Iudged in the Dutchie.
               
               6 The ſaid Leaſe was Antedated about two yeeres before the ſaid Brag came to be Parſon there, that ſo made or Antedated the ſaid Leaſe.
            
            Yet by colour of this Leaſe the Gleabe lands are made away from the Church into the ſaid
            Copieholds for liues hauing but a pretended eſtate of 10. yeeres.
            And the Petitioner Morley ſtill remaining Parſon of the ſaid Church for theſe fiue yeeres ſpace, hath nothing to ſupply the Cure, being diſpoſeſt
of the profits thereof by an Iniunction giuen with out hearing.
         
      
   