
      
         
            
            
            THE True knowledge of a mans owne ſelfe.
            Written in French by Monſieur du Pleſsis, Lord of Pleſſie Marly.
            
            ❀And truly tranſlated into Engliſh by A. M.
            
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for William Leake, at the ſigne of the Grey-hound in Paules Churchyard. 1602.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Aduenturez et marchez auant.
                  coat of arms or blazon
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT VVorſhipfull, Maiſter Iohn Swynnerton, Eſquire: And to the moſt vertuous Gentlewoman his Wife: All happines to them & theyrs in this life, and in the life to come hartilie wiſhed.
            
               THis excellent Treatiſe, (right Worſhipfull) beeing written in the French tongue, by that honorable and learned Gentleman, Monſieur du Pleſsis, appeareth by his owne words, to be doone for the reformation of a mightie Atheist, who stood ſtifly against the knowledge of God, & verie deepe diſgrace of Religion by him dailie committed. In regard whereof, albeit hee had commended to him his learned labour

of the truth of Christian religion, (able enough to ſtop the impious mouth of any blasphemer whatſoeuer:) yet he was the rather induced this way to deale with him, becauſe by laying open the knowledge of a mans owne ſelfe, and the ſeuerall admirable testimonies hee carrieth about with him, Gods omnipotent glory might the more plainly be approoued, the immortalitie of the ſoule no way be able to be denied, nor the truth of Gods religion & his prouidence be at any time doubted of.
            If wee looke vpon any curious picture drawne to the life: wee immediatly conceiue, that the ſame was the work of ſome rare and artificiall Painter. If wee gaze vpon the goodly Monuments and ſtately erected Pallaces, full of arte, industry, & many exquiſite perfections: wee preſently apprehend, that ſome ingenious Maister was the contriuer thereof, and that it proceeded from a skilfull workman. If diſcretion, in cenſuring of theſe and ſuch like things, dooth ſo ſway our oppinions: what

can wee then ſay, when beholding the world, and attayning to the knowledge of wonderful thinges therein contained, but that perforce wee must confeſſe and acknowledge, an higher cauſe and eſpeciall Creator of them all?
            Let vs come then to Microcoſmus, to the little world man, and enter awhile but into this kinde of conſideration. Wee cannot be ſo abſurd and blockiſh, but that we will graunt he had a beginning, a cauſe from whence he came, that it was not poſſible for him to make himſelfe, but must needes come into the world by the help & meanes of ſome other.
            This very conſideration, guides vs to acknowledge a Father and Mother, frō whoſe loynes we proceeded, & that from them wee had the benefit of life. Ariſing thence by further gradations, wee attaine to intelligence of our prediceſſors, & iudge by them as of our ſelues: that they had an originall as we had, and were not the first men in the worlde, but aſcending vp ſtill

from Father to Father, wee ſhall finde in the end one Father of vs all, & that from him we had our first beginning.
            Concerning that first Father of vs all, hee must alſo deſcend of one, or el
                  •
               e bee eternall, or come of ſome matter like to God, or at the least be GOD himſelfe. Which becauſe he could not be, hee must needes haue ſome beginning, & be borne after ſome other ſort, then they that did deſcend of him: wherein what can wee otherwiſe ſay, but that the Creator of the whole world must needes be his father? From this beginning wee can climbe no higher, but there of neceſſity must ſtay & conclude: that this first Creator of Nature was without beginning, and becauſe we ſhall elſe haue no place to rest at, confeſſe him to be infinite and eternall. Thus the creature leades vs to finde out the Creator, and proceeding from one eſſence to another, attaines at last to the first eſſence, endleſſe & euerlasting, as the ſpring and originall of all in generall, to wit, the

almightie and omnipotent great God.
            Hauing thus attained to the knowledge of God by the creature, let vs nowe proceede to learne to know what the creature is: which beeing the whole ſcope and argument of the Treatiſe following, I will leaue the whole caſe to be reſolued thereby, as beeing therein handled at full and very learnedly.
            Now my humble ſute vnto your Worſhip is, that in regarde of ſome breach of promiſe, concerning my Paradox Apologie, which long ſince you ſhould haue had, but that the troubles of the time, & miſinterpretation of the worke by ſome in authoritie, was the only cauſe why it went not forward: that you would pleaſe to accept of this excellent labour, not as in diſcharge of that former debt, becauſe it being againe restored me, ſhall ſhortly come to aunſwer for it ſelfe, but rather to looke with the more fauourable regard on this, first for the honorable Frenchmans ſake, whoſe workes doe carry no meane commendation

through the vvorlde: And next, for the vnfained affection I beare you, deuoting my best abilities of ſtudie to your kinde patronage, ſo pleaſe you but to grace them with fauourable acceptance.
            The Treatiſe against Atheiſme, written by the ſame Author, to the ſame perſon, and annexed to this learned labour of his, beeing likewiſe ſo lately come to my handes, I will (by Gods aſſistance) finiſh with what expedition I may, and entitle it to the kinde entertayner of this former, as beeing a booke most needfull for theſe times, wherein neuer enough can be ſayde or written of that argument, ſo mightie is the multitude of blasphemous Atheists, and ſo dangerous their proceedings to Gods high diſhonour.
            I am loth to be troubleſome by tediouſnes to your Worſhip, becauſe to the wiſe and iuditiall, I know a word is ſufficient: the worke, my ſelfe, and what I can beſide, I prostrate to your gentle interpretation, wiſhing to you, the vertuous Gentlewoman

your wife, & hopefull iſſue, all thoſe hapepie bleſſings that this worlde can or may affoord, & after the finiſhing of this frail-terrestriall pilgrimage, a full meaſure of eternall tranquilitie in the Land of the liuing.
            
               
                  Your VVorſhips in all truneſſe of affection, An: Mundy.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            BY the iudgement of the beſt and learnedſt Philoſophers, as alſo by ſome apparant proofe in our owne ſelues, wee finde, that our affection or deſire after any thing, is a quality proper & peculier to the ſoule: for from it onely are our affections deriued, and thereby are we led to the proſecution of whatſoeuer we can moſt couet. Now, all our longings and deſirous appetites, are not euermore for the beſt, albeit in our fraile iudgements it may carry a wel ſeeming likelyhoode: but too often we

finde it by wofull experience▪ that we haue no greater enemies then our owne affections, nor fall into heauier daungers, then thoſe we are led to by our owne wilfull follies.
            To runne into particularities of our ſeuerall appetencies, as ſome after honour, others after riches, others after temporarie glory or applauſe, and others after vaine & friuolous pleaſures: would require a larger diſcourſe then this whereto I am limitted, and I ſhould but follow the olde track of cuſtome, which almoſt is handled in euery tractate. Yet we find the nice natures of ſome to be ſo ſcrupulous, that when the liuer-veine of theyr corrupted opinions is but toucht a little,

not launced or let blood for the better ſafety of their health: they fall into ſuch extraordinarie fits, or rather frenzies, that no men are more condemned, then they that can ſooneſt cure them, nor worſe entreated, then ſuch as beſt loue them.
            And what is the maine impediment in thoſe teachie humoriſts, but only a mighty aſſurance and ouer-weening of their own knowledge, and skilfull reach in all thinges whatſouer? whereas if theyr capacity of knowledge were brought to the true touch indeede, it would euidently appeare that they know nothing at all, at leaſt not what they ought to know, and would beſt of all become them to haue knovvledge

of. The ambitious man pretends to know what honour & height of dignity is; yet findes his knowledge to be meere ignorance, vvhen the miſerable downfall from his expectation, teacheth him (too late) that a meane eſtate had beene much better.
            The greedy ſcraping money-monger perſwades himſelfe, that his knowledge in managing of worldly commodities, and battering for beſt aduantage by bargayning, is as much as is needfull and neceſſarie for him to be acquainted withall, and that, that is the onely reall ſubſtance of knowledge indeede: but when he finds by ſom croſſe & change of the world, as either loſſe at Sea

abroade, rapine of theeues at home, or ſome other caſualtie (vvhereof there vvanteth no aboundance) that this vvorldlie knowledge is indeede but witleſſe folly, then hee can cry out with the Philoſopher, that hee had much witte, but no knovvledge.
            The like might be ſaid of the proude, enuious, wanton, Epicure, &c. all of them coueting no other kinde of knowledge, but what beſt fitteth & agreeth with their ſenſuall appetites; to whom I aunſwer with that learned Father Saint Ambroſe; That it had beene much better for them not to haue knowne at all, except they had attayned to true knowledge indeede.
            
            
               
               Seneca tells vs, that the looking Glaſſe was firſt made & inuented, for a man to come to the eaſier knovvledge of himſelfe thereby. Nowe albeit we may gather ſomwhat concerning our ſelues, when we view our faces, proportion and the bodies liniaments therein: yet Socrates reached to a greater matter, and applied this beholding of our ſelues in a Glaſſe, to an euident enſtruction of life and good behauiour. For, he would very often aduiſe his Schollers and follovvers, to make a continuall vſe of looking themſelues in a glaſſe, to the end, that he who perceaued his ſhape to be comly and well beautified, might thereby learne to ſhunne all turpitude in manners, which

would much deforme and blemiſh ſo goodly an appearance. Moreouer, hee gaue them this further admonition, that vvhen any one did diſcern by the glaſſe, ſome want eyther of apt forme or comlines in himſelfe, or any other impediment vvhich hee thought to be defectiue: that his labour and care ſhould be the more induſtriouſly applyed, to recompence the lack of his outward wants and imperfections, with the mindes inward vertues & more ſplendant graces. Contrariwiſe, if the outward ſhape appeared Angell-like & goodly: to make the inward part thereto as beautifull in reſemblance, by auoyding all occaſions that may deforme it.
            
               Vpon conſideration (gentle Reader) of that which hath been before alleaged, happening ſo vvell on this excellent Treatiſe, vvritten in French by Monſieur du Pleſsis, an honorable Gentleman of the Kings Counſell, and gouernour of his Crovvne and Kingdome of Nauarre, being entituled, The true knowledge of a mans owne ſelfe, and therfore may the more aptly be compared to a Glaſſe, that guides a man to the knowledge of himſelf: I was the more deſirous to beſtow tranſlation on it, that it might paſſe abroade to generall benefit.
            And ſo much the rather was I thereto induced, becauſe this Glaſſe hath a vvonderous difference from the other, which but

deliuer our outward ſhape and ſemblance onely; For this diſcouers the inward parts of the bodie, from the very houre of conception, to the lateſt minute of life, vvith the manner of nouriſhing, encreaſing and grovving to perfection, and how the body naturally liueth by his power & organes, with euery ſence, nerue and faculty thereto belonging; likewiſe how the ſoule hath her being in the body, approouing the dignitie and immortalitie thereof.
            My humble ſute to thee, in requitall of my labour, and the ineſtimable benefitte thou mayſt gaine heereby: is, that thou wouldſt reade it with reuerence and diſcretion, as a woorke not

meete for euery immodeſt iudgment. Let thy reuerence be to God, who hath ſo miraculouſly wrought for thee, and beſtowed ſo many bleſsings on thee in Nature. Let thy diſcretion guide thee ſtep by ſtep, to a true and perfect knovvledge of thy ſelfe, by ſhunning thoſe corruptions and vices that blemiſh & vvrong Nature, and embracing thoſe excellent preſcriptions heerein inſerted, to preſerue thee in a moſt tranquile & happy condition.
            Laſt of all, for him that firſt in French vvrote it, and my ſelfe that haue made it apt for thee in Engliſh: we will refer our ſelues together to thine ovvne conſtruction, beeing loath to conceaue ſo vnkindlie of thee, as for

a good turne to looke for any other then kindnes at the leaſt, which if thou canſt affoord vs, it is all we deſire, and in trueth no leſſe then wee haue well deſerued.
            
               Thine, A. M.
            
         
         
            
            Errata.
            
               FOr dogs, read drugs.
               page, 1. line 6.
               For Genues, read Gennes.
               pa. 34. li. 11.
               For inteſtiues▪ read inteſtines.
               pa. 52. li. 2.
               For he, read the.
               page 53. line. 20.
               For cerkitude, read certitude.
               page. 96.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The true knovvledge of a mans owne ſelfe.
            IF great & excellent ſpirits, tooke delight to know and vnderſtand the nature of all kindes of Beaſtes, trees, hearbes, dogges, & other things, vvhich God by his power created, by his wiſedom gouernes & maintaineth, and in his liberal bounty hath ordained to our vſe: ſurely, vvith farre greater reaſon, vvee ought to take ſome

paines to haue knovvledge of our own ſelues.
            The knovvledge of a mans owne ſelfe,The benefit of the knowledge of a mans owne ſelfe. auaileth, not onely for preſeruation of the bodies health, but likewiſe to moderate the vehemē
               cie of inordinate affections, which hinder and impeach the health of iudgement. And, although it bee a matter indeed very hard to expreſſe, in regard of the excellencie & inexplicable maieſtie therein conſiſting, agreeing with him that ſaid, Excellent actions are of great difficultie: Yet, for the profit and pleaſure

which may be gathered thereby, my good will ſhall ſtretch foorth her vttermoſt abilitie. Our neereſt way then to attaine this intelligence, is in ſpeaking firſt of our chiefe & principall part, namely the ſoule.
            The ſoule is a ſubſtance ſimple,What the Soule is. hauing continuall agitation in the naturall bodie, poſſeſſed of parts capable to the actions thereof, and albeit (of herſelfe) ſhee haue powers and perfections: yet it is ſo, that while ſhee abideth within the bodie, ſhee hath no vſe vvithout her organes, and thoſe

parts of the bodie that doe agree with her actions.
            
               The vertues of the ſoule.It remayneth therefore to know what vertues are in the Soule; in what parts of the body ſhe performes her actions; by vvhat meanes; & how her vertues are extended; with the full effects of her ſtrength.
            The Phyloſopher numbers fiue ſeuerall powers in the ſoule,The powers in the ſoule. which are diſcerned by offices, organs and obiects, that is to ſay, thoſe thinges whereon ſhee grounds her action.
            The firſt of theſe powers or perfections, is

called vegetatiue, which by the meanes of ſuch thinges as doe preſerue her, (namely, ayre, eating and drinking, ſleeping and watching, reſt and motion, euacuation of ſuperfluities, and the affections of the hart nouriſhing the bodie,) doe giue increaſe, and power to beget.
            Nouriſhment is made by the vertue of naturall heate,Of nouriſhment. which conuerts the meat & drink into the ſubſtaunce of him that takes it. The organes & inſtruments which haue vſe of this power in operation, are thoſe parts of the body

appointed to receiue, change, and tranſport our foode: as are the mouth, the pipe or paſſage of the throate, the ventricle, the liuer, and the veines, which doe conuey the blood.
            Howbeit, all the bodies parts doe ſerue to make nouriſhment, & conuert the ſeuerall aliments or ſuſtenaunce into their ſubſtaunce: whereupon one vvell ſaith, that each part hath his peculiar power, to receiue, retaine, alter, and expell.
            
               The manner of the bodies nouriſhment.The maner how the body is nouriſhed, is neceſſary to be known▪
               
as well in regarde of health, as alſo behauiour, which makes mee the more willing to deſcribe it, for all mens eaſier apprehenſion.
            When the ſtomacke or ventricle hath receiued the foode, it locks it vp afterward to heate & conuert it into a kind of white matter, which beeing ſo changed (according to his qualities) diſcends by degrees into the guts and bowels, certaine veines wherof doe ſucke and draw the very pureſt & beſt ſubſtaunce, and ſo do cary it to the Liuer.
            When it is groſſe &

ſuperfluous, it diſcends into the nether guttes, but when it is elaborate and refined by the Liuer, then doth it make ſome ample diſtribution.
            
               Choller.For, the chollerick humour, in the greateſt part is with-drawne, & receiued into a little purſſe, cōmonly called the purſe of the gaule.
            
            
               Melancholie
               Mellancholie, which is the very groſſeſt and moſt earthy bloode, is ſent into the Spleene.
            
            The part cold & dry, cōmonly called fleame,
               Phlegme. is diſperſed by diuers proportions into the veines, according to the

oppinion of many, the very beſt whereof the kidneies doe drawe to them for theyr nouriſhment, and the reſt is caried by veſſels attending on the bladder, whereof vrine is made in that part.
            What elſe remaineth of this maſſe or ſubſtance, is tranſported to the hart, where the right ventricle thereof receiues and purifies it, to the ende it may bee conuenable and fit for nouriſhment.
            Moreouer,Of the blood. one part of the bloode ſo receiued into the right ventricle of the hart, is deriued

vnto the left ventricle, & conuerted into the ſpirits vitall: So called, becauſe by them the life & natural heate of the bodie is preſerued, and ſo are the animall ſpirits of the braine made, which are the inſtruments of moouing and vnderſtanding, and of thoſe noble actions that conduct our life.
            Againe, from thys right ventricle of the hart, is the blood diſtilled into the veines, and from them an appoſition & commutation of them, is conuayed into our ſubſtance.
            There are three ſeuerall

digeſtions made,Three kinds of digeſtion to perfect nouriſhmēt, onely to perfect thys nouriſhment: the firſt is in the ventricle, which vulgarly is called the ſtomack, whē the food is conuerted into matter dry and white: the ſecond is in the Liuer, where the ſaid matter is altered, & takes a kind of red colour: the third is in the veines, where this matter (already cō
               uerted red, and made blood) is purified, thinned, and heated, by the vertue and warmth of thoſe ſpirits which are in the arteries, & (as the nature of ſweat) doe paſſe ouer the heads of

thoſe arteries, and ſubtilly is mingled with the blood of the veines.
            Heerein truly nature gaue vs the lawe & example of communicating our graces,Natures inſtruction concerning our gifts & graces. gyfts, and perfections, from one to another, for the arteries, which are the pypes appoynted for carriage of the ſpirits, where the fineſt & perfecteſt blood (regularlie placed vnder the veines, by poares & little holes almoſt imperceptible) doe make cō
               munitie of their ſpirits with the veines, to the end that the bloode of thoſe veines moſt corſiue

and cold, might be heated, altered, & ſubtiled by the meanes of thoſe ſpirits: in recompence of which benefit, the veines doe impart theyr blood to the arteries, to moiſten and temper theyr ſpyrites, which (without thys helpe) would be verie dry, burning, and too hote.
            The like argument deriued from nature, vſeth S. Paule, 1, Cor. 12.1. Cor, 12. cōferring the offices of the bodies members, the vtilitie, dignitie and cōmunication of them, with the ſpirituall graces, which god hath diſtributed

to euerie one perticulerly, to make a cōplete body, & an intire church (as it were,) the place is well worth the noting.
            
               The inconuenience of the firſt digeſtion, not holpen by the other.Wee commonly ſay, that the hurte or defect of the firſt digeſtion, cannot be corrected & repaired by the other: euen ſo, when the ventricle dooth not iuſtlie performe his dutie, the matter which remayneth ouer-rawe or cruded, can neuer ingender good blood.
            Therefore, ſuch as giue not due leyſure to theyr ſtomack to make digeſtion, doe fill their

bodies with hurtful humours, abating and weakening the vertue of theyr ſtomacke, and likewiſe of theyr liuer: whence groweth Palſies, trembling or ſhaking of the members, age haſtened ſooner thē ſhould be, with bliſters and bleanes, which deforme and much miſſhape the bodie.
            Yet is not this all the inconuenience & hurt that enſues heereby, for if the blood be impure, the ſpirits made therof, cannot be cleere or noble, of which ſpirits, are vapours & fumes ſubtilly extracted & drawn

frō the blood, of which ſpirits are begotten and heated the left ventricle of the hart, & made like induſtrious & liuelie ſparkles, to giue heat and vertue to the parts of nature, as both proffer and produce theyr actions.
            Theſe ſparkles haue been (by reaſon of their dignitie & excellence) in ſo great admiration,The oppinion of ſom concerning the ſoule. that diuers entred raſhly into this errour, that thoſe ſpirits were the ſubſtance of the ſoule: then the impure blood, badly digeſted, groſſe and diſorderly concocted can neuer be made

ſpirites, nor by ouergroſſe and impure ſpirits, can be doone anie noble actions, neyther can the ſoule be freelie exerciſed in her offices, onely through theyr moſt harmefull hinderances.
            For we ſee thoſe men that are giuen to intemperancie,The hurt of intemperancie. be commonlie ſleepie, dull, of ſlender capacitie, not able any long while to contemplate, retaine, well conferre, or vnderſtand the order, diſcourſe, cauſes and effects of thinges, neyther what conuenaunce or difference is among them:

nor can they promptly or expeditiouſly apprehend and iudge the benefite or harme, which enſueth on any thing taken in hand, ſo great is the intemperance of the mouth.
            
               Herac. Ephe.
               Heraclitus the Epheſian, by impuritie of his feeding, became full of the Dropſie.Salomon. Salomon ſaith, that more periſh by the intemperance of the mouth, then by the ſword.
            
            Hipocrates numbers ſixe things,Sixe things not naturallie in vs. which hee calls not naturall in vs, becauſe they are no parts at all or members of the body, yet neceſſarie notwithſtanding

to maintain life: which are ayre, eating & drinking, ſleep and watchfulnes, motion & reſt, euacuation of ſuperfluities, and the affections of the hart. Hee giues a rule whereby to know thoſe things profitable for the bodie, as alſo the manner & order howe to vſe them. Firſt (ſaith hee) labour and moderate exerciſe of the body, meat, drink & ſleep, all theſe things are to bee vſed in a meane.
            The benefite of the firſt, is,The benefit of labour. that by moderate labor, naturall heat is excited and mooued,

ſuperfluities are conſumed & expelled, which is a profitable thing before new viands be receiued. For euen as hot water by the fires ſide becomes coole, when cold water is mingled therewith: ſo is digeſtion hindered, when the ſtomacke is charged vvith freſh receite of foode, not ſtaying till the former haue taken his due courſe. Thys ought wee eſpecially to auoyde, according to the rule which ſayth: that the more vve nouriſh an impure bodie, the more we do offend & dangerouſly hurt it.
            
               Thoſe labours & exerciſes, which do cauſe great agitation of the armes & ſtomacke, are moſt agreeable for health: but care muſt bee had of ouer great ſtirring, as well of the bodie as of the minde, immediatly after refection is receiued, for then we ſhould reſt, or keep ourſelues from immoderate moouing,The hurt of immoderate exerciſe. becauſe (in that caſe) the ſtomacke beeing too much ſtirred, it cannot intirely and fully make his digeſtion: For the little doore beneath in the ſtomacke, by thys ouer-haſtie ſtirring, is

opened, & therethrogh eſcapeth ſome matter vndigeſted, which fault (as already vvee haue ſaid) cannot afterwarde againe repaire it ſelfe.
            The qualities, meaſure or quantities, the kindes or ſorts of food, the time, and the place for taking them, the cō
               plexions both of them, and thoſe that receiue them: ought alſo to be diligently cōſidered & weighed, but them we doe referre to the Phiſitions, who haue therin preſcribed very learned rules.
            
               The benefit of ſleepe.Sleepe is neceſſarie for the preſeruation of

health, and then it beſt agreeth with the bodie, when the vapours and fumes (both ſweet and profitable) of nouriſhment, beeing in the ſtomack, doe raiſe vp thē
               ſelues to the braine, ſlyding ſweetly thorowe the ventricles of the braine, thickning and mingling them-ſelues vvith the braines naturall coldnes: for, in diſcending, they woulde hinder the courſe of the motiue and ſenſitiue ſpirits, and ſtop the conduits of vnderſtanding, and thoſe nerues vſuallie ſeruing for motion. Nor doe I without iuſt

cauſe terme theſe vapours to be ſweet: for if they bee at any time too clammie, ſharp, dul, or ſlow, they doe then wounde the braine, and engender Apoplexies.
            
               How ſleepe profits the powers of the Soule.This reſt ſerues to recreate the powers of the ſoule, it moyſtens the braine to beget new ſpirits, and labours for perfecting the offices of the ventricle & liuer: all which thinges at full it performeth, becauſe the hart (therby) reuocates & drawes his heat to him. For thoſe mē
               bers which are farre off from the hart, do wexe cold by ſleeping, as we

may note in the hands, head and feete: wherefore it behoueth to couer thoſe parts better in the time of reſt & ſleeping, then whē we are awake, buſied, and labouring.
            This reuocation of heate and blood for the hart, works it ſelfe thus,How heate and blood worke for the hart. the vapors being made cold by the braine, in diſcending, doe meete warme fumes cōming from the hart, wherevpon thoſe vapours are chaſed to the exteriour parts, and ſo the heate of the hart more amply is augmented: wherof, the hart, by the arteries,

like to a King, (willing to aſſiſt & furniſh thorowly the indigences & wants of the liuer, and the ſtomack) makes his prouiſion and ſtore of blood & heate, to help thē with ſupply in perfecting their concoctions, and offices of nature. And aſſuredlie, heerein we haue a liuelie example, of the well guiding, gouerning, & managing of a cōmonwealth:An excellent compariſon. for the hart (as Prince and King) enricheth & furniſheth him ſelf in the time of peace and reſt, (commonlie called ſleep) to the end he may in needful time

likewiſe, diſtribute to the liuer and ſtomacke, ſuch ſpirits as are ſufficient for their working, which ſpirits do helpe, further and fortefie the naturall heate.
            Truely,Three duties needfull in a Prince or Ruler. the firſt and chiefeſt office of a Prince or Gouernour of any Country, is, or ought to bee, that his Subiects may liue in quiet, without vexation or trouble of incurſions, and thefts of enemies.
            The ſecond office, is, that he take order they haue victuals and prouiſion, for their nouriſhment and maintenaunce.

And the third, is, that they ſhould bee inſtructed in Religion, honeſt actions, & other neceſſary Artes, for maintenaunce of humaine ſocietie.
            
               Concluſion concerning ſleepe.Sleepe then is moſt neceſſarie, and ſerueth for euery one of theſe vertues in the ſoul, as in the office vegetatiue or nouriſhing, becauſe it perfects digeſtion: and there is nothing more certaine, then that vncurable crudities doe come thorow lacke of reſt & ſleepe. For not onely by ouer-long watching, the food receiued cannot perfectly

concoct it ſelf, but likewiſe the vertue of the ventricle is feebled and vtterly ouer-throwne: as well through the charge & weight of the foode, as alſo that the nerues are made weake by the feeblenes of the braine, whence they proceede, and this debilitie is only cauſed by want of reſt. It ſerues alſo in the power appetente:
               The power appetente. for the hart attracts his heate, and engenders great aboundance of ſpirits, which are alwaies the cleerer, the more the bloode is neate and purified.
            It profits likewiſe the

power principal, which is the vertue Intellectiue,
               The power Intellectiue. for hee orders his actions by meanes of the ſpirits in the braine, which touch & mooue the nerues, as well ſenſitiue as motiue.
            Adde wee heereto, that in ſleepe, the ſubſtance of the braine is refreſhed and moiſtened, which braine, (by too great drynes,) looſeth his complexion, & the ſubſtaunce of the nerues cannot then wel performe their offices: iuſtly agreeing with the ſtrings of a muſicall inſtrument,An apt compariſon. which if they be too dry, or too moiſt,

too ſlack, or too much extēded, they can yield no ſounde of good accordance.
            This place admoniſheth vs to ſpeake of dreames and fantaſies,Concerning dreames in ſleepe. which happen in the time of ſleepe, and are nothing elſe but meere imaginations, that preſent themſelues, vvhen the ſpirits (which are the inſtruments of our cogitations) leaue their orderly courſe, & confuſedly and irregulerly moue themſelues in the braine.
            There are diuers ſorts of dreames,Diuers kinds of dreames. ſome being called common & vulgare,

becauſe that the cauſes are euident: as when in our ſleepe, the images and ſhapes of things, which the day before haue exerciſed and frequented our cogitations, doe make a tender and offer of thē
               ſelues:Example of dreames, the cauſes being euident. as Iudges do often reuolue on theyr law-caſes: Scholaſtical Diuines, on theyr relations & vrgent examinations: Carters cal on theyr horſes: Sheepheards on their ſheepe, and ſo of others.
            
               When the cauſe of dreames is in vs.Sometimes the cauſe of dreames is within vs, as thoſe dreames which agree with the humors

abounding & working in vs, and theſe humors doe induce imaginations: as ſometimes, by the great aboundance of phlegme beeing in the ſtomacke, a man dreams that he is ſwimming in a water: or by the weight & thicknes of humour in the ſtomacke or braine, a man thinkes he is crowded, or down-preſſed in his ſleepe.
            There be other ſorts of dreames,Dreames fore-telling things to enſue. which are many times predictions or fore-runners, of ſuch things as are to enſue: but theſe dreames are not alwaies certaine, &

they happē to perſons, by reaſon of ſome ſpeciall cōplexion or temprature remaining in them, or elſe by gyft of diuine perfection: as naturally ſome one is more enclined to poeſie or muſique, then another.
            
               Examples concerning dreames.Many eſpeciall examples haue beene noted, as namely the Phiſition of Auguſtus, who dreamed that the Tent belonging to the ſayde Prince, ſhould be ſpoyled: whereof he aduertiſed the Emperor, who immediatly did withdraw from thence, and ſoone after it hapned,

that the enemy came & ſet vpon it, ſpoyling & deſtroying all that was in it.
            And Cicero, who dreamed of Octauius before hee knewe him, that hee ſhould be the Prince of that cōmonwealth. And a ſouldier at Genues, who dreamed that hee ſhould be deuoured by a Serpent, and therefore, on the day he ſhould haue bin ſhipt away thence amongſt others, he hid himſelfe in his houſe: where, by the inconuenience of a tumult, vvhich happened that day in the Citty, he was

ſlaine by a bullet, which came from a peece named a Serpentine.
            
               Diuine dreames or inſpirations.There are other manner of dreames, which diuinely are ſent to mē by inſpirations, or announciations of Angels: ſuch as were the dreames of Iacob, Ioſeph, Daniell, and ſuch like. Such doe neuer happen vpon light affaires or occaſions, but in caſes of importance: as for the gouernment of GODS church in Kingdoms and common-weales, for order and obſeruation therein to be kept: Which kinde of dreames are

alwaies certaine. There be others deuiliſh,Deuilliſh dreames. as the dream of Caſſius, wherof 
                  Ʋalerius writeth.
            Wee haue then ſpoken ſufficiently (for this time) of the manner how we are nouriſhed, which behooueth the more to be vnderſtood,The hurt of intemperance. for our better preſeruation frō intemperance: for when wee giue no leyſure to Nature, to make her concoctions and tranſmutations, the receptacles of the bodie doe fil themſelues with hurtfull humors, which rotting within vs, doe engender very dangerous diſeaſes: conſidering

that the free and liberall courſe of the animall ſpirits, which are the chiefeſt and verie neereſt inſtruments, or organes of our vnderſtanding, are hindered by the colde fumes of the ſtomack, which thē doe mount vp into the braine.
            
               Encreaſe of nouriſhment.The augmentation of nouriſhmēt differs onlie, according to the time & quantitie of the creature, for there is a power, which in a certain time cauſeth in the creature a iuſt quantitie, according to his kinde: to wit, when it increaſeth through all

his dimēſions, as length, largenes, and thicknes in al parts, which works it ſelfe about fiue and twenty or thirty yeeres.When Nature receaueth moſt ſubſtance to her ſelfe. In this time nature receiueth moſt ſubſtance by what ſhee takes, which ſhee looſeth not by emptying her fumes & excrements, for then is the heate naturall in greateſt force.
            Galen ſaith, that after this iuſt quantity is confirmed in the creature, the action of nature growes to weaken, becauſe the pipes & veſſels of the body, wexe to bee more dry then before: but we ſay that

it is the ordenaunce of God, who hath conſtituted and limitted to euery creature a tearme and date, vntill vvhich time hee ſhould increaſe.
            Euen as wee behold the flame of a lampe,Example how the body is increaſed. to be nouriſhed & maintained by ſom clammie drines which is in it: in like manner the bodie of any creature, hauing life and vnderſtanding, hath ſom eſpecial good humiditie, fat and ayrie, which commeth of the ſeede and eſſentiall beginning of the body, & diſperſeth it ſelf throgh all the parts, wherein is

carried this viuifying & celeſtiall heate, holding together, & ſtill nouriſhing this heate, which humiditie once conſumed, immediatly that heate is quenched.
            This humidity is (by little and little) vſed & perfected by this heate,When naturall heate decayeth in vs. and as the meaſure and proportion of this humiditie is diminiſhed in vs, the naturall heate groweth to be the more weakened.
            And albeit that thys beſt and primitiue humiditie, be ſo maintayned and nouriſhed, by that which wee take in eating & drinking day

by day, yet whatſoeuer exceedeth, or goes beyond that iuſt ſubſtaunce, is held to bee moſt impure. Like vnto wine, which while his firſt force & nature is intire, he wil very wel beare ſome ſmall quantitie of water: but if often, & houre by houre it ſhal be ſo commixed, he will in the end looſe all his ſtrength.
            
               Example conceruing our life.Vpon the like termes ſtandeth our life, for that which we take and receiue daily in ſubſtance, doth not ſo naturally nouriſh this viuifying heat, as the firſt and originall humidity.

For note heereby how naturall death cōmeth,Death naturall according to Ariſtotle. which Ariſtotle ſayth to be, when the heat naturall is extinct: that is to ſay, when the primitiue & originall humiditie (pure and intire) is conſumed.
            Death not naturall,Death vnnaturall, occaſioned by many cauſes in our ſelues. hath many other cauſes, to weaken and impoueriſh this primitiue humiditie, vvhich is ſweet, pure and temperate of it ſelfe: As by drunkennes, gourmandizing, immoderate lubricities, and other exceſſes of all ſorts.
            Great pitty then is it, that in reſpect our life is

but ſhort, and that day by day it attracts & gathers ſom diminiſhing; that yet through our own barbarouſneſſe & inhumanities, (worthily termed worſe thē thoſe of the Cyclops) we ſhold accellerate and haſten our end, onely by intemperance, and diuers extraordinary kinds of exceſſes. The augmentation is then made by the ſame organes, & by the ſame naturall heate that our nouriſhment is.
            
               Concerning generation.Generation hath his parts properly ordayned by nature, & may be thus defined. The

power of engendering, is that wherby the creature is (as it were) remolded, and renewed for preſeruation of his kinde: that is to ſay, of the common eſſentiall forme, beeing in manie diſtinct and ſinguler parts.
            The manner how the fruite is formed in the matrixe of a woman,Howe the fruite is formed at the firſt. is thus. When the matrix hath receiued the ſeede of man and woman together, firſt of all the matrix, like to a little Ouen, (moderatelie made warme) doth dry & ſweetly harden outwardly the two ſeedes

together: and makes a thin skin about it, ſuch as wee ſee about the hard ſhell of an Egge, which skinne or membrane, is made to keep and continue the ſayde ſeede, ſoftly and ſweetly boyling within it, only by aboundance of fine and ſubtile ſpirits, which naturally are in the ſame ſeede.
            This mēbrane, wherin the ſeede is kept and encloſed,The offices of the membrane. is principally made of the Womans ſeede, which is more ſoft, and leſſe thicke or maſſie, becauſe it is extended with more facilitie then the other.
            
               And not onely is thys membrane made to cō
               taine the ſeede, but it is alſo for other vſes beſide:Of ye veines and arteries of the membrane. for thereon are placed and impoſed infinite veines & arteries, to the end that by them the menſtruall bloode might be caried, for the nouriture and encreaſing of the fruite, which veines & arteries haue their originall, not only of the ſpermaticke veſſels, that is to ſay, thoſe which draw, prepare & carie this ſeed, but likewiſe of a great truncke or veine, planted and rooted on the liuer.
            This skinne is (as it

were) folded and wrapt about the matrix, to the end the ſayde matrixe might giue warmth to the fruite round about.
            There is in this wrapper or membrane, many ſmall threds of veins or arteries, which ſpreading and extending themſelues one among another, doe conſtitute and make two veines and two arteries, and in the midſt of them a conduit. Theſe veines and arteries, like rootes of fruite,Howe the nauill is made, & in what time. beeing planted in the ſeede, doe make the nauil: where, by the firſt ſixe dayes, nature cloatheth theſe

ſtringes and threds of veines and arteries, and the ſeede ſoftly boyleth in his folder. Then about the ſeauenth day, when the nauill is formed, and theſe veines and arteries ioyned, through them is drawn the blood and ſpirits, & caried & mingled with the ſaide ſeede, for forming of the principall members. For in thys enuellopper there are diuers entries, like the entring into ſome little vault or ſeller, in which entries or concauities, they are conioyned together, & (thorow thoſe vaultes) the little rootes

doe attract blood and ſpirit. And while the ſeede thus heats & boileth,The places for the liuer, hart, and braine. it is made like three litle bladders or purſes, which are the places for the liuer, the hart, and braine.
            There is then drawn along by a veine proceeding from the nauil, ſome thicke bloode, as nouriſhment, vvhich thickens & ſhuts it ſelfe into the ſeede.
            The fore-ſaid veine is forked, and alongſt one of thoſe braunches paſſeth this blood,How the liuer is formed, and what it is. and ſettles it ſelfe to a thicke ſubſtance: behold then how the liuer is formed.
            
               Wee ſee by experience, that the Liuer is nothing elſe but thickned blood, grown hard together, and this liuer hath many ſmal threds, which ſerue to attract, retaine, change and expell, according as vve haue before declared.
            Alongſt the other branch of this veine, is formed a gutte or paſſage, which ſoone after,How the bowels are faſtned to the backe. carieth, contriueth and faſteneth the bowels or inwards, to the backe of the creature, and it is a veſſell where-with to ſuſtaine the veines, wherin proſpereth the verie pureſt part of

blood, in the ſmalleſt inteſtines or inwards, and ſo conueies it to the liuer. In like manner, alongſt the ſame brāch, the ſtomack, the ſpleen, and the bowels are formed. So whē the liuer is perfected, he makes an aſſembly of the ſmalleſt veines, as of little rootes, and by their aſſembling is made a great veine on the vpper part of the Liuer, which vaine produceth ſome high braunching foorth, whereof is formed Diaphragma:
               How Diaphragma is formed. to wit, a ſtrange rounde muſcle, lying ouerthwart the lower part

of the breaſt, ſeperating the hart and lites from the ſtomacke, with the Liuer and the Spleene. And ſo is made a part of the bones belonging to the backe,Of the back bones. and there be brāches which ſhoote out ſome-what lower, whereof is alſo formed the reſt of the ſaid back bones.
            The arteries diſperſed from the nauill amongſt the ſeede, doe tende toward the ridge of the back,The forming of the hart. & by little and little haue a place deſigned, for forming and engendring of h
                  •
               e hart. Theſe arteries doe drawe the hoteſt and

moſt ſubtile bloode, whereof in the little purſe (therfore appointed) is the hart engendered and formed: vvhich hart is a ſolide fleſh, hard and thick, as is moſt conuenable for ſo very hott a member.
            The great plant or veine, extends & goes iuſt to the right ventricle of the hart, onely to carry and adminiſter blood for his nouriſhment:The harts nouriſhmēt. and beneath this veine, ariſeth or ſprings vp another vein, which carrieth the purified blood to the lites, made ſubtile and hote, onelie to nouriſh and keepe it

warme.
            At the left ventricle of the hart ariſeth a great arterie, which carrieth the ſpirits vitall, formed of blood by the heat of the hart,A compariſon worth the noting. thorow all the body. And euen as by the braunches of thys great trunck of veines, the blood is conueyed thorowe all the bodies parts for nouriſhment thereof: So by the boughes or armes of this arterie, are the ſpyrits likewiſe caried thorowe all the bodie, to furniſh it with vitall heate. And doubtleſſe,The hart is the beginner of heat vitall. the hart is the beginner of vitall heate, without

which, the other members can not produce their actions, neither can theyr nouriſhment be dulie made.
            Vnder this artery of the fore-ſaid left ventricle, ſprings vp another arterie, which ſerues to carry the ſweet ayre frō the lungs & lites to the hart, to refreſh it: and likewiſe to recarry the ayre, beeing firſt made warme by the hart. So then, whē of theſe two ventricles of the hart, are thoſe veins brought forth which doe intend to the lites: of the ſubtile bloode (vvhich is tranſported by this

veine of the right ventricle of the hart,Howe the lungs and lites are formed, & cō
                  ſequently the height of the body.) is the lungs and lites formed and made, and ſo ſucceſſiuely all the height of the body, is made by theſe arteries & veines, which are conueyers to the ſpirits and bloode, whereby nature fullie makes vp all her building.
            Soone after, the brain,The forming of the braine. which is the place and ſeate for the very nobleſt functions and offices of nature, is formed in this manner. A great part of the ſeede with-drawes it ſelf, & is receiued into the third little purſe before ſpecified,

heereof is the braine cōpoſed, whereto is ioyned a couerture, hard and dry by force of naturall heate, like vnto a tile in a fornace,The skul of the head. & that is the skul of the heade. So the braine is onely made of the ſeede, to receiue, conſerue & change the ſpirits, which are the inſtruments and cauſes of voluntary moouing, and of vnderſtanding: it behoueth then that it ſhould not be made of vile or ſimple matter, but of the aboundance of ſeed, fulleſt of ſpirits.
            Novve, euen as the veines are bredde in the

liuer, and the arteries in the hart:The nerues are bred in the braine, as the veines in the liuer. So are the nerues in the braine, which are of the nature of the braine, viſcuous, clammie and hard. Nor are they holow, like the veines and arteries, but ſolid & maſſie: except thoſe two that are called Opticke, which doe cōuey the ſpirits of the braine into the ſight of the eye.
            From the braine diſcends the marrowe in the chine of the backe, and there is great difference, between the marow of the other bones, and this heere ſpoken of: for the marrowe in

the other bones is a ſuperfluitie of nouriſhment, engendred of blood, ordained to noriſh and moiſten the bones,The marrow in the chine bone of the back. but the marrow in the chine bone of the back, is engendered and made of the ſeede, appointed for producing of the nerues ſenſitiue and motiue.
            
            VVee may (by that which hath been ſaide) in ſome ſort knowe the beginning and faſhion of our humaine bodie. VVhile the fruite is in the wombe,Howe the fruit is nouriſhed in the wombe. it is nouriſhed by blood, attracted at the nauil, becauſe the fluxes ordinarie to

women, do ceaſe when they become great, and the infant drawes aboū
               dance of blood for his nouriſhment. The ſuperfluous blood is deuided into three parts: of the very beſt & pureſt part,The deuiſion of the blood into three parts, and to what vſes. is the infant nouriſhed in his mothers bellie: the other part leſſe pure, is caried to the breaſts, and conuerted into milke: the third and laſt part, like ſlime in the bottome of a mariſh, is diſcharged in the birth of the child.
            The times of the infants beeing in the wombe, are diſcerned in this ſort: and the bodies

of male chyldren,Male chyldren more perfect then female. are euer more perfect then the female, for the ſeede whereof the male is made, is hotter then the other.
            
               An admirable ſecret, & worthy (wt great reuerence) to be regarded.The firſt ſixe dayes after conception, the ſeede boileth, reſolueth, and becommeth as an egge, making three little bladders or purſes, as before wee haue declared.
            Nine dayes following, is the attractions of blood, wherof are made the liuer and the hart: and twelue dayes after the afore-ſaid ſixe and nine dayes, is the liuer, the hart, and the braine

to bee ſeene and diſcerned. Then eyghteene dayes after, are the other members formed: theſe dayes nūbred together, are fortie and fiue, and then when the members are formed & diſcerned, the fruit begins to haue life, for it hath ſom feeling: wher vpon it is ſaide, that about the fiue and fortieth day, the ſoule is infuſed into the body.
            Hipocrates giues a very good rule, ſpeaking in this manner.Hipocrates rule frō the time of cō
                  ception, to deliuerance. The daies from the conception, to the perfection & intire forming of the members, beeing doubled,

doe declare the time of the childs ſtirring: and thoſe dayes trebled, doe ſhewe the day for his deliuerance.
            So then, if the infant haue his members and parts perfect the fiue & fortieth day, he will ſtir at ninetie dayes, & ſhal bee borne the ninth month. This rule is ordinarie in male Chyldren, but the female tarie longer.
            
               Of the power Vegetatiue, and how it nouriſheth and increaſeth the body, as alſo maintaineth kindIt is as eaſie likewiſe to iudge, howe much the power vegetatiue is neceſſary, which preſerues and maintaineth (by his offices) as vvell the whole frame, as the

ſinguler parts there-to belonging: that is to ſay, by nouriſhing and augmenting, it maintaines the ſeueral parts, and by generation preſerues and ſupplies the ſtate of kind. Euery one ought to know thys, & reuerence theſe gifts of God in nature, vſing them lawfully, and to the benefit of humaine ſocietie: For it is no light offence, to be exceſſiue and diſſolute in theſe thinges, wherein likewiſe if we keep not a meane and meaſure, there dooth enſue horrible paines, not onely temporal, but alſo eternall.

Indeede Nature admoniſheth vs to bee continent,How nature admoniſheth vs to be continent. and if ſhee woulde not bee deformed in the beginning, ſhee would haue no other power vſed in generation then is neceſſary:Our ſelues the greateſt enemies to nature. but we deſtroy al, by vaine lubricities, inconſtant & inordinate meanes, decaying Nature in her very ſelfe.
            Ouer and beyonde this, the dilligence, arte and care, which nature appointeth to engender, preſerue and perfect the infant in the wombe of his mother: aduiſeth vs to preſerue and bee reſpectiue of

kind. It is then great inhumanitie, rage and furie, if one part do grow offenſiue to another: for we ſee by the archetecture of nature, the faſhion, the ſeate, the order and vſe of euerie ſeuerall part, that there was an infinite power in the Creator of thys frame and peece of workmanſhippe,The infinite goodnes of God in our bodies framing. by ſo great wiſedome or dayned and compaſſed, by vnexpreſſable goodnes liberally furniſhed, and prouided of all thinges for noriſhing & maintaining the ſame.
            Doubtleſſe, whoſoeuer ſees not & vnderſtands

theſe things, hath loſt the light of true ſence, and is more degenerate to humaine nature, thē Nabuchadnezzer when hee became a bruite beaſt.
            And in truth, the order of theſe powers is worthy conſideration:Howe the order of the ſeuerall powers is to be conſidered in theyr offices. for (as hath beene ſaid) the power to nouriſh, maintaines the diſtinct and ſinguler parts: the power of augmentation, giues them a iuſt quantitie, that is to ſay, greatnes, largenes and thicknes: the power to engender, preſerues & ſupplies kinde. I ſay (in repeating it againe) that

this order cleerly ſhews vs, that there is an eternall GOD,An abſolute proofe of God againſt any Atheiſt whatſoeuer. who by his infinite power created theſe natures, & by his incōprehenſible vviſedom aſſigned thē theyr offices, and ſeperated theyr effects, as we may behold that euery one begetteth a thing like to himſelfe. For theſe kindes are guarded in their cerkitude, and by a certaine law and maner are theſe liuing creatures produced: and not confuſedly (without counſell) mingled & confounded in their kindes.
            We ſhould conſider

and acknowledge God in nature reuerently,A note cō
                  cerning chriſtian dutie in vs toward God, in regard of al his diuine gifts beſtowed on vs in nature. we ſhould eſteeme the actions of nouriſhing, giuing increaſe, and ſupplying by generation, as diuine gifts and graces, the abuſe whereof is puniſhed by moſt horrible paines. VVe ſee drunkennes, licoriſh feeding, & groſſe gurmandizing, to bee the cauſes of murders, circumuentions in iudgement, trades, traffiques and merchandiſes, of beggeries, and miſerable ruine of goods and lands, of wretched diſeaſes and ſickneſſes, as well corporall as ſpirituall.

As for lubricities and immoderate thefts, we ſee the euils and inconueniences enſuing thereby, to be great, & in greater perſons then one woulde wiſh to ſee it: wherat thoſe of better vnderſtanding receiue no mean diſcontentment.
            The ſecond power of the ſoule,Of the power Senſitiue, being the ſecond power of the ſoule. is called ſenſitiue, it is that wherby wee diſcerne our ſeuerall actions, and it is an excellent and neceſſarie benefite to man: not only to ſearch and ſeeke after his liuing, & a certaine place wherin to confine himſelfe; but

likewiſe for many other offices requiſite in humane ſocietie. Thys power is deuided into ſences exteriour & interiour.
            
               Of the exteriour ſences, beeing fiue in number.The ſences exteriour are fiue, namely Sight, Hearing, Taſting, Sent or Smelling, and Touching, & theſe fiue ſences are diſcerned by theyr offices, ſeates or organes.
            
               1. Sight, & howe the ſame is wrought in vs.Sight is the ſence whereby vvee beholde colours and the light, which things are propper obiects to the ſayd power: and this perception is wrought by the meanes of certaine

ſpirits, comming from the braine by the optick nerues, into the apple of the eye, wherein there is a chriſtaline humour, which receiues (as by a glaſſe or mirrour) the kindes & luſters of colours, and likewiſe of the light.
            We gather alſo hereby, the greatnes, figure, number, motion & poſition of bodies, yet not ſingulerly and properly ſo, but likewiſe theſe things are known with and by helpe of the other ſences.
            Ariſtotle beeing demaunded, conſidering we haue two eyes, wherfore

all thinges which we behold, do not ſeem double to vs? the aunſwere he made thereto was thus.Ariſtotles anſwer concerning our two eyes. That becauſe the nerues of the eye, are ſeated betweene the place of their originall, and the eye, where they meete together like the forke of a tree, therfore the ſpirits vnited there together, doe make the obiect ſeeme but one thing onely.
            
               Of the inward organs of the ſight, and what vſe they ſerue vs to.The interiour organs then of this power, are the ſpirits aſſigned to that office, and they are tranſported by the Opticke nerues into the eye, whereof the exteriour

is the eye. This power ſerues vs to knowe the heauens, & they moue vs to vnderſtand, the power and wiſedom of ſo great a GOD: to know alſo the elemēts, and them ſeuerallie in their natures, to the end we might make election of the faireſt, and leaue the deformed.Small difference between life & death, but by the benefit of ſight In ſooth, there would appeare, no great difference betweene life and death, if we ſhold haue perpetuall darkneſſe: what a wonderful bleſſedneſſe then is it, and more then our frayle thoughts can ſtretch vnto, that GOD hath

giuen vs this gift, namely, the light?
            Plato ſaith, that our eyes are giuen vs,Platos oppiniō, to what end our eyes are giuen vs. to inſtruct vs in the knowledge of God, whē we behold the cleerenes of heauen, with his reguler and ordinarie motions: for this admoniſheth vs (whether wee will or no) of the builder and maker of the world, of his great power, wiſedom, & counſell, and of the admirable and eternall light, whereof we ſhall haue ioy after this mortall life. This power hath his ſeate in the humour chriſtaline, ſhut vnder

the bal of the eye, which humour ſhineth of his owne nature:Where the ſight hath his ſeate and abiding. and the nerues thereto deputed, doe carrie the ſpyrits, which attain to the boule of the cirkle, that ſhewes it ſelf in the eyes to be of diuers colours.
            Theſe ſpirits thē giue life to the eye, and are as a little flame,Of the ſpirits that giue life to the eye. reſembling the Celeſtiall bright beame, and giueth ſtrength & power to ſee. The names, the matter, the qualities, & the ſeat of the balls and humours of this member, wee leaue vnto the Phiſicall Anatomiſts: but properly and peculierly,

by this ſence wee apprehend the light & colours, for, as Ariſtotle ſayth,Ariſtotles iudgment of the eye. the eye can ſee nothing, but onely by his colour, which colour is the qualitie of a commixed body, participating of the light.
            
               A queſtion concerning the ſight of the eye.One demaunds, how thoſe things offered & apprehēded by the eye, or whether ſo euer it addreſſeth it ſelfe, are thereby perceiued? the common aunſwere is,The anſwer worth the noting. the light beeing in the colour of the thing ſeene, ſpreads and extends his beames thorow the ayre, and thys light formes an image

in the eye, as in a mirrour, becauſe that the beame when it findes the eye, redoubles if ſelf & gathers together, & ſo the image is made: as wee ſhall ſee the Sun beame,An excellent compariſon. entring by a creuiſe or crannie into an obſcure place, when it ſettles it ſelfe vpon any hard thing▪ as on a wall, it engroſſeth & redoubles it ſelfe, as is very eaſie to be noted.
            If the light bee ouer violent, it may hurt and offende the eye,How eaſilie the eye may be offended as wee may ſee by the flaſh of lightning: and any colour that is too excellent, cannot ſuddenlie

and perfectly be diſcerned, but it raiſeth ſome debilitie in the ſight, as we may ſee likewiſe by ſnowe: but queſtionleſſe, the whole nature of the light is full of meruailes, and can neyther be perfectly explicated, nor ſufficientlie vnderſtood.
            
               The maner how colours are truly diſcerned.The kinds or images of whatſoeuer colours, are not perceiued at all, but onely by the means of the aire, or the water, as we may note, when one offers a thing too neer vnto the eye, then the beholder doth not plainly ſee it, for aſſuredly, the light which is

in the colour, is very feeble, and a man cannot ſee or diſcerne it, without ſome diſtance, yea, and very ample meanes of it ſelfe.The true capacitie of the eye in ſight. And it is alſo to bee vnderſtoode, that the eye neuer ſees any thing, but according to a direct line, and that the ſhapes or images which come into the eye, doe carrie the figure or likenes of a Piramides, which figure is ſeated in the thing ſeene, and ſo in a direct ſharpneſſe renders it to the eye.
            The commodities of this ſence are euident,The benefits which the ſence of ſight yeeldeth. as well for the knowledge

of God, our ſearch for ſafetie and aſſuraunce, our willing preuention of perrils and inconueniences: as alſo for our choyſe and election, of thoſe things which are beautiful and fayre, and leauing them, which in themſelues appeare to be ill ſhapte and counterfeit, & God knowes what confuſion would happen in our life, if we had not this happie and gracious power of ſight.
            
               2. Of Hearing, & the organs therto appertayning.Hearing is a Sence wherby we apprehend ſounds, which ſence is garniſhed outwardlie with an organe ample

enough for entraunce, but crooked and ful of windinges in deſcending, to the end that by little & little, the ſound might gather it ſelfe together in the organe: for otherwiſe, if the ſound entred violentlie, & altogether, it would greatly hurt the power ſenſuiue.
            
            Sounde is a qualitie,What ſound or noyſe is, and howe it makes it ſelfe. onely cōming from the fraction of the ayre, which is made whē two bodies large and harde do beat againſt one another. This fraction is made in the ayre, as wee may eaſily ſee, when we throw a litle light ſtone

vpō the water, it makes an appearance like litle circles, in turning and entring into the water: and euen as in ſmall & narrovve Fountaines, thoſe circles beat often againſt the walls, and ſo redouble them-ſelues: euen ſo in places which are cauernie, vaulty, or in forreſts that are well furniſhed with Trees, the ayre comming frō ſuch hollow breakings, doth very audibly and perfectly redouble the ſounds.
            The meanes wherby any ſuch ſoūd or noiſe is apprehended,Of the means wherby eyther ſounde or noiſe is apprehended. is the ayre, for thereby is the

ſounde carried to the hole or buckole of the eare, and is there entertained by another interiour ayre, tempered by diuers ſweet ſpirits, only thereunto naturallie ordained, vvhich (againſt a litle thin skinne ſpredde ouer the hole,) renders back againe the ſounde; as wee ſee the skin doth vpon a drum or tabour.
            This ſounde made againſt the ſaide thinne skin,Howe all ſounds are conueyed to the ſence common. by the ſpirits tempered of the ſweete naturall ayre, is conuayed by the nerues (for that ſeruice deputed) to the ſence cōmon, where only

is made the dijudication & diſcretion, of the qualities of all kinds of ſoundes: to wit, which are obtuſe or piercing, which are ſweet, rude, wandring or delightful, & ſo of al other differences and varieties in the ſounds.
            
               The maner how our voyce or ſpeech is formed.To this purpoſe may wee ſpeake of our humaine voyce or ſpeech, which is formed and made on high at the rude, rough, and ſharp arterie, for ſo ſome call the cōduit or wezand, vvhere the tongue (at the entraunce of the throat) ſmites & cleaues the ayre, as we may verie

apparantly beholde in our Flutes, ſo is the voyce made in the wezand, and ſo is guided right alōgſt the throat. Therefore Fiſhes doe forme no voyce at all,An excellent note cōcerning our voyce or ſpeech. for they haue no ſuch conduit, neither lungs or lytes, by the motion whereof, ayre might mount vp into theyr throat: theſe things are euident, but the meanes and cauſes are hidden, beeing an eſpeciall benefite granted by God in nature. Nor can the ſaid cauſes be plainlie vnderſtoode, by the weakenes and obſcuritie of the light of our

capacities: Notwithſtanding, we ought reuerently to giue glory to the Creator, for hauing ſo wiſely created and ordained the cauſes, motions and effects of this ſence, which is ſo profitable and auayling, not onely for our health, but likewiſe for directing the affaires of this life: For, by thys ſence vvee haue faith,By this ſence wee haue fayth. ſaith S. Paule: thereby we alſo make our contractions, & in our conuentions, it is neceſſary to vnderſtand one another.
            
               3 Of Smelling, and by what organs it is apprehended.The ſence of Smelling, is that wherby we

diſtinguiſh ſents and odours; The organe of this ſence is two little ſpungie teates, and full of ſpirits, which are ſeated beneath the forehead, aboue the cōduit of the noſtrils, whence the ſubſtaunce of the braine, conuerts to a little neruie skin, but yet exceeding ſoft and verie tender: by the cloſing & preſſure whereof, all ſents & ſmells are apprehended.
            Nor are the two noſtrills the proper ſence, but onely doe ſerue to conuey the odour into this organe: as is verie eaſie to be noated; for,

we perceiue not at al anie odours or ſmels, but only attract the ayre by the ſaid noſthrils, to the organe ſeated neere the braine, to the end, ſuch gracious ſmells might recreate & cherriſh the braine.
            Odour or ſent,What odour, ſent or ſmell is. is a certaine qualitie in a ſubtile and inuiſible fume, iſſuing frō commixed bodies, wherewith the ayrie humiditie is mingled in an earthly nature, abounding eyther more or leſſe, and is like a thing burnt, or much dried▪ as wee may gather by the wood of Iuniper▪ Roſemarie

& others: wheron it is ſaid, that the humour or moiſture, gouernes in the ſauour, & the drineſſe, in the odour.
            Thinges burnt,Apt compariſons of ſents in their moiſt & dry kindes. that are moiſt in a mediocritie, doe ſauour well, but ſuch as are altogether dry, haue no odour at all: becauſe in them both cold and drineſſe, are the reaſons that they haue no ſent.
            And albeit that ſome colde things are odoriferous, as bee Roſes & Violets: Neuertheleſſe, by their odor they doe heate and vvarme ſweetly.
            
               This is the reaſon, why in the Eaſt partes, things of ſtrong ſauour doe moſt encreaſe,The ſweeteſt things haue leaſt ſauour. becauſe the coūtry is hot, and likewiſe things exceedingly ſweete, haue the leſſe ſauour, by reaſon they are fulleſt of humiditie.
            Contrariwiſe, thoſe thinges which bee leſſe ſtrong, & yet burning, are of the better ſauour, as Roſemary is good in odoure, but very bitter in the taſte.
            
               The differences between good ſents and hurtfull.The generall differences of odours, are thoſe that bee good odours, which comes frō the ſweeteſt parts, and

beſt digeſted, hauing an ayrie nature, and is a pleaſing recreation to the braine. And likewiſe bad odours, which are thoſe that be called ſtincking, being a qualitie comming from the corrupt and putrified parts, which is a poyſon and hurt to the braine.
            There be other differences of ſent, taken of ſauours, as is a burning and ſtrong odour, ſuch as the ſent of Garlick or Onions: & the ſower ſauour, drawne from ſharpneſſe, as the ſent of vineger.The means howe wee iudge of ſmells. The meane vvhereby vvee diſcerne and iudge of theſe odours,

is the ayre: for Fiſhes do ſauour a ſmel or odour in the water: as we beholde them to be ſooner taken, by the ſent of ſome one baite, then of another.
            
               Sent is very neceſſary to our life.It is a thing very neceſſary to life, as wel for recreating and delighting the braine, by the receiuing and perception of kindlieſt & beſt pleaſing ſauour
                  •
               
               ▪ as alſo for freeing and ridding (by the noſthrils) the ſuperfluities of the braine.
            
               4 Of the ſence of Taſting▪ & his organe.The ſence of Taſting, is that whereby we diſcerne and relliſh ſauours: the organe of

this ſence, is a neruous skinne, ſpred ouer the fleſhe of the tongue, which fleſhe is full of pores, ſlacke, ſlow and ſpungy.Howe the tongue receiues his taſt. The ſelfe ſame skin is extended to the pallate, and hath his originall of thoſe nerues which diſcende by the pallate, to the roote of the tongue, & giues the tongue his power to taſte, & to diſcerne the foure chiefeſt qualities: Now becauſe the ſayd fleſh is full of ſpirit and humour, the more eaſily is therin impreſſed the ſauour of things.
            The meanes of thys powers vſe in his actions,

is the ſaide looſe or ſlack fleſh,The means of the taſtes vſe in his actions. & the ſpettle or moiſture which is aboue it: and therefore we ſee, that ſuch as haue an Ague, find al things bitter, for their ſpettle is bilious or hot, as much to ſay, as mingled with the chollerick humour.
            The obiect of thys ſence,Sauour, the onely obiect of taſte. is ſauour, which is a certaine qualitie in the thing, hauing more humiditie then drines, vvhich is digeſted by the heat naturall.Many ſorts of ſauours. There be many ſorts of ſauors, which make very much for our further knowledge: becauſe they ſhewe and teach the diuers

temperature and complexion of things, and for whom they are meeteſt, vvhich is a matter well worth the regarding and vnderſtanding, as wel for our ciuill regiment in dyet, as for the remedie of diſeaſes: for, as Galen ſaith, it is neceſſary that our nouriture ſhoulde be ſweet, or prepared, & mingled with things that are pleaſing and ſweet.
            The ſauour that is ſweet, as of honnie,Of the ſweet ſauour. or of ſweet wine, doth delight the tongue, becauſe ſuch a ſauour is ayrie, & agreeing with

our fleſhe and bloode, proper alſo to nouriſhment, temperate both in heate and drought: for, (as is already ſayd) it is needfull that the nouriſhment be ſweet, or at leaſt tempered with ſweetnes, becauſe ſweet viands & drinks, doe mollifie and fill the parts which are dry & vacant.
            
               Of the ſauour ouer ſweet.But notwithſtanding, ſuch things as are exceeding ſweet, as Suger and honie, doe abounde in their ayrie heate, and very eaſilie enflame and conuert into choller: therefore ſuch as vſe Suger and

honie too often, or aboundantly, it ingenders in thē ſtrong choler, & putrifactions alſo, onely by the abounding of humours.Of the fatte & marrowie ſauour. The ſauour which is neereſt to this before named, is the fat and marrovvie, which is not ſo hott as the former: ſuch is the ſauour of butter, oyle, and fleſh.
            A meane in vſage of thē is good, for thinges which are ouer fattie, do hurt much: becauſe they will floate vpō the ſtomacke, offend and hinder digeſtion, and alſo doe engender oppilations.
            
               
               What ſauours beſt agree with nature, and moſt pleaſe the taſte.Theſe two ſauors are moſt agreeable to nature, and delight the taſt of a healthfull perſon. For, euen as the hand glads it ſelfe, at the entrance into lukewarme water, beeing made temperate in his heate: ſo the taſte delights it ſelfe in thinges ſweet and fatty, becauſe they are indeed temperately hotte, like vnto the blood and fleſh, & alſo doe procure delectation, in that they agree in temperature with nature.
            
               Of the bitter ſauour.The ſauour which wee call bitter, is properly contrarie to the

ſweete, and is a ſauour that frets, makes hoarſe and bites the tongue, & is of an earthy nature or complexion, which beeing thick alſo, hath naturally in it an exceſſe of heat in drines: as is the taſte of wormwood and Aloes, and therefore thinges ouer bitter, doe neuer nouriſh.
            The ſauour ſtrong and ardent,Of the ſtrōg and hot ſauour. differs frō the bitter, for not onely doth it wring, byte, and teare the tongue: but alſo it burnes and chaps it, which penetrates & enters by heating and drying extreamely:

This ſauour exceeds the bitter in hotnes, and ſuch is the taſte of Pepper, Ginger, Sneeſing-woorte, Garlick and Onions.
            There is a ſauour called ſower, drawing on ſharpnes,Of the ſower ſauour. which in returning backe becommeth cold, whereby it flagges & weakens the tongue much: vvhich ſauour is both colde & dry, neuertheleſſe it exceedeth moſt in coldnes, and ſuch is the ſauour of Sorrell.
            The ſauour of vineger is not altogether ſo, for, as it retaines ſome obſcure and weak heat,

ſo is it alſo ſome-vvhat ſtrong, and yet therein is coldnes moſt; For, when the ayrie partes thereof are caſt foorth, it remaines earthie in ſome chillie humour.
            Hence is it naturallie receiued,The ſharpeſt ſauours doe moſt vrge appetite. that ſharpeſt thinges doe giue moſt appetite: becauſe they deiect the ſuperfluous humours, gathered before together at the entrance of the ventricle, onely by byting, without any burning. So doth Sorrel ſeem good for ſuch as haue a Feauer, not onely becauſe it caſts out & diſcharges the ayrie ſuperfluities,

but likewiſe, by reaſon it moderates the heate chollerick.
            The ſauour called greene,Of ye greene ſauour, that edgeth the teeth. which ſetts the teeth an edge, ſhuts vp and drawes backe the tongue: Wherefore it hath the power to collect, thicken, and bind faſt, being of an earthy nature, crude, cold, & dry, therefore it differs from the precedent ſauour, becauſe the former is of a ſubtile nature, and this other is thickning: of ſuch taſt are Medlars and other greene fruites, before they are come to theyr maturitie, for whē they

are ripe, they haue a commixed ſauour, as mingled both vvith ſweetnes & greenenes.Of the rude and ſharpe ſauour. There are other ſauors beſides theſe, as that which is termed rude, & ſharpe too, that ſoftly dries & hardens the tongue, yet neyther wreſts nor binds it, like the precedent taſte: in nature it is earthy, maſſiue, cold and dry, neuertheleſſe, more hotte and moiſt then the other.
            Galen ſaith, that this relliſh is good in wine, for wines of this taſte, doe naturally ſhutte vp and dry the ventricle,
               
caſting fumes of ſmall heat vp to the braine.
            The ſalt ſauor makes not any retyring of the tongue,Of the ſalt ſauour. but it whets it by waſhing and drying it, for ſalt guardeth frō putrifactions, becauſe it thinneth and drieth the parts ſeuerally, perfecting all the humidities; wherfore ſalt hardneth ſoft fleſh, and ſoftneth hard: for, as in the ſoft it conſumeth all ſuperfluitie of humour, ſo in the harde it attenuates and ſoftens the parts, making the more mild and daintie, beeing of an earthy nature, thick, hotte, and dry.
            
               Some things are ſaid to be without ſauour,Of thinges without ſauour. becauſe in thē are not to be foūd any of theſe natures before expreſſed.
            The ſence of Touching,5. Of the ſence of Touching and his organe. is that whereby we diſcerne the foure chiefeſt qualities, to wit, heat, cold, drought and moiſtnes. The organe of this, is not in any ſole or alone part of the body, but is like a thin skinne or neruie caule, which is ſpredde ouer the whole bodie, vnder the vppermoſt skinne, taking his originall from the braine, and from the mouth of

the chine bone in the backe. The moſt ſubtile nerues, doe make the moſt ſenſible parts, as are thoſe nerues that deſcend into the purſe of the hart, and to the ventricle.
               Of the benefit of this ſence. The benefite of this ſence is apparent, for a man delights when hee is hotte, to touch coole things, & the coldeſt parts of the body, take pleaſure in touching thinges that are warme.
            The interiour ſence is a power working by organes,Of the inward ſence, and where it is ſeated. ſeated within the brows or forehead, appointed for knowledge and vnderſtanding,

excelling all the exteriour ſences. For if wee ſhould apprehend onely the things, which offer and preſent them ſelues before vs, without diſcerning or making any iudgement of them, it would profite vs but very little: For, what auailes it to looke on black and white, & not to diſcerne or ſeuerally diſtinguiſh them? Therfore the ſence interiour is very behouefull,The neceſſity of the inward ſence to make diſcretion and dijudication of things, by their ſeuerall cauſes & effects: as the horſe, accuſtomed to paſſe by the way where

hee hath once falne, growes afraid of falling there againe, this hath thē ſome power aboue the outwarde ſences, whereof we ſhal come to ſpeake hereafter.
            
               The ſence cōmon, and memory, according to Ariſtotle.Ariſtotle nūbers the ſences interiour, to bee two: to wit, the Sence common, and Memorie.
            
               Galens addition of cogitation.Galen puts another to theſe two, called Cogitation, ſo hee accounts thē to be three.
            
               Fiue inward ſences.There be others that name fiue inward Sences, to wit, the Sence common,1. Sence common. which receiues the images and apparitions of thinges

preſented to the outward ſence.
            Secondly,2. Sence imaginatiue. the ſence Imaginatiue, which diſcernes the actions of each one of the exteriour ſences.
            Thirdly,3. Sence eſtimatiue. the ſence Eſtimatiue, which by one thing iudgeth another: as a horſe, when one ſtrokes or clapps him, conceiues that he takes pleaſure in him.
            The fourth ſence is called Deliberation or Cogitation,4. Sence deliberatiue. which gathers (frō furtheſt off) the cauſes of thinges: theſe doe conferre and make iudgement, after knowledge is receiued,

what difference and agreement hath beene betweene them, which vertues and effects only they haue.
            
               The wonderfull prouidence of God for his creatures.Our eternall GOD, hath by his (prouidēce) enſtamped in his creatures, a moouing meruailous, to ſearch and ſeeke after thinges neceſſarie for conſeruation of their liues, and remedies likewiſe for their diſeaſes: as Serpents that ſeeke after Fennell, for clearing of theyr eyes, or young Aſſes that ſearch for the hearbe Ceterach, to allay theyr melanchollie.
            
               The Serpent or Snake,A ſtrange example of the Snake & the Lamprey. beeing willing to meet or company with the Fiſh called a Lamprey, begins to hiſſe or whiſtle, to procure her cō
               ming, and perceiuing that ſhe comes, to meet and bee ſociable vvith him, he caſts his venim on the grauell, as fearing to engender (of her) by venim or corruption: but when he hath ended, he returnes againe to ſeeke his venim, which if hee finde not, he dies with griefe, for hauing loſt his armes or weapons.
            Now, albeit that they doe theſe thinges naturally,

yet wee may notwithſtāding iudge,A kinde of deliberation in dumb creatures, confirmed by exāples. that they haue herein ſome kinde of deliberation: as we may note for example in a dogge, that knowes his owne maiſter amongſt a huge croude of people.
            A Foxe, a Cat, a Lyon, and other beaſtes, which haue been ſeene to doe admirable acts: and as for Swallowes & Bees, although they performe very meruailous workes, yet for all that, they haue much leſſe cogitation then they afore-named.
            
               5. Sence is memory.The fift interiour ſence, is Memory. The

organe of the ſence cō
               mon,The organe of the ſence common, & his place. is two ventricles at the doore or entrāce of the braine: as much to ſay, as vvhen the nerues of the ſence exteriour, doe carry their ſpirits in their concauities or ventricles, then afterward do theſe ſpirits imprint or ſtampe the ſhapes and images of things in the braine: and thus the ſence interiour workes his actions.
            It is certain that there be many powers in the inward ſences: for,Many powers in the inward ſences. a man may looſe memorie, without any detriment to eſtimation:

moreouer, when eſtimation is wounded, thē medicine or remedie is applied to the forepart of the heade, but when memory is weakened, then helpe is giuen to the head behind.
            Cogitation hath his organe in the midſt of theſe two ventricles or concauities,The organe of cogitation, and his ſeate. which are before in the head, and this power is more excellent to ſome, then others, according to the better compoſing of their heads: as wee ſee ſome more ſudden and quick in inuenting any thing, then others are. Some alſo wil diuine &

iudge more certainly of a propoſed caſe,Example of this ſences power. then others: as Salomon ſo readily perceiued that the woman lyed, who would haue the infant deuided in twaine, and diſtributed to her and the aduerſe partie by halfes, for he conferred the affectiō of the mother indeede, with the other parties, vvhich was nothing at all vnto the child.
            The organe of Memorie is behinde in the brain,The organe of memorie & his place. which part hath leſſe humiditie thē before, and is more apt to conſerue the images & ſhapes of things.
            
               
               Of the brain in his kinds, of diuerſitie.A braine too moyſt, doth eaſily apprehend thinges, but ſuddenly forgets them againe: wheras, the braine that is harder, apprehends more difficultly, but retaineth longer.
            Cold and drineſſe of the brain, is a very pernicious thing for memorie: wherefore it is ſaide, that lubricitie is a plague, which ſpends all humour naturall in a man or woman, and moſt certaine is it, that age then comes, when naturall heate & natiue humiditie do moſt decline.
            The power appetente,
               
is that wherby we purſue or flie thoſe thinges which preſent themſelues before vs: This power is called ſenſitiue appetite, vvhereby all our affections, do purſue what we haue apprehended by the exteriour ſence.
            There is one kind of appetence or deſiring,Two kindes of appetence in the ſences which begets it ſelfe by touching, and is one while tearmed griefe, another while delectation: the other is made without touching: & ſo enſues cogitation, or moouing of the hart, whereby wee followe vvhat is offered, and

which cogitation (be it true or falſe) ſhewes what is moſt conuenient for nature, or makes vs ſhun the things that are not conuenable: ſo that naturally wee may perceiue it cannot bee otherwiſe, but that the thing preſented to the eye, muſt bee from it a ſufficient diſtaunce, or elſe it is not ſeene, neyther can the Nerues doe theyr delighting functions, but in touching thoſe thinges agreeing with nature, vvhereas contrariwiſe, thoſe things which are diſagreeable, breaking and hurting the parts,

muſt needes bee yrkeſome to them, and very painfull.
            True it is,Of the power Motiue. that the motiue power may be reſtrained by the will, for, if wee pleaſe, vvee may ſhut our eyes, and thē vve can behold nothing at all: but vvhile the eye is open, and at libertie, diſtant frō his obiect by a ſufficient ſpace, it cannot but receiue the image thereof; therefore ſuch as haue ſaide, that griefes are oppinions,Of greefes. which come and goe according to imagination, haue ſpoken againſt manifeſt and vniuerſall

experience.
            
               
                  Foure principall affections.
                  
                     1. Ioy.
                     2. Feare.
                     3. Hope.
                     4. Hate.
                  
                  The oppoſites foure.
                  
                     1. Loue.
                     2. Greefe.
                     3. Enuie.
                     4. Iealoſie.
                  
               There be foure principall affections, to wit, ioy, feare, hope, and hate, whereunto are reduced loue, greefe, enuie, iealoſie and others. And ſurely it is a meruailous thing, that ſo ſoone as a man hath knowledge of a thing pleaſing or offenſiue: the hart moues it ſelfe, and likewiſe the ſpirits and humors of the bodie.
            
               Of anger, & the hurt it doth the braine.As in anger, the hart (as riſing to reuendge himſelfe) labours and beates, & then the ſpirits beeing chafed, doe heat the blood, and the

actions of the members are troubled, by the ſuddaine moouing of the ſpirits and confuſion of the blood: but eſpecially in rage or anger, the braine is hurt by the bloode, and the ſpirits inflamed or ouer-heated, doe mount thether, by fiering the nerues and ſubſtaunce of the braine▪ vvhich cauſeth a ſhaking or trembling in the heade, by vehement and ſuddaine mouing, as alſo a preſent fiering of the eyes, & all the face becommeth as burning: therefore, by ouer vehement anger, are frenzies

ingendered, & oftentimes Apoplexies.
            
               Homers oppinion concerning anger.Homer ſaith, that anger is ſweeter thē milk, as meaning, that a man takes great pleaſure, whē he may reuendge himſelf, as he that loues ardently, is buried (as it were) in ioy, when hee hath the iouiſſaunce of the thing by him beloued.Of feare, and how it hurts the hart. Feare is a moouing of the hart or affection, vvhereby the hart ſhuttes vp it ſelfe, as flying and ſhunning euill to happen, and this affection agrees with greefe: for albeit the harme or euil is not yet preſent, neuertheleſſe

it is woūded therby, as if it were inſtant. In like maner,The hurt of greefe and ſadneſſe. in griefe or ſadnes, the hart (as beeing preſſed downe & cloſe ſhut) is weakened, by drying & languiſhing, for not hauing the libertie of the ſpirits: wherefore, if it continue long in this eſtate, it prepares the death of the body, becauſe the ſpirits, by their long pining and conſumption, can giue no further help or ſuccour to it: beholde vvhat great hurt enſues by greefe and ſadnes.
            Loue is a mouing of the hart,Of loue, and how it helps the hart. whereby wee

deſire ſome thing, be it truly good, or but in apparance only. In this mouing, the hart doth (as it were) leap & flie, ſtriuing to attract that thing vnto it, onelie to enioy it: Hope dooth beſt of all agree vvith this affection, but yet ſhe is more vehement.
            
               Of hate and his hurt.Hate is a kind of cō
               ſtant & permanent anger: and anger & hate are contrary to loue.
            
               Of Shame.Shame is a motion, whereby a man deſpiſeth and growes agreeued at himſelfe, for ſom faulte or turpitude by him committed.
            
               Of mercy.Mercie is a greefe

which a man takes for the paines, miſeries or aduerſities of another.
            Enuie is a ſorrowe of one man, at the good,Of Enuie. cōmoditie, or aduancement of another.
            Iealoſie is a mouing,Of Iealoſie. mingled with loue and anger, to wit, vvhen a man loues ſome thing▪ and growes diſpleaſed againſt ſuch, as doe harme, diſhonor, or ill to the thing he loueth: as the prophet Helias, louing the honor proper to God, grewe offended at the misbelieuers.How a king ought to be iealous. So ſhould a king or gouernour of a coū
               try, bee inflamed with

the loue of iuſtice, the profit, honour and aduantage of honeſt people: contrariwiſe, hee ought to deſpiſe the wicked, vngracious, ſeditious, and diſturbers of peace, loyalty, and publique truth.
            
               An affection more hurtful then the reſt.There is another affection, which hath no name neither in Latine nor French, & it is cō
               trary to iealoſie: that is, when one deſires the loſſe and ouerthrow of the good, and the exaltation of hypocrites, lyers, and ſeditious perſons, ſuch as were Nero, Tymon, & (it may be) others of like qualitie

now in theſe times.
            Ioy is a moouing,Of ioy, and how it delighteth the hart. wherby the hart dilates it ſelfe, & ſweetly takes pleaſure at preſent good: it diſpoſeth it ſelfe in hope, to receiue a future good.
            Some of theſe affections are good and agreeable to GOD:Of affections pleaſing to God. as are honeſt loue of thy neighbour, of thy children, thy wife and thy country: iealoſie of the honour and glorie of God: deſire for the aduauncement of vertuous people: feare of the anger and iudgements of God: hatred of Tyrants, ſeditious &

diſſolute diſturbers of publique peace: hope and cōfidence in God in all afflictions whatſoeuer, beeing aſſured that he ſees vs, and that he will ſtill haue compaſſion on vs.
            
               What the contrary are.The other are vicious, as enuie, hate, and thoſe beſide, vvhich trouble the peace of humaine communication, and are the paines or penalties of the firſt fault, diſperſed ouer all mankinde: the meane or moderation of them is very neceſſary, for the cōſeruation of humaine ſocietie, beeing the onely butte & aime

of morall phyloſophie, and of all ciuill lawes in generall.
            And certainly,The hurt of humane ſocietie. neyther can this ſocietie or religiō be maintained, except we refraine frō auarice, hate, and other ſuch like vicious affections, which horriblie doe deforme nature in this part, it remaines then to ſupport thys part with all diligence and reſpect.
            The organe or ſeat of thys power, is the hart,The organe of the power appetēte. & not any part of the braine at all, for oftentimes a man ſhal deſire what hee knowes to be ill: as Ouid ſaide of

Medea: I ſee & approue the good, but I doe the euill. And S. Paule: I ſee another lawe in my members: that is to ſay, the hart, repugnant to the lawe of my vnderſtanding, & it holdeth me in captiuitie, vnder the law of ſin and death: and many other things (to like effect) in his Epiſtle to the Romanies. In briefe, very often is iudgement reprooued by affection, whereby then it is moſt cleere & euident, that our affections are not in the braine, where indeede is the certaine knowledge of thinges.
            
               In this ſort diſputes Galen,Galen, concerning our affections. and by the ſame reaſon it is apparant, that affections are not oppiniōs, as the Stoicks held and eſteemed thē to be.
            That the affections are not of the liuer nor the other parts,Affections are not of the liuer nor the other parts. where the naturall appetentions are, of eating and drinking, it is manifeſt: for, the affections can eaſilie appeaſe themſelus, or vſe ſome kinde of moderation, apprehending the ſame by reaſon, and demonſtrations: but the naturall appetites, as to eate or drinke, will not

be guided by any reaſon: for, as Homer ſaith, there is nothing more impreſſing or continually vrging,Homers ſaying of the belly. then the belly, eſpecially when it is hungry: for it compells vs to be mindfull thereof, although vve had no care thereof at all, and albeit wee had neuer ſo many other things to doe.
            Seeing then that our affections haue theyr ſeate, neyther in the braine, nor in thoſe parts where the organe is of the power vegetatiue: we muſt cōclude thē, that they are in the hart, for the hart is iocond

and merry in ioy, mirth, loue, and hope, but in greefe, anger, feare, hate, & ſuch like, it is wearie, and much troubled.
            The holie Scripture ſaith,Cōcerning our loue to GOD. that a man ought to loue God with al his hart, as much to ſay, as by the affection to receiue the fruition: to purſue this loue in cheerefulneſſe of hart, deſiring to pleaſe him, and in truth (without feigning) to embrace, franckly entertaine, & fulfill his Lawes, truſting in him, & expecting health onely from him: heereto are reduced

the commaundements of the firſt Table.The degrees of the commaūdemēts, in the firſt Table. Now becauſe thoſe works & labors which God commaundes vs, ought to be done of vs in cleannes of hart, not hipocritically, or vvith diſſembling: wee will ſpeake a little thereof heere in this place.
            The firſt commaundement dooth ſtrictlie charge vs,Of the firſt commaundement. to ſtande in awe and feare of God: wherby we may aſſure our ſelues without any doubting, that hee is a God, to whom we owe obedience, and that he puniſheth the faultes, offences, exceſſes and

malices of men.
            The ſecond expreſſeth,Of the ſecond commandemēt. how iealous hee is of his honour, that hee will haue no partner or competitour in his honour, much leſſe anie attribute at all to be giuen to ſtocks or ſtones, images, or inuentions of mens idle braines: the penalties of ſuch offences are therin deſcribed, & to what generations it in iuſtice extendeth, vvee ought then to be moſt careful of his honour & glory.
            The third,Of the third commaundement. chargeth vs to doe all honor and reuerence to the Name of God, & it is the exteriour

honor which is contained in this commaundement, wherby we are enioyned: that with great heede, wiſedome and feare, wee ſhould take care of an oath, for affirmation of any thing, becauſe it is moſt certain, that God hath an eye on all our dooings, and that hee wil ſeuerely puniſh our iniquities.
            So then wee ſhoulde affirme truth in an oths taking, and deſire him to puniſh vs iuſtly, if we ſweare not truly, or if wee doe beguile and deceiue any one: hereby alſo wee are taught,

to deteſt and holde as horrid, all blaſphemies & ſpeeches, which are contrary to Chriſtian religion, and ſo it is cō
               maunded in the inuocation on God.
            The fourth cōmaundement,Of the 4. commaundement. conſiſteth in the obſeruation of ceremonies and duties, thereto belonging, as alſo in their diligent regarding: according to our entraunce into the knowledge of God, of which knowledge they are viſible ſignes, exciting vs to obſeruaunce of true religion. Then the true performing of the commaundements

in the firſt Table, is true feare of God,The ſum of the firſt Table, well worthy to be regarded. certaine truſt in his mercy, obedience to all his commaundements, explication and publication of his doctrine, inuocation for his ayde and propitiation, giuing of thankes, praiſe of his Name & glory, for the creation, conſeruation, & manutention of nature, beeing his ovvne worke, created, conſerued, furniſhed, prouided and maintained by him: behold heere the lawes of the firſt table.
            
               Of the ſecond table.In the ſecond Table, is contained neceſſarie precepts for our owne

pollitique ſocietie: for, firſt of all, ſuch a ſtate cannot be rightly maintained, except there be a kinde of degree and order obſerued among men.
            It is that whereof Ariſtotle ſpeakes in his Pollitiques,Ariſtotle in his Pollitiques, concerning the difference amongſt mē. there are ſome naturally free, & others as ſeruaunts: as much to ſay, as that ſome haue (by the gift of GOD beſtowed on nature) more light of vnderſtāding, & more purity of affections, thē others can reach vnto, to the end, that they may guide and guarde by edicts, lawes & ſtatutes,

the affaires & negotiations of thys lyfe. Such were the ancient law-makers, Pretors, & Iuriſconſults, who left vnto vs ſo many prouident lawes, gathered by certaine demonſtrations, of the cleereneſſe and light, which God had infuſed and placed in their vnderſtanding, as alſo theyr ſincere loue & iealoſie, for the tranquility of publique peace:S. Paules affirmation of lawes & obedience. 
               Which Lawes, (ſaith S. Paule) beeing written in our harts and conſciences, woulde giue vs testimonie of them.
               What men are to bee honoured.
            
            Such perſonages thē ought to be honoured,

as, holding the bridle of authority, do tame rude ſeruaunts, that is to ſay, ſuch as cannot cleerelie iudge of thinges: or (thorowe their inordinate affections) do perpetrate crimes, & commit offence to the ciuil bodie, or to the honors or goods of others.
            There are two manner of gouernments,Two manner of gouernments, the firſt cō
                  pulſiue. one is, to force & compell the rebellious contemners of honeſtie: like vnto a maiſter, who conſtraines his ſeruant (willing or vnwilling) to doe his dutie, without any refuſall or contradiction.
            
               
               The ſecond, ciuill and obedient.The other manner of gouernment, is pollitique and ciuil, as when without compulſion, a man freely dooth the acts of honeſtie, holding in horrour and abhomination, all wickednes and turpitude: namelie, when a man in reaſon is perſwaded, that it ought to be ſo: as Pericles,Pericles ruling of the Athenians. who by honeſt reaſon & ſpeeches guided the Athenian Common-wealth: or as a holy & wiſe Preacher gouerneth his cō
               gregation and church.Seuerall affections in the multitude. In this multitude, euerie one haue their ſeuerall affections, ſome,

ſudden inordinate mouings, and directlie repugnant to vertue: but then by perſwaſion, which a man perceiues to be vſed, of the hurt & inconuenience that may thereon enſue, as well publiquely as priuately; they are made more moderate, and faultes remitted.
            God hath ſtamped in vs,Reaſon and iudgement giuen vs of God. the image and forme of either of theſe maners of gouerment. Reaſon & iudgement well and truly conceiuing thinges, fore-ſees the commodities and diſprofit of al enterpriſes whatſoeuer, exciting

or reſtraining, and accordingly moderates the affections of the hart: and this manner will hold out very well, if daily our affections be managed by ſound iudgement.
            
               The firſt offence, natures maine impedimēt.But becauſe (in thys caſe) nature being diſrancked and made vnrulie, by the firſt offence caſt generallie on all, the affections are not moderated by iudgement, deliberation,The wil, cō
                  maunder of the affections. or honeſt councell: the will, as miſtreſſe of the affections, forbids the motiue power, that ſhee tranſport not the members, to perpetrate

vnreaſonable or pernicious things. As a man hauing a Feuer, affects to drinke inordinately: but yet the will checks the hande, that it ſhall not approche to the cup or glaſſe.
            Thus ſee we two direct formes of gouernment,The application of the two gouernments in nature. the one (to hold back the rebellious inſulters) in theyr office: and the other, by ſweet exhortations and reaſons, drawne from the rule of vnderſtanding, to guide the obedient, and ſway their actions to publique profit and honour.
            Concerning the offices

we owe by dutie to our parents,Of the dutie we owe to our Parents, exampled. we haue a moſt cleere example in nature: as we may eaſily ſee in the young Storkes, who whē they attaine to ſtrength and age, doe nouriſh & aſſiſt their fathers & mothers.
            The following commaundements, forbid to doe iniury or harme to the bodies of one an other.Of the other commaundemēts following. Man is created to be ſociable & communicatiue, as is ſhewē vs by our procreation, carefull nouriſhment▪ and dilligent regard of our propagation: but the principall ende of

this ſocietie, is for our ioynt inſtruction, and erudition together in the lawe of God, and al laudible actions whatſoeuer.
            And becauſe improuident and ill aduiſed men,The reaſon why lawes & penalties were inſtituted. haue neede of directours, therefore, to the end our cōmunitie might continue ſound & intire: the obſtinate & ſtifnecked are to be exempted, & for that cauſe were paines and corrections by lawes inſtituted.
            Againe,Why the deuiſion of poſſeſsions was thought behouefull. in this vnbrideled communication and nature, the auarice and greedines of

the wicked, negligent and ſlothful is ſo great, as they will not permit any one to liue in equalitie or proportion: and therefore the deuiſion of poſſeſsions was thought neceſſarie for, if all ſhoulde bee common, then the idle, negligent and careleſſe wretches, woulde in ſhort while deuoure all the riches of the induſtrious and dilligent:Cōcerning theft. for this cauſe therefore was cōmitting of theft forbidden.
            Notwithſtanding, becauſe that men ſhould haue dealings one with another, it behooued

that the communication of theyr goods and labors, ſhould be made by certaine meaſure & reaſons: for, an vnequall communication, that is to ſay, when the price or recompence ſhalbe ouer-exceeding, or elſe of too light or little value; ſuch entercourſe among men,The reaſon of iuſtice in our contractions. cannot be long maintained: heereupon enſued iuſtice, which renders to euery one his rightfull proportion, in dealing & contracting thus one with another.
            More-ouer, our accords, contracts, tranſactions, cōfederations,

& appointments made by voluntarie agreements,Without truth, no ſocietie can be obſerued. are to be kept: for, without truth, fidelitie & loyaltie of promiſe in our contracts, humaine conuerſation can neuer be cōtinued. Marke then howe nature deſires conſeruation of her ſelfe.
            
               Natures cō
                  ſeruation of herſelfe: & our iniury to her and our ſelues.In eating and drinking, temperance muſt be obſerued: for, intē
               peraunce corrupts nature, and inordinate lubricitie ſpoyles the ſanctified combination of marriage, troubles titles of ſucceſsion, wardſhippes, caſes of dowrie, & al pollitique

order, all which are indeede moſt pernitious woundes to pollitique and diſcreete ſocietie.
            Thus ſee we the law to agree with nature,The lawe agreeing wt nature, and in what maner. which firſt of all eſtabliſhed Religion, afterward conſtituted Magiſtrates, thē they deuiſed to ordaine lawes, for defence of ſuch as were oppreſſed either in goods or bodie: cō
               maunding honor to be giuen to men of worth and deſert, and they to be committed to al politique functions, by certaine▪ formes and lawes. So grew eſtabliſhing of mariages, and

perfect diſcerning of poſſeſsions, as alſo iuſt orders and degrees of correction for all looſe wantons, ouer-daring reſiſters, and wilful cō
               temners of the lawes.
            Aſſuredly, the principall and chiefeſt cauſes of theſe lawes,The lawes them ſelues the voice of nature, by their cauſes. are euen thēſelues the voice and ſentence of nature reſtored, & reformed, that is to ſay: the actions of the light of vnderſtanding, ordered by the very pureſt: and ſincereſt braines, illumined and renued by the grace of God; doe declare in what eſtate this life is guided and

gouerned, and the preſcriptions in the Decalogue apointed, which expreſſe to the very life, the forme of liuing according to the integritie of nature.
            Nowe to returne to the poynt of the harts moouing,Two kindes of mouing in the hart, firſt by the pulſe. there are two ſorts of moouing: one is called the pulſe, whē the ſpirits engendred at the hart, moue the ſame, by meanes of the organes thereto deputed by nature, and likewiſe when by dilatation or cōtraction of his ventricles, the arteries driuen forward by the ſubtile ſpirits within

them, doe conuay & adminiſter heate thorow all the body.
            Novve, albeit theſe thinges are very admirable, yet notwithſtanding, the affections, which are the mouers of the hart, (as we haue heeretofore ſaide,) are worthy of farre greater and much more admiration.
            
               The hart mooueth likewiſe by contrarietie of humours, ſeuerally by each one of them.The hart dilated or ſhut vp, mooueth alſo by diuerſitie of humours: as in anger, it is mooued by the chollerick humour: in ioy it is mooued by the verie ſweeteſt blood, and ſends the ſame (as witneſſe)

to the exteriour parts. In feare, it calls it ſelfe backward, & in griefe it is trobled with the humour of mellanchollie.
            Doubtleſſe, in theſe motions of diuers humours, are fumes and riſings vp of diuers cō
               plexions: nor is it anie eaſie matter to cōprehend the cauſes of theſe moouings, or the coūſell of God in theſe their natural functions.Of the efficient cauſes (inwardly & outwardly) of the harts moouing. The efficient cauſes of theſe affections, are in vs interiourly the hart, and exteriourly the things which offer thē
               ſelues vnto vs, eyther

pleaſing or offenſiue: but it is neceſſarie that knowledge ſhold preceede affection, for, as one ſaith: no man euer deſired, what hee had not firſt knowledge of.
            Ye haue the very like combination betweene the powers of nature,Of the powers of nature anſwerable to the harts affections, & their difference. and that the motions of the hart, doe iuſtly anſwer to the knowledge which a man hath of any thing: but there is a difference in the complections or temperatures of the hart, & the ſpirits, and the bloods preſent beeing, for, the hart beeing hotte and dry, is the ſooner kindled,

whereon wee ſee ſome more ſuddenly to bee enflamed with anger, then others are, & the moouings of the hart & the ſpirits, moueth the blood (not euer-more) after one kinde, but diuerſly, and according to the diuerſitie of the affections.
            Therefore in griefe or ſadneſſe,Of the hart in greefe & ſadnes, and the bloods office in ſeruice then. the hart being ſhruncke vp and crowded together, the blood runnes to him, as willing to helpe him: and this is the reaſon, why men or vvomen (being ſad, agreeued, or fearefull) are pale, meager, and ill complexioned

or colloured.
            In ioy or anger, the hart dilates it ſelfe,Of the hart, in ioy & anger, & how the blood works then. and ſends his bloode to the parts exteriour: therefore becauſe in anger the hart is enflamed, it mooueth redd choller, which ſpreading it ſelfe ouerprodigally abroad, infecteth all the reſt of the blood.
            And if it continue long in that heat, it becommeth blacke, and ſeething ſtrongly, dries vp and burnes, whereby oftentimes it happens that ſome becom frantique, mad and deſperate.
            Thoſe men that abound

in mellancholy,Of mellanchollie and chollericke men, & their conditions. mingled with red choller: are enuious, full of ill will, and of verie ſtrange and hard conditions.
            Sanguine men are ioyous,Of ſanguine men. delightfull and pleaſant, by the aboundance and cleerenes of their blood, for the ſpirits in them are pure & full of rich ſplendour.
            The phlegmatick are dull, remiſſe,Of phlegmatick mē. ſleepie & heauie: becauſe theyr blood is thin, & theyr ſpirits ſcant warme.
            The mellancholick, are properly ſadde and fearefull, becauſe theyr blood is troubled, thick

and colde, their ſpirits likewiſe impure, groſſe, and (as it were) full of darknes.
            
               Of ye ſoules ſocietie with the body, anſwerable to the humours.The very ſame ſocietie is there of the body with the ſoule, and her effects doe aunſwer to theſe humours.
            In griefe or ſadneſſe, the hart ſhuts it ſelfe, & drawing backward (as it were) attracts the humour of mellanchollie to the ſpleene, vvhich ſpreading it ſelfe ſometimes on either ſide the body, engenders diſeaſes in the ſides, as pluriſies, and other verie dangerous obſtructions: which wee ſee to

happen to ſuch as are long time in ſadneſſe, meditating on nothing but matter of griefe & offence: I haue heereto-fore experimented this hurtfull humour in my owne ſelfe, & therfore can the better ſpeake it.
            The proper cauſes thē of theſe affections,Of the proper cauſes of our affections, and whence they receiue their originall. are the things whereto a man finds himſelfe & his cogitation moſt applied: and the hart being ſuddenly mooued, ioyning and following the knowledge of thoſe thinges, dooth in like maner apprehend thē. It is very cleere concerning

anger and griefe, that they haue theyr cauſe inwardlie in the hart, and the exteriour is the knowledge of ſome outward offenſiue thine.
            So of loue in like maner, for all ſuch as are of right iudgement, loue vertue and honeſtie: as Scipio loued honour grounded on vertue, and the beautie thereof in others, mooued him to attempt deedes of high proweſſe, and (oftentimes) very difficult enterpriſes Euen ſo, people excelling in vertue, doe deerely loue together,

for the conuenaunce and naturall ſimilitude that is between them:Ariſtotles oppinion of good people & good affections. For euery one (ſayth Ariſtotle) loueth his like; & truly good affections (ſaith hee) are cauſes of great profit & commoditie, and are as pricks and ſpurres enciting to vertue.
            Plato ſaith,Platos iudgment of anger. that anger is as the nerue of the ſoule, by looſing or with-drawing wherof, vertue is exerciſed.
            Seeing thē that there is in nature, certaine organes and parts proper to her actions, and certaine humours vvhich ſerue neceſſarily to thē,

it behoueth, that ſome of thē ſhould be voide of vice or offence: for euen as the light in the eye, is the gift of God to nature,Our good affections are diuinely inſpired. euen ſo are good affectiōs diuinely inſpired, vvhich prouoke and incite vs to what-ſoeuer is good & honeſt: as to loue our children, hate ſin, diſorder, tirannie, force, violence and all turpitude.
            
               Ariſtotles ſaying of anger in a vertuous man.The ſaying of Ariſtotle is very good, whē he ſaith, that a vertuous man vſeth anger, as a Captaine doth a ſouldiour: for it is moſt euident, that our actions

would be cold and remiſſe, if loue of honeſtie, & hate of vice did not ſeuerallie incite & moue vs. In al reſpects like vnto a ſhip, which hauing no winde, goes ſlowly and ſoftly: euen ſo were we, if wee had no good affections, for thē our actions would be lame, ſlowe, and of ſlender effect.The corruption of nature in vs, the cauſe of euill motions. If nature were not corrupted in vs, wee ſhould haue very good & excellent moouings, and no vices at all remaining in vs: but the order & harmonie of nature beeing troubled, makes bad affections

to ariſe in vs, and ſuch as are repugnant to honeſtie, which boldly do ſurmount, & ouer-goe thoſe that are good, abaſtardizing, and quite ouer-throwing them.
            Neuertheleſſe, in all times, and in all countries, in changes of cō
               mon weales, there hath euer-more beene reſerued ſome heroyick natures, exceeding thoſe of common courſe, hauing motions farre purer, and of much greater excellence then the vulgare.
            
               Of the diuine affections in our Sauiour.The repairer of nature, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, had in him moſt

true & pure affections: as when he threwe the Merchants out of the Temple,His zeale of his Fathers glory. onely for iealoſie hee had of the place, as alſo the honor and worſhip of God, contemning the miſbeleeuers, vvho had polluted the place of veneration, inuocation and holy ſacrifice.His heauines for Lazarus. In the reſurrection of Lazarus, he ſhewed great heauines, whē he wept, as beeing greatly mooued in ſpirit: In loue, wherby he commaunded,His loue to little chyldren. that they ſhoulde permit little children to come vnto him: In compaſſion, which he

had of the people, that had followed him in the deſert and vnfruitfull places:His compaſsion of them in the deſert. And how many times is the word of mercie vſed, repeated & inculqued in the Scripture?
            There is great differēce between the good affections of Chriſtians,The contrarietie of affections in Chriſtians & Infidells. and thoſe in Infidels: for Chriſtians acknowledge this puritie of motion, to be repaired in thē, onely by the grace of God, & cheerfully (for loue of him, and dreade of his diſpleaſure) do ordaine in their gouernmēts, good and honeſt lawes, referring

theyr actions to the glory of GOD: as did the Prophets Eſay & Ieremie, who knew that God would haue Common-weales to be gouerned by holy laws, and all wicked confederatiōs to be caſt out. The other,The wiſedom of the Heathen. (as Cicero) acknowledge not at al, that Magiſtrates are ordained of God, but doe build vppon their owne wiſedome & power, not attributing any honour to God, but onely to them-ſelues: wherefore theſe motions may bee thought good, yet are (by accident) euill to vnbeleeuers,

becauſe they are not ordered, nor ruled by the knowledge and loue of God.
            In this place, after our paſſed ſpeech of the affections, vvhich are actions and moouings of the hart, according to the knowledges comming to it by the ſences: me thinkes it ſhoulde not differ much frō our purpoſe, to ſpeak ſome-what of concupiſcence remayning in vs,Cōcerning concupiſcence abyding in vs. whereby we may vnderſtand many diſputations of Saint Paule, the eſtate of our owne nature, and the great domage or detriment

that comes to vs by originall tranſgreſsion.
            The worde Concupiſcence,Of the word Concupiſcence, and how it may be vnderſtood. according as it ſeemes to mee (yet yeelding ſtill to better iudgement) ſignifies, not onely a mouing of the hart, wherby a man deſires earneſtly & beyond meaſure, ſome thing that may be pretended for profit or pleſure, as to eat, drink, or commit follie: but likewiſe it is a priuation & defect of light in the vnderſtanding, whereof enſueth ignoraunce of God and his wil, vntrueths, boldnes to encounter

with any of his inhibitions, fayling in fayth and loue towards him, as alſo diffidence in his gracious promiſes.
            
               Concupiſcence an errour in the will.Likewiſe, the ſame word imports an error in the will, as diſobedience and contempt of the commaundements of God.
            
               The wills boldneſſe in his owne pride.In theſe obſcurities, our vnderſtanding loueth and conceiueth great admiratiō of him ſelfe, and of his ovvne wiſedom, wexing bold to feigne oppinions of God, & to apprehend thē after his own pleaſure, wherby afterward

it falls into ſome narrow diſtreſſe, where it is girded vp with feare & terrour, inſulting oftentimes beyond all obedience.
            Of theſe euills complained S. Paule, when hee ſaide:Rom. 7, 24▪
                
               Miſerable wretch that J am, who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie, ſo ſubiect to darkneſſe and death? Afterward he aunſwers,Rom. 7, 25, 
               The grace of GOD by Jeſus Christ.
            
            The word then ſignifies not onely an action ſenſuall, but likewiſe a vice & defect in the vnderſtanding and will, by which inſueth

infinite multitudes of miſhaps. So dooth the Scripture call the harts endeuours,The harts moouings ioyned with the will. becauſe the mouing and agitation of the hart, is cōioyned with the will.
            Aſſuredly, if nature had continued in her puritie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of nature. the knovvledge of GOD would haue been cleere in our vnderſtanding▪ whereto the will had franckly obeyed, but nowe is hindered only through her obſcurity.
            
               Of the contrary moouings of the hart & will.The hart & wil haue moouings diſtort, and contrarie to God: for the will (without the feare of God and truſt

in him) loues himſelfe, ſeeks ſafety in himſelfe, truſts in his owne dilligence, delights in his owne wiſedome: for a man would be honoured and eſteemed, and feares more the reproches or blames of the world, then of GOD his Creator.
            The very like agitations doe ſway the hart, the ſenſuall motions draw the will vnto thē, as much to ſay, as when the hart loues the voluptuous pleaſures of the ſences, which are prohibited, or when a man hates his neighbour, flatly againſt the

lawe of God.
            To this effect ſpake our Sauiour;Mark, 7, 21, 
               That out of the hart proceeded euill cogitations, thefts, blaſphemies, murders, adulteries, lies, and ſuch like other crimes.
            In this then it appeares moſt certainely,The hart ſignifies the will and vnderſtanding. that by the hart is ſignified the vnderſtanding and will: as vvhen the hart takes pleaſure in falſe oppinions, and ſuch imaginations as are contrary to the honour & glory of God.
            
               Howe to come to the knowledge of our ſeluesThe conſideration of theſe thinges, ſhoulde check the pride & preſumption reigning in

vs, and induce vs to obedience, by often and feruent prayer to God, that he would renue in vs the cleere, pure and ſincere light of our vnderſtanding: that hee woulde likewiſe make cleane our harts, and plant therein none but good affections.
            As Dauid deſired of God, A cleane hart, & a right ſpirit. And Saint Paule, who ſaid: That Ieſus Christ onely reformes the cleereneſſe of our vnderſtanding, and conformes the body to his brightneſſe.
            
            The Motiue power,Of the motiue power, carying the body from place to place, and what are his organes. is that whereby the bodie

and his parts, are tranſported from one place to another: the organes, are the nerues, the muſcles, and the cords of the members.
            
               The ſoule, the cauſe of the bodies moouing.Alexander Aphrodiſianus ſaith, that the ſoule is the cauſe of the bodies moouing, as weight is the cauſe why a ſtone falls downeward.
            
               Two kindes of mouing, naturall and voluntarie, and the power of eyther.This moouing is deuided into two kindes, naturall, and voluntarie.
            The naturall, neyther beginnes or ceaſſeth, according to our imagination and pleaſure, nor can it be otherwiſe,

but as when an obiect is preſented, thē it is afterward purſued: as the ventricle, vvhich drawes the receiued foode to it, & the hart attracts the ſpirits, eyther ſuddenly, or ſoftly.
            The voluntary moouing, both begins and ends at our owne pleaſure, & that is the property of this power: as is the ſeuerall mouings of our parts, going, rū
               ning, ſwimming, and ſuch like.
            There is another cō
               mixed moouing,Of a commixed mouing partly natural, partly voluntary. beeing partly naturall, and partly voluntary: as is the moouing of the

breſt or ſtomack. The benefit of this power is eaſily diſcerned: For thereby we ſeeke what is neceſſary for our cō
               ſeruation, and ſhunne what we imagine therto contrary.
            It remaines to ſpeak of the intellectuall power,Of the power intellectuall, according to S. Auguſtines oppinion. whereof S. Auguſtine makes an accommodation to the Trinitie.
            The memorie, (ſaith hee) forming the intellection, repreſents the Father: the intellection repreſents the Sonne: and the will, the holie Ghoſt. For the Father, conſidering & knowing

himſelfe, begot the Sonne; and the holie Ghoſt is the agitation proceeding of the Father, and of the Son.
            This is the povver whereby wee know,How action becoms appropriate to intellection. receiue, iudge and diſcerne, hauing in it the beginning of Artes: heereto likewiſe is action riciprocall for therby our actions are ſeen and iudged.
            This power differs frō the ſenſitiue:How it differs frō the ſenſitiue power. for the ſenſitiue takes knovvledge but of things peculiare and ſingulerly, but this other cōceiues, and apprehends both ſinguler & vniuerſallie.
            
               
               Of the obiect of intellection.The obiect of thys power, is God, and the whole vniuerſalitie of things, as well celeſtiall as elementarie.
            The offices of thys power,The offices of intellection. are to vnderſtand & forme in him ſelfe, the images & repreſentations of things, to retaine, and conferre them together: thē afterward, to ſee, what agreement & what difference is between thē.
            The organes of this power,The organs of intellection. are the interior ſences, wherof we haue diſcourſed already. Plato ſaith, that as the ſeale imprinteth on the wax, ſo (by meanes of the

ſpirits) are the ſhapes of thinges imprinted in the braine. But this is the matter moſt meruailous of all, that we ſhould retaine ſo great a multitude, and ſeueral diuerſities of things, & likewiſe for ſo long a time: but the reaſon thereof can neuer bee well or ſufficiently expreſſed.
            Wherfore,Our life is guided by our actions. ſeeing by our actions our life is guided, we ſhould pray vnto GOD, that hee would take pittie vpon our weake nature: and that hee would renewe his image in vs, to the end we may more perfectly

know his workes in vs, and ſhewe our ſelues more reuerent and obedient to him.
            
               Ariſtotles deuiſion betweene the two vnderſtandings, actiue and paſsiue.Ariſtotle makes a deuiſion, between the vnderſtanding actiue, and that which is tearmed paſſiue: mary hee calls the actiue vnderſtanding nothing elſe, but that which inuenteth any thing, as the vnderſtanding of Archimedes, did inuent the Compaſſe.
            The paſſiue vnderſtanding, is that which inuenteth not of it ſelf, but makes approbation of an others inuention: as he that approued

the inuention of Gunpowder, or that of the Compaſſe, or the Aſtralabe. The knowledges of the vnderſtanding, are deuided into actions and habitude. The knowledge which is called action,Actions and habitude, ye knowledges of the vnderſtanding. is that part of the vnderſtanding, which apprehendeth ſomthing, by forming the image thereof.
            Habitude, is as a conſtant & reſident light in the vnderſtanding, whereof wee make vſe whenſoeuer we pleaſe.
            The vnderſtanding ſomtimes buſies it ſelfe, and conſiders thoſe

thinges, whereof it can but hardly reach to the knowledge: as the changes of the ayre,Of ſpeculatiue & practiue knowledge. the reuolutions ordinarie of the heauens, & thoſe are termed ſpeculatiue. Sometimes it meditates on thinges that it can eaſily exerciſe, and then it is called practiue.
            
               Of reaſon, & the wills cō
                  iunction there-with.The word reaſon, is that which comprehends, and then the vnderſtanding cōceiuing things, conferreth and makes iudgement of them, where-upon the wil makes his coniunction.The definition of the will. Then may the wil be thus very well defined, it is a part or power

of the vnderſtanding, which is called reaſon: working freely, after that the vnderſtanding hath tried, & iudged the thing to be good or bad.
            If nature had continued in her firſt integritie,The hurt of natures lack of her firſt condition. we ſhould neuer haue willed, but what of it ſelf had been good & honeſt: but the order of nature beeing perturbed, makes ſuch an alteration, that there is a diſcord among the powers, & that the vnderſtanding is ſometimes deceued in iudging of things. And albeit it can eaſilie diſcerne

the hurtfulnes of things, yet many impediments doe happen to croſſe it:The impediments or hinderances of our vnderſtanding. as ſelfe cōceit, or ouer-great weening in our owne ſelues, enuie, and other ſuch like harmes, which drawes vs to cōmit enormous crimes, and to trouble (ſometimes) the quiet eſtate of the publique weale.
            
               How Gods image becommeth miſhapen in vs.Thus becomes the image of GGD deformed in vs, & keeps not the true Idea of his firſt excellence. Wherfore it behoueth vs,What wee ought to deſire of God, in reparation of our wants & defects. earneſtlie to deſire (with S. Paul) that GOD would make perfect his image in vs,
               
& that by vnderſtāding & knowing aright the cauſe & authour of all things, we may attaine to more noble & purer actions, as well in our vnderſtāding, as in our will. Likewiſe, that our memorie may euermore retaine good and holy cogitatiōs of god, and of commendable actions, whereby religion is preſerued & increaſed: that he would purifie our affections, & in ſted of ſuch as are euill and corrupt, excite (by his holy ſpirite working in his Word) honeſt and vertuous motions in our harts.

Moreouer, to worke ſo graciouſly in vs, that the inferiour powers may be obedient to the ſuperiour, beeing euermore guided, by the ſacred direction in his word contained: to the end, that by this accord and conſonance of vertues in our ſoule, the honor of God may be exalted and reuerenced in vs, and publique tranquilitie kept and maintained, vntil it ſhal pleaſe him to receiue vs, and giue vs eternall reſt in his high & happie dwellings.
            
               
               Of the immortalitie of the ſoule.
               NOW, as concerning the immortality of the ſoule, ſome doe diſpute in this ſort, by arguments taken and deriued from nature.Naturall arguments, concerning the ſoules immortalitie. It is impoſſible (ſay they) that all the honeſt and vvell diſpoſed people, which are borne and brought vppe in thys worlde, ſhoulde euermore be vexed or troubled with miſeries. Yet is it euident,1. Of the afflictions of good people in this life. that the greater part of good people, are moſt of all, and oftneſt afflicted greeuouſly, yea, many

times ſlaine by the wicked, ſeditious and Tyrants. It is then neceſsary to think and ſay, that GOD hath reſerued ſome port or hauen of ſafetie for them, where (after all troubles) they may arriue to perpetuall reſt.
               
                  2. Of paines reſerued for the wicked, notwithſtā
                     ding theyr felicitie in this life.Some likewiſe diſpute on the contrarie part, of the paines reſerued for the wicked, for, naturally we iudge and ſay, that euil deeds doe iuſtly deſerue puniſhment. Yet oftentimes wee ſee, that they which are oppreſſours of others, both in body and goods, are neuertheleſſe

happy in theyr worldlie enterpriſes: why then it is moſt certaine, that a place is alſo afterward reſerued for them, and paines likewiſe, where-with they are to be puniſhed.
               Firſt,Platos reaſon concerning the ſoule. Plato giueth this reaſon: thoſe thinges that bee not of elementary nature, are not ſubiect at all to coruption nor death: The ſoule cōſiſteth no way of the elements, it is then cleere, that ſhee is not mortall, nor any way corruptible.
               That the ſoule is no way cōſiſting or made of any part of the elements,The ſoule no way conſiſteth of the elements.
                  
is apparant and manifeſt by this reaſon. It is impoſſible, that nature being corruptible, ſhould cōprehend and conceiue thinges vniuerſall and incorruptible: as to conceiue and apprehend God, with the vniuerſality of thinges: the numbers, the differences of thinges honeſt and diſhoneſt:What nature can, notwithſtanding her corruption. yet naturally, and euen without teaching, men doe apprehend theſe things.
               It is then to bee iudged, that the ſeates of theſe apprehēſions, are not natures elementaries, but much more excellent

thē corruptible things, & likewiſe that they are perpetual: ſee heere what natural reaſons are yeelded, for the immortalitie of the ſoule.
               But we,Of Gods great loue and kindnes to vs, farre beyond others. whom God hath ſo much looued, and endued with ſo eſpeciall a fauour, as to make the beams of the glory of his Goſpell ſhine vpon our vnderſtanding, taking & receiuing the teſtimonies of true examples, and ſayinges of the Prophets, which we know to be diuinely beſtowed on them, & confirmed by the words and

works of our Lord Ieſus Christ: aſſuredlie, mee thinkes it is verie meruailous, ſeeing that this epithite of immortalitie is ſo apparant, & cōfirmed in vs by many ſayings and examples,Mens careleſſe regard of the ſoules immortality. why men doe not better prepare themſelues, to vnderſtād this iudgement aright, and that they haue no greater feare or horrour of the paines eternall.
               It remaineth therefore, that men of good and vertuous diſpoſition, ought to reſt aſſured, by the examples of Enoch, Elias, & our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt,

liuing already in life perpetuall.
               And if wee will take notice from the verie firſt age of the worlde,Gods inſtruction of the ſoules immortalitie, from the originall of the world. we ſhall find, that God declared, how he wold one day hold his iudgment, to puniſh the wicked, and reward the good, according to their ſeuerall workes, as when he ſaid to Caine: If thou hast well doone,
                  Gene. 4.7. 
                  thou ſhalt finde it, and receiue like recōpence: but if thou hast doone euill, thy ſinne ſhall be hidden, vntill ſuch time as it ſhall be declared and diſcouered.
                  The reaſon of wicked mens neglect of the ſoules immortalitie. This deferring & dilatation of puniſhment,

makes the wicked more bolde & forward in theyr ſinning, and begetteth likewiſe contempt of God: but albeit wee ſee not ſuch tranſgreſſiōs puniſhed in this world, let vs not therefore thinke, that they ſhall ſo eſcape without correction.
               
                  Gods delay of puniſhment agrauates the chaſtiſemēt.For, as the wiſe man of Greece ſaid: GOD deferreth his chaſtiſement, but hee recompenceth that delaying with greater meaſure of pains. And let vs likewiſe remember his own holie words, to wit, that ſinne ſhalbe diſcouered,
                  Gene, 4, 7, which let vs not thinke to bee

ſpoken in vaine, or that the words are of no effect: for, although wee beholde not heere the pittifull end of tyrants, or others that depart this life vnpuniſhed, let vs yet remaine aſſured, that the meaſure of their ſcourging will be the greater afterward.
               Enoch, who in his liuing body was rapt vp,An eſpeciall proofe of the life eternall. and tranſlated frō thys world, giues vs thereby to vnderſtand, that after this life, there remaineth a better: then is it not to be doubted, but that Enoch, Elias, and thoſe other holie perſons, taught and inſtructed

others in the happineſſe of this lyfe perpetuall, and that it alſo remained after this preſent eſtate.
               Likewiſe in the Epiſtle of the Apoſtle S. Iude, there is a part of the ſermon of Enoch, which ſpeaketh in this manner:Iude. 1, 14. 
                  Beholde, the Lord ſhall come with infinite company of Saints, onely to doe iustice, to rebuke and puniſh all thoſe that haue doone euill and vngodly deedes.
               
               And Helie & Eliſeus, who did raiſe vp, & make to liue againe ſome that were dead: and Elias, who was taken

vp in the preſence of his friendes, & carried to heauen in his intire bodie, both in a whirle-wind & a flame of fire.
               Many other examples,Infinite examples to cōfirme the immortalitie of the ſoule. and namely the moſt euident example of our Sauiour, vvho roſe againe, and to him excited the companie of the prophets & holie Fathers, to liue with him perpetually, & to enioy the fruitiō of the company of God.
               By diuine Scripture then it is moſt cleere,That our ſoules are ſpirits, not to be ouercome by death. that our ſoules are ſpirits, which are not to be extinct in death like the

body: but doe remaine ſeperated afterward, & liue perpetually.
               God ſaide, that wee neede not to feare ſuch as kill the body,
                  Math, 10.28 
                  and afterward can doe nothing els. He ſaid likewiſe to the cōuerted theefe:Luke. 23, 43 
                  This day thou ſhalt be with me in Paradiſe.
               
               If the ſoule could be extinct and diſsipated like ſmoke in death,That the ſoule is to liue with Chriſt after death. it would not then follow, that ſhe ſhould cōuerſe and liue afterward with Ieſus Chriſt: it is then a ſpirit, which continueth after death, and in regard it is a ſpirit, it cannot be idle.
               
                  As concerning the word Paradiſe,
                  Of Paradiſe, and what it ſignifieth. it ſignifieth the place of happie and eternall life: there where ioy, wiſedome and iuſtice are in all aboundance.
               It is neceſſary to note the ſermon of the good theefe,The good theefes ſermon on the Croſſe. which he made hanging aloft on the Croſſe, euen when he was at the inſtant of death, and when all the Apoſtles were aſtonnied, and had left off theyr office of preaching, & did forget the mercies of God.
               Vndoubtedly, thys ſpectacle was not without great ſignification,

for, there was to bee ſeen two theeues hanging with the bleſſed Sonne of God, which ſignified, that the world was condemned to death for moſt greeuous offences And ſeeing it ſhould be ſo, that the Son of God, was to appeaſe his Fathers diſpleaſure,One part of the world refuſed the benefit of Chriſtes death, figured in the bad theefe. and by his death onely: that yet one part of the worlde would ſtill contemne this benefit, & deſpiſe the kindnes of thys Sauiour, as may be diſcerned in the bad theefe, hauing no hope at all of ſaluation, and in whoſe perſon is figured

forth to vs, the wicked, ſeditious, and tyrants, enemies againſt the Goſpell of GOD, who ought aſſuredlie to know, that their cō
                  demnation is alreadie doone, for theyr wilful contemning the mercies of God.
               But the other part of the worlde,The condē
                     natiō of the wicked, and aſſurance of the elects ſaluation, in Ieſus Chriſt. which are ſuch as (with reuerēce) acknowledge and receiue this bleſſing of God, knowing & confeſſing (with the good theefe) that they haue deſerued nothing but condēnation & death: yet truſting onelie in God, doe inuoke his

mercy and propitiation, acknowledging alſo, that they are deliuered from ſin & death, onely by the bleſſed & innocent death of their Redeemer.
               The good thiefe, who deſired his deliuerance of God, acknowledged him therein, and albeit he ſaw him there to die with him; yet he helde it for moſt certaine & aſſured, that this was he who could giue him eternall life: wherefore he heard the ſweet anſwere of GOD, who promiſed him, that that very day, hee ſhoulde bee with him in the place of

reſt, life, and ioy perpetuall. By this voyce hee vnderſtood, that his ſinnes were forgiuen him, and that life eternal was (in mercie) beſtowed vpon him.
               Then, though hee was hanged, broken, & halfe deade, yet (for all that) he did honour & gaue reuerence to the Sonne of God:When the vvhole church was ſilent, & the Apoſtles dumbe, yet the good theefe preached ye glory of God, in his ſonne Chriſt Ieſus. euen then when the whole Church was ſilent, and when the Apoſtles were amazed and diſperſed, yet hee confidētly ſaid▪ that he who was there hanged, and readie to die, ſhoulde (neuertheleſſe) raigne

and giue eternall life to men: he called on him, as the onely maiſter & authour of life: Nay more, he defended the glory of GOD againſt the other euill ſpeaker.
               This ſpectacle then admoniſheth vs of many things, and all good mindes doe acknowledge, their tranſgreſſions to bee fixed to his croſſe: for wee are all (by our ſinnes) ſubiect to death and calamities of all ſorts, and can no way bee deliuered but by the Sonne of God only. It remaines then, that wee call on him▪, that wee declare to others

theſe great bleſſings,How much wee ſtand bounde to defend the glory of God, againſt all Atheiſts & misbeleeuers. & that we maintaine his honor & glory, againſt all miſcreants and euill ſpeakers: whatſoeuer afflictions, torments or deaths we endure in the cauſe, to the end, that hee may giue to euery one of vs, that which hee did to the happy conuerted theefe, ſaying: This day thou ſhalt be with mee in Paradiſe.
               
               Seeing then ſo great a matter is cōtained in this ſpeech and conference, of our Sauiour Chriſt with the good theefe, let vs confirme and fixe in our harts,

this ſaying and moſt powerfull ſentence: which manifeſtly declareth,The ſoule is a liuing ſpirit, after the bodies death, and conſiſteth no way of the bodies temper. that the ſoule is a ſeperable ſpirit, liuing after it hath left the bodie, according as Chriſt himſelfe ſayde, that the ſpirit of the cō
                  uerted theefe, ſhould conuerſe and bee with him in Paradiſe.
               Aſſuredly, it coulde not conuerſe nor liue after death, if it vvere onely of the bodies tē
                  per, or if it were ſome ſmoke, neyther coulde it likewiſe bee in Paradiſe, but would be diſperſed abroade in the ayre.
               
                  In Saint Mathewe,Math, 17, 3. Moiſes ſpake and conferred with our Sauiour in the Mountaine, although it be plainelie written in the Booke of the repetition of the law, commonly called Deuteronomie, that Moyſes was deade and buried: our Sauiour then ſpake with the ſeperated ſoule of him. Saint Paule ſaide,Philip, 1, 23, 
                  that he deſired to be deliuered from his body, and to bee with Ieſus Christ.
               
               And to the Corinthians hee ſaid:2. Cor, 5, 6, 
                  While we remaine in this bodie, we are far off from our Lord. But we haue this

confidence, that after we ſhall haue finiſhed this long voyage, we ſhall then abide with him.
               
               And S. Peter ſayth, that the Spirit of our Lord, while his bodie was in the Tombe, preached vnto the ſpirits of them that were in priſon:
                  1, Pet, 3, 19, which then aſſureth vs, that our ſoules are ſeparable ſpirits. In Saint Luke, the hiſtorie is recited of the wicked rich man that was in hell torments, & the poore begger,Luke. 16, 19 whoſe ſpirit was in Abrahams boſome.
               In another place, GOD ſayth, that hee

is the God of Abraham,
                  Math, 22, 32 
                  and the God of Iſaac, and the God of Iacob: and that he is not the God of the deade, but of the liuing. Let vs then end vvith this concluſion, that Abraham, Iſaac & Iacob are liuing.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               〈2 pages missing〉
            
            
               
               Socr.
               Tell me, which dooſt thou iudge to be workes of Fortune, or of reaſon and deliberation? as much to ſay, as thoſe workes that haue no certaine end, neyther are knowne wherfore they be made? and what thinkeſt thou of ſuch, as manifeſtly doe appeare, that they are made for the benefite of men?
            
            
               Aristo.
               Doubtleſſe, thoſe which are made for the profit of men, are queſtionles workes made by reaſon & deliberation.
            
            
               Socr.
               Doth it not thē appeare to thee, that

hee that frō the beginning made men, and gaue thē ſence, whereby they ſhoulde haue knowledge of euerie thing, did it not for their benefit? as eyes to behold thinges viſible: eares to heare ſoundes: & ſo likewiſe of things that are apprehended by ſent, whereof no profit woulde bee had except we had noſtrils: nor knew wee howe to perceiue or diſtinguiſh which taſte is ſweet, & vvhich is ſower or ſharpe, except we had a tongue and pallate to taſt them? Moreouer, dooth it not likewiſe

ſeeme to thee, to bee a worke of Gods high prouidence, to encloſe (within lidds) the weak and feeble eyes, which when need requires to ſee, doe open, & cloſe againe when deſire of ſleepe vrgeth?
               And to the end no angry windes may bee offenſiue to them, hee hath placed the browes ouer the eyes, as alſo to defend them from the ſweat, deſcēding down the head, yet kept therby out of the eyes. As in like maner the eares, that receiue all ſounds, and yet are neuer full: the teeth alſo in order

made and placed, that thoſe before do cut the meat, and thoſe behind chewe & prepare it for the paſſage: ſo may we ſay of the mouth, wherby the foode hath conuoy to the ſtomack, being ſeated vnder the eyes and noſtrills: but the cōduit of offenſiue ſuperfluities, is placed behinde, and far from the ſeueral ſeates of the ſences, leaſt it ſhoulde be any way hurtful vnto them.
               Theſe things which thou diſcerneſt to bee made by ſo great a prouidence, whether dooſt thou attribute

them to Fortune, or to counſell and deliberation?
            
            
               Aristo.
               Aſſuredlie, theſe thinges ſeeme to mee, to bee the workmanſhip of a moſt wiſe Creator.
            
            
               Socr.
               And the naturall great deſire vvee haue to beget a continuation of linage, as alſo of mothers to nouriſh their young chyldren, & when they become great, a care for theyr liuing, and then the mightie feare they haue of theyr death.
            
            
               Ari.
               In ſooth, al theſe thinges are the workes of him, who had a will,

that by counſel, reaſon, and deliberation, his creatures ſhoulde bee made liuing, hauing both ſence and moouing.
            
            
               Socra.
               Dooth it appeare to thee that thou haſt any diſcretion, whereby thou makeſt apprehenſion or iudgment of theſe thinges?
               Thou haſt in thee a little portion of thys earth, which thou ſeeſt to be ſo great, & a ſmall quantitie of humour, which is of ſo large aboūdance in the world: nowe, conſidering eyther of theſe thinges to be ſo great, & yet thou

haſt of eyther ſome ſmal portion, and altogether being ſo aſſembled in thy body, as thou couldeſt haue no vnderſtāding at all, except they were in this ſort ordered: Theſe thinges (I ſay) being ſo great, and in multitude infinite, howe dooſt thou imagine, but that they ſhould be well ordained?
            
            
               Arist.
               I can no way perceiue their ordenation, as I behold the order of other workmēs labours.
            
            
               Socr.
               Why euen ſo thou canſt no way beholde thy ſoule, which

directs and gouerns (at her pleaſure,) all thy whole bodie: yea, and in ſuch ſort, as thou mighteſt elſe ſay, thou dooſt all thinges without counſell; reaſon, or deliberation, but that onely raiſeth regard of feare and trembling.
            
            
               Arist.
               I vvoulde be lothe to neglect the Gods, but doe holde and eſteeme them ſo great, as wee ſhoulde haue nothing els to do, but to be reuerent onelie toward them.
            
            
               Socra.
               The greater then thou eſteemeſt them to bee, the more thou oughteſt to honour

them.
            
            
               Arist.
               If I wiſt that they had any care of men, I woulde adore them, and neuer neglect them.
            
            
               Socra.
               VVhy howe canſt thou thinke, but that they haue care and regarde of vs, ſeeing man is made onely (aboue and beyond al other creatures) to goe vpright? to fore-ſee many thinges intended to him, and to gouerne all other creatures vnder him? hauing eyes, eares, and a mouth beſtowed vpon him?
               And though to ſome he haue giuen but feet,

as to Serpents: yet to mā he hath giuē hands, to garde himſelfe from many outrages, wherin we are more happy then other creatures.
               And albeit other beaſtes haue tongues, yet to man onely it is giuen, to turne his tongue from one ſide of his mouth to the other, thereby to forme an intelligible voyce, to diſpoſe and make known his thoughts to others.
               Now not onely is this care taken of our bodies, but much more of our inward ſpirits. For where or when did any

other creature euer thinke or conſider, that God was the Creator of the very beſt and greateſt thinges? Or what kinde elſe, (onely man excepted) dyd euer, or can giue honor to God? or keep himſelfe from cold, heate, famine, thirſt, & other inconueniences? Or ſhun diuerſitie of diſeaſes? Or by exerciſe gather ſtrength, ability, and learning? or retain longer and more faithfully what-ſoeuer is to be vnderſtood?
               Seemes it not then to thee, that man onely is (as a God) amongſt all

other creatures? more excellent, and out-going them both in body and minde?
               Vndoubtedly, if man had had the body of an Oxe, hee coulde not haue doone what ſoeuer he would▪ & ſuch as haue hands (without any other part of inward ſpirit) haue ſomwhat to bee reckoned of much more, then they that haue no hands at all.
               But thou that haſt handes and vnderſtanding, canſt thou think that God hath not care and reſpect of thee? Dooſt thou not think,

that the moſt auncient and wiſeſt Citties, are thoſe that moſt dilligently & carefully doe honour the Gods?
               Learne, learne my friend, that thy ſoule gouerns thy body: likewiſe, that the good ſpirit which containeth all thinges, directeth all thinges at his good pleaſure.
               Thinkeſt thou that thine owne eye can ſee many thinges farre off, & that Gods eye doth not diſcerne them altogether? Or that thy minde may conceite at one inſtant, what is doone in Athens, Scicilie,

Egypt, or elſewhere, and the Diuine Spirit or minde, dooth not know all things directly together? Yes, hold and beleeue it for moſt certaine: that God ſees, heares, regards, and hath care of thee, me, & all thinges elſe whatſoeuer together.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Directorie, for the Readers more eaſie and ſpeedie apprehenſion, of the ſpeciall matters handled in this Treatiſe.
            
               WHat benefit a man gaines by the knowledge of himſelfe. page, 2.
               What the Soule is. page 3,
               Of the vertues and powers in the ſoule. page 4,
               Of nouriſhment, and the manner of the bodies nouriſhment. page 5, 6.
               Of Choller, Mellancholie, & phlegme. page▪ 8,
               Of the blood, and how it is receiued, page 9,
               Of three kindes of digeſtion, to perfect nouriſhment. page, 11,
               That the inconvenience of the firſt digeſtion, is not holpen by the other. page 14,
               Some mens oppinion concerning the Soule. 16
               The hurt of intemperancie. page 17,
               Sixe things not naturally in vs. page 18,
               The benefit of labour to the body. page 19
               The hurt of immoderat exerciſe to the body. 21
               Of ſleepe, how it benefits the body, and helpes the powers of the ſoule. page, 22, 24,
               How heat & blood do work for the hart. 24.
               Of dreames in ſleepe, their kindes, cauſes & examples. page 31, 32, 33, 34, &c.
               Of the increaſe of nouriſhment, & when nature receiueth moſt ſubſtaunce to her ſelfe. 38, 39
               
                  How naturall heat groweth or decaieth in vs, 41▪
               
               Of death naturall, and vnnaturall. page 43
               Of generation, & how the fruite is formed, 44,
               Of the offices, veines, and arteries of the membrane. page 46, 47,
               How the nauill is made, and in what time. 48,
               Of the places for the liuer, hart and braine, 50
               How the liuer is formed, and what it is. 50
               How the bowels are faſtened to the back, 51
               How Diaphragma is formed. page 52
               Of the back bones, and forming of the hart, 53
               Of the harts nouriſhment. page 54
               That the hart is the beginner of vitall heat, 55
               How the lungs and lites are formed, and conſequently the bodies height. page 57
               Of the forming of the braine, and skull of the head. page 57, 58,
               Of the marrow in the chine bone of the backe, page 60
               How the fruite is nouriſhed in the wombe, and the bloods deuiſion into 3. parts. 60, 61, 62,
               How the power Vegetatiue nouriſheth the body, and maintaineth kind. page 64
               Howe the order of the ſeuerall powers ſupplie theyr offices, page 68
               Of the ſenſitiue power, beeing the ſoules ſecond power. page, 71
               Of the fiue exteriour ſences, and firſt how ſight is wrought in vs. page, 72
               Of the inwarde organes of ſight, and what vſe

they ſerue vs to. page 74
               How ſight hath his ſeate, and what ſpirits giue life to the eye. page, 77
               The maner how colours are truly diſcerned, 80,
               The true capacitie of the eye in ſight, and benefits of that ſence. page 81,
               Of hearing and his organe, page 82
               What ſound or noyſe is, & of the meanes of apprehending it, page 83, 84
               How our ſpeech or voyce is formed. 86
               Of ſmelling, & by what organe it is apprehended. page 89
               What odour, ſent▪ or ſmell is, 90,
               Of taſting, and his organe, & howe the tongue taſtes with his meanes, vſe and obiect. 94, 95
               Of the ſeuerall kindes of ſauour; what ſauours beſt pleaſe the taſte: what moſt vrgeth appetite: and of thinges without ſauour. page 96, 97, 98, 99, &c
               Of Touching & his organe, & benefit. 107, 108
               Of the inwarde ſence, his ſeate, and neceſſarie vſe. page 108, 109
               Of the fiue inwarde ſences, their organes what they are, & how they help each other, 110, &c
               Of the braine in his diuerſity of kindes. 118
               Of two kindes of appetence in the ſences. 119
               Of the foure principall affections, and theyr oppoſites: both helping and hurting. 122. &c
               The organe of the appetente power, and what it is. page 133
               
                  Of the commaundements in both the Tables. page, 136, 137, 138, &c
               Of the contrarietie & difference amongſt men. page 41,
               Of two kindes of gouernment: compulſion & obedience. page 143, 144,
               That the will is the commaunder of the affections. page 146
               The reaſon of lawes, deuiſion of poſſeſsions, & iuſtice in our dealings. 149, 150, 151
               How the lawe agrees with nature, and in vvhat manner. page 153, 154
               Of two kindes of moouing in the hart: and the efficient cauſes thereof, 155, 156, 157
               Of the powers of nature, anſwerable to the harts affections, and their difference. page 158,
               Of the hart, with his helps and hurts. 159, 160.
               Of the ſoules ſocietie with the body, aunſwerable to the humours. page, 162,
               Of the proper cauſes of our affections, & whence they take originall. page 163
               That natures corruption is the cauſe of our euill affections. page, 167
               Of the diuine affections in our Sauiour, page, 168, 169, 170,
               The contrarietie of affections in Chriſtians and Infidels. page 170, 171
               Of Concupiſcence, and how it may bee vnderſtood. page 173, 174, 175.
               Of the cōtrary mouings of the hart & wil. 176.
               
                  Howe to come to the true knowledge of our ſelues. page 178.
               Of the motiue power, carrying the bodie from place to place. page, 180
               That the ſoule is the cauſe of the bodies moouing. eodem
               Two kinds of moouing, and the power of eyther of them. eodem
               Of a commixed power, partly naturall, & partly voluntary. page 181
               Of the intellectuall power. page 182
               Howe action becoms appropriate to intellection, and differs from the power ſenſitiue. 183
               Of the obiect of intellection: his offices & organes. page 184
               Of the two vnderſtandings, actiue and paſsiue. page 186
               The action and habitude, guide the vnderſtanding. page 187
               Of the ſpeculatiue & practiue knowledge. 188
               Of Reaſon, & the wills coniunction therewith. page eodem,
               Of the wills definition. eodem.
               Of the hurt of natures lacke of her primatiue condition. page 189
               Of the impediment and hinderances in our vnderſtanding. 190.
               How Gods image becommeth deformed in vs, and what we ought to deſire of him in repayring of our wants & defects▪ 190, 191, 192,
               
                  Of the ſoules immortalitie, and naturall reaſons therefore alleaged. page 193, 194
               That the ſoule conſiſteth no way of the elements. page 195
               What nature can doe, notwithſtanding her corruption. page, 196
               Of mens careleſſe regard of their ſoules immortalitie. page 198,
               How God inſtructed the ſoules immortality frō the worlds beginning. page 199
               That our ſoules are ſpirits, not to be ouer-come by death. page 203.
               That the ſoule is to liue with Chriſt after death. page 204
               Of Paradiſe, and what it ſignifieth. page 205
               Of the good Theefes ſermon on the Croſſe. page, eodem
               One part of the worlde refuſed the benefite of Chriſtes death. page 206,
               The condemnation of the wicked, & aſſurance of the elects ſaluation. page 207,
               That the good theefe preached Gods glorie, when the whole Church was ſilent, and the Apoſtles ſtood dumbe. 209
               That the ſoule is a liuing ſpirit after the bodies death, and no way conſiſteth of the bodyes temper. page 212.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   